1.

Letter from Dulles to Johnson

Washington, July 29, 1955

My dear Ambassador Johnson:

In your forthcoming talks at Geneva, Switzerland, with a represent­

ative of the Chinese Peoples Republic (CPR), you will be guided by the

following considerations:

(1) The talks are a continuation of the talks held in the last year

between representatives of both sides at Geneva.

(2) Through you and the appropriate representative of the CPR, the

talks are now being resumed at the ambassadorial level.

(3) The agreed purpose of your talks is “to aid in settling the matter

of repatriation of civilians who desire to return to their respective coun­

tries and to facilitate further discussion and settlement of certain other

practical matters now at issue between both sides”.

(4) You should seek agreement that the talks will be conducted in

an atmosphere of privacy and that no other than routine public state­

ments will be made regarding them, except as may be approved by both

sides or after prior notification by one side to the other. The approval

or notification from our side is to be authorized by the Department of

State. In the main, you will discourage publicity about, and exaggera­

tion of, the meeting.

(5) You may in your discretion meet socially with the CPR

representative.

(6) It is, of course, understood that the conversations upon which

you are to engage do not involve diplomatic recognition.

(7) Since the scope of your talks is “practical matters now at issue

between both sides”, i.e., the U.S. and the CPR, you will not discuss

issues which involve the rights of the Republic of China. If you are in

doubt as to the practical application of this instruction, you will seek

guidance from the Department of State.

(8) The U.S. is willing to talk about “other practical matters”

than the repatriation of civilians because we do not want to have

ten notation at the bottom states the letter was handed to Johnson by Barnes on July 31.

A stamp on the document indicates it is “a true copy of the signed original.”

unnecessary differences with anyone if these differences can be hon­

orably resolved.

(9) Direct talks have been preferred to carrying on discussions through

intermediaries. The reason is that there is more apt to be misunderstand­

ing when matters are dealt with through intermediaries; therefore, we

believe direct dealings should, in the first instance at least, be tried.

(10) The first agreed purpose of the meeting is already the subject of

bilateral talks, i.e., “settling the matter of repatriation of civilians who desire

to return to their respective countries”. You will seek immediate authori­

zation to U.S. civilians to return to the U.S. You may point out that so long

as American civilians are held under restraint on the mainland of China,

there is bound to be ill feeling in the U.S. We are not, however, willing to

promise political concessions to obtain their release. Only voluntary action

by the CPR would really serve to remove the widespread resentment now

felt in the U.S. because of the mistreatment by the CPR of U.S. citizens.

(11) You are authorized formally to assure the CPR representative

that the U.S. does not impose restraints upon Chinese civilians who

desire to return to the Mainland. The U.S. is prepared to authorize some

mutually agreeable government through its embassy in the U.S. to

assist Chinese students who desire to return to the China mainland and

to be a medium for the transmission of funds required for this purpose.

(12) One of the “other practical matters now at issue between both

sides” is the prisoners of war who were under the UN Command in

Korea, and as to whom an initiative has been taken by the United Nations.

The U.S. wishes to reinforce that initiative and you should raise this mat­

ter concurrently with the matter of the U.S. civilians. The considerations

above (paragraph 10) alluded to in reference to U.S. civilians apply with

equal or greater force with respect to the U.S. military, who are deemed

covered by the Korean Armistice agreement.

(13) You may, if and as you deem appropriate, mention that if U.S.

nationals, civilian and POW’s, now held within China, are released that

might facilitate the U.S. voluntarily adopting a less restrictive policy as

to U.S. citizens going to the China mainland.

(14) As another of the “practical matters” which you should take up

at a later stage of the discussions is the matter of assuring instructions

which will prevent a repetition of such incidents as the shooting down of

the Cathay Pacific airliner with death and injury to U.S. citizens.

(15) You will also, at whatever times you deem appropriate,

emphasize the deep concern of the U.S. in getting assurance that the

CPR is prepared to renounce force to achieve its ambitions.

If the CPR representative contends that the use of force in the For­

mosa area is justifiable because this involves a domestic matter, i.e., the

unification of China, you may point out that the fact of a divided China

is not basically different from the fact of a divided Korea, Germany, and

2.

Telegram 312 to Geneva

312. Essential Ambassador Johnson have full freedom telegraphic

communications with Department and interested posts during forth­

coming Chinese discussions. Following procedures will apply:

Telegrams will be numbered in regular consulate series without

external designator but carrying internal caption for or from Johnson.

Outgoing telegrams will be signed Gowen. This will not imply or

require consulate concurrence nor should any such telegrams receive

any distribution within consulate.

Dulles

Drafted by Kreer (SS).

3.

Telegram 227 from Geneva

227. From Johnson.

Extremely heavy press coverage at my arrival this afternoon. I

confined myself entirely to same statement made on departure from

Washington.

All press services and many principal correspondents here with

more arriving hourly. I am making clear all of them directly and

through ConGen press offices no news to be expected from me and

doing all possible play down, emphasizing these only talks between

two ambassadors. Hope Department will continue do all possible

help.

Wang gave press conference this morning and issued statement

which I presume available Dept through press services. Chinese are

exuding sweetness and light a la Soviets and appear making prepara­

tions heavy propaganda play. Anticipate I may have difficulty obtain­

ing Wang’s agreement closed nature meetings. However I intend

press hard on this if necessary adjourning tomorrow’s meeting on this

issue.

I have talked Pelt on phone and accepted his suggestion that I

visit Palais early tomorrow morning time press not usually around to

decide meeting room. He to suggest that Wang be there same time. If

Wang only sends rep I will send Clough. Pelt assures me unpretentious

small secluded meeting room is available. I have privately emphasized

to American press correspondents entire lack any significance Palais

meeting place other than only suitable place available and was where

Wang and I last met. Plan to seek Wang’s agreement to 3 P.M. meeting

time and no photographers to be admitted but will not blow latter up

into any major issue.

In reply correspondent’s questions Chinese have said Wang came

directly from Warsaw to Geneva.

Gowen

4.

Telegram 231 from Geneva

231. From Johnson.

Clough and Ekvall met with Chinese and Pelt this morning 9 A.M.

and agreed on office President Council for meeting room which is same

used meetings last year. Chinese suggested and we agreed to 4 P.M.

meeting time. Press inquiries have been informed time and place of

meeting but question photography still undecided at time this message.

I paid courtesy call on Pelt 10 A.M. this morning and he promised

full cooperation guard on meeting room, etc. Chinese have asked him

about press briefing room and facilities for issuance of communiques.

He replied that if any joint communiques issued he would at request

both sides extend facilities but would not (repeat not) act on behalf one

side. He made clear Chinese only UN role is renting meeting place.

I reiterated my desire cooperate with Hammarskjold on military

personnel. He said Hammarskjold would get in touch with me imme­

diately upon his arrival tomorrow afternoon.

Gowen

5.

Telegram 232 from Geneva

232. From Johnson.

Krishna Menon called at 2: this afternoon “privately to inform

me” that Nehru was informing Cooper that the 11 flyers were to be

released very shortly. Menon went great pains make it clear that this

due his efforts. Also said will be readily able reach agreement with

Wang on civilians on basis someone represent Chinese students in US.

Said Wang and Chou had both asked him remain in Geneva and was

fishing hard for me make similar request which of course I refused do.

Finally said would be glad come back if and when I asked him.

Will report long conversation more fully in subsequent telegram.

Gowen

6.

Telegram 238 from Geneva

238. For Assistant Secretary McCardle From Gowen. Your 310.

Garnish has been made available to Johnson. Garnish reported

here only today.

Gowen

Distribution.

7.

Telegram 239 from Geneva

239. From Johnson.

Held first meeting with Chinese 4 PM August 1. After agreed five

minutes of photography meeting opened and I asked Wang whether he

wished speak first. He accepted offer and read prepared statement gist

of which follows:

Chinese People’s Government announced July 31st that in accord­

ance Chinese legal procedure eleven Air Force personnel had been

freed and left Peiping same day. They due Hong Kong August 4. Wang

said his government hopes this action will have favorable effects on

present talks. He then quoted from agreed statement both governments

of July 25 and added he sincerely hoped talks would continue ease ten­

sion between US and China. Expressed conviction that with joint effort

it should be possible achieve this highly significant goal. Referring to

consular talks held during past year, he declared that although results

not entirely satisfactory he was sure I would agree that appreciation

should be expressed to consular representatives both sides for their

efforts. He said that so long as both sides adopt an attitude of concili­

ation it should not be difficult reach a solution of return of civilians of

both sides.

He added that talks should not be confined to above question

because number of other issues exist between China and US.

Wang then proposed following agenda:

1. Return of civilians of both sides to their respective countries.

2. Other practical matters at issue between two sides.

Regarding second item he proposed each side might put forth

matters they desired discuss so that there might be free exchange of

views.

After few words of introduction, I expressed gratification at

release of flyers and agreed it would facilitate our discussions. I

said agenda proposed appeared in accordance with agreement

between our two governments and I had no objection to it. Not­

ing fact neither Wang nor I had brought stenographer I proposed

that in interest maintaining maximum informality this practice be

continued at future meetings. I also proposed that we do our best

conduct these talks in atmosphere of privacy. And that we agreed

neither of us will make any public statements or otherwise make

available to press any information whatever concerning these talks

except in agreement with each other or after prior notification to

each other.

Wang declared he welcomed spirit in which I spoke and added

that so long as both sides sincerely desire solve problems favorable

results could be achieved.

He stated it was advisable at first meeting discuss procedural

matters and that he was glad note there was no difference of opinion

regarding procedure. Since there was no objection regarding agenda

he proposed discussion of first item begin August 2 at 10 A.M.

Regarding question publicity, Wang said he agreed in principle

that information should only be released after mutual agreement. He

proposed that as first meeting was closely followed by world press and

statements would receive attention throughout world each side be free

release statement made at today’s meeting. At second meeting public­

ity question should be further discussed. He expressed pleasure at fact

that there was no disagreement on agenda and suggested that it also be

released to press.

Texts of agreed statement as well as my oral statement to press

through Consulate PAO by separate telegram.

Gowen

8.

Telegram 240 from Geneva

240. From Johnson.

Details today’s meeting by separate telegram. However clear be

release military personnel CHICOMS have spectacularly grabbed prop­

aganda ball. World quickly forgets why these men detained and

CHICOMS get credit for magnanimous gesture. Menon’s visit to me also

well timed. As he was leaving office first telephone reports on release

were just coming in and in his own inimitable fashion without saying

anything definite managed leave impression with correspondents he

somehow responsible and that he discussed matter with me. I have

refused to admit to correspondents he even mentioned matter to me.

It also now seems probable CHICOMS are going to move fast and

early on civilians as they are playing for big game.

While they today accepted “in principle” my proposal for private

character meetings it was not possible for me refuse agree tell press

they had told me about release fliers or that we agreed on agenda which

was simply repetition July 25 public statement by two governments

although their purpose of showing great progress was clear.

I am going to have continuous difficulty on private nature meetings

but will fight this to best my ability. For example they may quickly agree

whatever proposal I make on representation under my present instruc­

tions and then wish make immediate announcement. I will in accordance

my instructions of course stall until I can consult Dept on any announce­

ment this kind but they are going do all possible make stalling difficult.

On such matters as their informing me release individual Ameri­

cans believe I must immediately release information here as they will

certainly do so one way or another.

While release fliers enables me maintain position can be no discus­

sion “other practical matters” until CHICOMS agree release all civil­

ians I feel we are very shortly going to be at this point. In addition to

points specifically mentioned my instructions I intend take up under

this heading 461 military personnel missing from Korean War and still

unaccounted for through MAC as well as 11 Navy and Coast Guard

personnel missing off Swatow.

However I may shortly be reaching point where I will have to intro­

duce “renunciation of force” by CPR and will desire make very careful

presentation this subject. We will prepare draft here for Dept’s approval

but in meanwhile would welcome any suggestions Dept may have.

Gowen

9.

Telegram 330 to Geneva

330. For 8 a.m. Delivery to Ambassador Johnson.

10.

Telegram 242 from Geneva

242. From Johnson.

Appreciate Deptel 330. As at today’s meeting Wang went whole way

in agreeing my yesterday’s proposal for private nature meetings I believe

it preferable wait see how he observes agreement before holding back­

grounder as it would quickly become known to him I had done so. If there

are any leaks out of CHICOMS I will immediately hold backgrounder.

He also agreed to my amplification of proposal at today’s meeting

that prior notice to each of intent to release information on meetings

11.

Telegram 243 from Geneva

243. From Johnson.

Following some additional highlights gleaned from Menon’s

remarks to me yesterday.

1. CHICOMS expect US concretely respond to gesture of flyer

release by relaxing trade embargo, that is bring US trade controls to

UN level. (Impossible say what extent this is message from CHICOMS

or may only represent Menon’s opinion.) US goods going to Chinese

through UK, many new US autos Peiping, self-denial on our part

quixotic, etc.

2. CHICOMS had previously promised Menon to release 11 flyers

and were all prepared to do so but handling release of four had irritated

them in spite Menon’s warnings to US. What Secretary and President

had said at time of release was good but what said subsequently by

some had interfered. (I was not very clear to what he was referring

by subsequent developments but there was some suggestion that giv­

ing public credit to UN was involved.) Protestations ad nauseum by

Menon he had carefully refrained from claiming any credit; important

point was only how he and India could quietly help etc.

3. GOI (Menon’s) work at Bandung etc. had made possible holding

present talks.

4. Cease fire agreement possible on basis evacuation Quemoy and

Matsu.

5. CHICOMS anxious for agreement with US but also must con­

sider Chinese “public opinion”.

6. Not fair to say CHICOM position is they will fight obtain

demands if not successful in obtaining them by negotiation. Also in

Chinese eyes question guns 7th Fleet pointing at them. Important point

(according Menon) is they willing negotiate and important get negoti­

ations going. (In context he was obviously pointing to Foreign Minister

meeting.)

7. CHICOM revolutionary phase now finished and they are no lon­

ger “hanging people”.

CHICOM different from Soviet Union or satellites. Political par­

ties with views different from commies tolerated and are not just

commie stooges. Many former ChiNat officers successful in Chicom

Army. CHICOM attitude toward Formosa “very liberal” and (accord­

ing Menon) not many years until Chiang will be a “Governor General”

of Formosa. Chiang entirely discredited on mainland and no serious

opposition to commies.

8. Without directly referring travel relatives prisoners Menon

raised desire CHICOMS receive American visitors, cultural exchanges

etc.

I made no response except where it was possible do so without

giving away my hand as I was convinced he was going to run and tell

Wang anything I said. However I bore down heavily on renunciation of

force by CHICOMS and gave him copy Secretary’s July 26 press confer­

ence statement with recommendation he carefully read it.

Menon called again this morning to say goodbye. He had seen

Wang last night and said Wang was anticipating these talks will not last

more than one week if “Americans are sincere”. Wang will raise trade

embargo and few other matters but does not intend get down much

serious business on “other questions”. All this to be left for ForMin’s

meeting. Chinese realize probably cannot take place for some time but

want agreement in principle and definite settlement date. Will more

fully report this morning’s talk in later telegram.

Gowen

12.

Telegram 244 from Geneva

Geneva, August 2, 1955, noon

244. From Johnson.

Second meeting with Chinese held August 2, 10 A.M. I led off with

statement on Americans detained in China. I expressed deep concern of

American people at continued detention of civilians pointing out many

imprisoned over four years and others under house arrest or denied exit

permits. I said despite my government’s efforts through various chan­

nels and direct talks initiated by Wang and me last year and continued

at consular level results have not been entirely satisfactory as Wang him­

self stated yesterday. At least 36 American civilians still detained in China

mostly in prison. I emphasized this causes continued deep concern to

American people and inevitably heavily influences attitude of American

people and government toward Wang’s government. I handed Wang list

of 36 American civilians. I continued that although gratified at release

11 rpt 11 Air Force personnel I must in all frankness stress that only release

of all Americans both civilian and military detained by Wang’s govern­

ment would serve dispel ill feeling existing in US over this issue and bring

about atmosphere permitting fruitful discussion other practical matters. I

then told Wang I was aware his government’s interest in discussing ques­

tion of some Chinese civilians in US. Said I would be glad hear his views.

Wang replied he had noted my statement, that he would answer

some questions raised there this morning and others later. Then pro­

ceeded read prepared statement qte status of American nationals from

our viewpoint unqte as follows:

American nationals treated like all other aliens in China and

accorded protection so long as they respect Chinese law.

If they breach Chinese law treated as law provides.

Wang said his government had been informing US from time to

time of status Americans in China and was now rpt now willing advise

US once again of status of Americans and measures they intended to take

out of special consideration. Classified Americans in four categories:

1. 42 ordinary Americans. This includes those who had applied to

leave China and those who had not. Those under this category may

apply and leave any time provided they not involved in unfinished

a message stating that the date of telegram 244, “received as August 2, midnight should

be corrected to read August 2, noon.”

cases. Chinese Government is now rpt now reviewing cases those who

applied and will advise results later.

2. 27 American civilians who have committed crimes. Persons

this category always leniently treated considering crimes committed

and their behaviour. Those with good behaviour may be granted early

release. Out of humanitarian considerations Chinese Government will

allow relatives these persons visit them. Chinese Government individ­

ually reviewing all cases and will advise later regarding each.

3. 16 American captured personnel of Korean War who refused

repatriation. These may leave at any time according own will. Only

recently three captured personnel of Korean War have returned US.

Persons this category will be granted permits promptly on request and

relatives may visit if desire.

4. American military personnel who have committed crimes.

Besides 15 such persons already released at different times only two

remain. Their crimes made known in past and US Government knows

what they are. Relatives these persons will be permitted visit if desire.

At my request Wang handed me lists persons mentioned above.

Comment on lists by separate tel.

Wang then took up question Chinese nationals in US. Said great

majority these have families on China mainland. For long time due

American Government restrictions and practical difficulties these

nationals unable freely return home join families. This is pressing ques­

tion demanding solution, one which Chinese Government always con­

cerned about.

Wang continued both sides had concretely discussed question

freedom Chinese nationals including students at Geneva during past

year. On four occasions US had informed his government of Chinese

leaving US. Of 27 such persons mentioned on first three occasions,

six have still not returned to China. On fourth occasion, April 8, 1955,

US representative stated 76 Chinese permitted leave but no name list

given so impossible verify whether they have returned. There have

not been necessary improvements in return of nationals including

students from US. Wang said might as well point out that when his

side issued exit permits to 27 Americans they always prompt and con­

crete in informing US.

Wang stated they recently informed that US Immigration Service

notified many students they must leave US not later than September

sixth and that those failing depart by that date were advised apply for

permanent residence under Refugee Relief Act of 1953. Short time limit

confronted Chinese with many practical problems. As result many may

not be able leave in time and no choice but apply for permanent resi­

dence which will increase difficulties their return to mainland.

Wang declared both our governments deeply concerned over fate

nationals. On basis mutual conciliation and mutual respect both sides

share desire safeguard interest of nationals in other country including

right return home. In order that nationals each side who desire return

may receive attention Chinese propose:

1. Each side advise other status latter’s nationals residing their

territory in same way Wang had just done re US nationals in China.

Expressed hope name list would include all Chinese nationals in US

including students.

2. US revoke all prohibitions and measures preventing departure

Chinese including time limit which adds to difficulty their return.

3. US supply Chinese with name list 76 persons granted exit per­

mits as reported April 8, 1955.

4. China and US each entrust third country of own choice take

charge affairs of nationals each country, first of all, question their return.

Chinese Government proposes India.

Wang expressed hope we would give his proposals due

consideration.

I replied I wanted study his proposals carefully and would give

him detailed reply later. In meantime however I wanted to state that

concern his government regarding Chinese students in US appears

largely on misunderstanding of true situation. I said I was authorized

formally assure him US imposing no restraints on Chinese civilians in

US desiring proceed territory under control his government. I repeated

that I could formally and categorically say to him that no Chinese stu­

dent was being prevented from leaving US. I asked if he knew any Chi­

nese student prevented from departing he let me know and I would

have case investigated at once. I expressed hope in such event he would

give me as much data as possible on each case just as I had done regard­

ing cases of Americans detained in China.

Wang replied he would carefully study all I had said and reply

at later meeting. He then proposed that since discussions had entered

concrete stage meetings be held as a rule only every other day unless

special reasons demanded more or less frequent meetings. I agreed to

this proposal.

Referring to my proposal not to release information to press with­

out prior agreement Wang said he had given matter careful study and

agreed in principle. Said if any statement considered necessary by

either side agreement should be reached with other or prior notification

given. In this way discussions could be completely frank and informal.

I told Wang I pleased he agreed with me that adoption this pro­

cedure would contribute to frankness and informality of discussions.

I suggested that any prior notification give reasonable time say one or

13.

Telegram 246 from Geneva

246. From Johnson.

Further my conversation with Menon this morning.

He again pushed question relaxation trade restrictions qte or some

other such gesture unqte but I received impression this may be some­

what more his own idea than that of CHICOMS and that he may also be

pushing it with them. Talked about Wang and I arriving at agreement

qte in principle unqte in this, details to be left to lower level officers—

possibly Consuls Generals in Moscow, Delhi or London. London would

be good as CHICOM Consul General there good man. Geneva poor

place as CHICOM Consul General here poor negotiator.

Much talk about importance agreement on ForMin meeting,

CHICOM desire eventual formal recognition as qte this will add

greatly to their prestige unqte, again talk about coastal islands qte

which are held by Nationalists only by virtue US support unqte, my

information situation quite not correct as Nationalists are carrying

out raids most recently in July and this obviously difficult situation

for CHICOMS etc.

CHICOMS interested in internal development and do not want

war. Are making great strides, while still behind India work together

much better and with more enthusiasm than Indians and before long

will pass India. CHICOMS do not like present great dependence on

Soviets and want diversify trade to West including US.

Also much talk about not important whether public knew role he

and India had played in release Air Force personnel and other devel­

opments; qte he and I unqte and China, US and India knew. That was

all that counted. India entirely disinterested this aspect, only interest

was in helping where they could and when they were wanted. Fully

appreciated domestic political and public opinion problems faced by

Secretary and President. However he had been received in US qte much

better unqte this last trip than previously.

He was still fishing hard for invitation stay in Geneva while drop­

ping inconsequential tidbits of his conversation yesterday evening with

Wang. He was apparently hoping I had since yesterday asked for and

obtained authority from Washington to ask him to stay.

Dept fully aware Menon’s conversational style and difficulty pin­

ning down his exact meaning. I also deliberately refrained from much

questioning as I did not desire get drawn into discussion as he was

carefully probing for anything he could carry back to Chinese. How­

ever I believe foregoing and previous tels represent substantially accu­

rate account.

I did keep coming back CHICOM renunciation use of force but

without any immediately apparent constructive result. I did let him

know I was planning request some explanation from CHICOMS for

461 personnel still missing from Korean War as well as 11 Navy and

Coast Guard personnel missing off Swatow. I went into some detail

regarding our efforts this regard MAC and elsewhere. He suggested

some agreement send someone China investigate. I said this was not

problem—obviously if any other Americans held in China no investi­

gator was going to find them. Only CHICOMS knew whether any these

men alive their hands and question was CHICOM good faith in giving

us honest and reasonable answer. In reply my flat question he said he

did not believe any were alive in CHICOM hands as he could not see

any political advantage to CHICOMS in holding them without letting

us know they had them. (I think he is right on this.)

I also gave him fairly detailed account CHICOM treatment our

Consulates and Embassy in China during period CHICOM take-over

taking line in light customary practice during such periods particularly

in China as well as elsewhere CHICOMS qte had refused recognize US

unqte rather than other way around and had made it impossible US

pursue any other policy even if it had desired to do so. This seemed to

be new information to him.

I have refused say anything to any correspondents on Menon’s

visits.

Because length have not repeated these tels to Cooper but presume

Dept will pass as considered desirable.

Gowen

14.

Telegram 248 from Geneva

248. From Johnson.

Before departure today Menon fed some correspondents story his

mission here accomplished in selling both sides India as “intermedi­

ary” in exchange nationals, civilian question now settled and talks

will be over before end of week with agreement reached on FonMin

conference. I have done best deprecate story with few selected cor­

15.

Telegram 249 from Geneva

249. From Johnson.

This morning CHICOM Ambassador Berlin told same source

mentioned Mytel 226 that American civilians under arrest in China

16.

Telegram 250 from Geneva

250. Some correspondents have learned from CHICOM newspa­

per sources CHICOMS gave me “lists” at this morning’s meeting and

will be carrying stories this effect. I have closely questioned them and

appears leak probably occurred before Wang had returned from meet­

ing. Correspondents say CHICOM group including press spokesman

thus far scrupulously observing secrecy agreement. I have assured

correspondents if CHICOMS do not observe I will give them back­

grounder. They seem satisfied if not happy.

Gowen

17.

Telegram 255 from Geneva

255. From Johnson.

List of Americans handed me by Wang August 2 headed “name list

of all Americans in China”. Gives names both English and Chinese and

city of residence.

Category (A) totalling 42 names and headed “Ordinary Amer­

ican nationals” includes ten of 13 listed under tab (B) in document

“brief biographical sketches of Americans detained in China,” dated

July 29. List omits Bradshaw, Huizer and Lai Mee Sen. In addition

includes Walsh, James Edward; Kelley, William; Henkel, Louis A.;

Henkel, Mrs. Louis A.; Erwin, Engst; Hinton, Joan Chase; Hodes,

Robert; Hodes, Jane; Hodes, Billy; Hodes, Nancy; Hodes, Peter;

Chaidien, Eleanor; Snek, Hinton Bertha; Hinton, Caymelita; Gerlach,

Talitha Agnes; Ilo rpt Lo, Ruth Earnshaw; Pu, Lucille Steward; Yap,

Marcelia Vance; Shapiro, Sudney; Rittenberg, S.; Winter, Robert; Tan­

nebaum, Gerald; Kemp, Donald Murray; Cheng, Dorothy Fischer;

Liu, Bertha Jee; Wu, Elma Keen; Liu, Grace Divine; Lau, Laura Louise;

Chandler, Elizabeth Mildred; Su, Sophie; Liang, Chuan-Ling; Wilcox,

Vella M. List does not indicate which persons have applied for exit

permits.

Category (B) totalling 27 names and headed “American civilians

referenced document. Omits Downey and Fecteau. Also includes the

three listed under tab A–2 and Mrs. Bradshaw.

Category (C) totalling 16 and headed “Former American captured

personnel in the Korean War who refused repatriation” contains fol­

lowing names: Adams; Gordon; Dunn; Fortuna; Hawkins; Sullivan;

Webb; White; Wilson; Wills; Adams; Skinner; Pate; Rush; Tenneson;

Veneris.

Category (D) totalling two and headed “American military per­

sonnel who have committed crimes” lists Downey and Fecteau.

Gowen

18.

Telegram 341 to Geneva

341. For Johnson.

1. AFP Taipei reports National Government August 2 made clear

“its resolution to withdraw immediately” from UN in event ­Chinese

Communists admitted.

2. Ch’en Ch’eng July 29 announced resignation Sun Li-jen as Chief

Military Aide to President Chiang Kai-shek because of “fault of impli­

cation in recent case of sedition.” Board headed by Ch’en will investi­

gate case.

3. Communist China and Nepal have signed agreement to estab­

lish diplomatic relations. Chinese Communist ambassador New Delhi

to be accredited Katmandu, presumably on Nehru’s urgings.

4. Registration of foreigners in Hanoi began last week July with

DRV showing clear intent harass and annoy. Objection to use of

­Consular titles by US personnel and many petty objections raised in

completion of forms. At week’s end attitude shifted to near politeness

and forms accepted. Consul unsure whether change indicates real

change in behavior toward Westerners, effort to expedite registration

with further difficulties postponed until data studied, or calculated

alternation between cajolery and admonition.

Dulles

­Jacobson (DRF); cleared in substance in CA.

19.

Telegram 257 from Geneva

257. From Johnson.

Had Hammarskjold to dinner last night. He had called on Wang

earlier in afternoon to ask him transmit reply to Chou’s message

informing him release flyers text of which he showed me and which

20.

Telegram 358 to Geneva

358. For Ambassador Johnson.

1. Reuters Taipei states Nat Legislative Yuan members August

decided cable protest to President Eisenhower against Geneva talks.

George Yeh assured legislators US policy toward China unchanged. AP

report adds Yeh informed Foreign Affairs Committee China would not

recognize any Geneva decision affecting its interests.

son; cleared in substance in CA and IAD.

21.

Telegram 359 to Geneva

359. For Johnson.

Reference your list of 36 American civilian detainees handed to

Wang. We believe as your talks constitute new stage of discussions

regarding Americans detained Communist China you should present

Wang with full list all Americans we believe being prevented from

leaving mainland including Mrs. Huizer, two Romanoffs and Mrs.

Bradshaw. Bishop James Edward Walsh authorized by his Maryknoll

Mission superior here to leave.

You should transmit to Wang these four names to supplement

your lists of Americans being detained and add note that superiors of

Drafted by McConaughy and Forman.

22.

Telegram 360 to Geneva

Chicom points one and four obviously require some time for study.

As to these two points, the pace should not RPT not be forced. You

might suggest they be deferred until after brief recess. This would

enable you in your discretion make quick visit your post. In meantime

points will be receiving full consideration here.

Point two met by our blanket statement as to non-interference with

departure of Chinese which you have been authorized to make and by

first sentence second para our 349. Point three met by our telegram 347.

It seems to us that, given full satisfaction we have afforded on

points two and three, you are in strong position to press insistently for

release forthwith of all Americans. Hope you will be able make Wang

feel that next move up to his Government and that only immediate

all-inclusive action on US nationals will meet obligation resting on his

Government in existing circumstances.

FYI we are considering with top people of Immigration and Nat­

uralization Service certain problems which may arise as to Chinese

aliens of various categories resident in US.

Dulles

McConaughy; cleared by Dulles.

23.

Telegram 310 from Geneva

310. From Johnson. Highlights third meeting follow:

Handed Wang list five names suggested Deptel 359. Made brief

comments their list Americans pointing out inter alia Downey and

Fecteau civilians not military (Wang subsequently explained listing

Downey and Fecteau referred to nature their “crimes” which military).

I then discussed Wang’s 4 proposals of last meeting. Re first said seems

go beyond terms reference talks, also involves thousands names. Need

further time consider. Re second and third proposals handed Wang list

76 names, reiterated assurance all restrictions lifted on return Chinese

to mainland, explained no general deadline for departure students but

cases dealt with individually and postponements departure granted

for good cause. Re fourth proposal said could not yet give reply. Con­

cluded by contrasting present freedom Chinese in US depart and con­

tinued detention 40 odd US citizens China.

After 10 minute recess requested by Wang, he again asked com­

plete list Chinese nationals in US, denying this request exceeded terms

reference; welcomed receipt list 76 but expressed dissatisfaction lack

of info on all Chinese in US, similar that given us on all Americans

China; reiterated familiar contention only US citizens detained China

guilty crimes who dealt with by law, therefore no basis US ill feeling.

Also made statement on alleged causes “Chinese ill feeling” toward

US. Said will examine individual cases Americans and prepared accord

lenient treatment. Welcomed US willingness take time consider his

fourth proposal.

I replied briefly Wang’s remarks reserving right reply more fully

next meeting which I suggested be postponed to August 8. Wang read­

ily agreed, exhibiting no anxiety force pace talks. Wang stressed his

compliance our agreement re press, saying Chinese hoped meetings

would settle matters under discussion not become propaganda forum.

I affirmed our full adherence press agreement.

Gowen

Priority.

24.

Telegram 314 from Geneva

314. From Johnson. Deptel 360.

Fully appreciate Dept’s desire not force pace but feel it also import­

ant that we avoid giving any impression to CHICOMS or public that

we are dragging feet on getting Americans out of China. Press would be

quick exploit in face Chou’s statement ability readily resolve this prob­

lem and rumors started by Menon which have received wide currency

that problem would be resolved at latest by end this week. In light these

considerations which I have been trying keep in balance I did not con­

sider it desirable at today’s meeting to propose recess beyond Monday.

By same token I am certain there would be adverse reaction among

correspondents here which CHICOMS would be quick exploit if I were

to make trip to Prague at this particular stage.

I am convinced that CHICOMS do not seriously expect obtain

point one Wang’s August 2 proposal and should not be led to belief

there is any possibility success although they will continue using it

to strengthen their case for point 4. I had therefore planned at today’s

meeting flatly to turn it down as outside agreed scope talks. In order

not give them too much encouragement on this point and carry out

instructions Deptel 360 I did say while not in position reply it seemed

to be outside scope our discussion.

I am satisfied something in field of point four of Wang’s proposal

is Chou’s minimum price for release remaining Americans. Under best

circumstances I do not now feel any mass release is to be expected and

fear most difficulty will be encountered over Downey and Fecteau with

difficulties also over those being denied exit permits pending settle­

ment financial “claims”.

I feel we are not going to get them move very far on Americans

until we give them some indication on point four. On other hand I have

feared that if we agreed on something along lines point four their tactic

would be to attempt to claim that question of civilians now resolved at

our level and “details” should be left to representing countries.

Therefore tactic which I had planned prior to receipt Deptel 360

was to put forward in informal conversational style a representation

proposal in strict accordance with my instructions as something I was

willing recommend my government’s consideration but didn’t feel I

could do so until they had come further on Americans in China. My

25.

Telegram 315 from Geneva

315. From Johnson.

At third meeting 10 a.m. August 4 I handed Wang supplementary

list 5 Americans as instructed Deptel 359 describing them as persons

we had “some reason” to believe were being prevented from leaving

China. With respect to list of 36 previously given Wang I had indicated

we had firm knowledge all these people desired leave China.

I next pointed out Wang had listed Gordon, Joyce and Hyde as

“persons who had committed crimes”. Noting Chinese representative

had told ConGen last June they were not in prison but being investi­

gated I inquired whether they now in prison.

I said we understood Mrs. Bradshaw released from prison and

asked why she was listed under category (B) Wang’s list. I also pointed

out Downey and Fecteau, whom Wang had listed as military personnel

were actually civilians and should have been listed among imprisoned

civilians.

Referring to Wang’s first proposal previous meeting I stated it

appears go beyond terms of reference envisioned by two governments

when talks agreed upon. Reminded him talks were to consider “repa­

triation civilians who desire return their respective countries”. Pointed

out also Chinese nationals in US number thousands and added US

Government required further time to consider.

I then referred to Wang’s second and third proposals and handed

him list of 76 Chinese students. I told him his reference to “exit per­

mit” in connection with 76 students was inaccurate since no exit per­

mit required of aliens desiring depart US. I then carefully summarized

in some details US immigration procedure, emphasizing absence exit

permit system and explaining that US Government neither preventing

Chinese from leaving nor unreasonably forcing them to leave.

I informed Wang I not in position reply regarding fourth proposal

which required further careful study. I added that as I already pointed

out as result of rescinding by US Government all preventive departure

orders previously issued against Chinese civilians there was not to

best of my government’s knowledge any Chinese civilian in US whose

departure for China was being prevented. However I continued “we

both know of the American civilians in your country whose departure

is being prevented by reason of their imprisonment or otherwise”. I

said I was therefore awaiting the specific information regarding meas­

ures which Wang had said at last meeting his government intended

take with respect Americans.

I then asked Wang for names of 6 Chinese he referred to last meeting

as not having returned China, saying I would have their cases investigated.

At this point Chinese requested 10 minutes recess.

Wang commenced stating he wished clarify a few points. Regard­

ing classification Americans on his list, said Gordon, Hyde and Joyce

had committed crimes but not now in prison. Said Mrs. Bradshaw had

been in prison but now out on bail. Regarding Downey and Fecteau

said their crimes already publicly made known and unnecessary go

into here.

I interjected that my question referred not to crimes but to their

classification as civilians. Wang replied they “classified according char­

acter of their crimes which were military in nature and not according

their personal status”.

Wang then handed me 6 Chinese names I had requested which I

said we would investigate. Names by separate tel.

Wang then said I had stated his first proposal beyond scope item

one of agenda. Since this item dealt with return civilians both sides it

entitled US to request complete list Americans in China, similarly enti­

tled Wang request complete list Chinese in US. He was glad know US

Government willing take further time consider this proposal.

Problem now facing us Wang continued is problem return civil­

ians both sides to respective countries. Both sides should make same

arrangements in order arrive at reasonable settlement. Regarding

Americans in China he had already submitted complete list including

place residence as well as classification of individual. Requested US

side respond this action by providing complete list Chinese nationals

in US, including students whose families on Chinese mainland, and

giving whereabouts each individual.

Wang said persons on list of 36 given him August 2 all included

in list American nationals in China he had provided, including those

guilty and not guilty of crimes. Those guilty must be treated under Chi­

nese law just as Chinese nationals residing US should be subject US

law. He had already made clear position Chinese Government regard­

ing treatment Americans in China and told me he would inform me

later results of review of cases.

Wang went on to say at August 2 meeting I had demanded com­

plete release all Americans in China. This not compatible with factual

situation and his side could not comply. There was no question con­

cerning release those Americans in China who never committed crime.

Those found guilty of crimes must be treated under Chinese legal pro­

cedure. Their cases not simply matter of releasing or not releasing. As

he had indicated his government would take lenient measures toward

these. His government would individually review each case and advise

results later.

I broke in to inquire if he could estimate how long it might take

make this review. Wang replied noncommittally that it would depend

on time required by responsible authorities to make review.

Wang then declared reading from prepared statement he would

like to make a few remarks on ill feeling American people toward

China. Detailed account of status Americans in China as well as of pol­

icy his govt was given me at last meeting. If this could have been made

known to American people in its entirety ill feeling never would have

arisen. Regarding handful of Americans who violated Chinese law,

every sovereign country is entitled take action against such persons.

Out of humanitarian considerations, Chinese Government willing give

lenient consideration cases by further review and also willing that rel­

atives visit prisoners. This all the more proves that treatment given

Americans by his govt is “fair and friendly”.

He considered “alleged ill feeling of Americans” intimated by

me “devoid of factual basis”. On other hand things causing ill feeling

among Chinese people toward American Government beyond enumer­

ation. Take subject Chinese nationals, particularly return Chinese stu­

dents, without mentioning other remote subjects. Chinese people very

dissatisfied. It is violation humanitarian principles for government

prevent by government order innocent person return home for inter­

course and reunion with family. Might as well cite an incident which

greatly irritated Chinese people. More than 14,000 personnel of Chinese

People’s Volunteers in Korea were not permitted listen to explanations

but forcibly removed to Taiwan to become “cannon fodder for Chiang

Kai-shek brigands”. Their families on mainland unable effect their

return. Wang said he had heard both Martin and I were in Korea at time

Korean armistice and knew this case well therefore unnecessary say

more. He did want to add that this is still pending case which enrages

Chinese people. He could mention others similar character. However,

considering atmosphere present talks perhaps not necessary enumerate

more. It was only because I had mentioned alleged ill feeling in US he

thought it might be useful explain how Chinese people feel toward US

Government.

Wang then started reading from another long prepared statement

which opened by stating I had made repeated references to Chinese

students in US and had said that US Govt had never exercised any

restraint on them.

I interrupted to state that was not what I had said. This morning I

had again said that there had been restraints against some few Chinese

students but that these had been removed and forcefully reiterated my

previous statement no Chinese being prevented depart.

Wang completely nonplussed at this point and fumbled through

prepared statement seeking a reply. Only after full four or five minutes

was he able continue.

Changing his approach Wang declared he welcomed statement

by me that restraints on Chinese rescinded. However this statement

only very “general” to effect Chinese not restrained from returning

their country. In the first place, US Govt failed provide complete list

including names and addresses so it impossible check which actually

desired return. It was not only impossible Chinese Govt communicate

these people but also impossible families communicate with them and

transmit funds. Secretary Dulles in press conference August 2 admitted

he could not answer question whether Chinese have financial difficul­

ties and could not pay their travel. This is sharp contrast with Premier

Chou’s statement regarding American nationals July 30. “Our nationals

in US are confronted by great difficulties”. Consequently appropriate

solution of return civilians both sides must be sought which beneficial

both parties not one unilaterally. Otherwise apparently “unfair” solu­

tion would not be understood by people of world and Chinese peo­

ple could not accept. It precisely for this reason that he had proposed

China and US each name third country to handle affairs of nationals

of each in territory of other, in first place, return of nationals to respec­

tive countries: Wang welcomed statement that US willing take further

time consider this proposition. Also expressed appreciation receipt list

76 students.

I replied expressing regret Wang felt it necessary discuss matters

outside terms of reference this meeting. Said I spoke to him of ill feel­

ing people in US, as I knew it, arising from issue we now discussing.

I added I did not intend engage in controversy, just wanted frankly

explain to him factual situation.

Referring to Wang’s remark that my statement on freedom Chi­

nese depart as being “general”, I said if general it was because it was

broad, categorical and without exception. I said I was unclear what

Wang meant by an unfair solution. I said there had been restraints on

some Chinese and these no longer exist. Told him again if he knew of

exception would be glad investigate. Also pointed out all Chinese in US

have complete freedom communicate, nothing prevents their writing

parents in China or communicating any way they desire. I informed

him that for long period US Govt had directly aided Chinese in US to

pay travel to mainland China. Where students did not have money US

Govt has helped by paying all or part of travel expenses. From April 1,

this not total of those returning mainland China, just those given finan­

cial assistance by US Government.

I dwelt on strong contrast present time between situation Chinese

in US and Americans in China and found it hard to understand why he

described it as unfair to China. As I had said previously, no Chinese to

best knowledge my government being prevented departing. Whatever

reasons may be this contrasts considerably with situation in China of

those Americans on list given Wang. Added I hoped Wang accepted

these remarks in spirit in which given.

Wang replied on their part they respect present talks with all sin­

cerity. They willing settle questions. That is why he did not want make

any statement irritating to American people nor hear any statement

which would irritate Chinese people. He did not want to bring up old

debates at conference table. He had thought it useful make few remarks

referring to ill feeling of American people. Also glad to note I not desir­

ous any more debate this subject. This also our desire Wang said. He

concluded that he would make few comments on Chinese students in

US at next meeting.

I then proposed since we both had work to do to make next meet­

ing more fruitful that we postpone our sessions until Monday at 10 a.m.

Regarding press, I suggested following press agreement and that con­

cerning day’s meeting we give only subject discussed and time next

26.

Telegram 368 to Geneva

368. For Ambassador Johnson.

Preliminary G–2 study August 2 estimates Chinese Communists

have present capability utilizing air superiority over Nationalists in

Taiwan Straits to: (1) participate in joint operations to seize and hold

offshore islands; and (2) destroying Nationalist Air Force in all-out

air war in which US did not intervene. G–2 further estimates when

present airfield construction and stockpiling completed Communists

will have capability—unless US intervenes—of: (1) denying effective

Nationalist air reconnaissance of the mainland; (2) protecting coastal

shipping; (3) establishing practical control air space over Taiwan Straits

thereby rendering Nationalist occupation offshore islands untenable;

and (4) subjecting Taiwan to prolonged air siege.

G–2 study not coordinated with other intelligence agencies, except

informally with Air Force at working level.

Dulles

Required—No Distribution to Foreign Nationals. Drafted by Colm; cleared in substance

by Moore (G–2) and Forman.

27.

Telegram 373 to Geneva

Washington, August 4, 1955

373. For Johnson.

28.

Telegram 317 from Geneva

317. From Johnson.

Would appreciate Department’s guidance on what form it envis­

ages for conclusion and announcement any understanding that may

be reached on representation interests nationals with CHICOMS. It

appears to me that form of agreed public statement issued here by

Wang and myself would be most natural one and one which CHICOMS

will expect. It would also seem from our standpoint preferable to pos­

sible alternative of Peking-Washington statement.

I believe any such statement should include CHICOM action with

respect Americans and CHICOMS will desire include something on

students. Such a statement would thus in effect become final statement

on conclusion discussions of return civilians. Thus it would also be

useful negotiating device by enabling us maintain position CHICOMS

must take acceptable action on Americans before understanding on

representation can be consummated.

Gowen

29.

Telegram 320 from Geneva

FYI. Have seen Feine several times and as last year have confi­

dentially given him general information on talks on civilians on basis

German interest German civilians in China. When discussion “other

practical problems” reached hope arrangements such Germans will

receive all info thru Dept and Bonn.

Gowen

to Bonn as telegram 46.

30.

Telegram 321 from Geneva

321. From Johnson. Deptel 373.

Presume Deptel 373 crossed my reports on yesterday’s meeting

containing my exchanges with Wang on Downey and Fecteau.

It will be seen I carried out my original plan of trying avoid high­

light Downey and Fecteau but keep them grouped with civilians making

clear we expected same treatment as for other civilians many of whom

31.

Telegram 328 from Geneva

328. From Johnson.

Believe public statement along following lines would be very help­

ful in handling press situation here and counteracting possible adverse

effect on negotiations of numerous erroneous press reports many of

which originating American press services.

“In order to correct misunderstandings which may exist concern­

ing the present talks, it has been agreed to release the following infor­

mation about the discussion to date:

32.

Telegram 384 to Geneva

384. For Ambassador Johnson.

Department (OIR) has noted indications, including rumors

reported by Congen Geneva and by press reportedly originating with

Chicom diplomats, that Chicoms may be preparing basis for agreement

to renounce use of force. Chicoms have probably concluded from US

statements that US may seek such agreement; may possibly be prepar­

ing for propaganda advantage by initiating proposal at Geneva or as

agenda item for proposed Foreign Ministers conference.

Chicoms could enter into such agreement without altering present

propaganda position by limiting renunciation to international matters,

thus excluding the quote domestic unquote issue of quote liberation of

Taiwan unquote. Note that other unresolved issues in Asia—Vietnam,

Laos, and Korea—likewise classed by Communists as domestic issues.

cleared in IAD and in substance in CA.

33.

Telegram 389 to Geneva

Washington, August 5, 1955

389. For Johnson.

Do you have text June 3 statement Immigration Commissioner

J.M. Swing? If not we will telegraph text since it may be of use at next

meeting.

Dulles

ity. Drafted by McConaughy. The time of transmission is illegible.

34.

Telegram 391 to Geneva

Washington, August 5, 1955

391. For Johnson.

1. Department concurs in general approach you have proposed for

fourth meeting Aug 8 and commends your clear analysis existing situa­

tion and your resourcefulness in devising tactics to meet it.

2. U.S. has already met Chinese Communists on points two and

three. With respect to point one we have already advised as to status

of Chinese nationals, which is that they are free to depart if they wish.

3. U.S. will not supply a name list of all Chinese nationals in U.S.

For your discretionary use (a) this could not be done without subjecting

many who hold allegiance to Republic of China and their relatives in

China to harassment, (b) it is not our policy to give any other govern­

ment a list of all of their nationals in U.S. and (c) we recognize Republic

of China as government of China.

4. Whenever CPR takes the same position with respect to U.S.

nationals in China that the U.S. has taken, namely, that they are free to

return and will be given exit visas on request, U.S. will take further step

of authorizing Indian Embassy in U.S. to facilitate travel of Chinese

here who desire to return to mainland and to transmit funds for this

purpose. Indian Embassy may publicly make known that it is prepared

to facilitate travel to mainland of any Chinese nationals who desire to

return.

5. U.S. would expect on its side to avail of the services of U.K. in

Communist China to facilitate return of U.S. citizens who desire to

return.

6. Dept prefers that agreement if reached on return of civilians be

announced by you and by Wang in Geneva. Announcement should be

identic. Announcement in Washington and Peiping would not RPT not

be considered desirable. Dept will be prepared to give you advice on

wording of statement when agreement is in prospect.

Dulles

by Dulles; cleared by McConaughy. The time of transmission is illegible.

35.

Telegram 333 from Geneva

Telegraph text.

Gowen

36.

Telegram 334 from Geneva

334. From Johnson.

Regret point out August 3 Washington datelined story appearing

August 4 New York Times (which undoubtedly read by CHICOMS)

giving accurately substance position on representation which I will

present CHICOMS Monday not helpful my negotiating position and

complicates my present difficulties with correspondents here who were

finally coming to accept my refusal give any info on talks especially on

future plans.

Gowen

37.

Telegram 398 to Geneva

398. For Johnson.

Your 328. First sentence third paragraph might irritate Ameri­

can correspondents, and appears unnecessary. Therefore it should

be deleted. Department authorizes you to seek Wang’s agreement to

remainder proposed public statement.

Bear in mind that you are still authorized to hold backgrounder

for American press if in your judgment it would serve useful purpose.

Indications here are that Wang probably leaking to Communist corre­

spondents who in turn are supplying Americans.

Dulles

McConaughy; cleared in substance by Dulles, McCardle, and Robertson.

38.

Telegram 399 to Geneva

399. For Johnson.

You will recognize Deptel 384 is only speculative intelligence

round-up and does not represent any agreed Departmental estimate of

probable Chinese Communist course of action.

Dulles

McConaughy.

39.

Telegram 400 to Geneva

400. For Johnson.

Do you have any clue as to source Scripps-Howard dispatch

Geneva August 4 written by Ludwell Denny? On surface some of infor­

mation would appear to be from American official source.

Dulles

McConaughy.

40.

Telegram 335 from Geneva

335. From Johnson.

Hammarskjold called on me this morning to give account call

Wang made on him Saturday morning. Wang delivered written mes­

sage from Chou thanking Hammarskjold for his last message stressing

release flyers not because UN resolution or UN pressure, expressing

disturbance at “propaganda” on UN role, stressing desire maintain

“personal” contact with Hammarskjold, and intimating desire Ham­

marskjold play go-between role in my negotiations with Wang. Ham­

marskjold transmitting copy to New York for delivery Lodge.

Wang then went on with oral presentation concerning now is time

for deeds (inferentially by U.S.—not clear whether this element also

included in written message). Wang then laid entire stress on repre­

sentation as issue as field in which “deeds” expected indicating some

flexibility in choice of country and exact formula.

Hammarskjold said in reply he stressed he could not and would

not play any “go-between” role but willing do anything he properly

can as “third-party”.

41.

Telegram 345 from Geneva

345. From Johnson.

Haguiwara asked me dinner Saturday night during which he out­

lined steps thus far taken at Geneva enter into contact with CHICOMS

on repatriation Japanese and tried sound me out on raising level con­

tacts. Spoke of government sending some one to Peiping.

I confined myself to general discussion present stage my talks, my

hope experience and possible result my talks would be helpful Japa­

nese and suggested question any further steps be taken by Japanese be

discussed Tokyo or Washington.

He said no reply had yet been received from CHICOM Consul

General here and Tatsuke was again going to press for reply this week.

Gowen

42.

Telegram 346 from Geneva

Geneva, August 8, 1955, noon.

346. From Johnson.

Ben Limb saw me Saturday under “urgent” instructions to ask me

to take up in my talks with Wang questions unaccounted for Korean

POW’s and civilians and “reunification” of Korea.

I expressed great surprise at particularly latter request as I said

always my understanding basic principle ROK foreign policy Korean

reunification should not be discussed without presence of ROK and we

had always supported them in this. Of course also pointed out strictly

bilateral nature my present talks and referred Secretary’s statements

we would not discuss anything involving rights of others. Said in any

event this is question should be taken up in Seoul or Washington and

not with me here. Limb said “ROK’s had great confidence in me” etc

and hoped I would see what I could do.

After discussion Limb took back letter on reunification which

he had prepared. Sent me one somewhat more vaguely worded to

which I am simply replying that matter should be taken up in Seoul or

Washington.

On prisoners I also explained impossibility my discussing matter

with Wang and assured him my deep sympathy with this problem and

hope that if I was able develop anything on Americans it would be

helpful to Koreans.

Am submitting copies correspondence.

Gowen

to Seoul unnumbered.

43.

Telegram 347 from Geneva

347. From Johnson.

Highlights fourth meeting lasting two hours twenty minutes.

Wang opened with long statement CHICOM grievances re stu­

dents. Said up to now some students continue be prevented leave, cit­

ing in great detail case of Dr. Tsien, Cal Tech Rocket Expert. Claimed

latter wrote Peiping authorities June 15, appealing assistance return

China. Handed me list names 44 of 76 students given him last meeting

who he said not yet returned China. Wang also made familiar allega­

tions students afraid express desire return, being forced leave by unrea­

sonable deadline, or apply permanent residence, unable receive travel

funds, et cetera.

I replied various points, stressing repeatedly restrictions on Chi­

nese students, including Dr. Tsien now rescinded and all without

exception free depart if desire. As result my reiteration no restrictions

against departure and contrasting with situation Americans in China

Wang shifted emphasis to “practical” difficulties faced by students

saying while these restrictions may have been lifted practical diffi­

culties mounted to restraint on students. Way to solve these difficul­

ties was to have third country look after affairs Chinese nationals in

United States.

I then read prepared statement (A) turning down Wang’s first

proposal August 2 re list all Chinese in US; (B) pointing out we had

fully met second and third proposals; (C) outlining “arrangement

being considered” re fourth proposal and (D) again contrasted situ­

ation Americans in China emphasizing US expected all US civilians

be released promptly and whatever measures necessary bring this

about should be taken by Chinese. Explicit information concerning

measures being taken this regard “would facilitate and expedite

discussions.”

Wang repeated his request for names all Chinese US and reserved

right comment on our suggestions re his fourth proposal at next

meeting.

I then handed Wang text proposed press announcement modified

according Deptel 398. Wang agreed to release with last portion first sen­

tence second paragraph reading as follows:

44.

Telegram 354 from Geneva

354. From Johnson.

At fourth meeting August 8 10 am Wang began referring my

statement restraining orders previously placed by US Government on

Chinese now all rescinded and that foreign nationals in US including

Chinese could leave without applying for permission. Wang said he

welcomed my statement but added he must frankly point out it not

altogether consistent with actual situation prevailing to date. Actual

situation is that although US Government has rescinded departure

restrictions on number of Chinese students who applied to leave long

ago, Chinese students are still subjected all sorts of obstructions and

many prevented from leaving up to present. All Chinese nationals who

want to leave subjected to interrogation by Immigration Service and

FBI and forced express their political opinions. Some even detained for

this reason. Many others for fear of interrogation do not apply to leave

and many who previously applied have reconsidered for same reason.

Many Chinese nationals who applied to leave long ago up to present

unable depart.

An example this is case Dr. Tsien who went US 1934 to study aero­

nautics. After graduation 1938 was engaged in teaching at California

Institute of Technology and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Now holds position at Cal Tech. Is one of few authorities on rockets

in US. When Dr Tsien was leaving US August 1950 US Secret Service

seized his baggage on charge contained classified material. August

23 he further notified not to depart and that investigation his activ­

ities pending. September 7 arrested by Immigration Service and not

released until put up $15,000 bail Sept 23. Later Dean of Cal Tech stated

Dr. Tsien not carrying classified material of US Government but only

his own research work and published books. Returned students in 1955

reported Tsien’s movements restricted to county of residence. In letter

June 15, 1955 to Vice Chairman People’s Republic Dr. Tsien restated his

anxiety to return and appealed for assistance.

Wang continued he could cite further evidence from American

newspapers. UP reported September 23, 1953 indicating no evidence

discovered connecting Dr. Tsien with Communists. However he unable

return to his country and awaiting trial in US. On March 6, 1953 New

York Times stated Dr. Tsien had been ordered deported to China but

that at same time had received orders preventing him from leaving US.

Times added this contradictory situation revealed by Chief of District

Immigration Los Angeles.

Case of Dr. Tsien vividly explains how many Chinese doctors in

US desire return and unable to do so. Up to present Dr. Tsien’s move­

ments still restricted to county of residence. Only charge against him is

desire return to motherland and reunite with family. This utterly unrea­

sonable situation suffices to show appropriate way must be found to

assure return of nationals.

Wang referred my statement August 4 that no general deadline

existing on departure individuals from US and those required leave

only those who no longer held student status. Wang declared even

those no longer students should not be subjected to unreasonable

departure time limit causing them difficulty. Especially unreasonable

aspect is that these people given unreasonably short time. If cannot

leave within limit suffer “torture” of Immigration Service procedure

including interrogation, payment of bail, arrest and other actions which

cause pressures on their minds. At same time they notified can spare

selves such tortures if they apply for permanent residence. This means

they compelled remain US against their will.

Wang then referred my statement that even if alien had applied

for and was granted permanent residence he still could proceed to any

place of his choice at any time. Wang said this is “matter of course”.

Whether Chinese national applied under immigration laws or Refugee

Relief Act still should be able to go to any place of his choice without

stating reason therefor. In order that those Chinese nationals compelled

to apply for permanent residence under Refugee Relief Act or other

regulations not be prevented from leaving in future is necessary find

appropriate way give them assurance.

Wang said he had checked list of 76 given him last meeting and

found 44 not yet returned China. Handed me list these names for

investigation. Referring to Department’s April 2, 1955 press release

concerning rescinding restraining orders these students he pointed out

reference made there to number of cases still under review. Wang said

he would also like to know names these people. On basis statements I

had made in course talks his government believed return these people

should not be subjected any obstruction. Question of return civilians

both sides not only involved return those who had applied to leave, but

also involved return all civilians. Those who may want return any time

in future should also be allowed to go. That is why he had given me list

of all American nationals in China for our convenience. He expressed

view his government also entitled request US make reciprocal arrange­

ment by offering him list all Chinese nationals, including students. Said

this was not beyond terms of reference but was precisely what he and I

should be dealing with.

Wang continued that many Chinese nationals US who have

expressed inherent desire return motherland treated as political prob­

lems. As result they restricted for long time from departing and sub­

jected all kinds of pressure such as interrogation procedure and time

limit for departure. Obstructions still prevail. Many Chinese nationals

have apprehensions regarding applying to leave. State Dept’s April 2,

1955 press statement acknowledged some Chinese students may refrain

from applying to Immigration Service for permission to depart for fear

of being refused. “If it can be said there is contrast between situation

Chinese nationals in US and American nationals in China this is appar­

ently great contrast”.

From time of founding Chinese People’s Republic to date 1523

Americans left China only 87 remain. Law-abiding American nationals

in China can leave any time providing make reasonable arrangement

for unsettled civil cases. However many law-abiding Chinese nationals

in US dare not apply for permission depart. Furthermore as result of

prohibition against remittance money by families of Chinese nationals

to them many such nationals no means obtaining travel funds. There­

fore it is necessary both China and US should entrust to 3rd country of

own choice care of affairs nationals in other, in first place, affair of their

return. Arrangements should be based on equality and mutual benefit.

This would be reasonable solution to problem of return of civilians of

both sides.

With regard to supplementary list five persons given him last

meeting, Wang said Bradshaw two Romanoffs and Walsh already

included in list Americans given US. Regarding Mrs. Huizer he under­

stood she wife of Dutch national. According his information she was

former American but in December 1951 on expiration her American

passport she replaced it with Dutch passport. Situation is she mar­

ried to Dutch national and is now Dutch subject holding Dutch pass­

port. Dutch Charge has repeatedly claimed she is Dutch national and

­Chinese ­Government respects claim of Dutch.

I told Wang I would like make few remarks of preliminary nature on

what he had said. In first place throughout his remarks he had repeatedly

referred to matter of Chinese in US applying for permission to leave. I

told him I might not have expressed myself sufficiently clearly at last

meeting but I had tried to explain that in US alien ordinarily does not

need to make application to leave. We have no such thing as exit permit.

In effect if alien wants to leave US he simply buys boat tickets and leaves.

It is for this reason restraining orders had to be issued against some

students in past. As I had said repeatedly, these orders now lifted. To

best my knowledge no Chinese now being prevented from leaving US

for China. Referring case of Dr. Tsien I said statement that US not pre­

venting any Chinese from leaving country also applied to him. If he still

desires proceed China US would not prevent. I said most of what Wang

said regarding him was past history which it would not be fruitful to go

into. I pointed out Wang had referred to many news articles and I sug­

gested that they not be taken as too authoritative since we had both seen

recently that the press frequently makes mistakes. I added I would want

point out that question whether Tsien tried violate US espionage laws by

attempting take with him US classified documents is of course question

of fact. Whether he did or did not, I stated I could not refrain from con­

trasting fact he still free with status our citizens in China charged with

similar offenses. However said I did not want to debate his case but only

repeat my original statement that if he wants to go he can.

I said in half-serious tone it seemed that Wang on one hand com­

plained we prevented people from leaving and on other that they must

leave too quickly. Said he had referred to cases of some who may wish

to apply under Refugee Relief Act for permanent residence and that

he had asked in future such persons should be permitted to leave if

desire to do so. I said as I had told him before they can do so. Regard­

ing question forcing people leave before they ready, I repeated each

case sympathetically considered on own merits and if extension justi­

fied Immigration Service would grant. No one forced to apply for per­

manent residence. This purely voluntary. Immigration Service merely

points out if persons do not apply they no longer entitled to status as

students when have ceased to be students.

Referring to Wang’s statement concerning interrogating people

on their political opinions, I said this becomes pertinent only if per­

son applies for permanent residence. It is necessary under our law to

inquire into a person’s loyalties to determine whether such person enti­

tled permanent residence. It is normal and natural procedure applied

to all aliens.

Referring to 44 names given by Wang I said I wished point out again

original 76 were those against whom restraining order lifted. Individ­

uals were informed orders lifted and they free to depart. This did not

mean they actually left. It is entirely possible some still in US; I did not

know. If they are it is of own free will and their departure not being pre­

vented. Some of these might have departed US for other places. We have

no way of knowing. Remaining cases referred to in announcement that

restraining orders on 76 lifted have now been completed and no Chinese

now being prevented leaving US including Dr. Tsien. I told Wang Dept’s

April 2 press release dealt primarily with question Chinese students who

apply to US Government for help in paying transportation to China. As

I pointed out US Government had paid or assisted in paying travel of

hundreds of those who returned China. That announcement mentioned

lifting of restraining orders against 76 Chinese students in context of

reassuring Chinese in US desiring obtain transportation from US Gov­

ernment and against whom restraining orders had been issued that they

need have no hesitation make application.

I expressed appreciation for receipt information on Mrs. Huizer,

adding that Wang undoubtedly familiar, like all persons in diplomatic

service, with matter of dual nationality.

I said that while our nationality laws very complicated, in general,

since 1922 any American woman marrying alien retains nationality

under our law. In many cases under law of husband’s country she may

also have acquired his nationality. She sometimes will apply for pass­

port of husband’s nationality and sometimes for American passport.

Under our law this does not affect fact that by our law she is American

citizen. This is Mrs. Huizer’s case and we desire extend protection to her

as American national even though she also may have Dutch passport.

Wang replied that as previously stated he had repeatedly indicated

his pleasure at learning that US Government had rescinded restrictions

on Chinese nationals in US. However according his info actual state of

affairs was at variance with what I had said. He desired clarify possible

misunderstanding my part his government’s position regarding Chi­

nese in US. It was not that his government dissatisfied in past because

Chinese students under restrictions and now dissatisfied again because

they compelled leave too fast. Dissatisfaction is based on fact that they

should have been able return and had not yet returned.

For long period US Government restricted Chinese. Now that

restrictions rescinded Chinese nationals notified to leave before cer­

tain date which left them following alternatives: (1) deportation proce­

dure if failed leave before deadline; (2) apply for permanent residence

if wanted avoid difficulties of alternative (1). Wang said he cited case

Dr. Tsien because well known, but this only one example. His appeal

for help in letter June 15 shows he not free to leave at that time. Further­

more Chinese nationals faced with series of difficulties such as financial

visa booking tickets etc. All these factors affect their freedom to depart.

May be possible under these conditions some dare not express desire

depart. May be cases of people who express desire but may change

mind for one reason or another. All these practical difficulties prevent

departure. Wang went on to say that all this serves explain why even

though I had repeatedly stated Chinese free to leave any time they still

faced many difficulties. Therefore he hoped way could be found bene­

ficial to both sides such as formula of 3rd country.

Regarding case Mrs. Huizer Chinese Government not in position

determine whether she is Dutch or American. He only knew she mar­

ried to Dutchman and held Dutch passport. If US and Dutch could

agree on status Chinese Government would not oppose. Wang con­

cluded he was only trying clarify few points and did not desire debate.

I told Wang that there was nothing we could agree with Dutch about

concerning Mrs. Huizer since according to laws of both countries she

was both (repeat both) Dutch and American. Wang interjected in humor­

ous vein that if husband cooperated with wife problem could be settled.

Then talking from prepared statement I referred to Wang’s first

proposal made August second and said as previously stated I felt this

goes beyond agreed scope present discussion and I had also at that

time mentioned practical difficulties. I now added it is not policy US

Government make such information available any other government.

Therefore it not possible agree Wang’s proposal.

With regard Wang’s fourth proposal I stated I believed it went some­

what beyond first agreed item of agenda. However I told Wang US Gov­

ernment considering arrangement which would be within agreed scope

present discussions and fully meet objectives with respect to civilians

both countries envisaged by two governments in July 25 statement.

Told Wang seemed to me all that is required carry out this purpose

is for each of our governments take whatever steps necessary permit

return of civilians who desire do so. As I had explained to him my gov­

ernment has already taken all necessary steps. If Wang’s government

would do same entire problem would be quickly resolved.

Nevertheless my government was giving consideration to follow­

ing arrangement:

Indian Embassy Washington could receive requests from any

­Chinese civilian in US who felt he being prevented from leaving.

Indian Emb could investigate case sending officer to interview per­

son if it desired and if Embassy concluded complaint justified could

report facts to Dept with request for whatever action Emb considered

appropriate. Emb could also act as channel for transmission travel

funds and otherwise extend to individuals appropriate assistance. Both

my government and Indian Embassy would give full publicity. British

Embassy in China would perform same services for American nation­

als there, Chinese Government agreeing to give and permit publicity in

same manner as arranged in US.

I then continued I had been giving particular thought to Wang

statement last meeting regarding necessity any solution reached

being beneficial to both parties. Said I thoroughly agreed this view

but failed to see how it possible to describe situation at present stage

of discussions as unfair to Chinese Government or people. Added

if I desired to do so could dwell at some length on unfairness pres­

ent situation to Americans in China but I did not believe it useful

engage fruitless debate this subject but rather look at present practi­

cal situation.

I said at second meeting Wang had asked for solution to question

of restrictions on return to China of Chinese nationals in US. I said I

immediately and promptly replied under full authority my govern­

ment no Chinese being prevented from leaving US. At last meeting I

carefully and frankly explained nature of restrictions formerly placed

on departure some Chinese students and explained these now entirely

removed. I reiterated to Wang that US Government not now preventing

departure any Chinese from US. Said it was difficult for me to see how

I could be more explicit or more fully meet request Wang had made. I

said I had tried make it clear that US Government expects all its nation­

als in China desiring to return to US will be able promptly to do so

and that Wang’s government should take whatever measures necessary

bring about this result. I concluded stating it would greatly facilitate

and expedite our discussions if Wang could shortly give me explicit

info regarding measures along this line which I understood were being

considered by his government. I emphasized again that my govern­

ment had taken all necessary steps to meet Wang’s requirements and

there were no exceptions not even case of Dr. Tsien to my assurance that

all Chinese free to leave US.

Wang said noted my statement. Said he had restated own posi­

with me it was necessary for both sides to make reciprocal or corre­

sponding arrangements for return of nationals which would bring

a solution to this problem. He expressed regret I had not agreed his

first proposal. Said on his part he had already given me complete list

all Americans in China which very convenient for our use. Therefore

Wang added which very reasonable his side require similar action from

US and would appreciate it if US could reconsider its position on first

proposal. Regarding arrangement I had suggested on the 4th proposal

he reserved comments until next meeting which Wang proposed be

August 10, 10 a.m.

I then proposed press release to which Wang agreed as reported

my tel 347.

Atmosphere continues easy and informal.

Gowen

45.

Telegram 356 from Geneva

356. From Johnson.

Denny article August 4 referred to Deptel 400 not available here.

Gowen

46.

Telegram 357 from Geneva

357. From Johnson.

Re Wang’s allegation today’s meeting:

No way families in China can remit funds for travel students from

US. If not correct would appreciate any information I can use refute.

Gowen

47.

Letter from McConaughy to Johnson

Washington, August 8, 1955

Dear Alex:

I haven’t forgotten the understanding that I would drop you an

Official Informal occasionally to give you some of the background and

nuances here that would not be reflected in a cable. Bill Sebald returned

to work this morning, so I should have more time to devote to your

mission now.

There is a pronounced feeling of satisfaction here with the way

you have handled the first week of the negotiations. The Secretary him­

self is following every development closely. He has drafted some of

the telegrams to you himself and ordered last Tuesday that henceforth

all messages to you which conveyed anything in the nature of instruc­

tions was to be personally approved by him. Mr. Robertson of course

is following everything. There is a rule now that even the factual and

background messages must be approved either by Mr. Robertson or

by me. So we will have a look henceforth even at the DRF intelligence

messages before they go out.

I am sure you will want to get the general feel of the reaction here

to the tactics you are using regardless of whether it is laudatory or not.

The only question at all which has arisen, and it is not a criticism, is as to

why you withheld the four names (Mrs. Huizer, Mrs. Bradshaw and the

Romanovs) from your first list. I have explained that these names had

already been given to the Chinese Communists and that the Commu­

nists had denied as to three of them that any exit application had been

filed and as to the fourth that she was an American citizen. However

there was a feeling that it was a tactical mistake not to press these cases

continuously by including them in every list. It has been remarked that

we have nothing to lose by putting the names in and perhaps some­

thing to gain. This was the reason for the follow up instructions to you

suggesting that you add the names by means of a supplementary list.

The belief that perhaps harm was done was reinforced by the unfortu­

nate Scripps-Howard article by Denny which stated that the names had

been omitted because we knew our case was weak on these four.

There has been something of a feeling that you might press harder

the point that the great preponderance of the Chinese students in this

country maintain their allegiance to the GRC and emphatically repudi­

ate the Communist regime. It is recognized that Wang Ping-nan would

be very allergic to this point but it is felt that you do not have to be

estopped on that account. We wired you the full text of the Chinese

Embassy’s statement which makes this point quite cogently. You may

find a peg on which you can hang an additional remark along this line

when the representation discussion waxes warm.

The only other even half way critical statement I have heard was

relative to your decision not to hold a backgrounder for the American

press as you were authorized to do last week. We are all profoundly

aware of the difficult position you are in with the American press. We

have had echos of your press relations problem back here and we have

all been casting about for some means of taking the pressure off you.

Part of the Secretary’s press conference of August 2 was an effort in that

direction. Carl McCardle apparently feels that you should have gone

ahead and held the backgrounder when you were authorized, espe­

cially since it was pretty clear that Wang was talking to the Communist

correspondents. He believes that the attitude of American correspond­

ents would have been improved and there would have been no net

loss as to the privacy of the conversations, since so much was leaking

any way. I believe he still thinks you should hold the backgrounder, as

indicated in our follow-up telegram of August 6 which of course was

largely a reflection of his view. If you feel you need a Departmental

press officer to help you, in addition to Garnish, Carl is ready to give

sympathetic consideration to the matter.

The question of leaks is indeed a trying and baffling one. We feel

very badly about the New York Times Washington dateline article of

We were particularly pained since we wanted your limited represen­

tation proposal to have maximum impact on Wang, which cannot be

obtained when there is no element of surprise. McCardle and Suydam

say the information did not come from the P area. I did not talk to the

correspondents at all. Dana Schmidt was getting around the Department

quite actively about that time and it may be conceivable that he may

have picked something up although I have no idea how or from whom.

The Denny item which obviously was based in part at least on a

leak also mystifies us. It seems that some of it, particularly the informa­

tion about the number of repatriated Chinese students who received

travel funds from the U.S. Government, might have been based on U.S.

official sources.

We have an additional information problem with the foreign

Embassies here which are closest to us, namely the British, Canadian,

Australian and New Zealand, and to some extent the French. So far we

have been telling them in confidence about what has already come out

in the papers, but they are pressing for fuller and more timely informa­

tion. This is something of a dilemma for us, . . . .

Let us know what you need which you are not getting, and any

ways in which we can help you. The meetings of this week should be

fairly decisive. If you think you will need Martin for a few days longer

than planned, let us know. It would be unfortunate and difficult if he

should have to miss a few days at the beginning of the War College, but

I do not say it would be impossible to arrange, if his presence in Geneva

is important to you. All the best to Ed, Ralph and Col. Ekvall. Our feel­

ing toward you and your staff is a mixture of admiration and sympathy.

Regards and good wishes.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

48.

Telegram 362 from Geneva

362. Eyes only Secretary and Robertson. From Johnson.

In considering future course these talks and our broad objectives I

offer following thought.

Present context, particularly in public mind is that talks are in

nature conference with definitive ending at some point in time. It

seems to me some of difficulties inherent this context would be obvi­

ated if and when we reach “other practical matters” we could grad­

ually shift to concept of contact between Wang and myself being of

indefinite duration in time and intermittent in nature to be utilized at

request either side.

Although possibly presenting some new difficulties I think this

concept would best meet our broad objective without difficulties inher­

ent in concept attempting prolong present series of talks.

I realize this is largely question of form rather than substance but

believe it important.

What I have in mind is that at some point in discussion “other prac­

tical matters” I would attempt obtain agreement that instead of meeting

more or less regularly with recesses of varying lengths we would meet

only at request of other to be transmitted through ­Consulates General

here.

There could be gradual press preparation for this and would take

advantage any opportunity prepare Wang.

While this has advantages must recognize contains disadvantages

present situation in heavy public attention whenever Wang and I would

appear here. However do not perceive any practicable alternative as

long as Wang and I remain point of contact.

Gowen

49.

Telegram 364 from Geneva

364. From Johnson.

With close yesterday’s meeting we have completed presentation

our position on civilians and next move is up to CHICOMS. I feel my

instructions have enabled me to establish very strong position which

has put CHICOMS on defensive and in future meetings plan largely

to reiterate position as necessary. I believe we should stand on posi­

tion performance by CHICOMS re Americans essential to agreement

on representation proposal and that agenda proposed by CHICOMS

and accepted by US precludes discussion any other matter until civilian

problem resolved.

If I get no performance on Americans I plan at appropriate time to

suggest fairly prolonged recess “to give them time to give further con­

sideration to cases Americans” thereby reinforcing position on relation

their performance on Americans to representation arrangement.

One of decisions we will have to make is what degree of perform­

ance on Americans we will consider sufficient for agreement on repre­

sentation. I do not believe we can or should reach this decision now.

Another decision is whether we will be willing to broaden repre­

sentation proposal to include inquiries by Indian Embassy initiated by

“parents and relatives” in China. I expect Wang will at minimum press

very hard for something this nature. This raises obvious problems but

it seems to me that even under our present concept it will in fact be

very difficult prevent or refuse “humanitarian” requests from Indian

Embassy do this. If this case should obtain from it whatever negotiating

advantage it gives us here, it does not seem to me this would increase

danger of use of families for coercion as even under present circum­

stances families free write to Chinese in US. Would also think Indian

Embassy would be very careful avoid giving any basis for charges it

was agent for coercion. From standpoint UK protection Americans in

China it also gives US something of much more value than present

formulation.

I plan present list 461 American POW’s missing from Korean War

and 11 Navy and Coast Guard personnel as first item under “other

practical matters”.

Gowen

50.

Telegram 369 from Geneva

369. From Johnson.

Some members congressional group here for Atomic Energy Con­

ference have indicated to Claxton desire obtain information from me re

my talks with Wang.

Claxton and I inclined feel probably useful if I do not (repeat not)

get ahead of whatever Department is doing keep Foreign Affairs and

Foreign Relations Committees informed.

If Department approves I would propose talk rather fully about

what has happened thus far on civilians including representation pro­

posal I made yesterday and confine myself to reference material Secre­

tary’s press conference on other problems.

Tomorrow is probably last day group will be here.

Would appreciate Department’s instructions and guidance.

Gowen

51.

Telegram 428 to Geneva

Washington, August 9, 1955

428. For Johnson.

Your 369. You are authorized in your discretion to brief members

congressional Atomic Energy Group on discussions to date regarding

civilians. You may also give them general idea of what is involved in

representation issue but you should avoid mention name of any third

country in this connection.

Dulles

Drafted by McConaughy; substance approved by Dulles and Morton (H). The time of

transmission is illegible.

52.

Telegram 429 to Geneva

Washington, August 9, 1955

429. For Johnson.

Your 357. FYI as of now US Treasury Foreign Asset Control Reg­

ulations prohibit remittance dollars to US from Communist China for

travel or other purposes unless special Treasury license obtained. A

few licenses have been granted for student travel from funds blocked

in US. In these cases Treasury required evidence that traveler of good

character and acceptable political orientation and that close relatives

mainland China believed non-­sympathetic Communist regime.

If arrangement authorized Paragraph 11 your instructions should

materialize, appropriate understanding with Treasury will be sought.

Dulles

by McConaughy. The time of transmission is illegible.

53.

Despatch 2 from Geneva

No. 2

Geneva, August 9, 1955

REF

SUBJECT

Transmitting Text of Ambassador Johnson’s Statement to Ambassador Wang on

United States Immigration Procedures

enclosing the full text of my remarks to Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan

on the subject of United States Immigration procedure. These remarks

were summarized only very briefly in the reference telegram to reduce

its length.

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Enclosure

Johnson Remarks

Geneva, August 4, 1955

“I then referred to Wang’s second and third proposals and handed

him list of 76 Chinese students. I told him his reference to ‘exit per­

mit’ in connection with 76 students was inaccurate since no exit permit

required of aliens desiring depart United States. Any alien, including

any Chinese national, did not need to apply for permission to leave

country but simply made travel arrangements and departed. That is

why United States Government had to issue restraining orders in cases

those few aliens whose departure we desired prevent. Such orders

issued against certain Chinese students in past. On April 8 our ­Consul

General informed Chinese representative that 76 students formerly

prevented from departing United States free to leave. These students

all notified that orders preventing their departure rescinded. They

not issued exit permits because there is no such permit. Vast majority

Chinese students never subjected to preventive departure orders and

always free to depart whenever wished. The few preventive depar­

ture orders previously issued all rescinded. I then repeated that, as I

informed him last meeting, United States Government not now pre­

venting departure any Chinese wishing return to mainland China.

I said, on other hand, no general deadline imposed for departure

Chinese from United States. I did not know where Wang obtained

information that Chinese students must depart by September 6 or

apply for permanent residence but said I was satisfied this informa­

tion inaccurate. I explained many Chinese who came to United States

as students have completed studies and no longer students. Thus

they no longer entitled student visas and in accordance with stand­

ard procedures applied all aliens such persons informed by Immi­

gration their visas no longer valid, and they should arrange depart

United States by certain date. However each case handled individu­

ally and each individual permitted give reasons why departure date

should be postponed. Many postponements granted for one or more

months or indefinitely at request of individual. Postponements have

been and will be granted in order avoid hardships or for other good

cause. I also pointed out that even though alien had applied for or

been granted status of permanent resident he still free leave country

at any time, and I concluded reiterating no exit permit required.”

54.

Memorandum of Conversation, Koo and Robertson

Washington, August 9, 1955

SUBJECT

Negotiations with Chinese Communists

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador V. K. Wellington Koo, Chinese Embassy

Walter S. Robertson, Assistant Secretary—FE

Walter P. McConaughy, Director—CA

Ambassador Koo said he had noted the remarks of the Secretary in

his press conference of August 2. The Chinese Government was uneasy

over the apparent possibility of a high level meeting with the Chinese

Communists. The Ambassador was instructed by his Government to

state that it would look with strong disfavor on any meeting between

the American Government and the Chinese Communists at the Foreign

Minister level. He said he would be very gratified if he could be given

a confirmation that no such meeting is in prospect.

Mr. Robertson said that there was no change whatever in the Amer­

ican position on this. The situation was the same as when the Secretary

held his press conference. There was no likelihood of such a meeting

then, and there was none now.

Ambassador Koo expressed his gratification at the receipt of

this information. He said his Government was also gratified to have

received through the American Embassy in Taipei, a summary of the

Secretary’s instructions to Ambassador Johnson for the talks at Geneva.

He said that his Government felt the instructions were not objection­

able “as far as they go”.

Mr. Robertson said that Ambassador Johnson’s authorization went

no further than the instructions summarized for the information of the

Chinese Government. The limitations on the discussions were clearly

set forth in the instructions, and there were no instructions beyond

those which had been paraphrased in the Chinese Foreign Office.

Ambassador Koo said that his Government was interested in

learning of the latest developments in the talks at Geneva.

Mr. Robertson said there had been no tangible progress so far on

the question of the release of the American civilians. The main purpose

of the talks was to get our people out. Wang Ping-­nan was trying to

make an issue of alleged interference with the travel to the mainland of

McConaughy on August 12.

Chinese students in this country. These allegations as to restrictions on

Chinese in this country were balderdash. It was only propaganda, since

the Chinese students actually are free to move about in this country and

to leave the U.S. if they wish. We do not want any Communist sympa­

thizers here as permanent residents. They are more than welcome to go

to the mainland if they want to.

Ambassador Koo mentioned the Chinese Embassy statement of

last week which pointed out that the great majority of Chinese stu­

dents in this country have been assisted and protected by the Chinese

­Government and its Embassy and Consulates in this country and that

the students are loyal to their Government and still look to if for rep­

resentation of their interests. They give their allegiance to the Chinese

Government and not to the Chinese Communists. It is presumptuous

deception for the Chinese Communists to pretend that Chinese in

this country should look to the Communist regime for protection and

representation.

Mr. Robertson said we had noted the Chinese Embassy statement

and had sent it to Ambassador Johnson. He considered it a very good

statement. He remarked that we know that the Chinese in this coun­

try, with very few exceptions, maintain their fidelity to the Chinese

Government. We are aware that the Chinese Government has helped

many of them with scholarships, travel arrangements and so on, and

that practically all of them came to this country on Chinese Nationalist

passports. Mr. Robertson remarked that there is no such thing as an exit

visa in this country and Wang Ping-­nan’s allegations at Geneva that

“exit visas” had been denied was nonsense.

Ambassador Koo said that he hoped the American Government

would never admit even tacitly any degree of Communist jurisdiction

over the general body of Chinese students and other nationals in this

country.

Mr. Robertson said the Ambassador need have no fear on this score.

The Communists would not be allowed to establish any contact except

with those who of their own volition stated that they wanted to go back

to the mainland.

Mr. Robertson mentioned that those few students who wanted to go

back might have some difficulty in paying for their passage. The United

States Government did not propose to pay their way back to Communist

territory. However, we were not standing in the way. Anyone who wants

to go to a Communist country can go—­the sooner the better.

Ambassador Koo mentioned that Mr. Robertson had informed

Minister Tan on July 29 that some third party such as India or Great

Britain might be designated to assist the Chinese students who want to

return to the mainland.

Mr. Robertson said some Embassy might conceivably be the

medium for handling travel funds and making other arrangements for

the return of those who expressed a wish to go back.

Ambassador Koo remarked that this arrangement would imply no

official representation of Chinese Communist interests in this country,

since the Embassy role would be that of a travel expediter.

Ambassador Koo reverted to the subject of a possible conference

with Communist China at the Foreign Minister level. He said that his

Government would appreciate a more definite statement or formal

assurance that no such meeting was contemplated. The Secretary’s

statement of last week was most welcome and President Eisenhower

had said that he associated himself with the statement of the Secretary

of State. But any doubt on this score would adversely affect the psy­

chology of the problem on Taiwan.

Mr. Robertson said the President and the Secretary had stated most

emphatically that this Government would not discuss, on any level,

matters affecting the rights of the Government of the Republic of China.

He felt there could be no objection to bilateral talks aimed at securing

the freedom of our nationals who are held. If there should be any inter­

national conference on Far Eastern subjects where matters involving

the rights of the GRC were to be discussed, “your Government would

have to be there”, or give its concurrence. Nothing could be decided

“without your presence or your concurrence”.

Ambassador Koo said his Government would appreciate a more

formal assurance on the lack of any intention of Secretary Dulles to

meet with Chou En-­lai. He wondered if his Government could obtain a

memorandum on the subject.

Mr. Robertson said he did not think there was any question of a

memorandum. Both the President and the Secretary of State have stated

their position to the American people and to the world. He felt this was

as explicit and as binding as anyone could wish.

Ambassador Koo said it was true that very satisfactory statements

had been made, but they were rather informal.

Mr. Robertson observed that they were categorical and were on the

record. He did not see how they could have more force or more effect.

He offered to send the Ambassador a copy of the press conference.

The Ambassador said he already had the record of the press con­

ference. He needed something more formal.

Mr. Robertson said he felt that what had been said could not be

more official. A public affirmation of our position before all the world

was better than a classified communication. It put the whole world on

notice what our position was.

55.

Telegram 389 from Geneva

389. From Johnson.

Desire call attention FBIS item 091427 Peking International English

Service. This probably forecasts line Wang will take when “no force”

reached and to which reply some kind will be required.

Gowen

56.

Telegram 439 to Geneva

Washington, August 10, 1955

439. For Johnson. Your 362.

While it is useful to be thinking ahead we doubt that it is useful to

attempt now to crystallize our thinking.

Dulles

Dulles; cleared by Robertson. The time of transmission is illegible.

57.

Telegram 440 to Geneva

1. Concur you should stand on position that the first necessity is

for CHICOMS to match US position regarding return if desired. Only

when the principle of free return has been conceded is it useful to con­

sider the means, if any, needed to implement this principle. In most

cases, certainly in this country and surely for Americans in China, no

third party intervention is needed.

2. We question fairly prolonged recess in view of Chou En-­lai’s July

30 statement that “the number of American civilians in China is small and

the question can be easily settled”. We believe that we should seek to hold

the CHICOMS to this utterance of Chou En-­lai.

3. We believe that the right of return should be conceded to all

Americans but agree that we should not commit ourselves now to a “all

or nothing” position.

4. We are not disposed to broaden Indian Embassy representation

to cover follow up of inquiries by parents or relatives in China since this

Dulles; cleared by Robertson.

58.

Telegram 441 to Geneva

441. For Johnson.

FYI. Internal Revenue Code provides no one depart from US with­

out certificate of compliance with income tax obligations. In the case of

such aliens as Chinese students, this is formality which would probably

involve not more than ten to thirty minutes at some local office. These

students either have no independent income or, if employed, there has

been a withholding of income tax at source so that nothing is due and

indeed if they leave before end of year, they would presumably be enti­

tled to a rebate because they would get full year exemption.

Procedures would be slightly different but also simple in the case

of alien who was working for himself. Our records indicate that this

is not the case with reference to Chinese students but might of course

be the case as regards other Chinese aliens. However, here the result

would be presumably the same since income tax payments are required

to be made quarterly on basis of estimate of income and departing

aliens would get a full year exemption.

We would doubt whether foregoing requires you qualify statement

which you apparently made, as reported your 354, August 8, since no

exit permit is in fact required and since this income tax requirement

would as indicated normally be a formality. However, you will have to

be judge whether or not your previous statement requires qualification

in light of foregoing.

Dulles

by Hanes (S) and Dulles; cleared by Robertson.

59.

Letter 2 from McConaughy to Johnson

Letter No. 2

Washington, August 10, 1955

Dear Alex:

I hope to get off a short note to you by each pouch (Monday,

Wednesday and Friday) whether or not there is much that is new to

pass on to you.

The report of the 4th meeting on August 8 was illuminating. It was

good to see how well you met the cleverness of Wang Ping-­nan and

kept him on the defensive despite the resourcefulness of his approach

and the subtlety of his misrepresentations. We are struck by the fact that

the full report of the meetings gives an appreciation of the atmosphere

of the talks no condensed summary can convey.

Walter Robertson and I hope to meet with the Secretary today on

your 364 which anticipates questions which will probably arise in the

near future. We concur that the question of what degree of perform­

ance on Americans will be considered sufficient for our agreement on

representation ought to be deferred. There is considerable skepticism

as to whether we should be prepared to give on the representation

proposal to the extent that you suggest. The symbolic significance of

the representation issue has become magnified here and every angle

of any agreement we make will be exposed to the closest scrutiny in

many quarters. The GRC of course is watching us like a hawk on this.

Wellington Koo was in yesterday chiefly to stress the dangers implicit

in any concession on the representation issue going beyond students

who take the initiative to return to the mainland. I am sending you

a copy of this memorandum of conversation. It is true that friends

and relatives of Chinese in this country can now write them from

China, but this is not the same as writing to an officially designated

representing Embassy. I have no doubt that the Chinese Communists

have the resources to get the names and addresses of great numbers of

Chinese students in this country and to arrange for real or pretended

relatives in China to address the Indian Embassy in regard to them.

Thus the Indian Embassy might get involved in a mass of cases. This

would give the Chinese Communists the widespread access they want

to Chinese students in this country in practice, whether they have it in

theory or not. We hope to get an instruction to you on this by the end

of the week.

Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.

The information we got from Elting Arnold of Treasury, who is in

charge of Foreign Assets Control (our 429) does not afford you any­

thing useful for your discussions with Wang. As you can see, Treasury

has followed a very hard-­boiled policy on remittances from Mainland

China for repatriation of Chinese. We can not thrash out the matter

with Treasury now because your instructions are so closely held. Of

course we do not anticipate any difficulty with them if the matter ever

comes to a head, since your instructions were explicitly approved by

the President. Actually it will be a good thing from an economic war­

fare standpoint to require the Communists to remit dollars to pay for

the travel of those who want to return.

I am enclosing a copy of the Ludwell Denny article from Geneva

which disturbed the Secretary and which seems to involve a leak some­

where. Nobody is accusing anyone of leaking. It is just that we are mys­

tified where all the information is coming from and trying to run down

all leads. It is not inconceivable that the information could have been

deduced by Denny from information supplied by Wang to Communist

correspondents.

I suppose you got the copy of the memorandum of conversation

of August 3 between Murphy, Robertson, Devaney and myself. I think

INS is well in line. I am proposing that we give them copies of those

parts of your conversations which directly concern their practices. I

believe it will help to keep them happy and insure that they are dis­

posed to cooperate fully.

We are considering your cable on a junior assistant to help you

when Ed Martin departs and Ralph Clough moves up. If we can raise

the money I would like to send one of our junior China Language offi­

cers. It would put a strain on us here but I believe he would be more

useful to you than an officer from a European post and it would be

very valuable experience for him. I am still awaiting word from you

as to whether you think Martin should stay on a few days after the

War College opens. I do not want to encourage this unless you consider

it highly desirable, but I believe the Commandant would agree if the

Department requested it at a high level. And I do not think it would

spoil the course for Ed since the first days are largely for orientation.

The added insight he will have on Chinese Communist aims and nego­

tiating tactics will be a very valuable contribution to the course at the

War College.

The Secretary is holding a press conference in a few minutes.

We will send you a transcript of the pertinent portions as soon as we

get it.

Good luck and good wishes,

60.

Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Geneva, August 10, 1955

Dear Walter:

This is just a very brief note to let you know that after I arrived here I

discovered there is only one pouch a week. For this reason I have covered

things more fully than I otherwise would by telegram. It is also undoubt­

edly for this reason I have as yet received nothing from you. It therefore

appears that our plan to keep in close touch by informal correspondence

is not of much use as far as short range matters are concerned.

I realize my volume of telegraphic correspondence is very heavy,

particularly the record of the meetings. However, I felt it important that

all of you know exactly what is being said and pouch service is too slow

to be of any practical use. I have followed the practice of attempting to

give you the highlights by priority message as soon as we come back

from each meeting and then sending the more complete record by fol­

lowing message. I know that during the Korean armistice I found this

most helpful. However, if you have any other suggestions or would pre­

fer we further condense the record of the meetings, please let me know.

As I have indicated in my messages, I feel very satisfied with the

situation and feel my instructions have enabled me to keep on top of it.

Ed Martin has been of tremendous help and has greatly added to

whatever effectiveness I have had. I greatly appreciate the sacrifice he has

so cheerfully made as well as you and Walter making him available. I have

sent a message on my need for a junior officer when he leaves. In addition

to the record of the meetings I receive a quite heavy volume of correspond­

ence which requires replies and there are many other such chores.

Due to the Atomic Conference we are in very crowded quarters

although the Consulate General has done its very best. They were suc­

cessful in getting me a sitting room which has been very useful for

meeting people and doing some of our work. They supplied me with

a most excellent secretary who the three of us have very badly over­

loaded but I am hoping our volume of secretarial work will not remain

at its present level.

I was sorry not to be able to comply with the suggestion that I go

back to Prague last weekend, but it appeared to me here unthinkable at

this time. However, I have that part of my instructions [illegible in the

Official–­Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A handwritten note on the letter

indicates it was received on August 15.

61.

Telegram 401 from Geneva

401. From Johnson.

Briefed all members congressional group except Hinshaw yester­

day in very broad terms including representation issue. No mention

made and no question raised concerning any specific third countries.

Only reaction on representation was “why not?”. Some concern over

slowness talks which spontaneously ascribed Chinese. I said thought

no particular significance except narrowness Wang’s instructions and

slowness his communications.

Gowen

NOTE: Reference Deptel 428, CWO-FED.

62.

Telegram 402 from Geneva

402. From Johnson.

Following is text of draft agreement proposed today by Wang:

QUOTE

Agreement on the question of the return of civilians of both sides

to their respective countries adopted by the Ambassadorial representa­

tives of the People’s Republic of China and the United States of Amer­

ica in their talks held in Geneva.

1. Both sides declare that the nationals of each side residing in the

other who desire to return to their respective countries are entitled to

depart for their respective countries. Civilians of the above description

who are involved in unfinished civil or criminal cases under the laws

of the country of their residence shall be entitled to the same right upon

the settlement of their civil or criminal cases.

2. In order to guarantee the implementation of the above principle,

the People’s Republic of China and the United States of America will

each entrust the Republic of India and the United Kingdom respectively

with the charge of the affairs of the return of civilians of the respective

countries residing in the other. The countries thus entrusted shall per­

form the following duties:

A. Upon the request of a civilian of one side residing in the other

who desires to return or upon the request of his government made in

his behalf the entrusted country shall make representations with the

government of the country in which this civilian is residing with a view

to settling his difficulty in departure;

B. In the event of a civilian of one side residing in the other who

desires to return and who is being prevented from doing so, the

entrusted country shall, upon his personal request or the request in his

behalf by his government, conduct investigations and make represen­

tations with the government of the country in which the civilian con­

cerned is residing in accordance with the findings of the investigation

with a view to arriving at a settlement;

C. In the event of a civilian of one side residing in the other who

desires to return and who finds difficulty in paying off the return jour­

ney the entrusted country shall render him assistance on behalf of his

government.

Priority.

63.

Telegram 403 from Geneva

403. From Johnson.

At meeting this morning issue was clearly joined. In interest expe­

diting agreement and although not completely satisfactory to Chinese

Wang submitted “draft agreement” incorporating but somewhat broad­

ening along line anticipated Mytel 364, our representation proposal

(text by separate tel) and stated that if concluded “I will advise you

very soon concerning results review” cases detained American nation­

als. During course informal discussion he mentioned release fliers as

Chinese gesture and expectation gesture from US.

I stressed degree we have gone meeting their point of view, that

is removal all restrictions against Chinese in US, consideration rep­

resentation proposal, lack substantial results his last year’s promise

review cases Americans, length time Americans in prison, lack of value

representation proposal to Americans in China whose situation could

be resolved only by action his government, inequality situation two

groups nationals, and repeated with increasing directness agreement

representation not possible until action their part Americans.

During course considerable give and take Wang increasingly clear

in implication no action on Americans until representation agreement

but that such action would promptly follow agreement.

64.

Telegram 412 from Geneva

412. From Johnson.

At fifth meeting August 11, 10 am Wang, reading from prepared

statement, said he had carefully studied views both sides on question

return civilians to respective countries, especially my statement last

meeting. Said he thought there had been approach of views between

two sides and progress in talks. Regarding problem Chinese nationals,

including students, in US he said he had proposed US should remove

all prohibitions and measures preventing their return, including dead­

lines which increased their difficulties. Had noted with satisfaction

that US not restraining any Chinese civilian wanting return. Further,

had noted my categorical assurance Chinese students not being pre­

vented from leaving US and that all restraining orders affecting Chi­

nese nationals, including Dr. Tsien, had been rescinded. Continued that

I had also agreed Chinese national applying for or granted permanent

residence in US should be permitted travel anytime to any destination

their choice without giving reason. Regarding deadlines, he had noted

my statement each case sympathetically considered on own merits and

Immigration Service giving reasonable time.

Wang continued he welcomed all these statements which facili­

tated progress of talks. Said I had also met his proposal by submitting

list 76 names for which he expressed satisfaction. Meanwhile, he felt

bound to point out that although given list of Americans in China I

had failed provide list all Chinese, including students, in US. This fail­

ure regrettable and he reserved right put forward this demand again

in future. Regarding American nationals in China he had indicated

when he handed me list that all ordinary Americans could depart

anytime so long as not involved in civil cases or had made reason­

able arrangements regarding civil cases. American civilians who had

committed crimes would be treated with leniency according to their

crimes and behavior and those with good behavior would be granted

commutation of sentence and early departure. Captured personnel

from Korean War who had chosen not to return could leave at any­

time they desired. Regarding military personnel who had commit­

ted crimes, 15 had been released at different times. Said he had also

informed me that Chinese Government reviewing cases American

nationals who have applied return their country. Cases of Americans

who had committed crimes being reviewed individually. In order

safeguard interests nationals both sides he had proposed each should

entrust third country of choice with care of affairs these nationals;

in first place affair of their return. He deemed this proposal meets

interests nationals both sides. Obviously, affairs concerning return

nationals both sides closely connected with other affairs in their coun­

try of residence and his proposal should therefore not be regarded as

exceeding terms of reference agenda item one.

Wang continued saying at last meeting I had stated US Govern­

ment considering certain arrangement. He then proceeded repeat

almost word for word arrangement I had suggested previous meet­

ing. He went on to say in opinion his government this arrangement

could not satisfy demands of nationals both sides, especially Chinese

nationals in US. However in interest speedily reaching agreement on

first agenda item he was ready agree basically such arrangement as

first step in safeguarding interests nationals both sides. Based on state­

ment made by both sides he would like propose draft agreement to be

adopted as the agreement reached in these talks concerning question

return civilians both sides to their respective countries. Wang then read

draft agreement quoted Mytel 402.

Wang then stated I might recall his statement at first meeting that

so long as both sides adopted conciliatory attitude would not be dif­

ficult agree on question return civilians to respective countries. Now

joint agreement had been reached unanimously on majority of points

under item one. Expressed hope it possible speedily to adopt draft

agreement. After above draft agreement adopted by both sides he

would advise me “very soon” re cases US nationals who had applied

leave China.

I told Wang I was sorry I unable share his view that we as close to

agreement as he appeared indicate. Said we came to discuss question

nationals of both sides who prevented from returning their country. As

Wang had pointed out this morning US Government had removed all

preventive departure orders against Chinese civilians, including that on

Dr. Tsien. There remained no governmental measure preventing depar­

ture Chinese. This fully met Wang’s request of me this regard.

I said I was confident there are no practical difficulties which

would prevent Chinese in US from proceeding their country if they

desired do so. However in effort fully to meet his point of view I had

outlined an arrangement which my government considering regarding

third party representation. I again wanted contrast situation Americans

in China who wished depart with that of Chinese in US. All Chinese

nationals now free depart. However in case Americans in China sit­

uation same as at time talks began. Solely measures taken by Wang’s

government prevented departure these Americans. No third country

representation arrangement could remove those obstacles. Only action

by his government could clear road for departure Americans detained

against their will in China.

I added I was pleased to learn at meeting August second and

repeated today that Wang’s government reviewing cases Americans in

China including those in jail. I also had carefully noted statement his

government intended take measures with respect to them out of spe­

cial consideration. I expressed hope these measures would be such that

Americans now prevented from leaving his country would be free to

depart. If this done promptly I was confident it would establish basis

on which it would be possible work out arrangement such as I had

suggested last meeting and he suggested today. Otherwise I feared it

would be very difficult to do so.

I told Wang that speaking very frankly I was sure he appreciated

problem of public opinion in US faced by my government on this ques­

tion. I had referred to this in my statement August 2nd. My govern­

ment had taken very far reaching measures regarding Chinese in US

and also, in response his request, had told him of arrangement on rep­

resentation we considering. I said I frankly did not believe it possible

for my government make any announcement or enter any agreement

to be publicly announced at this time without more in way of results

on problem my nationals which I had come to discuss. Said I had spo­

ken very frankly because I wanted him understand my problem. In

meantime I said my government and I would study Wangs proposal

and might have something further to say on it later but wanted him to

understand exact situation this regard.

Wang replied he had noted my remarks. Regarding civilians both

sides returning their country American side had its viewpoint and

his side also had own viewpoint. He recalled that in talks conducted

last year he had made clear the general principles of his government

on question nationals both sides residing in other country. Said his

government had same policy toward all foreign nationals in China,

including Americans. These classified two categories: ordinary aliens

and those who breached Chinese law. So long as ordinary civilian

free of unsettled case in China he allowed freely to leave. Those who

had breached Chinese law also granted lenient treatment according

Chinese law. Recent release of 11 airmen was evidence of great con­

tribution made by his government in present talks. He recalled Chou

En-­lai in statement to People’s Congress, July 30, had said number

Americans in China small and this problem easily settled. Further­

more as he had just informed me so long as he had agreement on his

draft proposal he would advise me very soon on results of review of

cases by his government.

Wang continued he must frankly point out, though he did not

intend go into it, bitter plight Chinese nationals, including students, in

US past years. Chinese people very excited in their sentiments regard­

ing bitter plight innocent Chinese nationals and students in US. Chi­

nese nationals in US including students faced difficulties in US just as

I had pointed out US nationals in China facing difficulties. If it were

not that nationals both sides having difficulties there would have been

no reason to meet here. As result exchange views past four meetings

he had indicated to me Chinese welcomed attitude of American side.

Although not entirely satisfied with arrangement suggested on fourth

proposal in interest of progress of talks he prepared to use conciliation

and compromise and was ready accept arrangement proposed by me.

Draft agreement he had put forward was only more detailed version

of one I had suggested last meeting. In the main it was same one I had

advanced. Said he regarded such arrangement as means of settling

problem. It showed his side willing avoid more debate this question

and reach agreement in conciliatory way.

I replied to Wang that of course our governments each had its

point of view and our task was one of reconciling these viewpoints.

It seemed to me that my government although Wang not completely

satisfied had gone nearly whole way in meeting desires his govern­

ment. So far as American nationals concerned whatever Wang might

feel regarding his nationals in US most Americans had been in jail for

long period. At our meetings last year I had understood these cases

being investigated. More than year now passed and majority these

people still in prison. I hoped his government would now find it pos­

sible to expedite measures he had spoken of in order that this problem

could be resolved. Said I would examine his proposal in light of what

I had just said. Hoped by next meeting he might have some sugges­

tion to meet problem I faced.

Wang replied ways should be found beneficial to both sides

in joint effort solve problem our nationals. That is why they had

accepted arrangement I suggested last meeting. If we proceed on basis

this arrangement future progress on question of nationals would be

expedited. He welcomed spirit in which I had spoken this morning

concerning talks. In interest of reaching agreement, willingness for

conciliation and compromise must exist both sides. We two ambassa­

dors were sitting face to face but if we did not make effort reach one

another could not accomplish anything. If each would hold out his

hand problems could be solved. Each side must approach other and

as he had stated so long as both sides displayed sincerity he would

be able to advise me regarding cases of Americans now under review.

I responded that I supposed each thought his side had gone far­

ther than other. I felt that we had gone farthest. Representation pro­

posal did not originate with us but with him. I had proposed my

arrangement at last meeting in effort meet his point of view. However

did not see how it helped solve problem faced by American nation­

als. Their problems could only be solved by action his government.

Wang replied that in course of talks important thing not what each

side claimed it had done but for each side to see what other had done.

So long as both sides showed sincerity would not be difficult over­

come our problems.

I said I hoped that he could help. So far I had nothing to show my

government regarding problem my nationals and asked if he would

have something by Saturday. Wang replied there were two separate

problems. One was arrangement regarding return of nationals of both

sides and the other was measures to be taken by his government.

Agreement on detailed arrangement would be test of sincerity each

side regarding this question. So long as both sides showed spirit of sin­

cerity he believed it would not be difficult to find solution.

I proposed next meeting Saturday, 10 am.

Gowen

65.

Telegram 417 from Geneva

417. From Johnson. Re Deptel [Embtel] 364 and reports on today’s

meeting.

As I see situation question of principle is one difficult for me to

pursue further since substantially all Americans are being detained on

pretext crimes and claims. CHICOMS have consistently claimed they

adhere to principle all Americans free depart unless have committed

crimes or have civil claims pending against them. On one hand I can­

not argue principle we willing permit Chinese depart even if they have

committed crimes and on other have been trying avoid being drawn

into fruitless morass of discussing CHICOM justice with them. There­

fore I have been attempting keep discussion within framework practi­

cal situations.

Today’s meeting makes clear that CHICOM asking price for fur­

ther action on release Americans is representation arrangement. Pres­

ent CHICOM position asking US for performance on representation

arrangement in return for promise on Americans is clearly unacceptable.

However problem we will be facing is how many Americans

we insist on in return representation arrangement. I have up to this

time and will as long as it seems useful talk in terms “all Americans”

although in context give and take at today’s meeting I left door open for

something short of that.

Do not feel we will obtain release any further Americans prior to

agreement on representation but that we should strive for simultane­

ous announcement release Americans with announcement agreement

on representation.

At Saturday’s meeting I plan again to press Wang on release

Americans possibly obliquely suggesting simultaneous announce­

ment as mentioned above and argue against broadening our sug­

gested arrangement on representation.

Would appreciate Dept’s preliminary reactions to Wang’s “draft

agreement”.

Gowen

NOTE: Reference believed to be EMBTEL 364 from Geneva. Mr. Wad­

Limit Distribution.

66.

Telegram 418 from Geneva

418. From Johnson.

Following are our general observations thus far. While Wang has

been bargaining hard he has been avoiding uncompromising and

extreme positions usually taken by Communist negotiators. At today’s

meeting in particular his review of my previous statements was nota­

bly accurate and devoid of usual attempts at distortion and misrepre­

sentation. In fact he seemed entirely to accept my previous statements

as meeting the requests embodied in his points two and three and while

mentioning point one in effect dropped it. He is acting much more in

tradition of old time Chinese bargainer than Communist diplomat.

He has almost completely avoided usual Communist cliches and

language as interpreted by his translator which is basis reports our

messages tends be considerably more brittle than in original Chinese.

He is uniformly courteous at meetings and I now have definite

impression from manner as well as substance that they desire reach

agreements.

Gowen

67.

Telegram 466 to Geneva

Washington, August 11, 1955.

466. For Johnson.

summarized separate telegram. You will be instructed in time for

August 13 meeting.

FYI. We wish avoid formal agreement with Chinese Commu­

nists. Prefer unilateral US declaration which would be matched by

by Dulles and McConaughy. The time of transmission is illegible.

68.

Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Geneva, August 11, 1955

Dear Walter:

Just a very hasty note this morning before I leave for the meeting

to thank you for your letter of August 8 which arrived yesterday. I find

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

that because of the Atomic Conference there is a pouch leaving today in

which I will send this letter.

With regard to the four names, Ralph states he had left them off

because they were not on the list Gowen gave the Chinese on May 30th.

They have now been added and I do not see this has necessarily raised

any particular difficulty.

As we said in our telegram, we had not seen the Denny article

and had no idea what it said until your letter. Ralph is the only one

who has seen Denny, and he tells me that he definitely did not make

any statement to Denny along the lines quoted and I am sure that this

is correct.

I feel very much it would have been a serious mistake for me to

press the point that the preponderance of Chinese students in the United

States maintain their allegiance to the GRC. Wang has been very careful

not to raise the issue of the allegiance of all students, as I am sure that

he knows the facts and the problems which this would pre­sent. We both

have been carefully talking only about Chinese who desire to return.

Any such sweeping statement on my part would immediately raise the

question of how do we know, and it seems to me clearly lead to a pro­

posal for polling all students by some third country, which is exactly the

issue we are trying to avoid. If we get into any hot, heavy debate on the

subject, it is something I have very much in the back of my mind but do

not expect that we will do so.

I gave you my feeling on the press backgrounder in my last letter,

and I still feel that I have been right. I am confident that in spite of the

strain to which they have been subjected, my relations with the corre­

spondents are still on a friendly and sympathetic basis. I have taken

a great deal of time in seeing them individually, talking about what I

could talk about, explaining my position on secrecy and they are very

understanding.

I hope you will continue frankly to keep me informed so that I can

promptly clear up any questions as to why I do or do not do this or that.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. As another brief note, going back over the record, we noted

that when on August 2 Wang gave me a list of Americans and said the

cases of those who had been convicted of offenses were being reviewed,

he carefully omitted that statement in regard to Downey and Fecteau,

who were put in a separate category. This reinforces my belief they are

going to be the most difficult and I am not quite sure how best to handle

it. While I am of course going to push the maximum on their cases, at

the same time I hope to avoid doing anything that would jeopardize

the release of the others. I would welcome any ideas you have on the

subject.

UAJ

69.

Telegram 425 from Geneva

425. From Johnson. Reference: McConaughy’s August 10 letter.

Martin departing August 16.

Gowen

70.

Telegram 4 from Geneva to Hong Kong

426. From Johnson.

It would be helpful if you could inform me number Chinese stu­

dents from US who have arrived Hong Kong en route Communist

China since August 1 and transmit such figures on a continuing basis

whenever any significant change.

Gowen

Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 426.

71.

Telegram 428 from Geneva

428. From Johnson.

here.

1. Believe form should be unilateral simultaneous declarations

agreed in advance and issued here as suggested my 317 [417].

2. Do not see necessity for phrase “if desired by CPR” in para 2(A).

3. Believe desirable particularly on behalf Americans in China

retain element of investigation validity complaint suggested in my

original presentation.

4. Believe 90 day limit as presently worded not (repeat not) desir­

able as carries erroneous implication that at end 90 days US may no

longer be willing permit departure Chinese aliens. If 90 day limitation

considered necessary believe should be limited to para two.

5. Para 5 would tend destroy our present bargaining position in

using representation agreement as cheese to obtain Americans and

would not be necessary under concept in para one above. CHICOMS

could well fully subscribe this agreement and continue hold Americans

whom they allege have committed crimes or have unsettled claims.

Do not believe it necessary or desirable submit counter proposal

tomorrow. Believe we require further time for careful study and deci­

sion on any counter proposal and at tomorrow’s meeting I can confine

myself to debate on CHICOM broadening our proposal, if Department

concurs, suggesting form unilateral simultaneous declarations, say we

are still studying and will have further observations later. Also will con­

tinue press Wang on release Americans along lines I followed at last

meeting.

Gowen

72.

Telegram 429 from Geneva

429. From Johnson.

Am not clear on thinking underlying draft declaration contained

Deptel 466 but from content assume thought might be to issue entirely

unilaterally, possibly publicly as final effort in these negotiations. If

such is case I do not believe that point yet reached in negotiations here.

By throwing down public challenge to CHICOMS at this point seems

to me would retard rather than expedite release. If we are willing enter

into any representation arrangement before release any Americans

I believe we can accomplish much more in context negotiations here by

my working out with Wang an agreed public statement which would

be in form individual unilateral declarations of which other would take

note. I would strive have included in his statement as firm and definite

commitment as could be obtained on release imprisoned Americans in

particular.

Gowen

73.

Telegram 470 to Geneva

Washington, August 12, 1955

470. For Johnson.

Your 402 and 417. Department reaction is Wang draft

1. represents no basic advance over Chinese Communist posi­

tion of 1954 on detained Americans. Cases all detained Americans

are classified by Communists as criminal or civil, and there is still no

commitment to release them until QUOTE settlement UNQUOTE to

Communist satisfaction.

Drafted by McConaughy. The time of transmission is illegible.

74.

Telegram 478 to Geneva

478. For Johnson. Your 428.

1. Agree form should be unilateral simultaneous declarations and

our 466 was designed to suggest the form of such a declaration.

2. QTE If desired by C.P.R. UNQTE can be deleted at your discre­

tion. We proposed it with a view to creating a situation such that in the

C.P.R. Declaration the Government of the United Kingdom would not

be obligated to seek the return of American turncoats in China whom

we do not want to get back.

3. See no objection to insertion in 2(a) of words QTE if it deems

such a complaint valid UNQTE as precondition to intervention on civil­

ians’ behalf. Some such language would conform to your original pre­

sentation which is unobjectionable.

4. 90-­day clause was designed to permit of subsequent modifica­

tion if conditions change. We do not want to be committed in perpetu­

ity to a situation where Chinese Communist spies could operate in this

country, knowing that if caught there would never be any penalty other

than their prepaid first-­class ticket to China. However, possibly it is

sufficient to drop out reference to 90 days and merely provide that the

Declaration shall be valid until notice of termination given or possibly

nothing need be said explicitly about termination as long as it is under­

stood that it is not necessarily in perpetuity but subject to reasonable

termination.

by Dulles; cleared by Robertson and McConaughy.

75.

Letter 3 from Johnson to McConaughy

Letter No. 3

Geneva, August 12, 1955

Dear Walter:

Thanks very much for your letter of August 10. I understand the

same more frequent pouch schedule will be in effect through next week

so I will take full advantage of it.

I had thought that my previous telegram on a replacement for Ed

Martin had overtaken your letter. Therefore I had not replied to this

point. However, I today sent a telegram simply stating that he was

leaving August 16th. As I previously said, Ed has been invaluable to

me here and I greatly regret his going. If there were any possible way

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

of keeping him without sacrificing his opportunity to go to the War

College I would certainly want to do so. However, I do not see that

a few days one way or the other is going to make much difference as

long as he is leaving in any event, and, therefore, have agreed to his

leaving in time for him to get back for the opening. I also feel that it

will be very useful to both of us for him to have the opportunity to

discuss fully with you in Washington the situation here as we see it.

He plans to come to the Department just as quickly as he arrives.

I am particularly anxious that he discuss with you the question of

broadening the scope of representation as suggested in my 364. So I will

defer any discussion of that in this letter.

I appreciated the information on income tax clearance for depart­

ing aliens. I was aware of this requirement when I was discussing the

matter with Wang, but I am glad to have the exact information. As you

will see from the full report of the meeting, the discussion was in the

context of exit permits. I was trying to make my statement just as strong

as possible and believe that it is fully correct within the context. It seems

to me that it goes without saying that before anyone departs he should

take care of his obligations, including taxes. It just points out that Treas­

ury handles income tax matters in the manner it does. It is in no sense

a control over the departure of aliens. I intend to stand on statements I

have made in this regard.

Thanks very much for the Denny article, which we had not seen.

As you observed, most of the article is deduction on the basis of a few

scraps of information, and not very good deduction at that.

The Secretary’s last press conference was of tremendous help to

me. I was able to point out to correspondents here that he said almost

exactly what I have been saying to them. Please thank the Secretary for

me. I believe our press problem is now rapidly approaching its proper

proportion.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

76.

Letter from McConaughy to Johnson

Washington, August 12, 1955

Dear Alex:

We have decided to send Douglas Forman, FSO–4, to assist you

when Ed Martin leaves. We are awaiting word as to whether you intend

to request a short extension of Ed’s stay before we issue Doug’s travel

orders. He will be severely missed in CA and it does not seem necessary

to send him until about the time that Ed will be leaving.

Doug is well qualified for the assignment. He has been doing most

of the leg-­work on your messages here and is thoroughly familiar with

the issues, both from his service here and his experience in Hong Kong.

He is an able and dependable officer and is good in Chinese. Ed and

Ralph can tell you more about him.

There has been quite a debate here as to whether USIA should be

allowed to give normal “straight” news play to the story of the mis­

treatment of the eleven airmen. Naturally they would not be allowed to

“play it up” while the Geneva talks are going on. Everybody is agreed

that we should not do anything to inflame the Chinese Communists

needlessly or afford them a pretext for continuing to hold the remain­

ing Americans. The question is whether straight normal news play,

without comment or beating of the drums, accurately reflecting the

attention received by the story in the American press, would be hurtful.

The present instruction is for them to play it down—­in effect suppress

it temporarily, and we understand Defense is instructing the airmen to

keep quiet for the present.

One piece of quite sensitive rumor, which is solely for your pri­

vate background info. Yesterday we saw the interrogation of one

of the eleven released airmen, Benjamin. He reported that he had

seen quite a bit of Fecteau for a while in prison. He said Fecteau had

been able to give him bits and pieces of his story. Fecteau expressed

some doubt as to whether the two American pilots of his plane had

been killed in the crash. He said the plane landed fairly flat with­

out any lethal impact. He said he regretted to have to admit that he

and Downey had left the vicinity of the plane immediately without

investigating what happened to the two pilots so he had no real evi­

dence. Personally I am quite skeptical that the pilots are still alive.

It is doubtful if the Chinese Communists would have any motive

for public announcement that they were dead if this was not the

case. In any event it is unlikely the pilots will ever turn up after the

The enclosure is not printed.

announcement that they were killed. Of course, nothing has been

said about this to the next of kin or anyone else outside of a very

restricted group.

We are awaiting your reply to our 466 of last night regarding the

formula for parallel unilateral declarations. Your report giving the

detailed account of the fifth meeting on Thursday has just come in and

I have not had a chance to digest it yet. Since the pouch is closing, this

letter cannot wait.

Your 418 on Wang’s general negotiating attitude is of special inter­

est. I believe there is a tendency here to read less significance into his

conciliatory approach than you may be inclined to do from there. The

semblance of reasonableness and willingness to go part way may be

recognizable, but when his draft agreement is taken apart there is really

nothing in the way of tangible concession at all. There is as yet no assur­

ance that the Chinese Communist position on the Americans is any dif­

ferent from what it was last year. Undoubtedly they would be willing

to release the Americans in return for the sort of broad representation

arrangement which they are seeking. But a concession on this from us

is not to be expected. In the absence of a complete yielding by us on the

representation issue, can any substantial “give” by the Communists on

the detained Americans really be expected? Maybe so, but there is as

yet nothing we can rely on.

There is something of a feeling here that you do not need to show a

great measure of tolerance of Wang’s proposals when their terms reflect

no assured advance.

The Secretary does not like the idea of a formal agreement with the

Chinese Communists. He feels definitely that parallel unilateral decla­

rations are preferable, as indicated in our 466.

We are well aware of the tough row you have to hoe. The questions

coming up now are in a different sense more trying than the relatively

superficial press problem you had to wrestle with the first week.

We are naturally troubled as you are by the dilemma we may soon

be faced with if we have an opportunity to spring only part of our peo­

ple in return for a limited representation arrangement.

Enclosed is the transcript of the Secretary’s August 10 press

conference.

Good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Director for Chinese Affairs

Enclosure:

Transcript of Secretary’s press conference of August 10, 1955.

77.

Telegram 448 from Geneva

448. From Johnson.

Wang opened this morning’s meeting with statement that if I

would immediately agree upon his draft agreement he would before

announcement thereof made give me and publicly release results

review those cases Americans both prisoners and exit permit cases in

which review completed. Was clear to us that qte review unqte not rpt

not qte completed unqte cases all Americans. In context satisfied qte

completion of reviews unqte meant release but was unable obtain any

indication number.

During course much give and take there was strong implication

that he was probably prepared accept my original formulation for third

party representation.

During course give and take I also obtained from him categorical

statement that cases all Americans including category (D) his August 2

list (Downey and Fecteau) being qte reviewed unqte.

In reply I referred again to measures taken by US Government

permit departure Chinese, our categorical assurances none prevented

from departing and stated I had hoped results of qte review unqte on

Chinese side would permit him make same statement to me, that is no

American desiring return being detained. I stressed inequality of situ­

ation and expressed disappointment early settlement forecast by Chou

En-­lai had not materialized. I could not consider agenda item one set­

tled until all Americans able return.

I then commented on draft agreement stating our original formu­

lation fully and adequately meets situation and that provision for qte

investigation upon request of government unqte entirely unnecessary.

I said I was not in position accept draft agreement or its present form

and reserved right for further comment.

Wang then pressed me to state any other objections. In reply I

pointed out second sentence first paragraph his draft offered nothing

to Americans detained in China.

I then outlined our thoughts on form of simultaneous unilateral

statements giving as rationale those matters “concerned internal affairs”

each country. I said any statement we made would include categorical

statements I had made to him during course of meeting on freedom

Chinese depart from US together with whatever arrangements made

78.

Telegram 452 from Geneva

452. From Johnson.

At sixth meeting, August 13, 10 a.m., Wang led off reading pre­

pared statement. Said at last meeting he had advanced draft agreement

concerning return civilians both sides to their respective countries,

based on arrangement I had suggested. He considered that although

arrangement could fully meet requirements American nationals in

China could not fully meet those of Chinese nationals US. Nevertheless

in interest reaching agreement he had basically accepted my proposal.

Was regrettable I had been unable promptly adopt his draft agreement

last meeting.

Wang continued I had stated last meeting that measures taken

regarding Chinese nationals fully met desires Chinese side and that no

practical difficulties delayed departure Chinese nationals from US. This

not in accordance facts. As he had already pointed out to date Chinese

nationals especially students encountered all sorts obstacles to leaving

US. In every case of Chinese students who wanted return but whose

departure had been restricted many still unable to return up until now.

How could this be construed as meeting requirements Chinese side?

While he had furnished information all Americans in China I had failed

provide list all Chinese US. How could this be construed as fully meet­

ing requirements Chinese side? He had also pointed out third party

arrangement did not fully meet their needs. Therefore it could not be

construed as fully meeting his request. Nevertheless he endeavoring

reach agreement in spirit conciliation.

Wang said at last meeting I had raised question public opinion.

As he had already pointed out, if status Americans in China could be

known to American people in its entirety he believed they would real­

ize treatment these Americans just and lenient. However in present

American propaganda many things gravely provoked feeling Chinese

people. For example, Chinese Government took initiative release 11 air­

men. As result American newspapers and even official spokesmen had

seen fit direct all sort slanders against Chinese Government. Up to pres­

ent Chinese people viewed all such utterly unreasonable slanders with

extreme restraint. If one were to talk of things provoking public opinion

he would have to raise question of thousands Chinese volunteers from

Korea still detained. This caused strong feeling on part Chinese people.

However his side had refrained from raising this question both outside

and inside talks for if both sides dwelt on this type question results

would be propaganda debate unfavorable to talks.

Wang said Chinese Government had released 11 airmen on eve

of talks for purpose creating favorable effect on talks. Wang said he

had repeatedly expounded reasonable and lenient policy of Chinese

Government toward Americans in China. During year from initiation

talks last year to present, 38 Americans had left China as result review

their cases by Chinese Government. He had also informed me that Chi­

nese Government now reviewing cases Americans in China and that

he would advise me of results. In interest speedily reaching agreement

on return civilians both sides and in spirit of conciliation, he willing

make still another effort. Declared he “hereby instructed” inform me

that under condition of an agreement on return civilians both sides (it

was clear this referred to representation arrangement) Chinese Gov­

ernment prepared inform US side on results of cases of Americans

in China review of whose cases completed. He would also agree to

announcement of results this review prior to announcement on agree­

ment regarding return civilians both sides.

When I asked Wang to clarify this statement he said his govern­

ment had basically accepted an arrangement proposed by me and had

worked it out in practical form. If we could reach agreement on this

draft agreement he could promptly inform me of results of review cases

of those Americans on whom reviews completed. If agreement could be

reached at today’s meeting he could tell me results today.

I said I had understood at second meeting when he gave me names

of Americans in China divided into various categories that his statement

concerning reviewing cases and informing me of results did not apply

to those persons under category (D) described as American military

personnel committing crimes. I also mentioned our previous exchange

on this in which I had pointed out that classification two persons in this

category was erroneous as they were in fact civilians.

Wang replied as he had repeatedly informed me his government

prepared review all cases involving Americans in China. Asked to

repeat this statement he said reviews not confined to any single cat­

egory of Americans but applied to all and repeated “all cases being

reviewed”.

I said to Wang we had come here to discuss return of civilians to

their respective countries. I had informed him measures taken by my

country including the one man he had mentioned as being detained.

Said it was difficult for me to understand why it not possible for him

to do same regarding American nationals his country. If he was in posi­

tion now to inform me under certain conditions regarding steps taken

regarding some of our nationals it was obviously not completion of

review procedure that prevented our being given this information. I

would hope that results he able give me of review these cases would be

such that he could make same statement to me as I made to him. That is

that his government not preventing departure any American in China

who desired return to US. I had told him categorically my government

had taken all necessary remaining steps to permit return of any Chinese

nationals without exception to his country. At outset of talks I hoped

and expected he could make same statement to me regarding Amer­

icans in China. My government took action it did regarding Chinese

nationals in US in order promptly dispose of question under agenda

item one. I said it difficult reconcile situation still facing American

nationals in China with statement of his Prime Minister to which he

had referred that number of Americans in China small and question

could be easily settled.

I was expecting it possible equalize situation our two groups of

nationals and thus lay basis for mutually acceptable agreement on third

party representation. That was best way lay ground for discussion next

agenda item.

Referring to Wang’s draft agreement I said it went considerably

beyond scope of suggestion I had told him being considered by my gov­

ernment. I reminded him my suggestion was that if any Chinese civilian

in US felt he being prevented from leaving he could communicate with

Indian Embassy which would take appropriate action. I stressed this

would apply to any Chinese civilian in US and that there would be no

hindrance whatsoever in their communicating with Embassy any way

they wished. We would expect any American civilian in China would

have same right with respect to British Embassy there. If this done it

seemed entirely unnecessary provide for action at request individual’s

government. Only each individual himself knew whether in fact he

desired return and whether he felt he being prevented from doing so

by government his country of residence. I believe formulation which I

said my government considering fully and adequately met situation.

Therefore I unable accept his draft agreement in present form.

I continued that during talk each of us had talked about meas­

ures which our governments had been considering or willing to take,

including question third party representation. It seemed almost all

these things involved internal matters each country. US had already

taken action regarding some these matters as I had said. Said Wang

had informed me certain actions his government has taken or will­

ing take. What I was leading up to was form of any understanding

we might reach. Seemed to me might be most practicable each make

public statement of action we had taken including action on third party

representation question. Each could take note in such public statement

of statements made by other. While we would agree to making of state­

ments and they would appear together this method would not involve

us in same problems as trying to reach agreement on any one text.

We would exchange texts of statements each proposed to make, the

two texts to embody understanding reached here. They would appear

together but would not be in form agreement.

I said what I have in mind was a statement that Ambassador

Wang had informed me his government had taken such and such steps

regarding Americans in China and making such and such arrangements

regarding third party representation. I would make similar statement

that US Government had taken such and such steps regarding Chinese

nationals US and making such and such arrangements regarding third

party representation. My statement regarding Chinese in US would

repeat assurances which I had given him here, that no Chinese desiring

to leave US being prevented and I would expect him to make similar

statement regarding Americans in China. I concluded that this only my

tentative thinking and not formal proposal but I hoped incorporate it in

exact form for next meeting.

Wang inquired whether I differed in principle with respect to his

draft agreement.

I replied that as I had pointed out I differed on one point. It seemed

entirely unnecessary provide for action at request of individual’s gov­

ernment. I reserved right make further comment later on draft.

Wang declared we had already held six sessions on agenda item

one and that his side not satisfied that so much time spent on it. From

beginning he had given complete list Americans in China but American

side failed reciprocate. First paragraph draft agreement sets out very

clearly that nationals residing in other country wishing to return their

respective countries entitled to do so. Said we should not discuss return

civilians in abstract but find ways settle their return. As he had already

stated he had basically accepted our arrangement and naturally was

prepared to listen to our opinion on his draft agreement which was pre­

pared on basis arrangement suggested by US side. He felt there should

be concrete ideas on all points rather than abstract. He could perceive

only three possible alternatives regarding draft agreement, namely

rejection, acceptance or amendment. Since original arrangement had

been put forward by American side fourth meeting, he felt it difficult

understand why I could not form explicit opinion concerning draft

agreement.

Wang continued he could not agree to separate announcements. It

was very clear now as result joint declaration our governments that as

result initiative taken by US Government we were able sit down together

at Geneva. Furthermore at very beginning of talks joint announcement

had been made concerning agenda. These two communiques very well

received by world opinion. They were directed toward finding ways

and means to solve questions facing us.

Said he was puzzled that since we had agreed on common way to

find settlement these problems we could not agree to joint announce­

ment. Effect of separate announcement on public opinion would be that

we had failed find common method settle return of nationals. Impres­

sion would be each side had own way instead of common method

which would be reverting to original situation before discussions

began. It is not expressing sincerity to suggest separate announcement

on this question. This is not first time our governments have made joint

announcements or statements. He could not understand why today I

should suddenly find I could not agree to joint statement. Said my sug­

gestion was not conducive to progress present talks.

I said possibly I had not made myself clear. I was not suggesting

that announcements not be issued together but referred to form they

79.

Telegram 457 from Geneva

457. From Johnson.

Developments at today’s meeting show that our tactics of keeping

representation arrangement as bait for release Americans has paid div­

idends. (I carefully avoided at today’s meeting asking “how many” as

such a question could not have been put without weakening stand on

release of all.)

Distribution.

Question we now clearly face is whether we can or should pursue

this tactic further.

We all have strong impression from today’s meeting that it will not

be possible further to advance position we have gained without great

difficulty and much time.

Question therefore is what approach is going to get most Ameri­

cans out in shortest time. Related to this is question whether we are jus­

tified in taking action which will result those Americans whose release

we can now obtain remaining in prison because we strive to obtain

simultaneous release large number or all of them. I refrain from com­

menting on cold-­blooded attitude CHICOMS which has brought about

this situation but simply say it is fact we must face in dealing with these

people however distasteful it may be.

We have carefully discussed among ourselves all aspects problem

and have come conclusion that course in best overall interests detained

Americans is to reach some agreement on representation at present

point.

First we strongly feel that I would not in forseeable future be able to

move Chinese off of legalistic approach to individual American cases.

They are not going take simultaneous action on cases all Americans

which would jeopardize their ability maintain public pretense action

is result workings “justice”. I have tried hard avoid backing them into

corner where they could not do this and believe any other course would

only indefinitely delay release of any Americans regardless strength

Chinese desire get ahead to item two.

Second we believe that after release of first group we will be able

maintain steady pressure for release of remainder during course talks

on “other practical matters”. CHICOMS obviously very anxious get to

“other practical matters” and while they will want much we not able

give believe we should be able play hand so as to continue pressure

for release. I now have commitment for “review” all cases including

Downey and Fecteau and can take maximum advantage all opportuni­

ties exploit this. Of course CHICOMS could continue hold remaining

prisoners for further bargaining but they may well estimate prisoners

are diminishing asset and I do not exclude possibility of fairly prompt

release remainder. Of course, before agreeing proceed second agenda

item we would reserve right revert agenda item one as long as any

Americans detained.

Third, they have come so far on substance our representation

proposal that it is difficult maintain further discussion this except in

context straight trade for release Americans. In fact this point virtually

reached at today’s meeting. In this connection believe it helpful recall

that original concept before these talks was that agreeing to representa­

tion proposal would assist in obtaining release Americans. I undertook

tactic use as bait obtain release some Americans and avoid anticipated

CHICOM tactic of asserting agenda item one completed with agree­

ment on representation. Believe it would be mistake now to extend this

tactic to point of making release all Americans price of representation

agreement.

If Dept agrees with foregoing position it will be very important

that at Tuesday’s meeting I have the maximum discretion Dept is will­

ing to give me and instructions on our minimum positions on points at

issue.

I would plan at Tuesday’s meeting to present Wang with a draft

of simultaneous unilateral statements to be issued by joint agreement

accordance our agreement on private nature these talks. (See following

tel for text.)

For best bargaining position I would require considerable discre­

tion exact language we would be willing accept so that I can press him

for agreement and reach firm as possible understandings. Possibility

should not be excluded he willing reach immediate agreement and

make statement public.

I do not believe I should be in position of asking him how many

they are releasing before entering into agreement on representation, or

being required to haggle over numbers or in any way ever to imply that

we are satisfied with anything other than release of all. Do not believe

I should go any further toward bald position of bargaining representa­

tion agreement against Americans.

I will also require instructions on our minimum position on enlarg­

ing scope of representation proposal to include governmental inqui­

ries or inquiries from families. There were some indications at today’s

meeting Wang may be prepared recede on this point and I will of course

press hard on it. However if we are willing to concede in any way (and

I believe we should for reasons set forth my tel 364) it would be of max­

imum bargaining use to me at Tuesday’s meeting.

If Dept does not accept foregoing general approach situation is

such I do not at moment see any alternative for Tuesday’s meeting

other than asking him for numbers of Americans they prepared now

to release (which I think undesirable for reasons stated above), indicate

number is unsatisfactory, and recess talks, at least on item one, until they

have “completed review” of more or all cases (I would have to indicate

which) and we would then have to be prepared on that position.

Will remain Hotel Du Rhone tomorrow from 2 p.m. in event Dept

believes any phone discussion possible or desirable.

Gowen

80.

Telegram 458 from Geneva

458. From Johnson. Re Mytel 457.

Propose hand Wang following draft text “agreed announcement”

next meeting (to be released following Wang’s unilateral announce­

ment results “review” cases detained Americans promised today):

“Ambassadors of USA and PRC have agreed to announce the meas­

ures which their respective governments have adopted with respect to

return of nationals of each located in country of other. With respect to

Chinese nationals residing in US, Ambassador Johnson on behalf of US

Government has informed Ambassador Wang that:

“1. USA recognizes that Chinese nationals in US who desire return to

PRC are entitled do so and declares that no Chinese national who desires

depart US for PRC is being prevented from doing so. This includes all those

Chinese nationals who were at one time prevented from departing US.

“2. Embassy of Republic of India in US will be authorized assist

return to PRC of those Chinese nationals who desire to do so as follows:

“(A) If a Chinese national believes that contrary to declared policy

of US he is encountering official obstruction in departure he may so

inform Indian Embassy and Indian Embassy will, if it deems such com­

plaint valid and if desired by PRC, intervene on such national’s behalf

with Government of US.

“(B) If a Chinese national in US who desires to return to PRC has

difficulty paying return journey, Indian Embassy may render him

financial assistance needed to permit his return.

“3. Government of US will give wide publicity to foregoing

arrangements and Embassy of India in US may also do so.

With respect to American nationals residing in PRC, Ambassador

Wang has informed Ambassador Johnson on behalf of PRC that:

“1. PRC recognizes that American nationals in PRC who desire

return to US are entitled to do so and declares that no American national

who desires to depart PRC for US is being prevented from doing so.

This includes all those American nationals who were at one time pre­

vented from departing PRC.

“2. Embassy of UK in PRC will be authorized to assist return to US

of those American nationals who desire to do so as follows:

Distribution.

“(A) If an American national believes that contrary to declared pol­

icy of PRC he is encountering official obstruction in departure he may

so inform UK Embassy and UK Embassy will, if it deems such com­

plaint valid and if desired by US, intervene on such national’s behalf

with Government of PRC.

“(B) If an American national in PRC who desires return to US has

difficulty paying return journey, UK Embassy may render him financial

assistance needed to permit his return.

“3. Government of PRC will give wide publicity to foregoing

arrangements and Embassy of UK in PRC may also do so.”

Since Wang will almost certainly reject foregoing statement on

grounds that his government is not yet prepared state that all Ameri­

cans, including those who have been detained, are free to leave, I would

like to be in position to agree to substitute paragraph one somewhat

along following lines:

Begin quote

PRC recognizes that American nationals in PRC who desire return

to US are entitled do so and declares that aside from those American

nationals previously prevented from leaving PRC whose release has

just been announced PRC has undertaken speedily review cases all

remaining Americans whose departure being prevented by reason of

imprisonment or otherwise and promptly settle these cases in spirit of

foregoing declaration of policy.

End quote

In anticipated event that agreement on representation reached

without assurance all Americans are being released, I would also pro­

pose following announcement be released to press here:

Begin quote

In view of fact that Ambassador Wang has informed Ambassador

Johnson that ___ Americans, review of whose cases completed, are being

permitted depart for US and that his government is proceeding expe­

ditiously with review of cases of remaining Americans detained, two

Ambassadors have agreed suspend for time being further discussion of

agenda item one pending completion of review these cases by PRC and

will at their next meeting proceed to discussion agenda item two. It is

understood that discussions of agenda item one may be resumed upon

initiative of either Ambassador.

End quote

could not and would not agree blanket return any Chinese whatever

crime he may have committed. I have been taking maximum advantage

fact as far as we know or CHICOMS have alleged no Chinese desir­

ing return now under arrest. Believe I have thus far been successful

81.

Telegram 492 to Geneva

492. For Johnson. Your 448.

We feel very satisfied with the line you have taken.

We would be willing to have a joint statement which would say in

effect:

QUOTE The USA and the CPR have respectively declared on the one

hand that Chinese nationals in the US who desire to return to the Chinese

mainland are now free to do so, and on the other hand that US nationals on

the Chinese mainland who desire to return to the US are now free to do so.

If any national so entitled to return believes that contrary to the above,

he is encountering official obstruction to departure, he may in the case of

a Chinese inform the Indian Embassy in the USA, and in the case of a US

citizen inform the UK mission to the CPR which may investigate the facts

and intervene on such civilian’s behalf. Furthermore, these missions may

render financial assistance needed to permit any civilian to return.

Wide publicity will be given in each case to the provisions of

respective declarations and the referred-­to missions may also give

appropriate publicity.

UNQUOTE

We are willing to omit paragraph 4 our 466 relying in substitution

upon the word “now” in the first paragraph above. Also, paragraph 5

of 466 would in the present form become unnecessary.

Dulles

by Dulles; cleared by McConaughy.

82.

Telegram 495 to Geneva

Washington, August 14, 1955

495. For Johnson.

you to agree to joint statement as urged by Wang. This is only conces­

sion you should make at August 16 meeting apart from minor drafting

changes not involving matters of substance. No retreat position as sug­

gested by proposed substitute paragraph in latter part your 458 autho­

rized and no possibility of any retreat position should be intimated.

We believe it essential to hold tenaciously to our basic position on

return of all detained nationals as part of any agreement on representa­

tion before we proceed to discussion of Item 2 of Agenda. Wang is eager

to obtain representation arrangement and to open up Item 2. If we yield

on these key points before we obtain firm commitment covering all our

nationals we are left without any suitable pressures which we can exert

on behalf remaining detained nationals. It would be doubtful if we

could obtain their release without responding to new demands made

by Chinese communists under Item 2.

You should maintain unremitting pressure on Wang for acceptance

our principle, relying heavily on statements in Chou’s July 30 speech

that “The number of American civilians in China is small and their

question can be easily settled” and “it should be possible . . . to reach,

first of all, a reasonable settlement of the question of the return of civil­

ians to their respective countries.”

Draft text “agreed announcement” your 457 approved subject to

observations below based on our 492.

(A) In Para. 1, first sentence, “Chinese mainland” preferable to

“PRC”. You may concede this point if you consider advisable.

(B) In same sentence, “now” should be inserted before “entitled”

and before “prevented” to make clear that declaration is subject to rea­

sonable termination.

(C) Your Para 2 believed slightly less desirable than Para. 2 our

492, in that latter accords clear right of investigation to Embassy after

initiative taken by a national entitled to return.

You should cable us promptly exact text you propose submit.

by McConaughy; cleared in draft by Dulles and Sebald; cleared in substance by ­Robertson.

The time of transmission is illegible.

83.

Telegram 463 from Geneva

463. From Johnson.

Following is text agreed announcement I plan present Wang

August 16 which incorporates observations Deptel 495:

“Ambassadors of USA and PRC have agreed to announce the meas­

ures which their respective governments have adopted with respect to

return of nationals of each located in country of other. With respect to

Chinese nationals residing in US Ambassador Johnson on behalf of US

Government has informed Ambassador Wang that:

1. USA recognizes that Chinese nationals in US who desire return

to China mainland are now entitled do so and declares that no Chinese

national who desires depart US for China mainland is now being pre­

vented from doing so. This includes all those Chinese nationals who

were at one time prevented from departing US.

2. Embassy of Republic of India in US will be authorized assist

return to China mainland of those Chinese nationals who desire to do

so as follows:

(A) If a Chinese national believes that contrary to declared policy

of US he is encountering official obstruction in departure he may so

inform Indian Embassy and Indian Embassy may, if desired by PRC,

investigate facts and intervene on such national’s behalf with Govern­

ment of US.

(B) If a Chinese national in US who desires to return to China main­

land has difficulty paying return journey, Indian Embassy may render

him financial assistance needed to permit his return.

3. Government of US will give wide publicity to foregoing arrange­

ments and Embassy of India in US may also do so.

Distribution.

84.

Telegram 464 from Geneva

464. From Johnson.

Comments on agreed announcement my telegram 463 follow.

1. Expect Wang to object “China Mainland” and would be pre­

pared agree to PRC for small bargaining advantage from this conces­

sion. Assume Department would prefer “PRC” to “China”.

Distribution.

85.

Telegram 112 from USUN

112. Verbatim text.

Pre US-Chinese Communist talks.

SYG sent Lodge today “personal and confidential” note enclosing

copy of August 4 letter from Chou En-­lai and memo of SYG’s conver­

sation with Wang Ping-­nan. Memo pouched Department, letter reads:

“I thank you for your message of August 2, transmitted to me

through Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan.

“As I have told you through Ambassador Wistrand, the action

taken by the Chinese Government in connection with the release of the

11 guilty American airmen has nothing to do whatsoever with the res­

olution of the United Nations or with the report to the United Nations.

I once again want you to take note of this because the American side is

now making propaganda again in an attempt to link this action of the

Chinese Government with the United Nations.

“I appreciate your goodwill in expressing to Ambassador Wang

Ping-­nan your desire to make your best efforts to facilitate the

Sino-American talks. The Chinese Government has already acted in a

way which will facilitate positive results from the Sino-American talks.

I hope you will persuade the American side to respond also by deeds.

Signed Chou En-­lai.”

Wadsworth

86.

Telegram 496 to Geneva

496. For Johnson.

In event a break threatens over Point 1 of agenda, we think you

should inform Wang that we suggest a recess of two weeks or some

such time to permit CHICOMS to complete their investigation of cer­

tain American cases, a short time which should be ample in view Chou

En-­lai’s July 30 statement that “the number of American civilians in

China is small, and their question can be easily settled” and that US at

time of recessing would make a public statement somewhat as follows:

QTE The US is prepared to make a joint declaration with the C.P.R.

which would confirm formally a) that all nationals of either under the

authority of the other who desire to return home are now free to do so;

b) that a third party in each country may be designated to assist such

return if ever a national desiring to return believes that, contrary to

declared policy, he is encountering official obstruction, and c) that such

third party may also be the means of providing financial assistance to

those desiring to return.

However, this joint declaration is not now being made because the

C.P.R. reports that it has not yet completed its investigation of certain

US cases. Therefore, the talks are recessed for quote blank unqte weeks

at the end of which time we hope the C.P.R will join with the US in mak­

ing a joint declaration such as the US is now prepared to make.

Despite the present recess, the US is continuing its own policy

of permitting Chinese nationals in the US who desire to return to the

mainland to do so.

The US hopes and believes that agreement on the release of Amer­

icans on the China mainland can be reached by the end of the period of

recess, having in mind Mr. Chou En-­lai’s statement of July 30, 1955 that

“the number of American civilians in China is small, and their question

can be easily settled.” UNQTE

Dulles

Dulles; cleared by McConaughy.

87.

Telegram 361 to New Delhi

You may inform Nehru, stressing information confidential unless

and until agreement announced, that we understand Chinese Com­

munists, if agreement on return of nationals reached at Geneva, intend

designate India as their representative to assist Chinese in US who

express wish to return to mainland. Assure Nehru US will welcome

such designation if agreement on repatriation materializes and if Chi­

nese Communists do in fact designate India. US will be glad facilitate

discharge of Indian Embassy responsibilities under agreement.

FYI Question of third party representation being discussed

Geneva. No disagreement either side regarding identity suggested

third parties PAREN UK in case Americans, India in case Chinese

PAREN. Delay in agreement has resulted primarily from Chinese

Communist unwillingness so far match U.S. position of declaring

categorically all other-­side nationals free depart. This unwillingness

in marked and disappointing contrast Chou En-­lai’s July 30 state­

ment QUOTE number American civilians in China is small and ques­

tion can be easily settled UNQUOTE. At meeting Geneva 16th will

again attempt secure Chinese Communist agreement joint announce­

ment this basis. On basis of proposal, third-­country embassy would,

in response complaint from returning national that he encountering

obstruction to departure, be empowered investigate facts and inter­

vene on such national’s behalf. Could also render financial assistance

for travel as needed.

Dulles

Repeated to Geneva for Johnson as telegram 513. Drafted by Osborn; cleared by Dulles,

Allen (NEA), McConaughy, and Jones (SOA).

88.

Letter from McConaughy to Johnson

Washington, August 15, 1955

Dear Alexis:

Doug Forman left this morning for Geneva. I believe he will be

able to give you a useful fill-­in on the thinking here and the general

background of the decisions which have been taken. We took special

pains to bring him in on meetings with both the Secretary and Mr. Rob­

ertson so he has the feel of their approach to the various problems.

Walter Robertson left at noon yesterday for a two weeks rest and

sick leave at Meadow Farm and at Richmond. He wants us to keep him

closely informed of any major developments, either favorable or unfa­

vorable, this notwithstanding the fact that he is supposed to dismiss

official cares while he is away. He saw your 457 and 458 just before he

left on Sunday, and could not have been more emphatic in his reaction

that we should not give up our main trading points in return for half

a loaf or less. He felt that to do so would mean throwing in the sponge

when we may have come close to the point of agreement on all the

Americans. His view was generally shared by all who were working on

the matter including the Secretary. Still a lot of thought went into the

preparation of our 495.

Enclosed is an excerpt from a report we have received from Air­

man Benjamin in regard to Snoddy and Schwartz the pilots of the

Downey-Fecteau plane mentioned in my last letter:

“1. In a debriefing of the 11 airmen in Hong Kong and Tokyo, Air­

man Benjamin stated that he and Fecteau had become close friends

and Downey and Fecteau were held in the same cells. Airman Benja­

min said that Fecteau had stated the following in regard to Snoddy and

Schwartz, the pilots of the plane:

‘On the second pass the Chinese Communist guns opened up

with incendiaries, the aircraft was hit and crashed… The plane was not

badly smashed. I ran from the plane and feel badly that I did not check

on the pilots. Several minutes later I heard shots and was captured. I

was led down a trail stained with blood. Possibly the pilots are alive.’

Benjamin himself said that he thought he had seen the pilots in a

group of prisoners and believed they were still alive.”

I do not believe that you can usefully exploit this information in

your current talks. Let us know if you think differently.

Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.

89.

Telegram 485 from Geneva

485. From Johnson.

Two hour twenty minute meeting with no progress. Next meeting

Thursday.

Meeting consisted almost entirely of reiteration previous positions

of both sides. Wang pressing hard on my unwillingness agree to sec­

ond sentence first paragraph his August 11 draft and I pressing hard

for release all Americans. No sign any relaxation their position but

atmosphere was relatively mild and he was not pushing for any break.

Stated qte propaganda campaign unqte resulting from release 11 fliers

was having qte adverse effect unqte on talks here.

Details and comments follow.

Gowen

90.

Telegram 490 from Geneva

490. From Johnson.

As stated my 485 no visible progress made today on fundamental

issue of return of Americans. Wang stuck firmly to his previous position

on cases being reviewed and we would promptly be informed results

those completed. He raised no objections to form our draft agreed

announcement (Mytel 463) and confined objections to para one, press­

ing for substitution para one his draft and for broadening scope para

they not asking US exempt from US jurisdiction Chinese in US involved

in crimes or having unsettled debts, why should we ask them do so for

Americans in China etc.

In reply I disclaimed intention raise theoretical questions jurisdic­

tion. Our para one dealt with practical situation and we asked them

say no more than we said ourselves. Said I recognized their desire han­

dle matter within framework their law, para one our draft specifically

designed enable them to do so, was not something imposed but simply

statement what each government decided do within framework its sov­

ereignty and laws. Chou’s statement before talks led me believe would

promptly and easily be done with respect Americans. Puzzlement at

time thus far consumed with no results whatever on Americans. All

I had were vague statements cases being “reviewed”. Simultaneous

release of flyers who had received varying sentences pointed up what

could be done when they wanted to (he had previously alluded to fly­

ers) etc. In reply my specific questions as to what he objected in para

one our draft he indicated might be acceptable if second sentence first

para his draft added. I immediately rejected pointing out that as far as

91.

Telegram 499 from Geneva

499. From Johnson.

At 7th meeting August 16 I began by referring to Wang’s statement

last meeting that he desired deal concretely with problem of return

civilians of respective countries rather than in abstract terms. Said I

agreed entirely this approach and I had come here to seek concrete,

Distribution.

practical way of effecting return to US of American nationals detained

his country and was prepared make every reasonable effort meet his

viewpoint concerning Chinese nationals US. With regard to latter he

had made certain proposals and I had immediately informed him my

government had taken most far-­reaching action within its power to

meet basic question raised by his proposals. That is US Government

had rescinded all measures heretofore restricting departure some few

Chinese and there now was no measure preventing any Chinese desir­

ing do so from freely departing. In additional effort meet his viewpoint

I had told him consideration being given his proposal on third party

representation.

I continued I had consistently attempted make it clear I expected

his government would take similar measures regarding Americans

detained his country. That is take whatever measures necessary permit

return to US of all who desired return thus equalizing situation two

groups nationals this regard in respective countries. Said I had tried

make clear I not attempting dictate what action his government should

take to bring about this result since this obviously something only his

government could and should decide. Pointing out this was 7th meet­

ing and 3rd week these talks, I said I did not know of single Ameri­

can civilian previously detained his country who had been able depart

since beginning of talks. He had only informed me cases all detained

Americans being reviewed and that he would inform me results those

cases in which reviews completed if I would meet certain conditions. I

commented that action taken by US Government with respect Chinese

nationals in US was without conditions.

I said I found myself puzzled by situation and amount of time it

was taking to settle problem, particularly in view statement his Prime

Minister that number American civilians in China small and question

easily settled. Prime Minister also had said it should be possible reach

first of all reasonable settlement question return civilians their respec­

tive countries. I had been patiently hoping and expecting his govern­

ment would take action to bring about this result but my hopes thus

far in vain.

I told Wang I had given much thought to seeking resolution situation

we faced and had also attempted meet his desires with respect to single

agreed text. I then read text of draft agreed announcement (Mytel 463).

I pointed out language in draft identical with respect each country. I

was not proposing or suggesting anything with respect ­Americans his

country that I was not prepared to say with respect Chinese in US. It

seemed to me this agreed announcement fully met needs nationals both

countries on basis full equality and reciprocity. It was based in large part

upon proposal he first made August 2 and also contained much from his

August 11 draft proposal. I concluded I was prepared immediately agree

with him on this draft and announce it today.

Following 10 minute recess requested by Wang, he stated he had

made preliminary comparison my draft with his August 11 draft. He

noted my draft did not include a few points in his.

1. Quoting first paragraph his August 11 draft, Wang declared we

should not object provisions this paragraph. At last meeting he had

stated that under condition that agreement reached on question return

civilians both sides Chinese Government would be in position inform

me of results investigation cases of Americans on which investiga­

tion completed. In my draft no mention made of nationals involved

in civil or criminal cases. International law recognizes right of sover­

eign state exercise jurisdiction over civil or criminal cases in its terri­

tory. To demand a state refrain from exercising jurisdiction is obviously

infringement on its sovereignty. In past used to be such things as extra­

territoriality in China but such unreasonable things now gone forever.

Wang said I had repeatedly indicated my aim was to secure return all

Americans in China who desired return. As he had repeatedly pointed

out all those not involved in civil or criminal cases able to leave any­

time. Even with respect to Americans involved in unfinished cases,

Chinese Government would review cases and grant lenient treatment

making allowance for nature of crime and conduct of individual in

accordance Chinese legal process. Such persons could leave promptly

on completion their cases. He was sure I could appreciate sincerity of

this offer. However if my intention was that American nationals now

or in future should be permitted leave prior to settlement their cases he

must point out frankly this impossible. There might also be few cases of

Chinese in US involved in civil or criminal cases though he didn’t know

of any. Could be seen situation two sides quite different. US maintained

liaison station Hong Kong to gather information on American citizens

in China. He had also given me information on all ­American nationals

in China. However his government had no liaison station close to US

and he had been ­unable obtain list Chinese nationals from me. Hence

he not in position know whether any Chinese nationals involved in

civil or criminal cases. He did not believe I had intended propose Chi­

nese nationals involved in civil or criminal cases should never come

under jurisdiction American law and should be permitted leave prior

settlement their cases. Hence he held that reference in draft to nationals

involved in civil or criminal cases was reasonable and applied equally

both sides.

2. Reference was made in draft to cases American nationals previ­

ously detained in China. He must point out as general principle Chi­

nese Government did not detain American nationals in China. So there

was nothing in common with the situation in US where orders issued to

prevent departure Chinese students. All Americans in China applying to

depart granted exit permits promptly. Where such application involved

procedural questions they granted permission promptly on completion

procedural question. Even in case American civilians violating Chinese

law they dealt with in lenient spirit and in accordance legal procedure.

Therefore he must point out allegation that Chinese Government had

detained American nationals was quite contrary to fact.

3. In August 11 draft he had proposed government of each side

might on behalf its nationals request intervention of entrusted power in

order solve difficulties in connection their departure or conduct inves­

tigation so as to make representations on basis investigation. He con­

sidered this proposal reasonable and necessary. After implementation

of third party arrangement it goes without saying that nationals could

request without restriction intervention by third party. However among

those desiring return might be some who wanted to let their govern­

ment know their difficulties. In past there were number of Chinese

nationals who appealed his government assist their return. Dr. Tsien

was one such case. Under such circumstances government concerned

obligated to request third party take necessary action. Furthermore

since outset of discussion first agenda item he and I had been making

representation on behalf nationals each side desiring return. Obviously

we could not make such direct representations regularly as there were

no diplomatic relations between the two countries. After implemen­

tation third party representation arrangement questions of nationals

desiring return could always be referred to third country. Hence it was

necessary provide for action of national’s country on his behalf.

4. Wang added he objected to one minor point of wording, the ref­

erence to “Chinese mainland”. He did not think this term appropriate

and suggested replace with “China”. Wang concluded these were pre­

liminary comments and could be regarded as amendments to my draft.

He was ready listen my comments and if I agreed his few amendments

he hoped agreement could be reached today.

I replied major difficulty between us seemed paragraph one. We

both agreed we were here to deal with practical situation—­that of our

nationals in other country. I had tried in paragraph one to avoid theoret­

ical concepts and issues and tried to keep to practical situation. I didn’t

think anything in paragraph one infringed on or raised question of sov­

ereignty or jurisdiction. This was one reason it contained two parts. It

simply a statement each government would make in its own right and

in full recognition its sovereignty. It was not intended to establish any

theoretical concept for future. Intent was to deal with practical situa­

tion now facing us under conditions of complete reciprocity and equal­

ity. I had carefully tried avoid any attempt dictate to or demand of his

government what it should do. Only his government could and should

decide measures to take to deal with practical situation.

I pointed out I had not used the word “detained” in agreement and

as used in my statement meant to refer only to those Americans pre­

vented from leaving China. Whatever the reasons we both recognized

that Americans being prevented from leaving his country. I was not

suggesting his government say anything my government was unwill­

ing to say. As I had pointed out, his paragraph one did not in any way

solve problem American nationals.

I had thought it possible we could quickly reach agreement on

some form that would resolve situation our nationals. Seemed to me

my paragraph did that. I didn’t hold any brief for exact wording but

thought contained there must be embodied in any announcement.

I  had come here to discuss return of American nationals. Statement

their cases being reviewed did not bring about their return. I was not

suggesting how Wang should handle matter but asked him how we

were to solve first item, that is, return of our nationals.

I said these were my preliminary remarks, that I was always willing

consider minor changes in wording. As for term “China mainland” if he

preferred to substitute “People’s Republic of China” would not object.

Referring to Wang’s desire that draft announcement provide for

action by individual’s government on his behalf I repeated my state­

ment at last meeting that this unnecessary. Said Wang had pointed out

some nationals in past had written directly to his government. How­

ever if arrangement we were suggesting were in effect this would be

unnecessary as Chinese in US could communicate directly with Indian

Embassy. I pointed out my draft specifically provided that representa­

tion by the Indian Embassy on behalf of Chinese nationals would only

be undertaken if desired by his government.

Wang said problem lies in first paragraph of proposed agreement.

First paragraph his draft already included idea of ours. Of course he

agreed we were here to resolve practical issues rather than discuss

theoretical concepts. Two points were involved. One that both sides

declare nationals of each in other desiring return be allowed to do so

without restriction and other that any such national involved in civil

or criminal case might also return as soon as his case settled. There

was no intention include anything unfair to one side. Merely attempt

settle practical issues. Point to keep in mind was mutual respect of

each for other’s law or sovereignty. Wang said he had not been in US

and not familiar with situation there but could easily imagine case

of a foreign national doing business there who happened incur debt

he unable to clear. Could US Government allow him leave before he

had cleared debt? Suppose foreign national driving automobile killed

someone. Could American Government permit him leave without

first settling case? He hoped I was considering problem from both

sides instead just one. He was sure both of us willing seek formula to

solve problem facing us. First paragraph his draft should be accept­

able since not harmful either side.

I replied I had never suggested cases of Americans should be

settled outside framework his law. I understood his viewpoint. How­

ever I had understood from public statement his Prime Minister that

since American cases few they could be settled easily and promptly.

I assumed he desired to do so within framework his law. I had tried to

find formula which would accomplish result I was seeking and still not

go beyond framework his law. There might be other ways to do this but

this was my idea.

Wang replied that statement by Prime Minister Chou and provi­

sions of first paragraph were of course within framework of laws of

sovereign state permitting departure of those nationals who desired

go except those involved in civil or criminal cases. Prime Minister’s

statement was put forth in spirit conciliation in order settle questions

between two countries.

Wang continued that he recalled when we first met last year I had

inquired whether Chinese legal procedure provided for commutation

of sentences or pardon. He had replied that in cases persons violating

Chinese law Chinese Government could consider commutation in light

degree of crime and person’s conduct. Also recent release of American

airmen provided clear example this regard. They already sentenced but

to give these talks good atmosphere and as token goodwill to Ameri­

can people, Chinese Government had granted early release. Provisions

in first paragraph his draft very reasonable providing those desiring

return may do so and those violating law or involved in civil cases may

promptly return upon settlement their cases. Suppose American mer­

chant in China should be involved in debt case. Chinese Government

willing help him clear debts and resolve case so that he can return at

early date. Chinese Government always willing give greatest coopera­

tion help settle these questions. In light all this he hoped his paragraph

one could be retained in joint announcement.

I asked Wang how he felt my paragraph departed in principle from

statements he had made. It didn’t deny Chinese Government’s right to

handle matters any way it desired. It simply stated solution to practical

problem.

Wang then suggested amending my paragraph by inserting sec­

ond sentence his paragraph. I pointed out second sentence his para­

graph took away from American nationals everything granted them in

rest of paragraph since American nationals prevented from departing

China were described by him as involved in crimes or civil cases. So far

as Americans concerned, this put us back where we started.

Wang denied this could be regarded as returning us to status

quo ante. He repeated he only wanted indicate that both sides do not

restrict return of civilians and that persons involved in civil or criminal

cases could return as soon as cases completed. This applied both sides

equally and he hoped I would agree.

I replied I couldn’t agree since it left practical situation of detained

Americans in exactly same situation as when talks began.

Wang then proposed I study his proposed amendment to see if we

could agree on text at next meeting.

I replied I would gladly study it but could not see how it solved

question my nationals his country. How were we to resolve practical

problem of return American nationals? I said Wang had mentioned

the eleven fliers. We had our own opinion concerning that and I didn’t

want to engage in controversy. However I understood although all

were sentenced to different terms that all released together. It seemed

to me would not be impossible find solution to rest of American cases.

Said I would be glad to hear Wang’s ideas next meeting on problem I

was here to discuss, namely return of Americans. Added I had made

my best effort find formula to meet his viewpoint.

Wang commented he hoped I would note that comments he had

made were not only of benefit to one side but both. He hoped hear at

next meeting results my consideration his comments.

Wang then said would like to raise another point. He had noted

lately propaganda campaign had been launched regarding release of

11 airmen in order slander Chinese people. This propaganda provoked

feelings of Chinese people. Since talks began Chinese Government had

repeatedly made clear conciliatory attitude. Chinese public opinion

always cautious regarding progress these talks. If one were to draw on

question of mistreatment there would be no end to his recounting mis­

erable treatment of Chinese People’s Volunteers captured in Korea. He

had avoided raising this sort of question since it would not be in inter­

est present talks. He only wanted express feeling on their part which he

hoped I would note.

I replied I didn’t know Wang’s motive in rising this matter. First, I

didn’t know what he meant by “propaganda campaign”. All I had seen

were factual interviews and accounts of the men released. I told Wang

he was perfectly aware American press practice and our free press.

Also perfectly aware US Government could not, even if it would, pre­

vent publication such accounts. Furthermore these men’s accounts not

unique. Almost every person released from prison his country has given

similar accounts. Fault does not lie with these accounts but in treatment

that gave rise to them. Accounts of eleven fliers had tremendously

increased anxiety of American people over those Americans remaining

92.

Telegram 500 from Geneva

500. From Johnson.

Believe following are among considerations in planning our next

moves:

1. Do not believe we should minimize importance CHICOM devo­

tion to “legal forms” in spite their agility in adopting their forms to suit

their political needs. It will be seen from today’s meeting as well as

previous I have tried hard to leave them a “legal” way out and believe

this should be continued.

2. Also believe they now consider flyer release was probably tac­

tical mistake that has largely backfired on them rather than producing

hoped-­for results. This has not increased standing Peiping proponents

of release of American prisoners.

3. Possible additional factor is suspicion from our tactics we have

been trying trick them into releasing Americans while holding out bait

third party representation which we intended find excuses for with­

drawing after release accomplished. Our proposal today will have

removed any doubts they may have had this regard.

Distribution.

Believe present tactic can be continued for little while longer par­

ticularly at Thursday’s meeting when Wang will have had opportunity

receive Peiping reaction our today’s proposal. Now believe we should

if possible avoid any prolonged recess which would require public

explanation and inevitably return problem to public propaganda forum

while Americans remained in prison. Therefore believe that I should

strive as necessary keep discussion going while continuing maintain

my present position.

In order accomplish these purposes and in light today’s dis­

cussion, request authorization propose at next meeting amendment

first sentence numbered paragraph 1 draft “agreed announcement”

(Mytel 463) by insertion phrase “as a result of official action taken in

accordance with its governmental processes” following words “and

declares that”. Same amendment to be made in paragraph one PRC

section.

Would appreciate any other suggestions Department may have in

this regard.

I do not anticipate Wang is going to attempt precipitate any “break”

in discussions but rather that he will face me with statement they have

gone as far as they can go and there is nothing further to talk about

under item one.

At that point I perceive no alternative under our present tactic

except to propose a recess as suggested in first paragraph Deptel 496.

However I believe that to publicly explain the recess I should first pro­

pose to Wang we make a simple joint statement somewhat to the effect

that two of us have decided that a recess would be helpful in resolving

the remaining problems standing in the way of final agreement. I feel

we should if possible avoid unilateral public statement along lines sug­

gested Deptel 496 as seems to me this would constitute a public chal­

lenge and return problem to propaganda forum.

Dept will observe Wang pressed me hard today on question raised

last para Mytel 458 and my efforts avoid direct reply. Would appreciate

Dept’s suggestions on what further I might usefully say if as antici­

pated he continues press me on this.

Gowen

93.

Telegram 523 to Geneva

523. For Johnson.

Number 7865.

Dulles

by McConaughy; cleared by Bond (IO).

94.

Telegram 526 to Geneva

526. Personal for Johnson from Secretary. Your 490.

I have the distinct impression that the CHICOMS had intended

after announcing release of flyers to proceed promptly at your confer­

ence to announce release of US civilians, all in expectation this would

create wave of good feeling toward them which would enable them

to make gains in discussing other matters. I have also impression they

have altered this policy because release of flyers and report of their treat­

ment has created considerable wave of indignation and indeed the edi­

torial and press comment expresses itself with greater hostility toward

CHICOMS since the release of flyers than before. Parenthetically, I might

mention that after first report of torturing of Colonel Arnold came from

Tokyo we asked Defense to try to moderate this theme in interest of civil­

ians and they are cooperating this end.

CHICOMS should realize that whenever prisoners are returned

there is inevitably initial wave of resentment as they tell their stories.

This is a phase which CHICOMS must live through and they do not

get anywhere by postponing it. However, once the American civilians

are out of China, then we may be compelled to alter our policy toward

Drafted by Dulles.

95.

Telegram 504 from Geneva

Geneva, August 17, 1955, noon

504. From Johnson.

On re-­reading my telegram 500 this morning believe I overstated

case against recess in first paragraph following “three considerations.”

Still believe prolonged recess should be avoided if possible but if it

could be carried out as suggested second sentence penultimate para­

graph my telegram 500, do not (repeat not) believe it would “inevita­

bly remain problem to public propaganda forum.” I would put recess

to Wang as constructive helpful suggestion rather than any challenge

and attempt agree on simple joint statement of public explanation. Of

course any recess this context would be conditional on Wang’s agree­

ment and believe he would probably resist. I do believe issuance uni­

lateral statement as suggested Department’s telegram 496 would have

adverse effect and should be avoided unless and until it is clear I can

make no further progress in private talks and it is desirable return to

public forum.

Gowen

Distribution.

96.

Telegram 516 from Geneva

516. From Johnson.

Reference penultimate para Mytels 500 and 504. Following is text

of draft agreed announcement which I would propose to Wang in event

recess agreed upon.

“During the course of the talks being conducted by the Ambas­

sadors of the USA and the PRC, it has become evident that a certain

period of time will be required before it will be possible to agree on a

satisfactory solution to agenda item one. Therefore it has been agreed

that their next meeting will be held (blank). This will also give the two

Ambassadors an opportunity to attend to affairs at their regular posts.

It is hoped that at the next meeting it will be possible to reach a mutu­

ally acceptable settlement of the problems raised in the discussion of

agenda item one so that the Ambassadors can proceed to agenda item

two.”

Gowen

Distribution.

97.

Telegram 541 to Geneva

Washington, August 17, 1955

541. For Johnson. Your 500 last paragraph.

Department presently unable to give you anything which would

enable you make additional statement on still theoretical problem Chi­

nese possibly in prison US who might wish return to mainland. Your

handling Wang queries on this subject based on fact it is not practical

problem has our approval and commendation. As you are aware this

question in principle has difficult constitutional, administrative and

by McConaughy; approved in draft by Dulles and Sebald.

98.

Telegram 542 to Geneva

Department agrees with your analysis situation following sev­

enth meeting. You are authorized in your discretion at eighth meeting

tomorrow agree insert phrase QUOTE as a result of official action taken

in accordance with its governmental process UNQUOTE in numbered

paragraph 1 both sections of draft QUOTE Agreed Announcement

UNQUOTE, following words QUOTE and declares that UNQUOTE.

Our only reservation on this language stems from fact that US has

no exit permit system and statement on US side does not seem com­

pletely consistent with our position that no US Government approval

ordinarily necessary in order for alien depart from US. However, this

objection not fundamental and can be disregarded if you believe incor­

poration of phrase might be helpful.

It would seem undesirable for you take initiative in proposing

recess at next meeting. Our position is that no reason exists for delay in

settling all matters under item 1. Therefore, if recess needed it would be

only because required by Chinese Communists, and they should take

responsibility for proposing it. We should be prepared meet again on

item 1 after usual two-­day interval if other side does not propose recess.

Proposal of recess by us except in case of threatened break would not

be consistent with our desire maintain continuous strong pressure on

Wang and encourage general impression that action by Chinese Com­

munists to match ours is awaited and expected.

FYI Our 496 was designed primarily to enable you demonstrate

to Wang that we were in a strong public relations position. If matters

by Dulles and McConaughy; cleared in draft by Sebald.

99.

Letter from McConaughy to Johnson

Washington, August 17, 1955

Dear Alex:

Since my last letter I have received your first three letters, of August

can make some arrangement for pouch service more frequent than once

a week after the Atomic Conference closes.

Last evening the Secretary sent you a personal message from

him concerning the likelihood of travel by Americans to China after

all detained Americans are released. You will note that a qualification

was put in concerning the possible effect of the Foreign Assets Control

Regulations. This is something that would have to be discussed with

Treasury and Commerce. If we made exceptions for American travelers

there would be immediate pressures to make corresponding provision

for Americans who wanted to buy Chinese Communist merchandise.

The whole economic warfare effort to deny dollars to the Chinese Com­

munists might well be undermined. So the question will have to be con­

sidered in the broader context of our entire policy of total severance of

financial, trade and transportation relations with the China mainland.

There is still food for thought in the Secretary’s suggestion though it

Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.

may not be entirely clear how you can best exploit it, if at all in your

talks with Wang.

Ed Martin is due here today and we hope that he will have a chance

to talk to the Secretary this afternoon.

You are certainly getting a better press here now. The American

press sees clearly the failure of the Chinese Communists to match our

position on unrestricted right of return of nationals. You are getting a

sympathetic press and there seems no longer to be any feeling that you

are less out-­giving to the press than is Wang Ping-­nan.

I might mention, not for any use by you, but merely that your back­

ground may be as informed as possible, the fact that we are undoubt­

edly paying quite a stiff price in Taiwan for these conversations. There

has been a subtle but none the less perceptible decline in morale and

inclination to follow through with full energy and cooperativeness on

various programs there. The MAAG, ICA and CAS missions in Taipei

have all felt this and to some extent have been handicapped by it. There

is a let down which we must hope will be temporary. The informed

people in the Government, of course, know in considerable detail of

your instructions and the progress of the talks. They know that they are

not going to be let down but this assurance apparently does not extend

to the Legislative Yuan, the press and the general public. Even those

who know that we are not going to undermine their interests at Geneva

feel that the mere fact of the talks improves the status of the Chinese

Communists and betters the prospects of success in their campaign for

general acceptance as the only Chinese Government. Foreign Vice Min­

ister Shan is here on a brief visit. He has received further assurances

from us. Just to show the trend of the thinking of our people in Taipei,

the following is quoted from a letter received from Bill Cochran our

Charge at Taipei, while Karl Rankin is on home-leave:

ness there as regards the Ambassadorial talks in Geneva. This, added

to the bad effects caused here, raises in my mind the question: will

the benefits obtained from the talks outweigh the damage done to

the confidence of our real, fighting friends (as distinguished from our

fair-­weather friends, the fence-­sitters, and the amici hermaphroditi who

aren’t sure what they are) in our resolution, persistence, and depend­

ability. If not, won’t we have lost something more valuable than we

have gained?—­for we can never satisfy the avidity of the neutralists for

concessions on our part.”

The Secretary has been informed of the message of appreciation con­

veyed in your letter of August 12. He in turn is pleased at the way you

are handling the negotiations. You have undoubtedly carried out your

instructions to apply unremitting pressure to Wang at the August 16

meeting. We feel that he is on the defensive on the basic issue, despite all

his efforts to transfer the onus. We will be interested to see if you consider

it advisable to use the authority you have to suggest a recess if there is no

progress at the eighth meeting on August 18. We feel that only you can

determine this in the light of Wang’s position and demeanor at the next

meeting. It should be becoming increasingly apparent to Wang that there

is no give in our position on this fundamental issue.

We have authorized Cooper to tell Nehru of the prospective

arrangement for limited Indian representation, emphasizing the fact

that it is sensitive information and that no agreement has yet been

reached. Cooper is authorized to assure Nehru that if the arrangement

goes through, we will welcome the proposed Indian role and will

accord all facilities for its discharge.

I am letting Carl McCardle know of the pretty cogent reasons

you gave why you decided against holding a backgrounder. In ­Walter

Robertson’s absence Bill Sebald is being kept closely informed of the

contents of your official-­informals, and anything which we think

would be useful for the Secretary to have is being passed on to him.

Congratulations on your adroit handling of countless difficulties

and good luck,

Sincerely,

520. From Johnson.

Two hours and 20 minutes this morning repetition same themes

both sides with no progress.

Wang presented proposal virtually identical with our August 16

draft agreement announcement except for vital first paragraph which

he proposed be amended read as follows:

“1. The People’s Republic of China recognizes that American

Nationals in the PRC who desire to return are entitled to do so and

declares that it has adopted and will further adopt appropriate meas­

ures so that they can exercise their right to return.”

His theme was this was “key which would open door” to solu­

tion problem Americans in China and again offered promptly give me

names whose cases “review completed” making clear this grant release.

My theme was contrast action we had taken Chinese US. He was

asking I open door without showing me what was behind it, that if he

would show me what was behind it and if it met my request on release

all Americans question timing could be worked out.

He inflexibly resisted my persistent pressure give me any assur­

ance or even indication that his solution would bring about release all

Americans. Result was complete deadlock but no effort by him to pre­

cipitate any break or hint at recess. Next meeting Saturday, 10 a.m.

Gowen

537. From Johnson.

1. In addition my 520, at this morning’s meeting many references

by Wang to “pressure”, “demands”, “would never respond pressure”

etc all of which I of course attempted counter. When on this theme he

showed more feeling than on any other point.

2. However irrational, their position seems to be that if they

release all Americans before or simultaneous with representation

agreement it would publicly be interpreted as “yielding to pres­

sure”. They are willing announce release some Americans as purely

unilateral act prior to public announcement representation arrange­

ment but must first have firm commitment. They will then subse­

quently announce further release Americans but will not commit

themselves to all as this would be “interference with their sover­

eignty, legal processes” etc. etc.

3. I went as far as I felt I could under my present instructions

to meet whatever substance this may have in their minds by stating

Distribution.

that if their solution encompassed release all Americans and it was

only question timing in relation announcement representation

arrangement this could be worked out. However, Wang showed no

interest. He also showed no interest in my amendment para one by

insertion phrase “as result official action taken in accordance with

its governmental processes”.

4. His replies to my references Chou’s statement were weak and

beside the point. He avoided direct reply to my reminder that he had

promised me last year “review” cases and that in interim only five

civilians out of thirty had been released from prison.

5. Deadlock is now very tight and little scope for further discussion

until there is some shift in position one side or other.

6. Subject to Dept’s suggestions or instructions believe I can do lit­

tle at next meeting but reiterate our positions as necessary and pick up

remaining questions on representation arrangement which is subject

separate tel.

(I deliberately avoided details representation arrangement today

in order concentrate on and highlight fundamental issue.)

7. Would appreciate Dept’s instructions on whether if negotiating

situation permits it would approve my attempting explore possibility

release some now with commitment release remainder within definite

time limit, say three months. Even if it could be obtained CHICOMS

would in all probability not be willing make such commitment public.

Gowen

538. Eyes Only for the Secretary. From Johnson.

I have feeling now would be useful time for me to invite Wang

to private dinner with only interpreters present. Have available place

I believe safe from press attention.

If we are going maintain our present position believe I can do

much in such an atmosphere reinforce firmness our stand and at same

time put across thoughts contained Urtel 526 in way that is not possible

in atmosphere meetings.

He is obviously at end his instructions and I have feeling gesture

such as this at this time might help in moving Chou.

However would appreciate your advice.

Gowen

540. From Johnson.

1. Revised draft given me by Wang August 18 made following

changes in draft transmitted Mytel 463:

A. Numbered paragraph one revised as reported Mytel 520.

B. Words “the USA agrees that” inserted at beginning numbered

paragraph two.

C. Word “official” omitted from phrase “encountering official

obstruction” in paragraph 2 (A).

D. “Office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK” used throughout in

place “Embassy of the UK”.

E. Paragraph 2 (A) reworded to read: “(A) If any Chinese national

believes that contrary to declared policy of the US he is encountering

obstruction in departure he may so inform the Indian Embassy and

request it to make representations on his behalf with the US Govern­

ment. If desired by the PRC the Indian Embassy may also make inves­

tigation on the facts.”

F. “PRC” substituted throughout for “China mainland”.

2. In addition to above changes in text Wang also read and handed

me copy of statement intended to establish supplementary understand­

ings not to be incorporated in text of agreed announcement. Gist of

points made was:

A. I had stated that nothing in agreed announcement in any way

infringed on sovereignty or jurisdiction and that I presumed cases of

Americans would be settled within framework Chinese judicial proce­

dure. On basis Wang’s understanding of these statements of mine he

willing to omit sentence his original draft referring to persons involved

in unfinished civil or criminal cases.

B. If nationals either side reported to own government they being

prevented from leaving, their government could refer such complaint

to the third country for investigation or representation. If we would

agree to understanding to this effect, Wang would be willing omit this

provision from agreed announcement.

3. Comments on para one above.

A. Obviously unacceptable.

B. Do not see this is materially objectionable in context but prefer

language our draft.

C. Believe it important retain “official” as in our draft.

D. Would appreciate being informed whether UK objects to this

terminology.

E. Not clear on motive behind this ostensibly slight change but may

be related to their proposal on “understandings” mentioned para two (B)

above. Would appreciate Dept’s instructions.

F. Unobjectionable.

4. Comments on para two above.

A. Meaningless unless agreement reached on release all Ameri­

cans. However this again raises point of their jurisdiction over Amer­

icans and conversely our jurisdiction over Chinese. Believe at same

point it is going be necessary for me say jurisdiction not questioned at

least for future. That is make clear we not attempting re-establish any

extraterritorial principle.

B. Will maintain our present position.

Gowen

543. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened meeting with prepared statement and revision

text proposed announcement. (Text revisions in separate tel). He said

his agreement to revised text based on understanding two points:

A. That announcement in no way infringed upon or raised ques­

tion about Chinese sovereignty or jurisdiction over Americans in China

and that US did not attempt dictate PRC what measure it should take,

that being matter only his government could decide within framework

their own juridical procedures.

B. That nationals either side may report to entrusted third country

and also their own government in order latter may refer complaints to

third country in case their departure being prevented.

2. Wang requested these two points be included in record of meet­

ing as conditions governing his agreement to revised proposal which

he stated followed form and content our proposal.

3. I replied I was interested in practical situation Americans his

country. Asked what was effect Wang’s revised paragraph one with

respect all Americans now prevented from returning US for whatever

reason.

4. Wang stated Chinese Government never put restrictions on

American nationals. Those desiring return free do so but those who vio­

lated law quite another problem. These latter Americans may also leave

country upon settlement their cases, as guaranteed by proposed agree­

ment. Item one of agenda now settled by provisions this first paragraph

because Americans who desired return could do so. US Government in

past restricted departure Chinese students but these orders rescinded

so no need include in first paragraph.

5. I replied not at all clear to me how statement his proposed text

affects American nationals now prevented from returning.

6. Wang repeated these are two different matters, and not possible

make concrete stipulation in announcement regarding either Chinese

students or American nationals. If agreement reached on announcement

then these specific matters could be settled in light of agreement. Added

it was his opinion sentence regarding Americans whose cases unsettled

could have been included in announcement but because I objected they

willing leave out sentence provided understanding reached regarding

sovereignty and jurisdiction over such aliens. As to specific cases return

certain Americans, he promised inform us results after agreement on

announcement and even this morning. He repeated that reference to

nationals being prevented from returning applied only to American

Government restrictions on students as Chinese never issued orders pre­

venting departure Americans.

7. Wang continued that we had referred to Chou En-Lai’s state­

ment number of Americans small and problem easily solved. He said

Chou’s meaning is clear that if agreement reached on method speci­

fied in announcement then specific cases could be solved using this

method. Emphasized infringement on sovereign and internal affairs

Chinese state clearly could not be tolerated.

8. I replied I could not understand meaning his reference to

infringing sovereignty his government. Wang had asked me take

measures permit all Chinese in US leave if they desired. Measures

we took permit them leave were completely within our law. We did

this in response request his government and we did not consider it

infringement our sovereignty. In same way we asked him take mea­

sures permit Americans China return and we hoped and expected he

would do this during talks as we had done, unilaterally and without

conditions. However, Chinese had not acted and I could not agree

that question announcement and question Americans in China were

two different matters.

9. I continued that Wang at last meeting had raised question of sov­

ereignty and jurisdiction over Americans in China. Suggested might

help insert following clause in paragraph one draft announcement: “As

the result official action in accord with government processes”. I sug­

gested this because it reaffirmed that everything we were doing was in

accord our laws and government processes.

10. Wang ignored this suggestion and returned his original argu­

ment, saying two problems before us were: (A) whether nationals could

return freely to their countries, and (B) whether governments doing

whatever possible help their return. Ambassadorial talks concerned

primarily bring about return nationals desiring to do so and proposed

announcement solved this question. He said Chinese tried meet US

halfway and listed compromises he claimed his side had already made

to meet our objections. He stated specific cases Americans cannot be

included in text of agreement in present form which is most just and

reasonable solution question. His government has taken steps and is

prepared take further steps effect return Americans.

11. I replied perhaps his government had not issued special order

preventing departure Americans but in fact they unable leave China.

Our two government processes differ and US has no exit permit system.

We have each taken measures against some nationals on other side. I

had informed Wang exactly what we had done and against which of

Chinese citizens. In contrast he told me simply that cases Americans

detained China being reviewed. This left my nationals in very vague

situation. I asked again whether review and action by his government

on American cases would fully meet request I made that all Americans

will “now” be permitted depart. I said if I understood his remarks cor­

rectly, this was not their meaning.

12. I continued by saying at our meeting a year ago Wang

informed me cases Americans being reviewed but during following

year only five American civilians imprisoned in China were released

and 25 civilians remained in jail. Judging by this experience, his state­

ment cases will be reviewed does not indicate civilians will return

promptly US. I stated I have tried make it as clear as possible I was

here to discuss return all US civilians but we are no closer to reso­

lution that problem than when we started three weeks ago. I hoped

statement made by Chou meant situation different now from last

year but apparently not. I emphasized I had been frank and hoped

he would be equally frank because not in interest either party keep

this matter dragging on. Simple, straightforward solution problem of

civilians was permit them to return.

13. Wang returned previous line argument by saying my remarks

deviated from discussion wording proposed announcement. He stated

when last year he asked US rescind all restrictions Chinese nationals

I had said US laws could not be changed. He said I should not now

demand Chinese Government change their law governing civilians

year and review of remaining cases are additional indications his gov­

ernment’s lenient policy within framework Chinese law. He added if

anyone had tried force his government release 11 American airmen

they would not have been freed. They were released only to improve

relations two countries. Attitude PRC toward Americans in prison is to

help them leave as soon as possible. He said they had agreed to changes

in text joint announcement and could not see reason for further delay.

They had made their best effort and Americans could not object or con­

sider arrangement unjust.

14. I replied again [garble] was not text of announcement but

the return of the Americans. Phrase “preventing departure” seemed

describe action Chinese regarding American civilians but maybe Wang

knew better word. Any solution arrived at must make clear beyond

doubt that question return of ­Americans had been resolved. I empha­

sized we not attempting dictate how problem should be handled nor

ask changes laws or procedures and hoped, in view Chinese statement,

PRC able reach solution in accordance their laws.

15. Wang replied agreement is like key and we have only to take

it to open door to see results review cases Americans. He said efforts

reach agreement should come from both sides but he saw no compro­

mises being made by US.

16. I said hoped he would find it possible next meeting open door

wider and tell us whether results his review would be release of all

Americans. I added if his reluctance do so was a matter of timing I was

sure that could be worked out. The one and only request I had made

was the release of all Americans and I would accept changes in word­

ing of text to achieve this objective. I had told him exactly what we

prepared to do and expected him reply equally frankly.

17. Wang completely ignored my suggestion that question of

timing could be worked out. Instead he replied if we not willing take

key, door must remain closed and could not be opened by “violence”.

If Americans forced them do anything, frankly it could not be done.

Repeated claims American Government made on basis of list tanta­

mount to obliging Chinese to comply. This they could not do because it

would mean repudiation procedures in framework Chinese law.

18. I asked Ambassador tell me what I had said that he interpreted

as my attempting use “force”. I came here to find solution with him. If he

took action regarding our nationals comparable to our action toward his,

agreement was possible. He replied by stating my “repeated claims on

basis list” was “obliging them to comply. This they could not do” etc, etc.

19. Meeting closed with much sparring, I repeating theme release

all Americans and he repeating theme key was in our hands.

Gowen

562. For Johnson. Your 520.

We presume reference second paragraph to QUOTE August 12

draft Agreed Announcement UNQUOTE actually refers to draft agreed

announcement quoted your 463 August 15 which was presented to

Wang at August 16 meeting PAREN your 490 PAREN.

Please confirm, giving full text Wang’s draft if you have not already

done so.

Dulles

by McConaughy.

Geneva, August 19, 1955, noon

545. From Johnson. Deptel 562.

August 16 draft correct. Understand transmission error already

corrected.

Mytel 540 gave Wang’s amendments our August 16 draft. However

avoid any possibility error following is full text first portion Wang’s

draft. Second portion same mutatis mutandis:

“The Ambassadors of the PRC and the USA have agreed to

announce the measures which their respective governments have

adopted with respect to return of nationals of each located in the coun­

try of the other. With respect to American nationals residing in the PRC,

Ambassador Wang Ping-nan on behalf of the Government of the PRC

has informed Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson that:

1. The PRC recognizes that American nationals in the PRC who

desire to return are entitled to do so and declares that it has adopted

and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can exercise

their right to return.

2. The PRC agrees that the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK

in the PRC will be authorized to assist the return to the USA of those

American nationals who desire to do so follows:

(A) If any American national believes that contrary to declared pol­

icy of the PRC he is encountering obstruction in departure he may so

inform the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK and request it to

make representations on his behalf with the Government of the PRC. If

desired by the US the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK may also

make investigation on the facts.

(B) If any American national in the PRC who desires to return to the

US has difficulty in paying the return expenses, the office of the Charge

d’Affaires of the UK may render him financial assistance needed to per­

mit his return.

3. The Government of the PRC will give wide publicity to the fore­

going arrangements and the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in

the PRC may also do so.”

Gowen

Geneva, August 19, 1955, noon

Seems to me attempt revise draft agreed announcement (Mytel

463) fully to meet point raised by GOI note raises real problems for

US. I would suggest substitution phrase “Republic of India” in place

“Embassy Republic of India in US” in numbered para two, remainder

draft to be left as is but prior agreement GOI thereto to be obtained. In

theory CHICOMS should obtain GOI agreement but as CHICOM inter­

est is in enlarging scope representation believe it would be preferable

if we also did so.

Would appreciate instructions prior to Saturday’s meeting as Wang

will probably raise.

Gowen

551. From Johnson.

1. Re last paragraph Deptel 542 and previous on statement to be

made in event recess proposed by Wang or proposed by me in case

threatened break. In either these events believe first step should be pro­

posal by me of agreed announcement to explain recess. If as I antici­

pate Wang turns down any agreed announcement acceptable to us way

would be cleared under our agreement on private nature of meetings

for me to notify him that we intended make unilateral statement along

lines Deptel 496. Under our agreement feel I am obliged give him at

least 24 hour notification. I would of course hope that our threat make

unilateral statement would cause him reconsider.

2. Following is text of agreed announcement which I would pro­

pose to him:

3. “For the past ..... weeks, the Ambassadors of the USA and the

PRC have been seeking a settlement of item one on their agenda, the

return of civilians of both sides to their respective countries. Ambas­

sador Johnson has informed Ambassador Wang that all Chinese in the

US who desire to travel to the PRC are now free to do so. Ambassador

Wang has informed Ambassador Johnson that all Americans in the PRC

who desire to leave are now free to do so, with the exception of those

involved in unfinished civil or criminal cases. With respect to the lat­

ter, Ambassador Wang has stated that his government is reviewing all

cases and that he will report the results of the reviews to Ambassador

Johnson.

4. “The two Ambassadors, with the approval of their governments,

have also agreed in principle to a joint declaration to be made by the

two governments which would formally confirm

(A) That all nationals of either under the authority of the other who

desire to return home are now free to do so;

(B) That a third party in each country may be designated to assist

such return if ever a national desiring to return believes that, contrary

to declared policy, he is encountering official obstruction, and

(C) That such third party may also be the means of providing

financial assistance to those desiring to return.

5. “However, Ambassador Wang has indicated the PRC is unable

to subscribe unconditionally to this declaration pending completion

of the review of all American cases by the PRC. In order to allow for

the completion of these reviews, the two Ambassadors have agreed to

recess their talks for ….. weeks. It is anticipated that when the talks are

resumed it will be possible promptly to reach an agreement which will

permit the departure from the PRC of all Americans who desire to leave

and the issuance of a joint declaration along the lines of that referred

to above.

Unquote.

Gowen

We do not yet have full text proposal referred to your 520. Super­

ficially paragraph 1 seems to represent some advance. Indeed if word

QUOTE immediately UNQUOTE were inserted before QUOTE further

adopt UNQUOTE and if word QUOTE promptly UNQUOTE were

inserted before QUOTE exercise UNQUOTE we would believe it might

be acceptable. We would however want it clearly understood that

QUOTE promptly UNQUOTE meant that a beginning would be made

at once and completion effected within some such period as two or

three months and that unless this in fact developed we would not con­

sider they were acting in good faith and that further talks might then

be broken off. However this understanding need not be made public

unless it were breached.

As talks have developed it seems to us that Chinese Commu­

nists are frustrating agreed first purpose of resumed ambassadorial

level talks. That agreed first purpose was QUOTE to aid in settling

the matter of repatriation of civilians who desire to return to their

respective countries UNQUOTE. Also we again recall Chou En-lai’s

statement that purpose forthcoming talks at ambassadorial level was

QUOTE first of all UNQUOTE to reach a reasonable settlement of

this matter.

As we read your cables, Wang’s proposal would leave situation

in precisely the same unsettled state it was when new negotiations

were agreed to. It seems to us that until Wang is prepared agree that

Americans in China who want to return can promptly do so, we have

no alternative but to stand pat constantly repeating that the agreed

first purpose of talks is to QUOTE settle UNQUOTE these cases and

what settlement does he propose.

Dulles

Dulles; cleared by McConaughy.

Washington, August 19, 1955

582. For Johnson.

1. Your 540. Department believes principal objective is obtain Chi­

nese Communist agreement our version paragraph 1 as set forth Sec­

retary’s 569. In order facilitate Wang’s acceptance satisfactory version

paragraph 1, we would be willing make some concessions on textual

points enumerated your 540. While in each case our language believed

somewhat preferable there is no fundamental issue involved as we see

it and we would yield in order afford additional face saving to Wang if

he agrees on our proposed paragraph 1. Specifically we would accept

paragraph B PAREN insertion of QUOTE USA agrees that UNQUOTE

PAREN, C PAREN omission word QUOTE official UNQUOTE PAREN,

E PAREN rewording of paragraph 2  A PAREN subject clarification

garble following words QUOTE if desired by the UNQUOTE, and

F  PAREN substitution QUOTE PRC UNQUOTE for QUOTE China

mainland QUOTE PAREN. Regarding D PAREN substitution QUOTE

Office of Charge d’Affaires of UK UNQUOTE for QUOTE British

Embassy UNQUOTE PAREN British Embassy perceives no objection

but has queried Foreign Office.

2. Your 543. As to Wang’s proposed supplementary statement Legal

Adviser is working on this and we will not have anything definitive for

you in time for tomorrow’s meeting. Expect to send definite instruc­

tions by early next week. Believe this delay not important inasmuch

as it seems unlikely that final agreement will be reached at tomorrow’s

meeting. Our preliminary reaction to paragraph 1. A. is that we could

accept some sort statement making clear that each side is acting entirely

on its own and that no question interference jurisdiction arises on either

side. We will naturally desire avoid language which would imply US

recognition CPR attributes of sovereignty.

As to paragraph 1.B. you should take position this point is ade­

quately covered by representation provisions agreed announcement

and it therefore is unnecessary.

wishes Indian Government in regard nomenclature. Presume Wang

will introduce this question. You should be prepared accept language

QUOTE Government of the Republic of India UNQUOTE in place of

by McConaughy and Sebald; cleared in substance by Dulles. The time of transmission

is illegible.

QUOTE Indian Embassy UNQUOTE only in first sentence paragraph

2 of agreed announcement. Subsequent references to Indian Embassy

should be retained. We plan make it clear to GOI in our reply that it is

our understanding Embassy would be agency GOI for implementation

agreement and that no Indian Commission or special team would be

sent to US for this purpose.

Dulles

Letter No. 4

Geneva, August 19, 1955

Dear Walter:

I received your letter of August 17th today. This is very good pouch

service and if it could be maintained would certainly be most helpful. I

also received your letters of August 12th and 15th but did not reply in

view of Ed Martin’s return as I knew that he would fill you all in much

better than I could by letter.

Doug Forman has arrived, and I greatly appreciate the effort which

was made thoroughly to brief him before he left. It has been very help­

ful to me.

Frankly I am still bothered by what might not entirely accurately

be described as our present “all or nothing” position. I fully appreci­

ate that it is a question of judgment upon which it is not possible to

be categorical one way or another. You may be entirely right that their

desire to move on to item two is so strong that they will eventually

concede, but I, nevertheless, stick to my original estimate even if this

is true it is going to be a long, hard struggle. There is no question on

the moral rightness of our position, but, unfortunately, that seems to

have little influence on the people with whom I am dealing. What par­

ticularly bothers me is that our position is resulting in the retention of

persons whose release could otherwise be obtained while we wrestle

with getting all the others. I am finding it hard to equate the cases of

say Harriet Mills and some of the missionaries with some of the other

cases, much though we intend to get them all out. Of course, all this

in turn largely depends upon whether it is Chou’s intention to exploit

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

those remaining for further concessions from us. Of course one cannot

be sure, but I still have the feeling that they consider just about the

maximum amount of capital has been squeezed from the prisoners

and that the others would gradually be released in their own way and

in their own time.

It seems to me that also we are running some risk, slight though

it may seem at the time, that the maintenance of our present position

just might result in a breakdown of these talks, if not because of devel­

opments here but because of incidents elsewhere and that this would

result in indefinite detention by the Chinese of those whose release

we could have otherwise obtained. Of course, the only way in which

I could fully and finally test the Chinese Communist position on this

and bring maximum pressure would be to force the issue to the point

of threatening a breakdown from our side. We would be gambling that

their desire is so strong to go on to item two that they would not permit

it to happen, but, on the other hand, if they called my bluff it would

indefinitely delay the release of any Americans.

I do not say our present position is wrong and will, of course,

continue to present it to the best of my ability. However, I hope that

in reaching a decision full weight has also been given to these other

considerations. I have never felt the situation was so simple as throw­

ing in the sponge when we were near agreement on all Americans

because I did not feel that we were that near that point. I hope that I

am wrong.

I sent an “eyes only” to the Secretary last night on the possibility

of my very privately having Wang to a meal, and, if it is our intention

maintain our present position, putting it to him just as forcefully as I

can. It is my feeling that if I would do this in this atmosphere it would

be much more effective than anything further I might say in our meet­

ings and that the gesture of inviting him to dinner just might help in

bringing Chou around. I think that it is a situation which calls for using

all the arts of our profession.

If I do not do this, it seems to me that I should probably adopt the

opposite tack and, while trying to avoid anything that would precipi­

tate a break, could take a much less “reasonable” attitude at meetings

and attempt to give him a feeling that if we don’t get what we are ask­

ing for we would be willing to see a break develop. This would be a

difficult operation to perform without its leading to a break if they are

in fact willing to break over the issue.

I am also glad to see the improvement in the press. From what

Doug Forman tells me, I fear that I had perhaps in the past not made

clear enough to all of you, including Carl McCardle, that I have been

spending a great deal of time seeing individual correspondents and

believe that it has done some good.

The Department’s telegrams of instructions are most prompt

and helpful, and I greatly appreciate the tremendous amount of most

urgent work that I know goes into each of them. The regional commu­

nications supervisor came over here from Paris and there has been a

considerable improvement in our code room problems. With the end­

ing of the Atomic Energy Conference, there should be further improve­

ment. I am still distressed at the amount of time it takes things to move

between us.

With kindest regards, I remain

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. I assume that you, Sebald and Robertson will see any “eyes

only” transmitted to the Secretary. I will only very occasionally use this

when I am particularly anxious matter not be given any further circula­

tion in the Department.

You might tell the Secretary that he owes me a franc for the use of

“conference” in his 526.

UAJ

Letter No. 6

Washington, August 19, 1955

Dear Alex:

The pouch service may be less frequent from now on. If there is

going to be only one a week, we cannot depend very heavily upon

the official-informal letter channel. I hope we can find some means of

exchanging letters at least twice a week.

The deadlock seems pretty tight following the August 18 meet­

ing. We thought, on the basis of your 520, that the Wang Paragraph

1 proposal might give some hope of progress, but your 537 affords

less ground for optimism. The Secretary’s telegram 569 of last night

gives you as much negotiating leeway as is possible under present

Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.

circumstances without compromising the essential principle. This

telegram gives the Chinese Communists an easy way out if they are

willing to take it, for it means in effect that we would accept their

promise as to Americans who would not be released immediately and

the understanding on the remaining Americans would not have to be

publicized at present. This is going a pretty long way. If we went any

further to meet their demands, we would not even have a Communist

promise in exchange for U.S. performance. We would indeed be “buy­

ing a pig in a poke”.

The August 20 meeting might be fairly decisive. The added negoti­

ating latitude given you in the Secretary’s 569 probably will enable you

to ascertain whether Chou’s July 30 statement which you have ham­

mered so hard, really means anything. If there is no affirmative action

from Wang, the deadlock on Item 1 is indeed a tight one.

Ed Martin arrived here on Wednesday the 17th and gave us very

full and illuminating reports over a period of several hours. He saw the

Secretary for over half an hour in the afternoon and conveyed a clear

picture of the atmosphere of the negotiations and the nuances of the

give-and-take which cannot be obtained from the telegrams. We have a

better grasp of what you are up against and a better visualization of the

general environment of the talks.

The head of Foreign Assets Control of Treasury Department gave

the Secretary a full briefing on the 17th regarding the relationship of

Foreign Assets Control Regulations to possible travel of American

citizens to Communist China. This was in relation to the Secretary’s

526 to you. He made it clear that the licensing procedures under the

­Regulations are flexible and Treasury will of course readily accept for­

eign policy guidance from State.

We have informed Cooper on August 17 of the general nature of

the impasse we have encountered and he has informed the Indian Gov­

ernment of the failure, as we see it, of Wang Ping-nan to live up to

Chou En-lai’s July 30 statement. Cooper has informed the Indian Gov­

ernment that Chinese nationals in the U.S. who wish to return to Com­

munist China are free to do so and that the Chinese Communists have

entirely failed to match this position. Cooper was authorized to inform

the Indians that we were not prepared to go on to discuss other matters

until the agreed first item was disposed of. Bohlen in Moscow has also

been informed. It is conceivable that the Indians or the Soviets or both

may [unclear—exert?] some influence on Peiping to moderate its posi­

tion, although we have carefully avoided a request of any intervention

by either Government. If they do anything it will be on their own initia­

tive and responsibility.

There is nothing but admiration for the ingenuity, resolution and

patience you are showing in holding Wang to the basic issue through

these seemingly interminable exchanges.

I hope you were not disappointed when no telephone call came

through last Sunday. You will understand it was not as a result of any

lack of desire to talk, but solely because we are apprehensive about

possible monitoring and the difficulty of having a meaningful conver­

sation which does not skirt on sensitive matters.

All the best and sincere regards,

Sincerely

560. From Johnson.

One hour and half meeting this morning again with no visible

progress. I opened with statement to effect our agreed purpose was

settle matter return civilians, I had told him exactly what we had done

with respect Chinese and were prepared to do representation, was

still waiting know settlement his government proposed make Amer­

icans. When this information available could readily agree exact lan­

guage public announcement but futile further discussion form words

until both clear as to substance of what we are announcing. He replied

reiterating previous positions but during course give and take I asked

him series questions to which his replies made clear all repeat all cases

being qte reviewed unqte, qte completion review unqte means persons

can promptly depart for US, review all cases not qte completed unqte,

qte he could not forecast time required complete remaining cases unqte

which was dependent on qte nature case, conduct individual, improve­

ment relations between two countries unqte. Talks were one indication

improvement and agreement on putting third party representation into

operation would be additional improvement. All this would qte make

settlement of cases easier than in the past unqte.

Had made their qte best effort unqte. All argument that he would

reciprocate frankness with which I had made detailed explanation

action taken respect Chinese in US was evaded or brushed aside. My

efforts this regard were qte infringement of sovereignty and interfer­

ence their juridical processes which they could never accept unqte.

I deliberately avoided any discussions details representation

arrangement in order keep discussion focused on central issue. For

same reason I also avoided answering familiar allegations treatment

Chinese in US and their treatment Americans China.

Next meeting Tuesday, 10 A.M.

Gowen

563. From Johnson.

1. Following is full text Wang’s proposed “understandings” as

given me August 18 meeting which may be helpful in study referred to

Deptel 582 paragraph two.

2. “In your proposed agreed announcement no specific pro­

visions have been made of those nationals with unfinished civil or

criminal cases. At our last meeting, however, you stated that you did

not think anything that you said in the agreed announcement in any

way infringed upon or raised a question of sovereignty or jurisdiction

and that you did not in any way attempt to dictate to my govern­

ment on what measure or action it should take, that being matters

only my government could decide. You also stated that you had never

suggested cases of Americans should be settled outside the frame­

work of our law and that you had always presumed that the measures

taken by my government were within the framework of our juridical

procedures.

3. On the basis of our understanding of your statements we are

ready to agree to write down in the agreed announcement that both

sides announce that they have adopted and will further adopt appro­

priate measures to enable the nationals of the other side who desire

to return to exercise their rights to do so, without specifically raising

the question of those being involved in unfinished civil or criminal

cases.

4. As regards the question of one government making requests

on behalf of its nationals towards the entrusted country, I have pro­

posed that the respective governments should be able to request,

on behalf of their own nationals who desire to return, the entrusted

country to investigate the facts and to make representations with the

government of the other side in order to resolve the difficulties of

such civilians in their departure. However, your proposed agreed

announcement also failed to provide for this point. At our last meet­

ing you indicated that after the implementation of the third country

arrangement nationals of each side can directly approach the diplo­

matic mission of the third country concerned. If, however, nationals

of any side report to their government about their departure being

prevented the government concerned can also refer these complaints

to the third country for the latter to make representations or to carry

out investigation. I believe you certainly will have no objection to

that. With this understanding we will also agree to make no provision

on this point in our agreement.

5. I request that the above two points be included in the record of

the meeting.”

Gowen

564. From Johnson.

1. I did not at today’s meeting introduce textual changes mentioned

first para Secretary’s tel 569 nor those mentioned para one Deptel 582 as

it was very clear that question is not verbal formula but factual situation

and no concession on words was going to move him to any substantive

concession on Americans. Wang will probably agree almost any verbal

formula for para one but will insist on understanding that agreement

does not infringe on CHICOM sovereignty and jurisdiction which he

will interpret to mean that qte unfinished civil and criminal cases unqte

will be settled in own way and own time.

2. Issue is very clear and there is little left to say until shift in posi­

tion one side or another.

3. My present thinking is that at Tuesday’s meeting I might introduce

redraft qte agreed announcement unqte based upon Wang’s August 18

draft (Mytel 545) modified as suggested first para Secretary’s tel 569

and para one Deptel 582 together with an qte understanding unqte on

jurisdiction to be based on legal study mentioned para 2 Deptel 582 in

which I would include a statement on timing of CHICOM completion

review qte unfinished civil and criminal cases unqte. I would think that

a phrase somewhat as follows would be sufficient: qte It is understood

that the PRC has completed the review of some unfinished civil and

criminal cases involving Americans and that these Americans will be

able promptly to depart for the US. It is understood that the review of

all remaining civil and criminal cases involving Americans will be com­

pleted within ….. weeks and that they will thereupon be able to depart

for the US. Unqte

4. My tactic would be to present Wang with full text of draft agreed

announcement and qte understanding unqte pointing out how far we

have gone to meet his point of view and stating it is only for him to

insert some reasonable number of weeks in blank to conclude matter.

I would state qte understanding unqte would not be made public. In

event qte understanding unqte breached it seems to me we would have

full freedom make public.

5. Clear that under his present instructions Wang could not accept

foregoing but it would place me in strongest possible negotiating

position.

6. Only other suggestion I have for action on our part which might

resolve impasse would be to enter into agreement without any qte

understanding unqte on time period during which release of Ameri­

cans would be completed but take position that agenda item one not

settled until release all Americans who desire leave and therefore not

possible proceed to item two until that time. I merely suggest this as a

possibility which I have not thoroughly thought through.

Gowen

566. From Johnson.

1. At 9th meeting today I opened by reading prepared statement.

I said our two governments agreed first purpose discussions was to set­

tle matter return civilians who desire to do so. I had told Wang exactly

and precisely what we have done and are prepared to do regarding Chi­

nese in US and of arrangements we willing make for their assistance by

Indian Embassy. I repeated I was still waiting hear settlement proposed

regarding American nationals desiring return and, while not attempting

dictate action to be taken by Chinese, emphasized purpose our talks was

to discuss all civilians desiring return. I concluded futile to discuss form

of words used in public announcement until both clear in our minds sub­

stance of what we were announcing. Therefore difficult for me see how

we could make further progress until this was done.

2. Wang reverted to his line argument last meeting accusing us rais­

ing same old points and introducing nothing new. Stated if we agreed to

text announcement then he would tell procedures his government will­

ing take and results cases of Americans which have been reviewed.

3. I then asked series simple, direct questions in attempt further

clarify his exact position.

4. I asked if his government was reviewing all civil and criminal

cases involving Americans. He replied he had answered this question

in affirmative many times.

5. I asked whether as soon as governments agreed arrange third

party assistance for civilians who wished return he would inform us

results cases Americans reviewed. He agreed.

6. I asked whether reviews cases all Americans completed. He

hedged. I stated implication was that all not completed. He returned

to standard formula that they would advise on results when reviews

completed. Later he stated very clearly reviews had been completed on

some but not the others.

7. I then asked whether completion review meant that persons con­

cerned would be able return promptly to US. He replied clearly that

they could depart China promptly.

8. I asked whether possible give estimate time required complete

reviews remaining cases in accordance laws and procedures his govern­

ment. He replied time required complete reviews depended upon two

factors: (1) nature of cases involved, which included conduct of persons

themselves; and (2) the state of relations between our two countries. In

amplifying latter, he said these talks represented improvement. Also

their release of “guilty” airmen done in effort improve relations. Later

he added agreement on third party representation would also constitute

improvement relations.

9. I stated it takes two to improve relations and that I knew of no sin­

gle thing which from our standpoint would do more to improve relations

than reaching solution on question return our nationals. Added that if

he could state specific period time required to review cases Americans

and permit them return, this would be of great help in improvement

relations. Wang replied impossible and unrealistic predict time required

such review, but if agreement reached on representation and relations

between our countries improved things would move easier than in the

past. He commented he could not expect me to say when Chinese stu­

dents would be able leave US. I replied immediately that I could and

repeated my categorical assurance when he endeavored qualify it.

10. At this point he began reading long prepared statement review­

ing all points he brought up at last meeting. These included: their alleged

willingness agree our text; their assurance they had made greatest effort

reach agreement and responsibility for failure not theirs; claim that

Americans at no time were prevented from leaving China and more had

left proportionately than Chinese had left US; statement all cases were

being reviewed and civil cases could leave upon reasonable settlement

while criminal cases would receive lenient treatment; and their objection

that our insistence release all Americans held constituted interference

their law and juridical processes which they could never accept.

11. Statement concluded alleging difficulties Chinese students

departing US due harassment by immigration officials, delays due

loss their files by authorities, inconvenience due confiscation of funds

sent for their travel and intimidation students go to Taiwan or apply

for refugee status in US. He said some recently returned Chinese

received official obstruction even after they had left US and obstruction

extended even to Hong Kong. He said these criticisms concerned only

ordinary Chinese in US and I could not tell him offhand how many

more Chinese were detained and jailed under federal and state laws

due to unfinished civil and criminal cases. He requested our side inves­

tigate such cases and added third party would also look into matter. He

concluded on theme which he emphasized often before to effect that

demands amounting to infringement on their sovereignty and juridical

process could not be tolerated.

12. I said in reply only that I knew of no Chinese who desired return

involved in what he termed unfinished civil and criminal cases and fur­

thermore that if he would provide me with names I would immediately

look into any cases Chinese whose departure had been interfered with

by official acts contrary to statements I had made.

13. Wang closed meeting by saying if we failed agree on announce­

ment it was not his responsibility as they had made their greatest

effort. He said he could not provide me with names of Chinese stu­

dents in difficulty lest our actions against them should be even more

unfavorable.

Gowen

We are telegraphing separately, with view to its introduction by

you at August 23 meeting, full text of “agreed announcement” as it has

now evolved (with drafting changes which we consider essential) and

request your immediate concurrence or comments.

You will note from this revised draft that U.S. and PRC sections on

repatriation not exactly parallel. This is reflection of fact that PRC so far

unwilling to match our position. We feel announcement should state

our position accurately. We would naturally welcome matching state­

ment PRC. If they still refuse, deviation from parallel language seems

unavoidable.

In general we do not desire any private agreements which add to or

subtract from “agreed announcement” or which provide anything other

than reasonable interpretation of it. On this basis we perceive no justi­

fication for “understanding” on jurisdiction question raised by Wang.

Assuming communists unwilling go beyond compromise language on

repatriation contained in our draft text “agreed announcement”, you

should insist on understanding which would contain reasonable inter­

pretation of time limit, i.e. “promptly” for completion of review of cases

of detained Americans as stated Deptel 569. No objection language

quoted latter part paragraph 3 your 564.

Dulles

by Sebald and McConaughy; cleared in substance by Dulles.

599. For Johnson.

Re Deptel 598. Following is text of draft “Agreed Announcement.”

BEGIN TEXT

QUOTE

The Ambassadors of the USA and the PRC have agreed to announce

the measures which their respective Governments have adopted with

respect to repatriation of civilians who desire to return to their respec­

tive countries.

With respect to Chinese residing in the United States, Ambassador

Johnson, on behalf of the US Government, has informed Ambassador

Wang that: (1) The US recognizes that Chinese in the USA who desire

to return to the PRC are now entitled to do so and declares that it has

adopted measures so that they may in fact promptly return. (2) The

US will authorize the Government of the Republic of India to assist

return to the PRC of those Chinese who desire to do so as follows: (a) If

any Chinese in the USA believes that contrary to the declared policy of

the USA he is encountering obstruction in departure he may so inform

the Indian Embassy in the USA and request it to make representations

on his behalf to the US Government. If desired by the PRC the Indian

Government may also make investigation of the facts in any such case.

(b) If a Chinese in the US who desires to return to the PRC has difficulty

in paying his return expenses, the Indian Government may render him

financial assistance needed to permit his return. (3) The Government

of the US will give wide publicity in the USA to the foregoing arrange­

ments and the Government of India may also do so.

With respect to Americans residing in the PRC, Ambassador Wang

on behalf of the PRC has informed Ambassador Johnson that: (1) The

PRC recognizes that Americans in the PRC who desire to return to the

USA are entitled to do so and declares that it has adopted and will fur­

ther adopt appropriate measures so that they can promptly exercise their

right to return. (2) The PRC will authorize the Government of the UK

to assist in the return to the US of those Americans who desire to do so

as follows: (a) If any American in the PRC believes that contrary to the

declared policy of the PRC he is encountering obstruction in departure

he may so inform the Office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in the

by Dulles; cleared by Sebald.

PRC and request it to make representations on his behalf to the Govern­

ment of the PRC. If desired by the US, the Government of the UK may

also make investigation of the facts in any such case. (b) If an American

in the PRC who desires to return to the US has difficulty in paying his

return expenses, the Government of the UK may render him financial

assistance needed to permit his return. (3) The Government of the PRC

will give wide publicity in the PRC to the foregoing arrangements.

UNQUOTE

END TEXT

Dulles

571. From Johnson.

1. Subject following comments concur text draft “agreed announce­

ment” Deptel 599:

(A) Note that word “nationals” has been dropped following “Chi­

nese” and “American” where appeared all previous texts including

those we introduced. Not clear on reason and desire authority restore if

question raised by Wang.

(B) Assume omission phrase “and the Government UK may also

do so” in numbered paragraph 3 (last sentence Deptel 598) inadvertent.

Probably little value under conditions in PRC but do not see why we

do not obtain for what it may be worth exactly same privilege for UK in

PRC as we give India in US.

In any event as phrased is discretionary rather than obligatory for

UK.

2. Believe it will not be possible avoid question “jurisdiction”. As

I have previously said they obviously concerned we are attempting in

some way reestablish extraterritorial principle for Americans in PRC.

Rightly or wrongly I have said in informal give and take substantially

what Wang quotes in paragraph 2 my telegram 563 and he will insist I

either reaffirm, deny or amend the statement. It still seems to me that

my statement is unexceptional and is consistent with language latter

part paragraph 3 my telegram 564. My thought would be simply set

forth in “understanding” that “nothing in agreed announcement is

intended raise any question of sovereignty, or jurisdiction over nation­

als of one country in territory of other and that it is assumed that mea­

sures referred to in numbered paragraph 1 of statement by Ambassador

Wang contained in ‘agreed announcement’ and measures referred to in

paragraph 1 of statement by Ambassador Johnson in ‘agreed announce­

ment’ are taken within the framework of the laws and legal procedures

of their respective countries.”

3. It seems to me this is not inconsistent with first sentence para­

graph 3 Deptel 598. My thought is that such an “understanding”

including language latter part paragraph 3 my telegram 564 would

in substance simply be oral statements exchanged between Wang and

myself in meeting, although we would, in accordance with our arrange­

ment at opening talks, give to other copy of any remarks we had made

which we desired other side have exact words.

4. Believe my ability do this would materially strengthen my nego­

tiating position in attempting extract from him “understanding” on

timing release Americans.

Gowen

602. For Johnson. Your 571.

1. PAREN a PAREN Word QUOTE nationals UNQUOTE has pur­

posely been dropped minimize possible Chinese claim that we recog­

nize in public document jurisdiction of PRC over Chinese in USA. Not

recognizing PRC as legal government China we are unable agree that

Chinese in USA are its QUOTE nationals UNQUOTE.

(b) No objection adding phrase QUOTE and the Government UK

may also do so UNQUOTE. We purposely omitted phrase because we

unable see that it would have any utility and we did not want to seem

to think that it had.

2. Deptel 599. Delete word QUOTE residing UNQUOTE in first

sentences in second and third paragraphs because QUOTE residence

Sebald, McConaughy, and Phleger; approved in draft by Dulles.

UNQUOTE has technical meaning not applicable to many Americans

and Chinese within scope of arrangements.

3. After full consideration we believe that basic text our 599 is

sound and should be pressed vigorously with oral understanding with

Wang that word QUOTE promptly UNQUOTE is defined as indicated

of agenda until all Americans actually released or acceptable time limit

agreed upon.

4. If it should prove utterly impossible get Wang’s agreement to

foregoing without an QUOTE understanding UNQUOTE, you are

authorized indicate you would consider ad referendum an oral QUOTE

understanding UNQUOTE which would cover both Wang’s jurisdiction

point and definition word QUOTE promptly UNQUOTE. If we agreed

to QUOTE understanding UNQUOTE it could not repeat not be private.

It would have to be announced simultaneously with agreement. Text this

QUOTE understanding UNQUOTE telegraphed separately.

Dulles

603. For Johnson.

Deptel 602. Following is text of “understanding” authorized as

fall-back position:

“Nothing in agreed announcements are intended involve any

question of sovereignty or jurisdiction and it is assumed that measures

referred to in the announcements are taken within framework of laws

and legal procedures of their respective countries. It is understood that

the PRC has completed the review of some unfinished civil and crim­

inal cases involving Americans and that these Americans will be able

promptly to depart for the U.S. It is understood that the review of all

remaining civil and criminal cases involving Americans will be com­

pleted within (blank) weeks and that they will thereupon be able to

depart for the U.S.”

Dulles

Sebald; cleared by Phleger and McConaughy in draft and by Dulles.

Letter No. 8

Washington, August 22, 1955

Dear Alex:

This has been a hectic morning with all efforts concentrated on

getting out a reply to your 571 in time for a possible further exchange

with you before tomorrow’s meeting. The pouch is closing now, so

I won’t be able to put anything substantive in this letter. I just want

you to know that the pouch channel is still open and that we are

working pretty long hours, seven days a week on the Geneva prob­

lems. It is a pity that I can not put full time on Geneva. It is physically

impossible to run the office and devote proper time and reflection to

your problems.

We hope to establish a semi-weekly pouch service to Geneva so

that if all goes well you will receive a letter from me a few days hence.

Sincerely

Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.

585. From Johnson.

1. Had Wang to dinner last night with Ekvall and Wang’s inter­

preter. Talked from 7: until midnight using every device of carrot and

stick of which I was capable but made no visible progress.

2. I had not intended enter into detailed discussion negotiations

but he took initiative, restating his position and trying to impress on

me number Americans that would immediately be released “was very

considerable” and number remaining “would not be large”. He was

obviously trying very hard to reassure me “everything was going be

Limited Distribution.

all right” and that release remainder would not take long without say­

ing anything I could seize upon as commitment. (His instructions are

clearly very rigid on this.) In response my pressing him throughout

evening on definite time he continued return to an involved and tortu­

ous explanation which I found it entirely impossible to pin down to a

definite time period.

However the purport seemed to be that time would be less than

year, as would be “doubly easy and doubly quick” over situation

during past year. However, ominous note of “state of relations” as

one factor in timing continued reappear. I returned again and again

to necessity specific promise on time, even private if they desired

(Deptel 602 was not received until after I had returned) but he flatly

refused. “Absolutely would not be forced into and could not state any

exact time.”

3. While touching in varying degree on most of arguments I have

used in previous meetings I hammered hard on theme that they were

entirely misreading American public opinion if they expected slow

piecemeal releases to “improve relations”. Any release involves tell­

ing of stories by former prisoners and produced very adverse pub­

lic opinion reactions. This had to be expected. Best course in their

self-interest was carry out immediate release of all. Wang countered

we had previously made flyers major factor, they would not release

even response UN SecGen, but released unilaterally interest good

atmosphere and demonstration good faith these talks. “Did not hold

them as bargaining counters and did not intend hold any others as

bargaining counters.” They knew Col. Arnold very “antagonistic” but

this did not prevent his being included release. Intimation was they

very disappointed not only at public reaction to release but that after

flyers had been removed as subject these talks we had now raised ante

in demanding release all others immediately or in specified time. I

countered by returning to theme public reaction to be expected, noted

press attention flyers now declining and cited as proof value getting

remaining cases completed quickly as possible. Believe this line may

have made some impression.

4. I carefully outlined successive concessions we had made to

obtain agreement and repeatedly stressed “we could go no further”.

“We did not even have a definite promise, much less performance we

expected, particularly in light Chou’s statements”. I also made it clear

could not proceed anything else until item one settled. (He has never

suggested we do so but of course their idea of settlement and ours

are still very different.) Also in context importance their meeting our

position on item one said it was important agreement be reached as if

we failed probably would be long time until contact such as this could

be resumed. He put his own emphasis on latter theme.

5. He give me good opportunity to make clear no possibility

even considering American visitors until all Americans now detained

released by bringing up their desire for visitors including Americans

and mentioning proposal for exchange “Chinese opera” and Porgy

and Bess companies. (This regard said they were not “Boxers” desiring

expel foreigners.)

6. During first part of evening he made apparently very purpose­

ful lead up to but did not pursue idea American aid their economic

development “which would require at least to end of century”. Much

of this was familiar Chou line with foreign visitors. However there was

no reference whatever to USSR, frank admission much difficulty and

special reference to “peasant conservatism”, China wants no war with

US, traditionally friendly, nostalgic reminiscences of friendship during

World War II etc.

7. I spoke very frankly on particularly CHICOM treatment US con­

sular and diplomatic personnel at time CHICOM takeover and also on

lack justification CHICOM intervention Korea and our unparalleled

restraint there. His defense treatment consular and diplomatic person­

nel perfunctory and almost admission had been mistake. He showed

little inclination defend Korean intervention or to retreat behind

“volunteers”.

8. Subjects Formosa, Seventh Fleet, trade etc. not mentioned any

way.

9. We agreed meet as scheduled this morning at which time I will

introduce our counterproposal accordance Deptel 571 and previous for

which I prepared ground last night. However view last night’s talk will

keep discussion to minimum necessary.

Gowen

586. From Johnson.

At 10th meeting this morning lasting 25 minutes I presented text

contained Deptel 599.

Presenting draft I noted that contained most language Wang’s

August 18 draft, called attention to use of “Government of India,”

difference in wording between paragraphs one of two sections made

necessary by difference in situation and their failure meet our posi­

tion, and particularly pointed out that word “promptly” in first para­

graph Chinese declaration. Said must be firm definition this word,

need not be written into announcement but could be in form oral

understanding. Did not want to labor ground we had previously

covered but wanted to make it perfectly clear without any possibil­

ity misunderstanding US Government cannot (repeat cannot) accept

any arrangement under which it would be possible for release any

Americans be indefinitely delayed. Must know all will be able leave

within reasonable time. Requested he inform his government that US

considers this vital. This draft went as far as I thought we could go in

meeting his point of view.

Wang stated desired reserve comment my draft until next meet­

ing but offhand did not see reason for difference of wording of two

paragraphs one. Then repeated in summary form previous statements

that “could not possibly accept time limit as this would amount to sub­

mitting to coercion”. Also repeated number immediately to be released

“not small” and cases remaining could be considered “favorably,

quickly and easily because of factors of attitude prisoners, fact of our

agreement and improvement in relations”.

I made no detailed reply but expressed hope he would send draft

to his government for most careful study as was very important.

Wang suggested and I accepted next meeting Thursday, 10 AM.

Gowen

589. From Johnson.

Additional minor sidelights on dinner with Wang last night:

Particularly inquired about Bedell Smith’s health and later made

point of saying “better relations began” when Smith spoke to Chou

in buffet at last year’s Geneva Conference expressing hope relations

might improve.

Gave usual line on civil war events but with noticeable restraint in

treatment Kuomintang and Chiang Kai-shek.

Were thankful and appreciative American aid to China during

World War II even though none received by Communists as it consti­

tuted contribution national strength in fight against Japan.

In reply my raising Communist bloc characteristics of super-­secrecy

and hypersensitivity to criticism as major barriers to fruitful interchange

persons and ideas which he had been urging, he did not contest but

implied improvement this regard under way. He was very quick reject

any implication Chinese Communists identification with satellites when

I cited personal experience in Czechoslovakia.

Rejected my suggestion China lacked natural resources, only prob­

lem was extraction.

Noted full texts Secretary’s and President’s statements and

speeches on Far East published in Chinese Communist press.

Gowen

Distribution.

594. From Johnson.

Comments on 10th meeting.

1. Text handed Wang differed only as follows from Deptel 599:

(A) Phrase “and the Government UK may also do so” restored in

order avoid wording Wang could object to as “unequal”.

(B) Word “residing” deleted accordance Deptel 602.

(C) Full names of Ambassadors given in paragraph two.

(D) Phrase “make investigation of” in paragraph two (A) both sec­

tions changed to “investigate”.

2. I assume requirement that “understanding” be public is appli­

cable only to type referred to paragraph 4 Deptel 602 and that “oral

understanding” along lines paragraph 3 same telegram would not nec­

essarily have to be made public unless breached. Acting on authority

Secretary’s 569 I had previously told Wang such understanding could

be private.

3. Wang showed no inclination retreat from position that he

could not state definite time limit within which all Americans could

be released, since this would amount to submitting to coercion. Made

only the slight concession of assuring me that number Americans to be

released immediately “not small” and that cases of remainder could

be considered favorably and quickly. However latter part of assurance

questionable value since settlement remaining American cases linked

to “improvement of relations between two countries”. This enables

Peiping halt release of Americans whenever they feel we not “coop­

erating” sufficiently to improve relations. I will continue press Wang

hard for firm commitment regarding time but foresee no early change

in his attitude.

4. See no reason change assessment in my 457 that only with great

difficulty and much time could we budge Wang from his position. Nev­

ertheless, I believe it still worthwhile hammering at him one or two

more meetings, even though each of us has already reached a position

from which it will become increasingly difficult to back down, should

that become necessary to avoid complete deadlock. My tactics will be

to hold a very firm line while watching carefully for any hint of com­

promise on his part. We should be fully aware, however, that these tac­

tics are risky, for they may result only in a corresponding stiffening of

Peiping’s position which will make it that much more difficult to find

compromise solution should we decide that is necessary.

5. If no progress is made in next meeting or two we will face very

serious decision. Wang’s most recent statements suggest strongly that

more than half of detained Americans might be released immediately

upon our reaching agreement. Fairly early action can probably be

expected on a number of others. How long are we justified in delay­

ing and possibly even jeopardizing release of these persons in effort to

obtain commitment for release of all within definite time?

6. However logical and justified, difference in language para one

two sections is going greatly increase difficulty obtaining substantive

agreement we desire. I feel it was worth putting forward as bargaining

tactic but would like have authority at time I would consider desirable

make language para one US section identical with language of para one

Chinese section, of text Deptel 599. In case of US “further appropriate

measures” would be understood to refer to acceptance of third-party

arrangement. In case of Chinese, would be understood to include also

review of “unfinished civil and criminal cases” involving Americans.

Thus, texts two sections would be identical and Chinese could not

object to “unequal treatment” to which they hyper-sensitive.

Gowen

616. For Johnson.

FYI. Secretary has sent following to U Nu in response to inquiry

from latter:

QUOTE (Code Room: Please recite here text of letter contained in

Department’s 150 to Rangoon) QUOTE

Dulles

McConaughy.

599. From Johnson.

1. I offer following thought as possible way out of present impasse

in event it continues be impossible move CHICOM off present posi­

tion on giving time limit in which release remaining Americans will be

completed.

2. I would inform Wang that we willing enter into representation

arrangement on basis his assurances that remaining cases will expedi­

tiously be settled within framework those arrangements. If this does not

in fact result we desire make clear that we reserve full freedom to recon­

sider the continuation of the representation arrangement for Chinese in

US. Also desire make clear that we would consider “expeditiously” to be

period of two and in any event not more than three months.

3. I would also inform Wang that at time agreed declaration

issued here that my government would find it necessary issue uni­

lateral statement to effect that US had entered into arrangement and

agreed to “agreed announcement” on basis of assurances that all

remaining cases would be expeditiously settled and that Americans

concerned would thereupon promptly be able to return to US. US

had accepted these assurances and expected that CPR would expedi­

tiously take necessary further measures to this end so that all remain­

ing Americans desiring to return would in fact be able to do so within

reasonable period of time.

4. No specific mention would be made in any such formal unilat­

eral statement of possibility of cancelling representation arrangement

nor would “reasonable period time” be exactly defined but it would lay

public basis for cancelling the arrangement if remaining Americans are

not in fact released within two-three months period.

Gowen

607. From Johnson.

1. As the situation has developed do not believe that text of agreed

announcement to explain recess contained my 551 is any longer appli­

cable. Believe text somewhat along the following lines would be more

appropriate and factually accurate:

2. “For the past . . . . weeks Ambassadors of USA and PRC have

been seeking settlement of item one of their agenda, return of civilians

both sides to their respective countries.

3. Ambassador Johnson has informed Ambassador Wang that all

Chinese in US who desire to travel to PRC are now entitled do so and

that US has adopted measures so that they may in fact promptly return.

4. Ambassador Johnson has also informed Ambassador Wang

when the PRC has agreed that all Americans, including those involved

in unfinished civil and criminal cases, can return to the US within

specified period of time the US Government is willing authorize Gov­

ernment of India assist return to PRC of any Chinese in US who may

request such assistance.

5. Ambassador Wang has informed Ambassador Johnson that

PRC has completed review of some unfinished civil and criminal cases

involving Americans but that he is willing inform Ambassador Johnson

of results of such completed reviews and permit the return of Ameri­

cans involved only when US has agreed to implementation of arrange­

ment with respect to the GOI mentioned above.

6. Ambassador Wang has also stated it is not possible for PRC to

estimate length of time it will take complete review of remaining unfin­

ished civil and criminal cases and to permit Americans involved to

return to US.

7. Ambassador Wang has informed Ambassador Johnson that

PRC is willing authorize Government of UK to give same assistance to

Americans in PRC as GOI would give Chinese in US.”

8. In view of fact foregoing statement would be used only in event

Wang had proposed recess or recess had been proposed by me to avoid

break in talks difficult to complete latter portion of statement explaining

reason for recess which would depend upon Wang’s position at time. It

is now clear he is certainly never going to propose or accept recess for

purpose “completing reviews”. In absence my proposing recess prevent

break most likely possibility would be proposal recess by Wang in order

that we “could reconsider our position”. My tactic this event would be

agree recess if he wants it but reject any implication we would reconsider

our position. I would then propose agreed announcement along forego­

ing lines which I would hope would cause Wang to reconsider as it seems

to me puts us in very strong public opinion position. Should he refuse I

would tell him that we have no alternative but make unilateral statement

along similar lines.

Gowen

CWO/FED

1. Department unable authorize any private understanding with

Chinese Communists which would involve any US commitment

or concession to them. Hence any private statement implying US

acknowledgment of scope or validity their judicial processes would be

unacceptable. However, private oral commitment by Chinese Commu­

nists as to the maximum period meant by word “promptly” in Chinese

portion draft agreed announcement would be acceptable and need not

be made public unless breached.

2. We believe you should press Wang insistently for immediate

release Americans whose cases they admit have already been reviewed

favorably. We do not see that failure to date to reach agreement on pro­

posed announcement should impede release Americans whose cases

already favorably reviewed. You may give Wang emphatic reminder

that no repeat no Chinese being held this country pending issuance

agreed announcement. They are free to leave now. Reciprocity by Chi­

nese expected. You might point out that continued detention Americans

whose cases completed is directly contrary Chinese Communist conten­

tion that all cases disposed within framework their laws and juridical

procedures. Denial departure right to Americans whose cases completed

Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Dulles and Phleger.

constitutes admission they being held as hostages for political advan­

tage. This is irreconcilable with basic tenet which Wang has maintained.

in your discretion bring language paragraph 1 US portion into confor­

mity with language paragraph 1 Chinese portion. It would be under­

stood that “further appropriate measures” on US side would refer only

to acceptance limited third party representation arrangement.

599 will be dealt with later message.

Dulles

627. For Johnson.

Following for your background information only.

We have apprised British in confidence of general nature respon­

sibilities British Charge Peiping would assume under draft agreed

announcement. O’Neill has commented from Peiping that it cannot be

assumed with confidence that all detained Americans will express a

desire return to US. He fears that some imprisoned Americans may be

so thoroughly brainwashed that they would not take any initiative to

return. He indicates possibility that some Americans in prison might

not be able communicate with his office. He remarks that the interests

of imprisoned Americans would be better safeguarded if his office were

accorded right to interview them.

He thinks it would be useful if the agreement additionally men­

tioned “the Shanghai branch of the Office of the Charge d’Affaires of

the UK” so that his Consul General in Shanghai would have the clear

right to assist him as to the Americans detained there and in South

China.

McConaughy.

O’Neill further comments that he would have no effective means

giving publicity to arrangement unless he were given right to place a

notice in the Chinese Communist press.

Dulles

Letter No. 5

Geneva, August 24, 1955

Dear Walter:

I have received your letter of August 19th, and I am writing this to

go out by tomorrow’s pouch. I would hope that you would be able to

work out something so that we could have an exchange at least twice

a week.

As you can see from my messages, the deadlock is now certainly

very tight. I am sorry that I apparently misled you a little in my first

flash telegram on the August 18th meeting by not including enough.

However, I thought that my statements that I had made no progress,

result was complete deadlock, made it clear that I had not in fact got

any place.

I believe that I have included in my two telegrams on the subject

everything of significance that passed at the dinner I gave for Wang,

although it is hard to condense four and a half hours of conversation.

As I said in my telegram, he was making a tremendous effort to go as

far as he could within his obviously very limited instructions to assure

me that everything was going to be all right. I thought you might be

interested in exactly what he said, which I had termed as “an involved

and tortuous explanation” in paragraph two of my 585. Ekvall and I

reconstructed it immediately upon our return as follows: “There is no

comparison to be made of the advantages which those who are left will

have over those who have been released during the past one year. For

there are three favoring factors which will make it clear quickly and

easily for them to be released. The three factors are (a) favorable effect

release of the others will have on people still there; (b) circumstances

of the case itself; and (c) state of our relations.” I prodded and poked

at this from every conceivable angle and was just unable to obtain any

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

further explanation. His conversation otherwise was very rational and

sensible and the only explanation I have for that he had been rigidly

instructed to say absolutely nothing more on this subject. The phrasing,

to my mind, very much carries the marks of Chou.

I asked him to dinner at the end of our meeting on Saturday, and

he replied that he would let me know at 8 o’clock Sunday morning.

This seemed a very short time to make an inquiry and get a reply from

Peiping, but I suppose that he was able to do so. In any event, his inter­

preter telephoned Ekvall promptly at 8 o’clock to accept. I had the din­

ner out at the little pension-type of place on the outskirts of Geneva

where Clough and Forman are living. In accordance with my sugges­

tion, he came in a car other than the one he usually uses and with­

out a flag. (Incidentally, he is normally driven around town in a big

Zim, while I am using a Chevrolet.) We had drinks down in the garden

before dinner. After dinner we retired to the sitting room the boys use.

I am satisfied that it was carried off without any leak to the press and

don’t believe that he will say anything. However, if it did come out, I

would simply take the line that I am leaving no stone unturned in mak­

ing every possible effort to reach agreement on getting our people out.

I should think that this would probably be well accepted by everybody

except possibly Taipei.

I feel that the dinner was a good idea and that now was exactly the

right time to do it. They are, I am convinced, extremely sensitive on the

subject of social ostracism and were particularly sensitive at our rejec­

tion of their little overtures at last year’s conference here. I think that

Wang’s mention of Bedell Smith’s little gesture towards Chou towards

the end of the meetings last year particularly significant in indicating

their sensitivity to such little things. My having taken the initiative this

year represents a major departure, and I believe that it gives me a sub­

tle, though distinct, advantage.

Thanks very much for the information on what we have done with

the Indians, as well as today’s telegram giving me the text of the Secre­

tary’s letter to U Nu. I think it was excellent and presented the situation

exactly right. I will, of course, be extremely interested and hope I can

promptly receive anything from any source on what the Chinese may

tell the Indians or the Burmese in Peiping.

I greatly appreciate the Department’s affirmation in 603 of the

line that I had taken on “sovereignty and jurisdiction”. I had done this

entirely ad lib in give and take during a meeting and was a little con­

cerned that the Department may have felt I had gone too far.

We will keep plugging away but I fear that it is going to largely be

a matter of saying the same thing over again as I have pretty much run

out of ideas on new ways to say things.

I am really going to need help and guidance if and when it comes

to a discussion of “no force”. In this regard, I note from recent Tai­

pei Weekas the Nationalists are still carrying out attacks on shipping

and various other minor actions, as well as over-flying the mainland.

Frankly I just don’t see what my reply is going to be when after I raise

the question of no force they raise the question of these Nationalist

actions carried out with equipment we have supplied them. Also when

I raise our treaty and supplementary understandings with the Nation­

alists on offensive action, I do not see what I say when they allege this

simply goes to prove that these Nationalist actions are being taken with

our approval. I hope you all will have some good ideas for me.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

133. Memorandum from Dulles to Phleger

Washington, August 25, 1955

I have looked at Johnson’s 607 of August 24. I do not like the idea

of making our authorization of the Government of India dependent

upon an agreement of the PRC as to American civilians.

It seems to me that the right position for us to take and the most

effective position from the standpoint of world opinion is that having

learned that there exists question in some minds as to the practical abil­

ity of Chinese in this country to return to the China Mainland if they

so desire, the United States voluntarily asks the Government of India

to serve to assist them and to transmit funds to them to finance the

expenses of their return.

If this is the right thing to do, then I think we should do it. If it is

not the right thing to do, then I do not think we should do it merely

because the Chinese Communists want us to. I think we should keep

whatever we do on a purely unilateral basis of ourselves doing the

right thing even though we are willing to make a joint announcement.

Therefore, if we are to break or have a recess, I would like to see us

announce unconditionally that we intend to invite the Government of

was sent to Sebald. Dulles initialed “JFD” above his typed signature.

India to serve, and that we should not make it contingent as suggested

in Johnson’s 607.

I realize that we may thus be giving up a certain bargaining posi­

tion, but I believe that disadvantage is more than offset by avoiding

the appearance of agreeing with the Chicoms to do something which

we would not otherwise do. Also, the impact on world opinion will be

very much stronger.

John Foster Dulles

616. From Johnson.

Two hour five minute meeting this morning. No progress.

Wang presented re-draft of “agreed announcement” very close our

August 23 text except for substitution “and declares that it has adopted

and will further adopt measures so that they can in fact return as soon

as possible” for latter portion US section our August 23 draft and

substitution “and declares that it has adopted and will further adopt

appropriate measures so that they can exercise as soon as possible their

right to return” for latter portion PRC section our August 23 draft.

(Full text showing other apparently minor changes by separate tel.)

I said his amendment para one US section not necessary as we had

already taken all necessary measures but focused attention on substi­

tution “as soon as possible” for “promptly” in para one PRC section.

In fact virtually all of meeting centered around my continued

effort obtain definite statement on definite period of time during which

remaining Americans would be released and Wang repeating this

“could never be done”, “impossible” and repeating virtually verbatim

his previous line this regard.

During course much give and take I took line contained para two

Deptel 622 and after he had in reply clearly related release of flyers to

decision hold these meetings, release Americans whose cases review

completed to our agreement to “agreed announcement” and again

gave “state of relations” as one factor in timing release remainder,

I very bluntly stated I had not and would not trade the fate of Amer­

icans detained by them for political concessions or agreements they

desired obtain. Said it seemed clear to me what he was saying was

that release remaining Americans would be dependent upon whether

in future I willing to agree further agreements desired by them. This

I would not rpt not do. I was prepared deal with each problem that we

discussed on its own merits, we had taken action respect Chinese US

without condition and without attempting extract political concessions

from them in return.

I had first hoped and expected they would promptly release all

Americans thus paralleling action taken by us with respect Chinese,

we could thereupon quickly agree on announcement of what each

country had done and announce agreement on representation. I had

then attempted obtain his agreement that release Americans would

be simultaneous with announcement and had now gone to position

that only some Americans would be released at time of announcement

(even though I had previously made clear was no justification with­

holding their release for this reason) and only asked that he give me

definite time limit in which remainder would be released. “I do not see

how it is possible for me to go any further.”

I also argued at some length that agreement on words in announce­

ment without clear and common understanding exact meaning would

not contribute to “improvement of relations” in future but could only

lead to misunderstanding. If “as soon as possible”, “promptly” or what­

ever word was agreed upon meant to them a period of for example a

year “that was one thing” but if it meant period of “two or in any event

not more than three months that was something else”. Said whatever

word or phrase this respect was used American people would expect

very prompt action on release remainder and if this did not eventu­

ate “state of relations” could not but deteriorate. From our discussion

thus far very clear PRC concept of “as soon as possible”, “quickly”,

“promptly” very different from ours. Could not reach any agreement

on words until we were clear what we were talking about.

Wang did not contest my statement release remainder would be con­

ditional on political factors. Now quite clear “political hostage” aspect

does not shock them. On contrary they are clearly proceeding on premise

that release of Americans is political act of grace and therefore directly

related to other political factors in relations between two countries. This

position more frankly and clearly stated today than ever before. It was

almost complete retreat from “legalities and juridical procedures”.

Next meeting Saturday, 10 am.

Gowen

617. From Johnson.

1. Following is full text agreed announcement mentioned Mytel

616.

“Agreed announcement of the Ambassadors of the PRC and the

USA.

2. The Ambassadors of the PRC and the USA have agreed to announce

the measures which their respective governments have adopted with

respect to the return of nationals of each located in the country of the other.

3. With respect to Americans in the PRC Ambassador Wang Ping-

nan on behalf of the Government of the PRC has informed Ambassador

U. Alexis Johnson that:

(1) The PRC recognizes that Americans in the PRC who desire to

return to the USA are entitled to do so and declares that it has adopted

and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can exercise

as soon as possible their right to return.

(2) The PRC agrees that the Government of the UK will be entrusted

to assist in the return to the USA of those Americans who desire to do

so as follows:

A. If any American believes that contrary to the declared policy of

the PRC he is encountering obstruction in departure he may so inform

the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in the PRC and request it

to make representations on his behalf to the Government of the PRC.

If desired by the USA the Government of the UK may also investigate

the facts;

B. If any American in the PRC who desires to return to the USA

has difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of the UK

may, on behalf of the Government of the USA, render him financial

assistance needed to permit his return.

(3) The Government of the PRC will give wide publicity to the fore­

going arrangements and the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in

the PRC may also do so.

4. With respect to Chinese in the US, Ambassador U. Alexis John­

son, on behalf of the Government of the USA has informed Ambassa­

dor Wang Ping-nan that:

(1) The USA recognizes that Chinese in the USA who desire to

return to the PRC are now entitled to do so and declares that it has

adopted and will further adopt measures so that they can in fact return

as soon as possible.

(2) The USA agrees that the Government of the Republic of India

will be entrusted to assist the return to the PRC of those Chinese who

desire to do so as follows:

A. If any Chinese believes that contrary to the declared policy of

the USA he is encountering obstruction in departure he may so inform

the Embassy of the Republic of India in the USA and request it to make

representations on his behalf to the Government of the USA. If desired

by the PRC the Government of the Republic of India may also investi­

gate the facts;

B. If any Chinese in the USA who desires to return to the PRC has

difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of the Republic

of India may, on behalf of the Government of the PRC, render him finan­

cial assistance needed to permit his return.

(3) The Government of the USA will give wide publicity to the

foregoing arrangements and the Embassy of the Republic of India in

the USA may also do so.”

Gowen

623. From Johnson.

My summary tel 616 on today’s meeting may not have made it as

clear as I might have that Wang and I both came much closer than any time

previously to taking “final positions” from which we could not retreat and

logical results of which could only be willingness lead up to point of break.

I repeatedly used terms “vital”, “essential”, “far as we can go”, et cetera

but avoided going to next and logical point of saying unless he met my

position on this nothing further talk about. He spoke with some emotion

and probably even greater finality than I, but also avoided going next step.

At today’s meeting thinking underlying CHICOM position clearly

emerged as follows: US proposed these talks thereby “improving

relations” and enabling CHICOMS release flyers. This was expected fur­

ther “improve relations” leading to response by US of agreeing third party

arrangement which in turn would enable CHICOMS release further Amer­

icans. If talks continued go well and “relations continued improve” all

remaining Americans could be released. They reconcile this with Chou’s

statement on grounds expectation “progress” would be made these talks.

They do not attach much real importance what we have done re Chinese

in US, nor have they ever attempted directly link future rate departure

Chinese in US with departure Americans. Their raising issue Chinese in

US is largely to construct “straw man” and give basis for exploiting open­

ing wedge Indian representation might constitute for them.

While not prominent in today’s meeting their sensitivity to anything

they interpret as “responding to pressure” and their desire maintain

appearance of “legality” are also still factors. However question “under­

standing” on jurisdiction and scope representation arrangement was

not raised today by Wang and, of course, I did not mention subject. He

may still do so but believe he may now have dropped this although his

rewording of paras 2 (A) both sections may be intended broaden arrange­

ment so that CHICOMS could request India “investigate facts” any case.

See little I can do next meeting except reiterate our position and

discuss remaining points disagreement in “draft agreed announce­

ment”. However I have little hope of making any progress on major

substantive issue.

Gowen

624. From Johnson.

As sidelight on today’s meeting there was much inconclusive

discussion translation from one language to other terms “promptly”,

“quickly” and “as soon as possible”.

Chinese expression which they insisted be translated “as soon as pos­

sible” actually means “most speedily”. Wang confirmed this by using as

synonym colloquial term meaning “very quickly”. Could not clarify why

Wang insisted upon inexact translation into “as soon as possible” and

unwilling accept my suggestion of “quickly”. He objected to “promptly”

on grounds had connotation of command. Although somewhat farfetched

believe they may be confusing with use of “to prompt” as verb.

Foregoing is without any real significance to substantive issue but

believe Department should be aware of type of problem we face on

language.

Gowen

625. From Johnson.

1. Eleventh meeting, August 25th, was opened by Wang who com­

mented upon our August 23 text proposed announcement (Deptel 599).

He said they discovered many changes from Chinese text of August 18

and wished make a few revisions. He had three principal points to make:

2. (A) Replace word “promptly” by “as soon as possible”. Com­

mented in their original text did not have these words but willing insert

them to meet our request.

3. (B) Add to paragraph one American section “and will further

adopt” measures enable nationals return who wish to do so.

4. (C) Add wording indicating third powers invited by respective

sides and agreed to by other power. He commented this in line with

international practice and as far as they were concerned conformed to

actual situation.

5. Wang concluded by handing me his proposed text and remark­

ing he prepared agree to remainder language we proposed. (Text by

Mytel 617).

6. I said word “promptly” was very important, and in fact vital

we have clear understanding between us what we meant by this word.

However, if we use “as soon as possible” this would change sense of

sentence very considerably. Whatever term we used, we must have clear

understanding what it means even though it may not be included in the

proposed announcement or be made public. By this I meant it must

be precisely defined in terms of reasonable period of time in which all

remaining Americans whose departure being prevented would be able

return. If that could be done I thought we could quickly reach agree­

ment on text. I asked if Wang could define “as soon as possible” in

precise terms of time more clearly than he had done so previously and

state just what this meant as far as return of Americans was concerned.

7. I commented further that statement US “will further adopt

meas­ures” seemed unnecessary. US already had adopted measures

permit prompt return Chinese and we knew of no further measures

we could adopt.

8. Wang replied phrase “as soon as possible” meant cases would be

handled “very quickly not slowly”. He had clearly stated PRC recog­

nized right Americans return US. Chinese would review cases so that

they could return as soon as possible.

9. Regarding phrase “will further adopt measures” Wang said

appropriate include this in statement regarding American actions

because although preventive orders removed by American Govern­

ment there were still difficulties because measures taken not sufficient

or authorities low level failed carry them out. Therefore US Govern­

ment should take further measures enable Chinese nationals in fact

return as soon as possible.

10. I remarked if “as soon as possible” meant cases would be quickly

reviewed why not use either “quickly” or “promptly”. Wang replied

“promptly” implied certain amount obligation in response to order.

11. I replied this not at all meaning in our minds.

12. Wang said “as soon as possible” more appropriate and meets

actual situation so far they were concerned.

13. I then said whatever term used, vital we have clear understand­

ing what word means with respect to time. This kind of terms used in

agreements between governments are apt to cause misunderstanding

unless clearly understood. It may have entirely different connotation

in his mind from mine. If in his mind it connoted one year or some­

thing in that order, that was one thing. If it connoted two or at most

three months, that was something else. Vital we have clear under­

standing what this means. If not, fear agreement this nature may give

rise increased misunderstanding rather than improve state relations

between our two countries.

14. Wang said his phrase meant they would deal with cases quickly

and there would be no delay in their review. He said solution of cases

involved a number of factors, including conduct of people concerned,

whether or not agreement reached as result these discussions and

whether relations between two countries developed favorably. He con­

cluded impossible for him give definite period of time in view these

various factors.

15. To illustrate point, Wang said release airmen excellent exam­

ple. Last year someone proposed that Chinese specify definite time

when airmen might be released. Longest sentence was Col. Arnold’s

of ten years. Impossible for Chinese last year to specify time required

airmen’s release. Only after airmen had proven good conduct and

talks at Ambassadorial level agreed upon, then Chinese advanced

time airmen’s release in accordance their own juridical procedures.

He said they had indicated Chinese would review remaining cases

Americans and permit their return as soon as possible. Impossible

for him to give in any more beyond this limit. He would not say any­

thing which his government could not do. If he promised anything,

his government would live up to it without question.

16. In reply I asked Wang if he would disagree my statement very

important we each understand what we were agreeing to and that we

not agree to words which have different meaning to our two govern­

ments. I was very disappointed no change in position of Wang evident

to enable us arrive at clear understanding what we meant by words we

were using.

17. Wang agreed clear understanding essential or agreement would

be empty. He said arrangement designed to resolve problem return our

respective nationals and it had been made clear his side would promptly

inform us on results review as soon as agreement reached and his gov­

ernment would adopt measures review other cases as soon as possible.

He was sure if this arrangement were made known to American public

it would be clear that question was settled.

18. I replied if this arrangement were made public American

people would expect Americans return from China mainland “very

quickly” as he had phrased it, but Chinese idea and my government’s

idea concerning “very quickly” were quite different. Result this mis­

understanding would be expectations of American Government and

people would not be realized and this would lead to increasing mis­

understanding and deterioration of relations rather than improve­

ment that we both hoped for.

19. Wang said improvement or deterioration depended on action

by both sides not one and if I insisted on definite period of time he was

afraid we could not reach agreement.

20. I then made statement in which I said I understood from him

that as reviews cases Americans completed and cases settled the Ameri­

cans would be able promptly to return. In August 11 meeting he had told

me reviews completed on some cases involving Americans and it was

my understanding their cases had been settled. That was two weeks ago

and none of these Americans had been able to depart. If I understood his

position it was that these Americans would not be able to depart until

we had reached agreement here. I found this fact very hard to reconcile

with my understanding Americans were able to depart upon settlement

cases in which they may be involved. Also hard to reconcile with fact

that my government had without condition taken all action necessary in

response his request to permit prompt departure from US any Chinese

who desires return to his country. I wanted make very clear no Chi­

nese being held my country pending our agreement here. It was entirely

impossible for me or my government to see why our failure thus far

to reach agreement on public announcement has prevented departure

any Americans whose cases favorably reviewed. If we were to deal here

on basis equality and reciprocity at least these Americans should be

able to return immediately. I could not help avoid conclusion that fact

these Americans not able return appeared due other than purely legal

or juridical reasons. Also hard avoid conclusion that as far as return of

remaining Americans concerned that also would be based on other than

purely legal or juridical reasons. This attitude on part Chinese made it

all more essential that a clear understanding be reached on period of

time during which it would be possible complete release and return to

US of all Americans now being prevented from leaving.

21. I continued saying I expected and hoped when I came that it

would be possible for us reach agreement on basis each our govern­

ments adopting measures permitting all those desiring return in fact

do so. My government took necessary steps so we could make such

announcement this regard. I next thought it would be possible agree

they could be released simultaneously with our announcement. Now,

however, I had gone another step and accepted his position that some

Americans will be released later, although I do not see any reason for

delay. All I asked him now was that he give me definite statement

regarding reasonable time in which steps will be taken by his govern­

ment in order remainder cases may be completed. This seems very rea­

sonable position and I did not see how it was possible go any further.

We came to discuss return our nationals and settle that question. I did

not see how simply vague statement that some will be able to return in

unknown time in the future and only under certain conditions, one of

which has no relation to juridical and legal processes involved, settles

matter of return of citizens.

22. Wang replied he could not agree to discuss things which gov­

ernments both sides unable to accomplish. He said Chinese in US had

not committed crimes and so it was not reasonable for US Government

to impose restrictions. Furthermore if we had reached agreement two

weeks ago Americans whose cases had been reviewed would already

have returned to US. Responsibility for their failure to return was not

Chinese.

23. He continued that legal and juridical aspects of the cases

of Americans were closely linked with agreement on proposed

announcement. If agreement reached, that would mean not only

that PRC willing improve relations and settle questions but also that

American Government had this desire. Agreement on announcement

would show both sides sincerely working for this goal. To talk much

about sincerity in reaching settlement but refuse to come to agree­

ment does not give appearance real sincerity. He said only because

of real sincerity, PRC has reviewed cases of airmen who according

Chinese legal procedure could not have left for very long time. Chi­

nese in making review took into account improvement of relations

and act was one of leniency and not part their juridical procedures.

Airmen released out of consideration for success of talks. Therefore

improvement relations between two countries will make it easier for

remaining cases to be settled. This is a lenient policy their part and

they link this action with agreement in order to show their sincerity.

If no such sincerity present he saw no reason for his side to continue

taking unilateral lenient steps.

24. I said he had spoken frankly and I would do the same. He

had indicated there was relationship between release of Col. Arnold’s

group and holding of these talks. He had also clearly indicated relation

between return of those Americans whose cases had been reviewed

and our reaching an agreement here. I did not now know what relation­

ship there might be between release remaining Americans and what­

ever future agreements his side might wish to have made. I wanted

to say bluntly I did not come with intent to and would not trade fate

of Americans in his country prevented from returning for political

agreements or concessions he might desire. I was willing discuss each

problem on its own merits. I did not ask for nor expect concessions of

that nature from his side in return for actions we took regarding Chi­

nese in US. I had also indicated willingness enter into arrangement on

assistance to Chinese in US who wish to return. I was not and could

not enter arrangement unless we had clear understanding between us

as to what action would be taken concerning Americans. I could not

consider statements he made regarding action proposed by his side as

being satisfactory. I had come long way meet his position and hoped

and expected he would be able come a little way to meet mine.

25. Wang returned argument Chinese in US had not committed

crimes and although announcement made restrictions lifted they still

encountered difficulties in fact whereas no restrictions on Americans in

China. He concluded that if I asked whether measures had been taken

to speed review of cases Americans to permit their return, answer was

“yes”. If I asked for understanding on time it would require, answer

was “no”.

26. He indicated willingness close meeting at this point and I

agreed. Usual end of meeting fencing omitted.

Gowen

CWO/FED

92. For Ambassador Lodge.

Please make the following two telegrams from Ambassador John­

son in Geneva available to Secretary this evening.

Dulles

Drafted by Barnes. Brackets are in the original.

633. For Johnson.

Comparison Wang redraft (your 617) with text our 599 indicates

following substantial changes: 1) In first paragraph “repatriation of

civilians” changed to “return of nationals.” 2) Unilateral announce­

ments are couched in terms of an agreement. 3) India is “entrusted”

to assist return, and in paying expenses Indian Government is to act

“on behalf of the Government of the PRC,” thus connoting idea of a

protecting power instead of a third party designated by US primarily

to confirm that its statement regarding freedom to return is in fact true.

4) Indian Government is authorized to “make investigation of the

facts,” the words “in any such case” being dropped. Effect of this would

be permit Indian Government investigate entire matter, presumably all

Chinese in US, and not merely those requesting assistance.

These changes appear to indicate 1) intent to convert announce­

ments into an agreement, 2) to have it apply to all Chinese in US and to

describe them as nationals of PRC, 3) to give India right to investigate

by Phleger and Sebald; cleared by McConaughy.

generally and not simply those Chinese who appeal to it, and 4) to

establish India as a protecting power. Above objections are in addition

to unresolved question of time limit for release of Americans.

Amendments proposed by Wang make his draft entirely unaccept­

able for reasons indicated above. We believe it preferable that Satur­

day meeting be postponed until some time next week so as to give us

further opportunity study our tactics. You should inform Wang such

postponement requested, assigning no repeat no reasons.

Dulles

628. From Johnson. Deptel 633.

I have requested next meeting Wednesday, August 31, 10 a.m.

Gowen

630. From Johnson.

Re Mytel 617 and Deptel 633 following our comments on Wang’s

redraft:

1. Doubt that Wang is attaching as much significance as we to term

“nationals” but my negotiating position in now obtaining its complete

elimination is not good. Also seems to me undesirable attract too much

attention to it. Term appears only once in both Wang’s August 11 draft

(Mytel 402) and August 25 draft. It was much more extensively used in

draft given Wang August 15 (Mytel 463) which was based upon draft

contained Deptel 466. Also first sentence Wang’s August 25 draft where

this term appears is identical with first sentence our August 16 draft.

With respect “return” vs “repatriation” it seems to me former term

preferable even though latter was used in July 25 statement by two

governments. “Repatriation” could carry connotation of force unless

modified by “voluntary” and status of belligerency between parties

whereas “return” is broader term and avoids undesirable connotation

of “repatriation”.

2. (A) While Wang obviously attempting give “agreed announce­

ment” greatest possible character of agreement between two govern­

ments believe he has valid point that our phrase “will authorize” does

not accurately represent fact that request to GOI made by PRC and US

is accepting that designation. Same situation mutatis mutandis with

respect UK.

(B) On other hand “agrees” as used in Wang’s text would also

inhibit our ability unilaterally to cancel arrangement unless “agreed

announcement” accompanied by understanding or unilateral US state­

ment on time limit for release Americans which if broken by CHICOMS

would give basis for cancellation.

(C) To meet these points suggest consideration following language

“US accepts designation by PRC of GOI to assist return to PRC of those

Chinese who desire do so as follows”.

(D) Foregoing language also eliminates “entrusted”.

3. Believe important delete “on behalf of the PRC” because protect­

ing power connotation. I would propose argue not applicable case US

as payments if any would in most cases probably be on behalf family or

firms. PRC can make whatever arrangements it wishes reimburse GOI,

need not be mentioned “agreed announcement”.

4. Concur deletion words “in any such case” would appear give

basis GOI investigate any case at PRC request. Believe we should insist

on restoration this phrase.

5. Cannot reach decision on most appropriate wording for

“promptly” until tactics for next meeting determined. Several different

words could be used, important thing is that whatever word used there

be common understanding of what it means.

Gowen

631. From Johnson.

I have accepted Wang’s invitation to private dinner Sunday eve­

ning. Would appreciate any indications Department could give me

by that time our thinking on future tactics. In absence anything from

Department will of course adhere same line and do maximum obtain

any indication shift in Wang’s position.

Gowen

144. Memorandum of Conversation, Koo and Sebald

Washington, August 26, 1955

SUBJECT

Geneva Ambassadorial Talks with Chinese Communists

PARTICI PANTS

Dr. V. K. Wellington Koo, Chinese Ambassador

Mr. William J. Sebald, Acting Assistant Secretary, FE

Mr. Walter P. McConaughy, Director for Chinese Affairs

The Chinese Ambassador called at Mr. Sebald’s request. Mr. Sebald

said that he had asked the Ambassador to come in so that he could be

informed of the status of the talks with the Chinese Communists at

Geneva. There was no progress to report, but even this fact might be of

interest to the Chinese Government. Negative information sometimes

was important and in any event we wished the Chinese Government to

have the knowledge that it was currently informed on the status of our

efforts at Geneva.

The Ambassador expressed his appreciation and confirmed that

his Government was very much interested in receiving frequent status

by McConaughy on August 29.

reports for its background information, even though there was nothing

positive to report. He inquired as to the apparent reasons for the lack of

progress in getting our detained nationals released.

Mr. Sebald said that it was difficult to say exactly what the stum­

bling blocks were. There were differences over words in the proposed

announcement, and differences over the interpretation to be attached

to the words. The general concept of the Chinese Communists as to

the right of the individuals to return seemed to be different from ours.

Wang Ping-nan was not specific on action the Chinese Communists

were prepared to take. Wang was, of course, pressing for an enlarge­

ment of the very limited role envisaged by us for the Indian Embassy.

He wanted it to appear that the Chinese Communists had a right to

assert an interest in Chinese nationals generally in this country. We,

of course, were not prepared to accord the Chinese Communists any

access through the Indian Embassy to Chinese nationals in this country

other than the small number who might express a wish to return to the

China mainland. There appeared to be no flexibility in Wang’s position.

Of course, Ambassador Johnson was standing firm on the basic princi­

ples inherent in our position. Mr. Sebald summarized the situation as

amounting practically to a stalemate, but with no actual break-off of the

talks appearing to be in immediate prospect.

Ambassador Koo then referred to what he termed the great anxiety

of Chinese communities in all the large cities of the U.S. over the pos­

sible outcome of the Geneva talks. His Foreign Office and the Depart­

ment of Overseas Chinese Affairs at Taipei were greatly concerned over

this matter and had instructed him to take it up with the Department

of State. He said that there was a general apprehension among Chinese

residents of this country that they might be subjected to interrogation by

representatives of the Chinese Communists. There seemed to be a fear

that they would be exposed to Chinese Communist pressures, either

through the Indian Embassy or through their families on the mainland.

The Ambassador said he hoped that the American Government could

do something to relieve this feeling of uneasiness. He thought it could

best be done through an official statement by some high official of the

U.S. Government which would assure Chinese everywhere that the

U.S. Government would not agree to anything at Geneva which would

expose Chinese residents of the U.S. or their families to intimidation

at the hands of the Chinese Communists. He mentioned that a large

number of letters from Chinese had been received indicating that they

were greatly disturbed. He said there was a general feeling among the

Chinese that Wang Ping-nan was pressing for information regarding all

Chinese in the U.S., and not merely the students. Even the Chinese who

had American citizenship and considered themselves “dual nationals”

were disturbed and suffered from a feeling of insecurity. The same was

true of long-time Chinese residents of this country who did not have

American citizenship but who were legal permanent residents. He said

that reports from the Chinese Associations in all the American cities

where there was a large Chinese population confirmed the existence of

these apprehensions. He felt that only official U.S. action could coun­

teract the mental anxiety.

Mr. Sebald said that the U.S. position was made clear at the time the

Geneva talks were announced that nothing would happen at Geneva to

betray the interests of free Chinese. The Ambassador surely must be

well aware that the U.S. would not do anything which would “sell Chi­

nese residents down the river”. As for an official U.S. statement, he did

not see any peg to hang such a statement on at the present moment. If a

statement were issued with no apparent reason, and without reference

to any current development, it would seem strange and might raise

questions as to why it was issued. It might tend to cause confusion and

might heighten rather than alleviate the unfounded fears of which the

Ambassador had spoken. Mr. Sebald thought that it might be preferable

for the Chinese Embassy to take action to reassure the Chinese commu­

nities in the U.S., based on the full knowledge possessed by the Chinese

Embassy of the U.S. position and the course of the Geneva talks.

Ambassador Koo said that the Chinese Embassy would be glad

to do what it could. However, he felt that some form of reassurance

from the U.S. Government was also needed. He inquired if the Secre­

tary could not take advantage of one of his press conferences to say

something to restore the confidence of the Chinese. If a question along

this line were asked of the Secretary, he would be afforded a logical and

natural opportunity to say something which would dispel the doubts.

In addition, Ambassador Koo requested that the Department reply

to the numerous petitions and letters on this subject which he under­

stood the White House and the Department had received from Chinese

groups and individuals. He said he understood that ordinarily such

petitions were not answered, but he hoped in this case answers could

be provided.

Mr. Sebald and Mr. McConaughy stated that they did not recall

any petitions or letters from Chinese on this subject. Correspondence

along this line ordinarily went to the Bureau of Public Affairs and was

handled there. Such correspondence did not ordinarily come to the

attention of the geographic bureaus.

Mr. Sebald, in response to a direct question from the Ambassador,

said that while Item I of the agenda did not specify that only Chinese

students were referred to on the Chinese side, the whole context of the

arrangements for the talks showed that the question of the return of

Chinese revolved primarily around Chinese students. The actual cases

which have become issues were all cases of students, and it was our

understanding that it was principally students in whom the Chinese

Communists were interested. The Chinese Communists have not

spelled this out specifically, and naturally they would like to enlarge

the representation formula if they could. But we would stand firm on

the principle that no Chinese in this country could be approached on

behalf of the Chinese Communists unless he first expressed a desire to

return to the mainland. Those who might express a wish to return pre­

sumably would be in the student category.

Note: Separate Memoranda of Conversation have been prepared on

the following subjects which were discussed at the same conversation:

Revision of the U.N. Charter and Detention of the Soviet Tanker “Tuapse”.

Letter No. 9

Washington, August 26, 1955

Dear Alex:

The communications people have very helpfully arranged a sec­

ond pouch each week, closing here on Friday morning and reaching

Geneva via Frankfort Sunday evening. The spacing (Mondays and Fri­

days) is not the best, but it is much better than once-a-week service.

Herman Phleger returned to duty on Monday the 22nd, and from

that date has played a large role in the direction of the Washington end

of this project. You must have recognized his talented and distinctive

imprint immediately. The Secretary asked him on Monday to coordi­

nate and take the immediate responsibility for all instructions to you.

So Bill Sebald and I are working directly with him on all your messages.

The Secretary has been away in New York since Wednesday.

I believe it is important for you to know the Secretary’s general

thinking at present on the matter of Indian representation. Last Sunday

afternoon he remarked that he thought it was important for it to be

clear that the granting of a limited role to the Indian Embassy would

be a matter of our own volition. He felt it should be made manifest to

all that this was something which we decided to do of our own free

will and accord, and not something that we were driven into by the

Chinese Communists against our own inclination, as a quid pro quo in

a deal for getting citizens out. It was even debated briefly whether we

Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.

should not go ahead immediately and announce independently that

we were prepared to give the Indian Embassy this role, without refer­

ence to any “agreed announcement” at Geneva. It was remarked that

our moral and psychological position before the world would certainly

be very strong if some such offer were freely made, with no strings

attached. We would then wait to see what the Chinese Communists

were prepared to offer on their own initiative. It was felt that the intan­

gible pressures on the Chinese to make a corresponding gesture might

be considerable. While it was decided not to do this, at least for the

present, the basic concept is still influencing the thinking here, as you

will have perceived from various of our telegrams during the week. We

think it important for it to be apparent to all that whatever we are doing

in regard to Chinese in this country who wish to return to the mainland

is our own free act, taken because it is right and just, and not because

the Chinese Communists have intervened as the pretended champions

of the rights of Chinese individuals.

This makes it important for you to avoid implying in the talks that

any Indian Embassy role permitted by us would have to be part of an

understanding with the Chinese Communists (paragraph 24 of your

624 [625]). Of course, you will not suggest the opposite either. It is sim­

ply an aspect to steer clear of at this juncture.

This thinking on the prospective Indian role has also influenced

the attitude toward the essential character of the Indian Government

responsibility. Herman Phleger feels that we must be very careful to

refrain from according even by implication the status of “protecting

power” to India, even in a narrowly defined field. We do not recognize

that Communist China has any Governmental interests in this country

which are entitled to protection by a third power. The Indian Embassy

would be acting essentially in behalf of the interests of the individual

travelers who want to return to the mainland rather that in the interest

of the Chinese Communists as a Government. And it would be serving

to verify the truth of our statement on Chinese aliens in this country.

This means that the Indian Government would be selected primarily

by us, rather than by the Chinese Communists, for its special function.

It would be filling a humanitarian role in reference to certain individ­

uals, just as say the Red Cross might have been asked to do. It would

not have in any sense the traditional role of a “protecting power” for

an established Government when diplomatic relations are severed. So

its role would be in no sense comparable to that of the Swiss when they

acted on behalf of our nationals in Japanese-occupied territories during

World War II. It is believed important to maintain this principle, and

it will affect the tenor of our reply to the Indian Government note on

representation of August 18.

L also thinks it important to maintain the character of any “agreed

announcement” as two unilateral and independent (although intercon­

nected) declarations or announcements, and not an “Agreement”. You

cannot properly have anything in the nature of a normal Governmental

agreement with a regime which you do not recognize. While this may be

a fairly fine point, it has validity, and I believe you would be well advised

to avoid in the informal oral give and take of the sessions, any references

to “agreements between governments” (paragraph 12 your 625).

Any implication that Chinese in this country, even the few who

want to return to the mainland, are “nationals” of the PRC, has danger­

ous connotations in L’s view, and is to be carefully eschewed.

Phleger believes that the changes which Wang introduced or reverted

to at the August 25 meeting (your 617) are all significant, although the

significance may be cleverly disguised. Our 633 may seem to represent

something of a hardening of the line, and this indeed may be the case.

The callousness and cynicism with which Wang has dropped the

pretence of full adherence to judicial procedures and admitted the

political basis of the Chinese Communist handling of the prisoner

question has caused a feeling of revulsion here as well as deep dis­

appointment. He has in effect demanded that we ransom our impris­

oned citizens with political concessions. Presumably he has done it in

the knowledge that we cannot submit to that sort of extortion. Wang’s

refusal to make any commitment on when the “remaining” Americans

would be released, his linkage of the prisoner question with the status

of relations between the U.S. and Communist China, and his attempt

to blame us for the non-release of Americans whose cases have already

been “cleared”, create painful dilemmas for us, but they also place the

PRC in a most vulnerable position morally and forensically if unhap­

pily this issue should be forced into the propaganda field.

The Secretary returns tomorrow afternoon. I anticipate there will

be some weekend soul searching on this whole question.

The request for the postponement of the Saturday, August 27 meet­

ing to next week was prompted by the belief that we have nothing to

gain by such an early meeting when we are so close to a deadlock and

with nothing new likely to come forth on either side so soon. The meet­

ing after a mere 2-day interval with nothing but repetition in prospect

would be likely to tighten, maybe cement, the deadlock. This we want

to avoid. We also of course still attach the very highest importance to

avoiding a breakdown. We do not even want to take the initiative in

proposing a recess on Item 1. Our only hesitation in asking for a post­

ponement of the next meeting was our desire to avoid any appearance

of lack of zealousness in pressing for the earliest possible action on

our detained citizens. We do not believe, however, that any reasonable

person would construe the postponement under the circumstances as

attributable to laxity on this score. The arguments for not hastening

either side into a tightly frozen position, and for avoiding aggravations

which might lead to the rupture which we must constantly strive to

avoid, are extremely cogent. The feeling now is that perhaps at this

stage we should not have three meetings a week. The tempo of devel­

opments is not sufficiently rapid to justify such frequent meetings. It

may be that meetings should be held no more frequently than twice a

week. It would be useful to have your reaction to this. We recognize it

is a delicate business. We must avoid giving the impression that we are

stalling, as well as the impression that we are not pressing to the maxi­

mum on Americans. At the same time we must balance this against the

danger of too frequent sessions leading up to a situation which might

become somewhat comparable to that which Dean ran into at Panmun­

jom in November and early December, 1953.

You will have noted O’Neill’s misgivings from Peiping. It is signif­

icant that the British are almost more skeptical of Chinese Communist

“performance” than we are. O’Neill thinks there would be a strong pos­

sibility of bad faith on the part of the Chinese Communists when only a

few Chinese express a desire to return to the mainland.

The loopholes which we have necessarily left in the announcement

in order to protect Chinese in this country would make it easy for the

Chinese Communists to prevent some Americans from informing the

British Embassy of a desire to return to this country. Undoubtedly he

wishes his Embassy could be given authority to get in touch with the

Americans on its own initiative. We wish it could be done too. But how,

without departing from our basic principle on Chinese in this country?

Your reporting is giving us the best possible visualization of

what you are up against. We feel that your reports and analyses have

imparted to us a good understanding of the Chinese Communist strat­

egy as well as tactics. There is nothing but praise for your handling of

the appalling difficulties, along with a keen desire to uphold your hand

in every way we can.

Your letter of August 19 came through promptly and was most

helpful. The appropriate portions got the needed circulation to the

interested parties.

Walter Robertson will be out all of next week too. He is still in Rich­

mond, bothered with bronchitis. Bill Sebald is nobly carrying a heavy

load on Geneva, the Shigemitsu visit, and a myriad of other things. He

sends his best to you.

Regards and all the best,

Sincerely,

642. From Johnson.

Although not received until this morning I in fact very closely fol­

lowed line in first para Deptel 648 at dinner with Wang last night.

I indicated had nothing further to add to what I had said previ­

ously, no enthusiasm for again covering same ground, and hope he

had something new. However, Wang insisted on again going over their

position in considerable detail and much earnestness thinking of which

followed general line given first portion second para Mytel 623.

Chinese in US brought up in context number much greater than

number Americans in China and therefore as set forth by Chou prob­

lem latter much more easily resolved. Implication may be that prob­

lem former resolved only by workings representation arrangement and

that proportion Chinese students in US who go CHICOM territory is

one test “improvement relations” and “facility” with which “problem

remaining Americans” resolved. Again repetition theme unilateral

release flyers had resolved what we had made major issue and there­

fore now “our turn” make gesture. Also brought up release flyers as

example how impossible forecast when remainder could be released

but at same time how quickly this could happen following favorable

developments (sic). Their “many concessions”, no list Chinese US, rep­

resentation arrangement not satisfactory but willing agree, our form

“agreed announcement” accepted etc.

I worked briefly but hard at theme we had agreed discuss return

civilians, way to resolve issue was permit them return, dragging out

releases not conducive “improvement relations”, but produces opposite

effect, “let’s get it finished”, again brought up possibility travel by cor­

respondents if all released (said was speaking personally could make

no promises) our very adverse reactions to linking releases Americans

to “improvement relations” etc. He rose to correspondent bait and was

obviously interested. His replies reinforced my feeling that they unable

see anything reprehensible in linking releases to “improvement rela­

tions”. They start from premise that imprisoned persons have “com­

mitted crimes” and that commutation sentences for other than “good

behavior” is political act for political purposes.

However unable detect any signs whatever any shift their position

and do not believe I gave him any grounds for believing we were going

Distribution.

shift. When he made mention at beginning conversation, gap until next

meeting I said he should realize their position was facing us with “very

serious situation”.

During preceding dinner table conversation again much talk by

Wang on economic backwardness China (steel production now three

million tons only three and one-half million by 1957 etc.) economy

would long be primarily agricultural and therefore complementary to

advanced industrial economy US thus providing good basis economic

relations, US industry very advanced—by implication better than

USSR (Soviet autos not good, low powered and old fashioned wanted

US cars etc.), wanted send students to US, China and US long been

good friends should be friends again etc.

Gowen

654. For Johnson.

Your 630. Instructions for August 31 meeting.

1. Propose solve problem reference “nationals” by returning to

phraseology of July 25 identic announcement: “repatriation of civilians

who desire to return to their respective countries”. Object is to avoid

any language which might be construed as implying that US acknowl­

edges that any Chinese in this country have PRC nationality.

2. It should be specified in announcement that we are authorizing

GOI to act. It would not seem essential for announcement to take note

of fact that PRC has requested GOI to act. If necessary obtain agree­

ment, we would be prepared consider insertion of modifying phrase

such as “which has been requested by the PRC to serve in this capacity”

following “will authorize the Government of India.”

3. You should stand firm on: (a) refusal to use term “US agrees”,

(b) avoidance “on behalf of the PRC”, and (c) restitution of phrase “in

any such case”.

Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Dulles.

4. Satisfactory definition of maximum time period for release of

Americans considered essential.

5. If you consider it would be useful, you may state you have been

instructed to request immediate, circumstantial and authentic report on

health and welfare each detained American civilian. Then you should

point out cumulative deleterious effects of prolonged imprisonment of

sort to which Wang’s Government has subjected US citizens grow rap­

idly more pronounced after several years have elapsed. Letters from

numerous relatives indicate increasing anxiety on this score. In this

context you may suggest next meeting be fixed for date on which this

report will be ready or in any event not before next week.

Dulles

Letter No. 10

Washington, August 29, 1955

Dear Alex:

There have not been many developments here since my last letter

of August 26. Phleger, Sebald and I met briefly with the Secretary this

morning and are to meet again late this afternoon on your instructions

for the Wednesday meeting. This is an unusually busy week, what with

Shigemitsu here and other matters also demanding time.

It is unfortunate that our 648 did not reach you before your Sunday

night dinner. Through some inadvertence the priority label was omit­

ted from the telegram but it was sent early Saturday afternoon and you

still should have had it before your Sunday evening engagement.

The feeling here is that we should get back to the language of July

25 identic announcements which was “repatriation of civilians who

desire to return”. We do not see that there would be any connotation

of involuntary repatriation or any other undesirable connotation in the

use of the word “repatriation” since it is used in the context “those who

desire to return”.

There is concern felt here in the obvious attempt of the Chinese

Communists to enlarge the repatriation concept. Clearly they wish to

assert a large measure of interest in and a right to claim the allegiance

of all Chinese in this country. They believe that even a limited degree of

­Informal.

Indian representation will be a useful entering wedge, especially if they

can sell the concept of India as a protecting power. Phleger remarked

that it would have been better if we had insisted on some non govern­

mental agency such as the Red Cross, to serve as a contact with those

Chinese who wish to return to the Mainland.

Your 642 has just come in. The dinner conversation certainly does

not bring up anything new or add to our hopes for a successful out­

come of item one. The one comforting thought is that it certainly does

not indicate any intention on the part of the Chinese Communists to

precipitate an early break.

We are trying to assemble information for you on current depar­

tures of Chinese for the Mainland via Hong Kong. Immigration tells us

that it takes at least 60 days to process the outgoing passenger manifests

of the American President Lines and the air lines. This is bureaucratic

red tape at its worst. We hope to get the information promptly, perhaps

using our Consulate General at Hong Kong to monitor all arrivals of

Chinese in transit to the Mainland.

At Phleger’s suggestion we are working on an outline which spells

out our objectives at Geneva, the limitations imposed, the courses of

action that are called for and under this the arguing points that might

well be brought up in the course of the talks. The outline also includes

some thoughts on the sort of statements the two sides might issue by

agreement if there has to be a recess. This statement would explain

the postponement of discussion of item two until all U.S. civilians are

released. We believe that there are some telling points you could make

to Wang regarding the unusual efforts we have made to reduce tensions

and the Chinese Communist actions which have actually increased ten­

sions. For instance our restraint in not giving publicity of the story of Ber­

sohn, who has now come around and whose account is utterly damning

to the Chinese Communists, is something of which note might well be

taken at some stage. The same is true of the forbearance we have shown

in suppressing the full story of the 11 airmen. We have even gone to the

Deputy Secretary of Defense in order to make sure that the airmen do not

tell any more of their stories for the present.

We are anxious to get your reaction to the suggestion that meetings

be reduced to twice a week.

Good luck and regards,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Geneva, August 30, 1955, noon

651. From Johnson.

I doubt if it would be useful carry out suggestion first sentence

paragraph 5 Deptel 654. It seems to me Wang’s immediate and obvi­

ous reply would be that if we had reached agreement “large num­

ber” of those with whom we concerned could have by now returned

to US and that if representation arrangement they proposed was in

effect reports on condition those remaining could be transmitted by

or through such channel. Also seems to me probable Wang would feel

required to reintroduce old demand for list Chinese in US or intro­

duce some new demand re Chinese in US in order balance our action.

All of this would serve further to take focus away from central issue

of when all Americans are to be able return, enable CHICOMS to

becloud this question, and possibly cause them further harden their

position.

Will, however, use as it seems useful second and third sentences

paragraph 5, although here again Wang can always also retort along

foregoing lines.

Am I correct in interpreting last sentence paragraph 5 as desire I

attempt fix next meeting for next week even though I do not use line in

first sentence paragraph 5? I would plan suggest Tuesday September 6

with thought following meeting Friday September 9. However I may

encounter difficulty with Wang and in this event would agree Saturday

September 3. I am bothered by tending give any appearance I am less

anxious than he to dispose item one.

Gowen

658. For Johnson. Your 651.

It would seem desirable hold next meeting September 6 unless

there are indications Wang may have something present before then. If

he requests meeting Saturday September 3, and you consider it desir­

able, you should agree, leaving date of following meeting to be fixed on

September 3. You may have opportunity establish pattern semi-weekly

meetings Tuesdays and Fridays in absence specific reason for meeting

on other days. We are confident your approach will make it clear wider

spacing meetings not due to any lessening of interest our part in earliest

possible completion item one but rather desire avoid useless meetings

while awaiting Chinese Communist decision take position necessary

for conclusion item one, as we have already done.

Dulles

by McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger.

Geneva, August 31, 1955, noon

657. From Johnson.

Two hour and fifteen minute meeting this morning. Wang showed

great flexibility on text “agreed announcement” and agreed with the

draft which I believe should be acceptable to US. (Text by separate tele­

gram.) Believe I have been successful in walking back almost the entire

way from our August 16 draft.

No progress on timing release remaining Americans but only reit­

eration previous positions.

Readily agreed to next meeting Tuesday, September 6th.

I am planning leave for Prague this evening, returning Sunday.

Gowen

658. From Johnson.

Following is text “agreed announcement” which Wang now

appears prepared accept. Believe it contains none of undesirable fea­

tures mentioned Deptel 654 and that we should be able accept it.

“The Ambassadors of the USA and the PRC have agreed to

announce the measures which their governments have adopted with

respect to return of civilians to their respective countries.

With respect to Chinese in the US, Ambassador U. Alexis John­

son, on behalf of the US Government, has informed Ambassador Wang

Ping-nan that:

1. The US recognizes that Chinese in the USA who desire to return

to the PRC are now entitled to do so and declares that it has adopted

and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can expedi­

tiously exercise their right to return.

2. The Government of the Republic of India will be invited to assist

the return to the PRC of those Chinese who desire to do so as follows:

A. If any Chinese in the USA believes that contrary to the declared

policy of the USA he is encountering obstruction in departure he may

so inform the Indian Embassy in the USA and request it to make repre­

sentations on his behalf to the US Government. If desired by the PRC

the Indian Government may also investigate the facts in any such case.

B. If a Chinese in the US who desires to return to the PRC has dif­

ficulty in paying his return expenses, the Indian Government may ren­

der him financial assistance needed to permit his return.

3. The Government of the US will give wide publicity to the forego­

ing arrangements and the Embassy of the Republic of India in the USA

may also do so.

With respect to Americans in the PRC, Ambassador Wang, on

behalf of the PRC, has informed Ambassador Johnson that:

1. The PRC recognizes that Americans in the PRC who desire to

return to the USA are now entitled to do so and declares that it has

adopted and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can

expeditiously exercise their right to return.

2. The Government of the UK will be invited to assist in the return

to the US of those Americans who desire to do so as follows:

A. If any American in the PRC believes that contrary to the declared

policy of the PRC he is encountering obstruction in departure he may

so inform the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in the PRC and

request it to make representations on his behalf to the Government of

the PRC. If desired by the US, the Government of the UK may also

investigate the facts in any such case.

B. If an American in the PRC who desires to return to the US has

difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of the UK

may render him financial assistance needed to permit his return.

3. The Government of the PRC will give wide publicity to the fore­

going arrangements and the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in

the PRC may also do so.”

Gowen

659. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting.

Wang was relaxed, made no serious effort press to any showdown,

and showed no great sense of urgency. He quickly reached decisions at

table on language draft and while immediately noting I had gone back

on language our August 16 draft particularly on introductory para did

not press his advantage this regard. Degree to which he conceded dis­

puted points in draft also indicated they may not have been attaching

same value thereto as we had assumed. While I succeeded in avoid­

ing expressly committing myself to draft in face his willingness reach

immediate agreement on text I will have to have very cogent reasons

for introducing any further changes.

Thus only remaining issue appears be Wang’s refusal set any definite

time for release remaining Americans. Both of us repeatedly and categor­

ically stated our positions on this issue and there seems little left to say.

In considering our future course of action believe must recognize

that we have cut back representation arrangement to point it is much

less attractive to CHICOMS than something along lines their original

proposal. Therefore its bargaining value is correspondingly reduced.

Thus their desire to get to item two is probably principal lever which

would move them towards accepting our position. Effectiveness lever

difficult estimate and Wang may be doing good job dissimulation.

However I have feeling their desire get to item two still far from strong

enough to overcome their very strong reluctance give up their posi­

tion to degree that would be required to give advance commitment on

time limit for release remaining Americans. Believe it would be mistake

to interpret Wang’s flexibility on wording “agreed announcement” as

any indication softening their position on substantive issue remaining

Americans.

While at moment risk may not seem great I continue be concerned

that there could at any time be development which would further delay

release those Americans whose release can now be obtained.

Gowen

661. From Johnson.

1. I opened 12th meeting today by handing Wang revised draft

agreed announcement incorporating changes Deptel 654. Full text my

remarks and draft as given Wang being forwarded air pouch tomorrow.

2. In my remarks I noted changes from and similarities to his

August 25 draft noting (a) I had added “will further adopt appropriate

measures” to paragraph 1 US section this to be applicable to authoriza­

tion to be given GOI; (b) use of “will authorize” in paragraphs 2; (c) res­

toration “in any such case” in paragraph 2(A) to make clear functions to

be performed only with regard to those who desire return; (d) deletion

“on behalf of government of” paragraphs 2(B) on grounds assistance

to Americans largely from private sources. PRC could make whatever

arrangements it wished with GOI; and (e) suggestion restoration July

25 language in introductory para.

3. I concluded that on important question time his phrase “as soon

as possible” not satisfactory and urged acceptance “promptly” instead.

I emphasized essential point was for both to clearly understand what

term meant and expressed hope he would be able define for me much

more clearly than in past and terms of definite period of time further

appropriate measures to be taken by his government which would

enable all detained Americans exercise their right return.

4. Wang studied our draft carefully and commented in detail.

A. He said “return of nationals” had been used in our August 16

draft and conformed with announcement on agreed agenda made fol­

lowing first meeting August.

B. “As soon as possible” was translation they desired for Chinese

term (chin su) and they felt “promptly” has feeling of compulsion. He

added however as each side had own opinion on appropriate word

perhaps best find another English translation while retaining original

Chinese. He suggested “expeditiously”.

C. In paragraph 2 he said [garble—the] phrase “US agrees that

[­garble—GOI is entrusted] to assist” implied authorization. However

they willing delete “US agrees” and simply say “GOI will be entrusted to

assist”. Since announcement comes as result Ambassadorial discussions

such a statement would imply agreement on part our two governments.

D. He agreed to deletion “on behalf of PRC (USA)” in paragraphs

2(B). He concluded that they had with these changes met requirements

our side to a very large extent.

5. I replied that his draft still contained word “entrusted” while ours

contained “authorized” which expresses exactly and more clearly what

each government will do. I asked if he would be willing use “authorize”

in place of “entrusted”.

6. Wang said “authorized” did not convey same feeling of polite­

ness toward third power which they were trying to indicate by using

word “entrust” which implied request.

7. I said possibly we could use “request”.

8. Wang objected because “request” too had some feeling of an

order in Chinese which he did not desire in speaking of third party.

9. I agreed to see if we could find a suitable word. I then said in

introductory paragraph announcement we simply returned to lan­

guage our two governments used in July 25th announcement. After

considerable discussion in which it appeared he was objecting to word

“repatriation” but not to “civilians” I agreed consider “return” in place

“repatriation”.

10. Wang then read introductory paragraph leaving out “who

desire to return” following word “civilians”.

11. I asked that “who desire to return” be included. He replied it

was naturally included by implication and had not appeared in agenda

announcement of August 1st. He said not necessary include “who

desire to return” because so explicitly stated in succeeding paragraphs

that arrangement applied to persons “who desire to return”. He said

introductory paragraph intended give general idea of problem, details

of which spelled out later.

12. I said I thought we could agree to elimination “who desire to

return” from introductory paragraph.

13. I then suggested in paragraph 2, we could use word “invite”

instead of “entrust”. Wang agreed to use of “invite” in English text and

said they would keep original Chinese (wei t’o) which meant substan­

tially same.

14. I said I would consider it. With respect his substitution “expedi­

tiously” for our word “promptly” I agreed to consider it although I did

not feel “promptly” had the meaning he was giving it. I then repeated

that I considered it vital that we have clear understanding what the

word will mean with respect to release of Americans. I added I was

anxious for anything further he could tell me concerning timing their

release.

15. Wang then resorted to prepared statement. He said they had

considered text of “agreement”, as a result it appeared we were fun­

damentally agreed on wording and expected no further problems in

wording. He welcomed fact that as result efforts made, distance now

dividing us had been lessened. He said now we seem to be returning to

old problem of trying to define “expeditiously” in exact terms of period

of time. He said they had made clear their position on this old prob­

lem many times, but as I had raised question again, he would repeat

their viewpoint. He said in past meetings I had insisted they should

release all Americans in a specified time before improvement relations

between China and US could be brought about. But it was his opin­

ion such a position was devoid of any justification because Americans

detained not ordinary Americans but violators of Chinese law and han­

dling their cases was Chinese sovereign right. Chinese had released 4

American prisoners in May and 11 more before commencement these

talks, but guilty persons must be treated according to Chinese juridical

process and impossible predict time limit for handling their cases. Chi­

nese Government would continue reviews and lenient policy would

be extended only if agreement reached and relations between the two

countries improved.

16. He said at last meeting I had charged him with relating polit­

ical concessions to release Americans. This accusation surprised him

since Americans concerned were law breakers. Showing leniency

toward them as result improvement in international relations was not

“exploiting them” for political concessions. On contrary he said we

were asking for concessions when we insisted on reaching agreement

only after they released all Americans. They hoped agreement would

be reached regarding civilians but they would never give up their sov­

ereign rights. He then repeated familiar arguments that: his side had

made greatest concessions; his side had provided list all Americans;

we refused list Chinese; his side was giving lenient treatment Amer­

icans but we were obstructing departure any Chinese and they were

greatly dissatisfied present state of affairs. He said very few Ameri­

cans in China, and Chinese Government had offered easy and simple

solution their return. However, Chinese had “tens of thousands of

nationals in the US” and their return depended upon US implemen­

tation of agreement.

17. He concluded by saying we had spent much time on text and

he would like to know if we could reach agreement on announcement

today.

18. I replied I was very sorry his statement did not add anything

to what he had previously said which would enable us to make further

progress today. I had not suggested anything which would infringe

upon their sovereignty and it was for them to decide what they would

do with respect to Americans. I had not said we would not conclude

understanding until all Americans were released. I had made many

concessions, first hoping all Americans would be released during

talks, then that they would be released simultaneously with announce­

ment and now I was asking for interpretation of word “expeditiously”

in terms of reasonable period of time. I was disappointed it was still

impossible for him to give me even that statement.

19. I said his statements regarding treatment Chinese in US called

into question good faith my statements this regard. I was satisfied facts

not correct but if he would give me information I would immediately

look into any cases he knew of.

20. Wang said problem now has boiled down to question of defin­

ing “expeditiously” in terms of a period of time. He said Chinese sov­

ereign right did not permit him to say they would release Americans

at any given time irrespective of their juridical procedure. If they gave

tomorrow or some other time in future not much different from say­

ing Americans would be released right now. They could only say they

would give results when reviews completed and with favorable con­

ditions review would be carried out very quickly. This he said was

greatest extent to which he could go today. He then repeated his state­

ment great dissatisfaction regarding status Chinese nationals in US,

complained his govt had no complete list and that since opening of

talks not a single Chinese national had been allowed freely to return

to China. He had mentioned case of Dr. Tsien but even he not able to

return yet.

21. I tried to probe further by saying he must have something in

mind as to meaning “expeditiously”. His government must be think­

ing in terms of one week, several months or several years.

22. Wang laughed and said nothing would come from discussion

of this point. They would talk only about things of which they were

sure. However, it would be easy for him to give the length of sentence

of each American imprisoned. It was not possible to say how much

these sentences could be shortened. Col. Arnold was sentenced to ten

years and yet was given early release. Speed-up release Americans

linked with reaching of agreement and improving relations.

23. I asked whether he could give me a definite time after the

announcement was issued.

24. Wang replied issuing of announcement would show progress

in improvement relations which would help to settle remaining cases.

25. I said if he could tell us now about some cases, why not give us

a definite time on remainder?

26. Wang said not possible deal with all cases at once or give them

all same treatment as they differed in various respects. I then stated I

was sorry no further progress had been made this morning and hoped

he would tell me something more definite at next meeting. I suggested

in order he have time for full consideration this important question we

meet on Tuesday, September 6.

27. Wang agreed immediately. Smiled and said he hoped I would

have good news for him.

Gowen

Letter No. 6

Geneva, August 31, 1955

Dear Walter:

I have received both your letter of August 26th and August 29th,

and I am writing this this evening before getting off to an early start for

Prague tomorrow morning.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

I want you to know how tremendously helpful your letters are for

the background and suggestions that they have contained, and I enor­

mously appreciate the time that I know that they have taken in your

extremely harried life.

Tell Herman that I certainly have noted his hand, and a very wise

one it is indeed. My only regret is that he was not there to make it man­

ifest sooner as I have had a feeling that I have been required to back-up

to a degree that is very difficult, particularly at this stage. However, as

I let myself go sufficiently to say in my summary telegram today, I feel

that I have been fairly successful. Speaking very frankly, I feel that I

have been required to back-up a long way from the line taken in the

Department’s 466, as well as the Department’s 492, particularly with

respect to this question of “nationals”.

I also have a feeling that we are becoming increasingly reluctant

to recognize the implications of having agreed to these talks. I am thor­

oughly in sympathy with doing everything possible to avoid all the

apparent pitfalls but believe it hard to maintain the fiction that two

Ambassadors can discuss and decide on matters without agreeing

thereto.

As far as our position is concerned, I have tried to make my

opinion very clear in my telegrams. I came here hoping and expect­

ing, particularly in view of Chou En-lai’s statement, that we were

going to be able to obtain the reasonably prompt release of all Amer­

icans. I am now inclined to believe that we probably read more into

Chou’s statement than we should have and that this never was their

real intention. I am inclined to think that what Chou was saying was

that the number of Americans is small and their problem is relatively

easy to settle compared with the problem of the large number of Chi­

nese in the United States. Just as in the Korean armistice negotiations,

they find it entirely impossible clearly to admit that any Chinese does

not want to return to their Communist paradise. I also believe that

there is a genuine inability to really understand the lack of restric­

tions upon return of Chinese from the United States. I therefore now

believe that there has from the beginning and still continues to be a

linkage between return of Chinese from the United States and our

response to other efforts to “improve relations”. However, as I have

previously said, I also believe they recognize that prisoners have

reached the point of diminishing returns and that they cannot play

this line too far.

I would certainly not go so far as to say that they would never under

any circumstances release all Americans simultaneously. (I believe that

Wang was probably right in saying today that they regard a definite

time period on the release of the remainder as being approximately

equivalent to simultaneous release.) However, I do feel that they are

still a very long way from this point.

The question, therefore, is whether or not we can expect and hope

to work them up to this point within a reasonable period of time and

without subjecting Americans whose release can now be obtained to

undue risk of unreasonably prolonged detention. While frankly admit­

ting to the narrow viewpoint of the man in the field, I am inclined to be

very doubtful.

One aspect that worries me is that the longer we continue in the

present deadlocked position, the more hardened positions on both

sides tend to become and the more difficult it becomes to shift there­

from. Looking at it solely from the standpoint of the overall welfare

of the detained Americans, I find it hard to work out the equation but

believe it important that we do so. We are today able to obtain the

release of X number of Americans and within the next month or two Y

number may well have been added to that. How large the remaining Z

will be I have no way of telling, but it will certainly include the three or

four “difficult” cases. I am convinced that these latter cases are, under

the best of circumstances, going to take a long time and doubt whether

what we now have to offer under agenda item one is going to obtain

their release. Of course I know that the answer is that under the present

outlook neither under agenda item two are we going to be able to offer

anything that would obtain their release. This may well be the case.

However, should X and Y be indefinitely detained in what may be a

futile effort to obtain Z?

Also it seems to me that the price we would be paying for X and Y

is in reality very small. The third party arrangement is very limited in

scope, and I believe that we would be in a position to withdraw it at any

time that we considered it desirable.

There is a very small point which struck me today and which I am

surprised Wang has not caught me up on—I have been pushing very

hard the thesis that we came here to settle the repatriation of civilians,

but in re-reading the July 25th announcement today, I was struck by

the fact that it refers only to “in order to aid in settling the matter of

repatriation . . .”

I am a little concerned that we may be permitting our bargaining

positions to become our final position without enough ammunition in

our belt to overcome the resistance.

With respect to the thought that we might go ahead and inde­

pendently announce the Indian representation arrangement, it seems

to me that this would be most unwise. If we are prepared to do this, we

can get the U.K. representation in Communist China for whatever it is

worth but, much more importantly, the release of at least a considerable

number of Americans. If we do it independently while Wang and I are

still negotiating here, it seems to me that we at the minimum set back

the release of Americans whose release we could now obtain. I also

wonder what the reaction of the Indians would be.

While I will appreciate any and all suggestions on arguments I

might use with Wang, as I have run dry myself, I want to make it clear

whatever debating satisfaction this may give, I do not believe that any

arguments or logic, no matter how irrefutable, are in themselves going

to produce any change in their position.

I hope that all of this does not sound too cynical or discouraged,

but at this late hour in the evening I simply wanted to share with you

very frankly and personally some of the thoughts that we are having

here on the other side of the coin.

With kindest regards from all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

156. Letter from Clough to McConaughy

Geneva, September 1, 1955

Dear Walter:

I am enclosing copies of our draft agreed announcement and the

Ambassador’s statement explaining the changes in the draft, both of

which were used at the 12th meeting with the Chinese Communists

on August 31. These are the texts promised you in telegram No. 661,

August 31st, paragraph one.

Alex is now in Prague and the rest of us are holding the fort here

until his return Sunday night.

Sincerely,

Ralph N. Clough

Informal. Enclosure 1, “Draft Agreed Announcement,” is attached but not printed.

Enclosure

AMBASSADOR JOHNSON’S REMARKS

Mr. Ambassador, I have given careful consideration to the draft of

the agreed announcement which you gave me on August 25th and the

observations which you made at that time.

I have prepared a new draft in which I have gone a long way to

meet the points raised by your draft which departed somewhat from

the suggestion which I had made.

You will note that although I consider it entirely unnecessary I have

made the first paragraph of our respective statements identical in line

with your views on the subject. Although, as I have often stated, I know

of no further measures which my government needs to take in order

that Chinese in the United States can promptly exercise their right to

return, I have inserted the phrase “will further adopt appropriate meas­

ures” with the thought that this will be applicable to the authorization

to be given to the Government of India.

You will also note that numbered paragraph (2) of our respective

statements I have used the phraseology that our governments will

authorize the Government of the United Kingdom, and the Govern­

ment of the Republic of India, to assist the return to their respective

countries of those who desire to do so. It seems to me that this much

more accurately describes the exact situation since obviously neither

of the third countries named could carry out these functions without

the authorization of our respective governments. The essential element,

therefore, is that our respective governments give this authorization

and that this is clearly set forth in our respective statements.

With respect to paragraph 2 (a) of our respective statements, I have

made a slight addition to the last sentence of your draft in order to

make it clear that these functions are to be performed only with regard

to those persons who desire to return.

With respect to paragraph 2 (b), I have deleted the phrase in your

draft “on behalf of the Government of the United States of America”,

in the one case, and “on behalf of the Government of the People’s

Republic of China”, in the other case. In the case of Americans, any

financial assistance in most cases would originate with the relatives

or firms of the persons concerned. You are, of course, entirely free to

make whatever arrangements you way desire for reimbursement by

the Government of India and there is no reason for specifying this in

our agreed announcement.

With respect to the introductory paragraph, I feel it appropriate

that we retain the words contained in the statement issued by our two

governments on July 25th announcing these talks.

You will note that I have accepted the revised wording which you

suggested for paragraph (3) of our respective statements.

With reference to our discussion at our last meeting of the word

“promptly” as used in the first paragraph of our respective statements,

I have retained this word as I have not been able to think of any other

that would be more appropriate. From the interpretation which you

gave me at our last meeting of the Chinese term which you had sug­

gested, it seems to me that “promptly” is the best and most adequate

translation into the English. It does not in the English carry with it any

connotation such as you suggested of command but rather carries the

connotation of quickly or very quickly which I understood from you

was the sense of the Chinese term. However, in the English usage it is a

more appropriate word in a context such as this than simply the word

“quickly” or “very quickly”.

However, as I said at our last meeting, the essential point with

respect to whichever term is used is that we both clearly understand

what it means. I would hope that you would today be able to define

for me much more clearly than you have in the past and in terms of

a definite period of time the further appropriate measures mentioned

in the draft of the agreed announcement which will enable all Amer­

icans now detained in your country to exercise their right to return.

677. For Johnson. Your 658.

Agree text proposed announcement quoted reftel as good as can be

expected. While we would like agreement as to time release Americans

it should not be pressed so as to jeopardize agreement on proposed

by Phleger and Sebald; cleared by McConaughy and cleared in substance by Dulles and

Robertson on September 1.

announcement. You should argue on Tuesday for time agreement but

if not forthcoming you should indicate your agreement ad referendum

that in next meeting PAREN presumably on Friday PAREN there should

be agreement on announcement quoted reftel and manner and timing

thereof without our insisting agreement on time release Americans.

Make clear however that word QUOTE expeditiously QUOTE means

just that and we expect announcement to be carried out in that sense.

Would like your views on timing of publication of announcement. We

believe announcement should be simultaneous Geneva, Peiping and

Washington or Denver at agreed time.

FYI Following announcement we believe meetings should con­

tinue not oftener than twice a week at which the subject for discus­

sion would be implementation and details and progress in carrying

out agreed announcement. Discussion about item two should not

be engaged in until it is clear that agreed announcement is initiated

in good faith. Under such circumstances discussions can be had as to

what should constitute item two on agenda. Such discussions should

be recessed whenever it becomes apparent Communists are not carry­

ing out agreed announcement in good faith.

Hoover

Washington, September 2, 1955

678. For Johnson.

Your 661. You may your discretion use following information in

reply Wang’s remarks on Chinese in US.

Paragraph 16: INS affirms no restraining orders in force since

March 24, except in case Tsien, whose restraining order revoked

August 3. Hence return to PRC of any Chinese National in US, and

timing such return, depends on volition individual, not on implemen­

tation agreed announcement.

Paragraph 20: Wang’s request for list all Chinese in US of course

will not be considered. Tsien Hsue-shen, only specific case mentioned

by Wang, has advised INS his intent depart Los Angeles ­September 17

Drafted by Nagoski and Osborn; cleared by Sebald and in draft by Phleger. The time of

transmission is illegible.

abroad President Cleveland destination China mainland. Tsien entered

US as student in 1935, admitted for permanent resident in 1947. Has

studied aeronautical engineering at institutes of technology of Massa­

chusetts and California. Has recently been engaged in research on rock­

ets and jet propulsion and has worked on classified projects.

Also signifying intention depart same time same ship as Tsien are

two other former restrainees, Li Cheng-wu and Lee Sun-hsiang. Kao

Fa-ti (prevention order revoked March 24) departed August 27 abroad

President Wilson destined Hong Kong. Presume his eventual destina­

tion is PRC.

Chinese constantly being allowed freely depart US. From July 11,

when initiative for Geneva talks occurred, to August 31, 83 Chinese

Nationals departed US for Far East. No information now available how

many these intended proceed Communist China, but obvious they

completely free to do so, as far as US concerned.

Information (FYI from Hong Kong authorities END FYI) indicates

and approved this telegram before he left yesterday afternoon for a two

week vacation at Duck Island. As this request I flew to Richmond yes­

terday afternoon to get WSR’s approval. I had an hour and a half with

him in Richmond. He readily gave his clearance.

Informal.

You will be interested to know that when WSR read the latest text of

the Agreed Announcement “cold”, without having any of the recent back­

ground, he was amazed at what you had accomplished. He felt that we

had just about written our own ticket so far as the phraseology went. The

wording could hardly be better from our standpoint. He felt that we did

not need to worry too much about fixing an express time limit in terms of

so many days or weeks, in view of the very explicit treminology used in

the Agreed Announcement. He observed that if the Communists did not

release all the Americans “expeditiously” in the literal sense of the term,

they would be in an absolutely indefensible position. We would have the

best club imaginable to beat them with. Not even their best apologists,

such as the Indians, would excuse them if they failed to act promptly on

all Americans. WSR thinks that their prestige is involved and they know

it. They may have consciously and deliberately decided to release all the

Americans in a hurry, if we allow them to do it in their own way and with­

out any suggestion of an ultimatum in terms of so many days. It would

seem to be part of their general diplomatic campaign to win widespread

acceptance and respectability.

WSR thinks it very important for you not to imply in any way that

we think it might take sixty or ninety days to complete the implementa­

tion. “Expeditiously” obviously means a shorter time than that. There is

a chance that the Americans might be released practically en masse in

ten days or two weeks. This is what it ought to mean. If we show that we

don’t really expect them to move with celerity probably they won’t, but if

we make it clear that we take speedy action for granted, they will be put

on their mettle, and probably live up to what is expected of them on this

since it fits in with their accelerated diplomatic campaign. Obviously you

don’t put them on their honor because you expect them to act for honor’s

sake, but sometimes it may serve their calculated purposes to deliver

when they are put on their honor, and this may be such an instance.

It is clearly important not to get into the substance of Item Two

until all the Americans are out. When we talk about “discussion about

Item Two” and “what should constitute Item Two” we mean the topics

that might be appropriate for acceptance under Item Two. Even this

discussion of what would be appropriate topics should be recessed if

the Agreed Announcement is not carried out in good faith. WSR’s last

injunction to me in Richmond yesterday afternoon was to stress the

importance of not getting into actual substance of Item Two until all

the Americans are out and that includes of course the hard-core cases.

We would probably never get the most difficult cases out if we move

into Item two while they are still held.

We probably won’t inform the Indians of the contemplated arrange­

ments until after the Tuesday meeting. We have already informed the

British and they are ready to assume their role.

Joe Nagoski is working full time on the assembling of informa­

tion on Chinese in this country who have been assisted, who have left,

and who are about to leave. A wealth of information is available and it

will be sent to you as it seems needful. Herman Phleger thinks there is

enough grist to keep the mill going for sometime if needed.

WSR is to return to the Department on Tuesday the 6th. Carl

McCardle is on leave and Bob McIlvaine will help us handle the press

and public relations aspects which will undoubtedly involve some

problems. The Secretary said yesterday that probably we should have

some sort of backgrounder for the press when the Agreed Announce­

ment comes out making it particularly clear just what the limitations

are and what the announcement does not signify.

We are getting out a circular to all our Chiefs of Mission from the

Secretary right after the announcement is released, spelling out for them

that the Agreement does not signify any relaxation to our opposition

to recognition of UN seating of Communist China, and that there is no

change in our policy of support of the GRC. The circular will also point

out that the continued Chinese Communist military build-up in the

South China coastal area and their direct and indirect support of threat

of force and subversion against the Governments of Korea, Vietnam and

Laos are serious unsettling factors in the general Far Eastern situation.

Bill and I were particularly happy to see the Secretary’s personal

telegram of commendation to you. It is well deserved and it means a

lot. Congratulations and regards,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

672. From Johnson. Re: Deptel 677.

Following are my preliminary thoughts on timing announcement:

Had assumed Department continued desire release “agreed

announcement” by Wang and me here accordance paragraph 6, ­Deptel

391. “Agreed announcement” drafted in this form. Simultaneous release

Washington or Denver and Peiping would it seems to me tend give

intergovernmental character which we been trying avoid. Also would

be very difficult coordinate three way simultaneous timing between

Peiping Geneva and Washington or Denver. Would probably require

several negotiating sessions with Wang with ever present possibility

leaks and would in fact delay announcement and release Americans

after substantive agreement had been reached.

One aspect to be kept in mind is that CHICOMs will if given

any opportunity attempt, as with flyers, steal show with magnani­

mous unilateral gesture of release Americans prior release “agreed

announcement”.

My thought is that only at Friday’s meeting would I reach final

agreement with Wang on “agreed announcement”, he will thereupon

in same meeting inform me of Americans being released. (Wang would

presumably do same.) In this way Peiping would be forestalled from

making any prior statement on release Americans as they would not

finally know until meeting whether or not I would in fact agree to

“agreed announcement”.

I should think that Washington or Denver should be prepared

make text “agreed announcement” available immediately upon con­

firmation release accomplished here together with any comments that

might be considered desirable.

Would appreciate Department’s guidance prior Tuesday meeting.

Gowen

682. For Johnson.

Reur 672. In light very cogent reasons set forth reftel we concur

QTE agreed announcement UNQTE should be released by you and

Wang accordance paragraph 6 Deptel 391.

by Sebald; cleared by Murphy.

We also concur tactics for Friday’s meeting suggested reftel but

would hope Dept could be informed immediately announcement

made Geneva thus enabling public relations aspect be taken care of in

Washington and possibly Denver almost simultaneously with Geneva

announcement.

Hoover

673. From Johnson.

Would appreciate amplification last three sentences second para

Deptel 677.

Am I correct in understanding that our purpose at that stage would

be attempt draw Wang into discussion which would have purpose agree­

ment on subpoints to be discussed under agenda item two with implica­

tion substantive discussion subpoints only after release all Americans?

Gowen

685. For Johnson.

Your 673. Our 677 intended map out general approach during

period immediately following release of agreed announcement and

in endeavor make possible reasonable time during which we can

by Sebald; cleared by Hodge (CA).

determine whether CHICOMS are carrying out their agreed announce­

ment in good faith. For this purpose we envisage possibility discussing

implementation, details and progress of CHICOM undertaking during

at least several meetings. If agreed announcement then being carried

out in good faith we have no objection beginning discussion about

repeat about item two with view determining what should constitute

item two on agenda.

We do not now wish foreshadow when substantive discussion

subpoints of agenda item two might begin.

Hoover

678. From Johnson.

Two hour and twenty minute meeting this morning. Wang opened

with statement on Americans granted exit permits.

I renewed request for time limit on release imprisoned Americans,

pointed out still none able depart, measures taken by my government

without condition permit Chinese depart, 83 departed since July 11, etc.

Wang repeated his former line this subject from prepared state­

ment and after some give and take along familiar lines I asked series

questions on “expeditious” confirmation imprisoned Americans whose

cases reviewed would be able promptly depart on issuance “agreed

announcement” etc to which he made replies identical with his previ­

ous statements.

I then indicated I was prepared recommend my government autho­

rize me accept “agreed announcement” and desired compare texts with

him. I gave him text which I pointed out represented my understanding

our discussion last meeting, introduced no new changes, and hoped we

could issue after next meeting.

After studying my draft and discussion of a few small nitpicks of

which he accepted my version, discussion centered around “now” in

para one PRC section and “in any such case” in paras two both sections,

he requesting deletion. I pointed out he had raised no question on “in

any such case” last meeting, and he noted I had not called their atten­

tion to “now” at last meeting.

Only voiced objection to “in any such case” was that it was clear

without it and phrase was therefore “unnecessary”. In reply my direct

question said did not object in principle to phrase and I pressed my

advantage to maximum. His argumentation was weak and he several

times appeared to waver toward accepting phrase but appeared he

had received instructions since our last meeting and he was not clear

whether he was able concede.

Opposition to “now” in PRC section was very much stronger,

implication of word not in accordance facts as far as PRC concerned,

could never accept this word etc. I pointed out always included our

drafts, while not in PRC drafts, they had not at last meeting or previ­

ously specifically raised issue, did not do violence to even their inter­

pretation facts etc. Clearly his instructions on this very categorical and

although I used to maximum my very strong negotiation position was

entirely unable shake him.

He was very anxious propose next meeting be Saturday and I agreed.

Gowen

682. From Johnson.

1. Following verbatim text draft “agreed announcement” given

Wang meeting September 6:

2. “Ambassadors of USA and PRC have agreed to announce meas­

ures which their governments have adopted concerning return of civil­

ians to their respective countries.

3. With respect to Chinese in US, Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson,

on behalf of US, has informed Ambassador Wang Ping-nan that: (1)

US recognizes that Chinese in US who desire to return to PRC are

now entitled to do so and declares that it has adopted and will further

adopt appropriate measures so that they can expeditiously exercise

their right to return. (2) Government of Republic of India will be

invited to assist in return to PRC of those Chinese who desire to do

so as follows:

A. If any Chinese in US believes that contrary to declared policy

of US he is encountering obstruction in departure, he may so inform

Embassy of Republic of India in US and request it to make representa­

tions on his behalf to US Government. If desired by PRC, Government

of Republic of India may also investigate facts in any such case.

B. If any Chinese in the US who desires to return to the PRC has

difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of Repub­

lic of India may render him financial assistance needed to permit his

return.

(C) The US Government will give wide publicity to the foregoing

arrangements and the Embassy of the Republic of India in the US may

also do so.

4. With respect to Americans in the PRC, Ambassador Wang Ping-

nan, on behalf of the PRC, has informed Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson

that:

(1) The PRC recognizes that Americans in the PRC who desire

to return to the US are now entitled to do so, and declares that it has

adopted and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can

expeditiously exercise their right to return.

The Government of the UK will be invited to assist in the return to

the US of those Americans who desire to do so as follows:

A. If any American in the PRC believes that contrary to the

declared policy of the PRC he is encountering obstruction in depar­

ture, he may so inform the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK

in the PRC and request it to make representations on his behalf to the

Government of the PRC. If desired by the US, the Government of the

UK may also investigate the facts in any such case.

B. If any American in the PRC who desires to return to the US has

difficulty in paying his return expenses, the Government of the UK

may render him financial assistance needed to permit his return.

C. The Government of the PRC will have [give] wide publicity

to the foregoing arrangements and the office of the Charge ­d’Affaires of

the UK in the PRC may also do so”.

Gowen

684. From Johnson.

With respect to remaining two disputed points in “agreed

announcement” I feel we must and can retain “in any such case”.

Wang’s motive for deletion is clear even though his argumentation is

weak and there is no reason we should concede.

I do not feel “now” is of same order importance.

It originally appeared in Deptel 492 which was drafted in form

joint statement in order meet point contained para 4 Deptel 466. Since

then we have shifted to “agreed announcement” form of unilateral

statements which do not have force of intergovernmental agreement

and which it seems to me we are free renounce any time we consider

such action justifiable and desirable.

Since that time I have continued to use word with thought that in

PRC rpt PRC section it signified all Americans were as of date of state­

ment able to depart. We are now accepting situation in which this not

case and from standpoint Americans in prison key portion para is “will

further adopt appropriate measures” and “expeditiously”.

While at today’s meeting Wang argued for its deletion from only

PRC section and may well argue for its retention.

US section his motives are of course entirely different from ours.

Certainly if retained in our section they will cite as admission Chinese

have in past not been free leave US.

Therefore believe it should be either retained or deleted in both

sections and that its deletion from both sections would not materially

weaken force of announcement. My ability accept deletion would also

of course strengthen my negotiating position for retention of “in any

such case”.

Also seems to me our interest now lies in getting announcement

issued as quickly as possible so as accomplish release some Americans

and bring into play public pressure on PRC for “expeditious” release

remainder.

Gowen

687. From Johnson.

­Americans who we had said were being detained would be free to

leave. He said on basis reviews completed following seven Americans

could leave any time: Emma A. Barry, Ralph S. Boyd, Juanita B. Huang,

­Robert H. Parker, Mr. and Mrs. Howard L. Ricks and Eva Stella Dugay.

Two Romanoffs who had recently applied exit permits could also leave.

Charles Miner, now in process clearing up debts incurred by firms in

his charge, was being given every assistance by local authorities and

should be able to complete procedures in two or three months, at which

time he also free to leave. James Edward Walsh had not applied for exit

permit, but since not known to be involved in any unsettled cases, he

also free to leave. Mrs. Huizer not on list of Americans in China and

claimed by Dutch reps as Dutch citizen, however, she free to leave also

and he said later her husband making arrangements wind up affairs

so he too would be able depart. He added that cases of remaining

American citizens who have committed crimes are different from these

twelve. When agreement reached, their cases will be reviewed and in

light circumstances of each and lenient attitude his govt reviews will be

quickly conducted and we will be informed upon completion.

2. I said I appreciated the information he had given re Americans

now free to depart. I then asked if I was correct in understanding that

Chinese Communists had completed reviews some cases civilians

accused of committing crimes and that he would inform me their names

at time when agreement reached on agreed announcement.

3. Wang agreed.

4. I asked if those Americans whose cases had been reviewed

would then be able to leave promptly.

5. He agreed.

6. I then said this brought us to what he had termed the “old ques­

tion” of time it will require for his government to complete review of

remainder cases. This central question I had raised in second meeting

and we had been discussing it ever since. I could see no compelling rea­

son why his govt could not if it wished release these persons immedi­

ately. Nevertheless I was willing accept simple statement of reasonable

length of time during which release could be completed. But he had only

told me that cases remaining Americans would be dealt with “expedi­

tiously”. I had no way of knowing what he meant by this term. Further­

more he implied it dependent upon fulfilment various conditions. These

conditions were such that his govt could at any time halt release Amer­

icans merely by alleging one or more conditions not being fulfilled. He

was asking my govt accept most unsatisfactory arrangement. We being

asked take certain concrete action in addition steps already taken to assist

departure Chinese wishing return. However he giving me only vague

promise re persons described as having committed crimes. Any reason­

able person would understand my govt’s reluctance accept such vague

arrangement.

7. I said he frequently referred to so-called obstructions hindering

departure Chinese from US. I was satisfied these so-called obstructions

nothing more than normal problems anyone encountered when he

Chinese had departed US for Far East. It was thus clear that any Chi­

nese perfectly free depart US for his country or any other destination.

I emphasized my govt took all measures necessary this end without

condition. We know number these persons reached his country because

their arrival reported official broadcasts. I contrasted this fact with sit­

uation facing Americans in his country and fact that not one Ameri­

can civilian had been able depart during period our discussions. That

is why it was so important to know in more exact terms what effect

arrangements agreed upon here would have on Americans accused of

having committed crimes.

8. Wang replied he had clearly, explicitly elaborated his position

and he considered renewal demand for specific period time in which

Americans would be released served no useful purpose in these talks.

In reference statement at last meeting he denied questioning my good

faith on statements I had made concerning action taken by my govt

permit Chinese freely depart. Although he had information Chinese

nationals and students departure still being obstructed he now pre­

pared accept my statement there were now no restrictions on their

departure and therefore willing accept agreed announcement. Despite

my statement 83 Chinese departed US, none had left US and arrived

in China since talks began and all those recently arrived had left prior

opening of talks.

9. Wang then read prepared statement going over old ground repeat­

ing that if we continued insist on release guilty American civilians within

specified time this raised question his good faith, violated his country’s

sovereignty, was utterly unreasonable, and could not possibly be met. He

said he had announced granting early release 11 airmen and today that

exit permits would be granted 12 more. Also, once agreement reached,

reviews remainder cases would proceed. All these acts showed they had

repeatedly made efforts resolve question return American nationals.

10. I interjected he said 12 but actually Miner not able leave

immediately.

11. Wang replied Miner being assisted every way possible by local

authorities and speed settlement was influenced by his own efforts, he

said if, as in Miner’s case, it were possible for them to give definite period

of time they would do so but they could never give definite time regard­

ing all cases. He said their solution explicit and clear and no question of

vagueness in terms they used. But if we insisted on definition of period

of time, then it would not possible for talks to make further progress.

12. I asked if my understanding correct that his statement cases of

Americans could “easily be solved” applied also to those accused of

crimes.

13. Wang said in light of conditions mentioned before their cases

also would easily be solved.

14. I said I also understood their cases would be expeditiously han­

dled in conformity with draft agreed announcement. He agreed.

15. I said I understood with respect to period of time it would not

bear any relationship to time it had taken in past to solve some of these

cases.

16. He answered that if agreement reached and relations between

two countries improved and conduct of persons concerned was good

then handling of their cases would be easier.

17. I then told him I could not consider his statements satisfactory

to my government. Nevertheless in light of information given me this

morning and relying on his statements remaining cases could be eas­

ily and expeditiously resolved, I was prepared recommend my gov­

ernment consider authorizing me agree on announcement along lines

wording discussed at last meeting. I would do this also on understand­

ing when we reached agreement on wording announcement, which

I hoped might be at next meeting, he would immediately inform me

results reviews completed cases of persons accused having committed

crimes. I then gave him text agreed announcement (Mytel 682) saying it

introduced no new changes.

18. After studying text, Wang suggested use full term “USA”

instead of US throughout. After my explanation normal practice use

abbreviated form after first mention, he agreed. After first objecting

to deletion phrase “the Government of” from introductory paragraph

each section he finally accepted deletion.

19. Wang objected to inclusion phrase “in any such case” conclu­

sion para 2(A). He said very clear from context which cases referred to

therefore unnecessary specify by adding phrase.

20. I asked if he agreed with sense of phrase but not the words.

When he agreed, I said we would then like to keep words in order that

English text be absolutely clear. He said he would consider.

21. Wang then raised objection to word “now” in para one Chinese

section although he said appropriate to keep it in American section. He

said people would misunderstand actual situation and think Ameri­

cans could not depart from China before these talks whereas actually

over 1500 Americans had left China.

22. I replied impression would be given talks had not accom­

plished anything and situation no different from past. Furthermore,

paragraphs would thus be identical.

23. Wang said “now” should remain in American paragraph

because in past we prevented Chinese from leaving and now we had

removed restrictions, so word appropriate in American section but not

in Chinese section.

24. I replied I could not see his distinction because thousands

of Chinese had also left US before these talks. Furthermore, we had

made concessions in order that both paragraphs could be identical

and we had accepted phrase “and will further adopt” which did

not really apply to our case, but we agreed to it in deference to his

desires.

25. Wang said there was a great distinction between a country which

restricted departure and one which did not. He would accept anything

which conformed with actual situation, but not otherwise.

26. I replied sorry we were not as close to agreement as I thought

we were. Furthermore, any American who desired to leave in past had

not been able to do so.

27. Wang said he had not raised question of word “now” at last

meeting because we had indicated this change from his draft.

28. I said if he would agree to this draft I felt sure we could reach

agreement on text next meeting and release announcement. How­

ever, if his intention now to introduce concept different wording two

paragraphs there were many changes to be made and entire question

reopened.

29. Wang said most important word is “now,” and they could not

agree on its inclusion their paragraph.

30. I replied if we eliminated it, it would make two paragraphs

different and also it would indicate we were not announcing something

of real substance.

31. Wang said no matter how we explained it, he could not accept

the word. He then turned to discussion “in any such case.”

32. I asked again if he objected in principle to idea it conveyed.

33. He said idea completely contained in paragraph and not at all

necessary add these words on end.

34. I said we should not leave anything implied that could be

clearly stated. It was consistent with rest of paragraph and necessary

to make meaning absolutely clear in English text. In this paragraph we

were giving frame of reference to third government and it was doubly

important to make clear to that government what its mandate was. I

therefore thought important to retain phrase. He replied he would con­

sider this point and reserve comment until next meeting.

35. I concluded that I had come tremendous distance to meet his

point of view on substantive issue and I had indicated I was prepared

to consider issuance announcement even though we did not feel situa­

tion with respect to Americans satisfactory. I hoped we could agree on

wording so that I could request authority to issue statement. Wang said

“me too”.

36. I then said I thought press should be promptly informed of

names he had given me of those Americans who were now free to leave

because our people very much interested. I read to him text my pro­

posed release.

37. Wang agreed we could release information and read back to me

announcement he had made at opening of meeting. There was impli­

cation he desired joint announcement or that we use substantially his

wording.

38. I said he could make his own announcement and we would make

ours in somewhat shorter form. After I accepted a few minor suggestions

to make our announcement consistent with his own essential points, he

said he had no objections to my proposals.

39. He then said announcement for his side would be made in

Peiping.

Gowen

1. You should stand firm on retention phrase “in any such case”.

2. Department accepts your reasoning on decreased significance

of word “now”. Would still like inclusion “now” in PRC section and

by McConaughy and Sebald; cleared in draft by Phleger and Suydam (P).

would be agreeable to having it in both sections but would not repeat

not find acceptable having this word in U.S. section only.

Under present circumstances we would acquiesce, upon Wang’s

request, in deletion of word “now” from both sections in order to come

to agreement.

3. Believe foregoing provides basis for reaching agreement at 14th

meeting September 10. You will be in strong position to press accep­

tance of “in any such case” on Wang, particularly with our concession

on deletion of “now”.

4. You should make every effort to have announcement agreed

upon and released September 10. Press for agreement then without

further reference to principals. Immediately announcement released by

you in Geneva we plan to issue Departmental press release here refer­

ring to your announcement in Geneva. Simultaneously background

briefing of press here would be undertaken by Robertson. In order to

schedule press release and background briefing at reasonable hour

here, you should seek Wang agreement to release of Agreed Announce­

ment in Geneva at 3 PM local time (10 AM Washington time).

5. If agreement on text of announcement reached, you should

notify Department by fastest possible means, using both Niact plain

language telegram and international telephone. Have circuits open on

stand-by basis if feasible.

6. Talking paper which Robertson will use in background no-attri­

bution briefing of press being telegraphed separately.

7. Cable your considered estimate of likelihood that agreement on

foregoing basis can be reached and released on September 10.

Hoover

Letter No. 7

Geneva, September 7, 1955

Dear Walter:

I find that the second courier which arrives here Sunday evening

with your mail does not go directly back to Frankfort and, therefore,

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

while he is extremely useful in giving me a channel twice a week from

you, for practical purposes I have a channel only once a week to you.

I greatly appreciated your letter of September 2 which expanded on

the second paragraph of the Department’s 677. I thought I knew what

the paragraph meant, but I wished to be absolutely sure. I am sorry that I

bothered you by sending a telegram over the Labor Day weekend.

Before going on with anything else, I would greatly appreciate

your having someone look into the situation in our code room staff

here to see if something can’t be done. Gowen has sent many tele­

grams on the subject and I have sent one, but apparently all he gets

back are repeats to other posts asking them whether they can spare

anybody and, of course, they never can. While our traffic is lighter than

it was, it still comes in big bunches and it is very important that it move

promptly. The Department’s telegram to me last weekend on my din­

ner with Wang is a good example. They were short-handed, no one was

on duty to decode it, and, as a result, I did not receive it. No great harm

was done, but this well could happen in much more important matters.

Going back to the talks, I know that you all must have been as

disappointed as I was that I was unable to sew-up the announcement

at yesterday’s meeting. I have a feeling that Wang had probably gone

somewhat farther than Peiping approved at our last meeting, and he

had received instructions to back-up. However, I am very hopeful that

if you agree with me upon the “now” question that I will be able to tie

it up at Saturday’s meeting.

I do not know quite how to interpret the release of the nine. I must

confess that it came as a complete surprise to me although I have always

recognized that this was a possibility. Of course, it was designed to put

public pressure on us—they first released the flyers, now they release

the nine—probably the reaction of most people is the same that I found

even among friendly newsmen; that is, what are we now going to do.

I am impressed by the success that the Communists have had in

building up the issue of the Chinese in the United States. Last night

Wolf and de Traz of the ICRC were in to see me (I am sending a separate

memorandum of conversation), and it was quite clear that even they

thought that there was a problem with respect to Chinese departing

from the United States. I, of course, gave them the facts, but believe that

as soon as the agreed announcement is released we should do a much

better job then we have in the past of telling this story.

I presume that you are reconciled, and prepared for Wang scream­

ing loud and hard when I refuse to go on immediately to item two fol­

lowing the announcement. I hope we will be successful in our tactic but

believe we must recognize that the July 25th announcement does not

in any way imply that we would not talk about other practical matters

until all the Americans were released. In fact, if they had not released

the flyers, I would have had from the very beginning to have talked

about that “other practical matter”. Of course the agenda proposal

which they made greatly helps and strengthens our ability to maintain

this tactic, but I see some rough seas ahead.

While it may be true that if we do not get all the Americans out

before we undertake discussion of item two, we will not be able to do

so, at the same time I am not sure it is going to be at all easy to get the

PRC to fall in with this. I most certainly do not expect any mass release

in any ten days or two weeks and think it would be wrong to base our

plans on this even being a possibility. In spite of the satisfactory nature

of the “agreed announcement” and our ability to use it to put public

pressure on them, we must recognize that “improvement of relations”

is still being maintained by them as a factor in the release of all Amer­

icans. If we too obviously stall on coming to grips with item two, they

may well get their backs up on the release of further Americans, and we

will again face another impasse. We can, of course, publicly beat them

over the head with the “agreed announcement” and will do so, but the

entire operation is not going to be easy or simple.

I will greatly appreciate all the thoughts and suggestions that you

can give me on how you visualize my handling of “what should consti­

tute item two of the agenda”. That is, do you visualize a program which

would have for its ostensible purpose the establishing of an agreement

upon the sub-points to be discussed under agenda item two? If so, how

do you visualize my formulation of our points, particularly the “no

force” point?

As soon as you have a chance to do so, I would greatly appreciate

an outline of the whole trend of our thinking on our tactics under agenda

item two. There are, of course, many difficulties in attempting just to keep

talking without asking for or giving concessions. We have a great pau­

city of subjects which can be raised without involving the interests of the

GRC. If the PRC has definite objectives, as it probably does, under item

two, it will be easy for them to seize and retain the initiative and I will be

continually on the defensive. It seems to me that it will also be difficult in

such circumstances for me to avoid being too obviously in the position

of simply stalling. I wish I could think of some positive and offensive

approach we could make, but thus far have not been able to do so.

On the whole question of renunciation of force, I believe it important

that we have a carefully thought out program. We have clearly renounced

force in Article I of our treaty with the GRC, as well as under our United

Nations obligations, but it does not seem to me at all clear that the GRC

has done so since it considers action against the mainland as an inter­

nal matter. It seems to me that the PRC is playing the present situation

very cleverly by talking softly, apparently engaging in no overt offensive

operations, while the Nationalists still continue their small-scale raids,

their reconnaissance flights and their belligerent statements. How do

I answer PRC allegations that our Treaty with the GRC and the accompa­

nying exchange of notes, together with our supply and equipment to the

GRC, simply proves that we are approving and supporting the military

activities of the GRC against the mainland? Also what do I say when the

PRC quotes GRC official statements in questioning whether the GRC has

in fact accepted the principle of non-recourse to force with respect to the

mainland? Perhaps there are easy answers to these questions, but I must

confess that I do not know what they are.

When this entire question comes up, I believe we should antici­

pate the possibility of PRC proposing to us a joint declaration perhaps

something along the lines of Chou’s “five principles” or perhaps even

Article I of our Treaty with the GRC which would not in the slightest

affect their “right” to use force to “liberate” Taiwan as long as they treat

it as an internal matter. If, as I assume, we reject any joint declaration,

what are we proposing in its stead? Do we want a general unilateral

declaration on renunciation of force so worded as also to specifically

apply to the Formosa situation, and, if so, are we not asking for some­

thing which the GRC would refuse to do? Or rather than a renunciation

of force, are we looking for a de facto cease fire between the PRC and

GRC? If so, this seems to be outside the scope of these talks as clearly

something that directly involves the GRC.

All the foregoing I realize is very confused as it simply reflects my

very confused thinking which I am sharing out loud with you and know

that you will treat it as such. I will appreciate all the thoughts you can send

me, however preliminary they may be, as I would very much like to have

this thought through clearly in my own mind before I come up against it.

I am sorry that there was not sufficient time while I was in Washington

really to talk these things through. I hope that you will have an opportu­

nity thoroughly to do so with the Secretary and Walter Robertson.

Give Walter my best and tell him I am glad to know that he is back

on the job.

I would appreciate your having someone stick into an envelope

for us:

a. The Sino-Soviet Treaty,

b. Something containing Chou’s “five principles”,

c. DRF study on the Bandung Conference, including the Chou

En-lai speech,

d. Something giving quotations by Chinese Communist leaders on

the liberation of Taiwan (We have DRF study No. 6858, “Chinese Com­

munist Views on Taiwan”, which is primarily historical, and

e. Indochina Armistice Agreement.

With kindest regards.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

691. From Johnson.

Appreciate Deptel 693 and agree it puts me in very strong negoti­

ating position.

On basis Tuesday’s meeting believe better than even chance

agreement can be reached and released on Sept. 10. Only aspect that

somewhat bothers and puzzles me was Wang’s eagerness to have next

meeting on Saturday. Fear they may have something further up their

sleeve but do not know what it might be.

Am pleased backgrounder being held by Robertson. As no Amer­

ican correspondents now here except regular staffers who mostly

non-American nationality plan no backgrounder here.

Gowen

694. For Johnson.

Departments 693. Following is text of talking paper on which Rob­

ertson plans to base his background no attribution briefing of press

September 10 if Agreed Announcement issued:

QTE The Announcement issued September 10 at Geneva by U.S.

Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson and Chinese Communist Ambassador

Wang Ping-nan relates to the repatriation of civilians who desire to

return to their respective countries. The discussions which resulted in

this Announcement required 14 meetings over a span of six weeks. The

Announcement means precisely what it says. There are no hidden or

by McConaughy.

ambiguous meanings to be read into it. There are no side understand­

ings or agreements whatever in relation to it.

The United States has consistently recognized in principle the right

of Chinese in this country to return to the mainland of China if they so

desire. During the Korean War, this right was temporarily suspended as

to 129 Chinese students with advanced technical training which could

be used against the United States by an enemy. The restraining orders

against this small group of Chinese (less than 3% of the Chinese stu­

dents who have come to this country since 1945) were rescinded before

the current Ambassadorial talks at Geneva began, and Chinese who

wish to depart from the United States for any destination have been

and are free to do so.

WHAT THE ANNOUNCEMENT DOES SIGNIFY

1. It commits the PRC to permit the civilians expeditiously to exer­

cise their right to return.

2. The Government of India by invitation of the U.S. Government

plays a limited role in assisting those Chinese who of their own volition

and on their own initiative approach the Indian Embassy in Washing­

ton for facilitation of their return to the China Mainland.

3. The Office of the Charge d’Affaires of the United Kingdom with

the agreement of the U.S. Government likewise plays a limited role

in assisting those Americans who approach it for facilitation of their

return to the United States.

WHAT THE ANNOUNCEMENT DOES NOT SIGNIFY

1. The Announcement does not constitute an Agreement of any

kind, governmental or otherwise. The Announcement is in the form

of two parallel and interrelated unilateral announcements, the text of

which has been mutually agreed upon. The only agreement was that

the unilateral announcements were to be made.

2. It does not accord any degree of diplomatic recognition on the

part of the U.S. Government to the Chinese Communist regime or

change in any way the U.S. position in that regard. The conversations

were conducted on the basis stated by Secretary of State Dulles at

Berlin in February 1954 when he enunciated the principle that the

U.S. Government would be prepared to deal with the Peiping author­

ities in regard to limited subjects where they are necessarily a party

at interest.

3. The Announcement does not give the People’s Republic of

China any claim to the allegiance of the Chinese in the United States.

The Announcement covers only those Chinese in the United States who

voluntarily express a desire to return to the China Mainland. The vast

preponderance of the many thousands of Chinese in this country who

continue to give undivided allegiance to the Government of the Repub­

lic of China are in no way affected.

4. The Indian Government will not be a “Protecting Power” in

this country for the Chinese Communists. Other than the limited

assistance afforded by the Indian Government to individuals covered

by the Announcement, all Chinese interests in this country are the

responsibility of the GRC. The Indian Government, as the Announce­

ment makes clear, is assuming its function at the invitation of the Gov­

ernment of the United States. Its role will be limited to facilitating the

travel to Mainland China of those Chinese who communicate with the

Indian Embassy in Washington in reference to their desire to return to

Mainland China. The Indian Embassy will not be expected to make

any inquiries with reference to Chinese who do not first communicate

with it.

5. The discussions so far have been devoted exclusively to the

return of civilians. UNQTE

Hoover

695. For Johnson.

Re “List of US Armed Forces Personnel Believed Held by the

­Chinese Communists”, Defense Prisoner Officer advises case summa­

ries therein of Ashley, Ishida, Olsen, Shaddick, and Turner contain clas­

sified information. Pouching revised case summaries, to be substituted

for originals in your copy of roster. Return original summaries these

five cases to Department for destruction.

Hoover

Osborn.

696. For Johnson. Department’s 678.

Immigration Naturalization Service reports 90 Chinese left

­Honolulu for Far East between July 11 August 31 inclusive. Total

departures given next to last paragraph should be changed to 173.

Hoover

Drafted by Osborn.

555. Your 333. Request Embassy reply to Ministry of External

Affairs note of August 18 along following lines:

QTE American Embassy has honor to acknowledge the receipt of

MEA’s Note of August 18 and to assure it that the position of the Indian

Government as set forth therein is appreciated and will be respected in

any arrangement which the U.S. Government may make. The Indian

Government will be promptly informed of any such arrangement.

Hoover

by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger, Sebald, and in substance by Robertson. Repeated to

Geneva for Johnson as telegram 702.

Geneva, September 9, 1955, noon

700. From Johnson.

With reference Deptel 694 know Dept appreciates more we depre­

cate announcement and more we emphasize what it is not, less value

it has in obtaining release remaining Americans. I fear that whatever

we say for background, headlines are inevitably going be “agreement”.

While minor point believe amendment first section numbered para

one under “what announcement does signify” to read “PRC commits

itself to permit etc” would be more consistent with our overall position.

Believe press will be quick pick at points two and three same section

and that New Delhi will put out contradictory interpretation. Do not

see we weaken our position and believe we help avoid foregoing diffi­

culties if we simply state fact PRC suggested India, we concurred and

have extended invitation. PRC has concurred in UK having same role

on mainland China.

Particularly in view large amount press speculation on subject,

possible Wang will raise agenda item two issue at tomorrow’s meeting

by proposing we tell press next meeting will start on item two or some­

thing to effect we have concluded discussion agenda item one. I will

of course reject but will attempt handle by minimizing issue at Satur­

day’s meeting so as not jeopardize issuance announcement suggest­

ing we postpone discussion to next meeting and in addition “agreed

announcement” and info on Americans released, only tell press time

next meeting. In reply any press inquiries this point will only say have

nothing to add to press release.

Will do best obtain 3 pm release time but Wang may want earlier

hour as that about midnight Peiping time. As meeting will undoubtedly

finish before opening Dept will place telephone call to McConaughy

home for immediately following meeting in addition to Niact telegram.

Gowen

176. Telegram Unnumbered to Hagerty in Denver

Text and substance of background press material on prospective

Geneva announcement has been changed. I will brief US press in this

sense, not Robertson. Other arrangements stand. New guidance text

follows:

The Announcement issued September 10 at Geneva by US Ambas­

sador U. Alexis Johnson and Chinese Communist Ambassador Wang

Ping-nan relates to the repatriation of civilians who desire to return

to their respective countries. The discussions which resulted in this

Announcement required 14 meetings over a span of six weeks. The

Announcement means precisely what it says. There are no hidden or

ambiguous meanings to be read into it. There are no side understand­

ings or agreements whatever in relation to it.

THE ANNOUNCEMENT COVERS THE FOLLOWING:

1. People’s Republic of China recognizes that Americans on the

Chinese Mainland who desire to return to the US may do so and com­

mits itself to permit them expeditiously to exercise their right to return.

2. The Office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK, at the request of

the US Government and with the concurrence of the PRC, will assist

those Americans who request its aid in facilitating their return to the

United States.

3. The Government of the United States reaffirms the right of Chi­

nese in the United States who wish to return to the China Mainland, to

do so. The Government of India by invitation of the US Government

will aid those Chinese who voluntarily ask the Indian Embassy in

Washington for facilitation of their return to the China Mainland. The

PRC suggested India and the United States concurred.

The United States has consistently recognized in principle the right

of Chinese in this country to return to the mainland of China if they so

desire. During the Korean War, this right was temporarily suspended

as to 129 Chinese students with advanced technical training which

could be used against the United States by an enemy. The restrain­

ing orders against this small group of Chinese (less than 3 percent of

the Chinese students who have come to this country since 1945) were

rescinded some time before the current Ambassadorial talks at Geneva

Suydam.

began, and Chinese who wish to depart from the United States for any

destination have been and are free to do so.

The Announcement does not constitute an Agreement, govern­

mental or otherwise, but is in the form of parallel unilateral statements.

The Announcement does not accord any degree of diplomatic rec­

ognition on the part of the US Government to the Chinese Commu­

nist regime or change the US position in that regard. The conversations

were conducted on the basis indicated by Secretary of State Dulles at

Berlin in February 1954 when he stated that the US Government would

be prepared to deal with the Peiping authorities in regard to limited

subjects where they are necessarily a party at interest.

The Announcement does not give the People’s Republic of China

any claim to the allegiance of the Chinese in the United States and cov­

ers only those Chinese in the US who voluntarily express a desire to

return to the China Mainland.

The Indian Government will not be a QUOTE Protecting Power

END QUOTE in this country for the Chinese Communists but will afford

limited assistance to individuals as provided in the Announcement.

Henry Suydam

Chief, News Division

705. For Johnson.

Your 700. Following is text of revised press background talking

paper. Now planned for Suydam rather than Robertson meet with

Press September 10.

Code room: Please repeat Department’s Tel. ________ omitting

first paragraph and submitting the above paragraph.

Hoover

Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Robertson.

Letter No. 12

Washington, September 9, 1955

Dear Alex:

Events are moving so fast that this letter is sure to be out of date

when you receive it. Either the Agreed Announcement will be issued

tomorrow, or the Chinese Communists will make some new move

which will change the complexion of the negotiation.

Today we have the difficult task of making complete preparations

for the possible issuance of the Agreed Announcement tomorrow,

while keeping everything on an extremely closely held, need-to-know

basis. There is strong pressure from Cooper in New Delhi and Butter­

worth in London to be given the full story to date. Also USIA feels that

the VOA and their Public Affairs officers around the world need to be

given guidance in advance on a secret basis, so that they will not be

caught flat-footed if and when the story breaks. But the Department

is resisting these pressures because it is strongly felt by both Walter

Robertson and Herman Phleger that any leak which might expose an

assumption on our part that agreement on Saturday is likely or indicate

that we put a quite limited interpretation on the scope and significance

of the Agreed Announcement, might well endanger both the prospects

of the 28 Americans in jail and the continuation of the talks. When the

stakes are so high, not even a remote chance of a slip can be taken.

Hence we are prepared to incur the displeasure for the time being of

various people who understandably feel they have a legitimate right

to know more than they are being told. Nothing is now being sent to

London, nothing to New Delhi (except the routine acknowledgment

of the Indian Government’s Note of August 18, repeated to you as the

Department’s 702), and no advanced guidance is being given to USIA

or our P area. The text of the proposed Agreed Announcement and the

backgrounder talking paper have been sent to Hagerty at Denver.

We have a carefully blocked out schedule of actions to be taken

tomorrow if the Agreed Announcement is issued. The whole thing

would be triggered by a green light from you.

In case the Agreed Announcement is issued tomorrow, both WSR

and HP feel that you can keep Wang fully occupied for some time

in talking about the implementation of the Agreement. You should

endeavor to keep him so busy reporting on the progress of the departure

of Americans and telling him about the Chinese who wish to return to

Official–­Informal.

the Mainland that he will be in no position to press for immediate dis­

cussion of the topics which might be considered under Item Two. We

will want to know for example how and where the Chinese Commu­

nists have given publicity to the announcement; the nature of arrange­

ments for the imprisoned Americans to communicate with the British

Charge in Peiping; the nature of the financial settlement requested of

Miner; the status of the exit applications of Mrs. Huizer and Bishop

Walsh; the whereabouts of the jailed Americans; the movements of

Americans following the issuance of the announcement; their various

ETA’s at the Hong Kong border; arrangements for the British Embassy

to “investigate the facts”, and to make representation as necessary; etc.

Of course we will expect to send you information about the arrange­

ments for the fulfillment of the Indian Embassy role in this country

too, although we will be careful not to bring up anything concerning

Chinese who have not taken the initiative to return to the Mainland.

The idea is for you to keep Wang so engaged in demonstrating that the

Chinese Communists are making good on their obligations under the

Agreed Announcement that they cannot yet get you involved in Item

Two. For the time being you should refuse to get engaged in any discus­

sion of what topics might be acceptable for discussion under Item Two.

minating and useful to all of us who are working with you. Everybody

feels that you have done notably well in bringing Wang to the brink

of agreement without sacrificing anything essential. I hope our 693

strengthened your hand and allayed some of your misgivings.

You will be glad to know that WSR returned to duty on Tuesday

the 6th looking very well and rested. He plunged into your problems

immediately and of course is actively in on every decision and message.

We are in an extremely bad way in CA, with no replacements yet

for Clough or Forman, with Joe Nagoski (who has been doing the leg

work on Geneva matters) down with an ailment variously diagnosed

as stomach ulcers and malaria, and with Steve Comisky suffering

from asthma. We hope to get some reinforcements and I would not

think of asking you to give up either Ralph or Doug, with a very diffi­

cult stage of the discussions now looming on the horizon.

Regards, accolades and good wishes from all of us,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

708. From Johnson.

At today’s meeting Wang struggled hard to retain “now” in US

section trying various combinations and at one time even suggesting

both “now” and “in any such case” be retained US section while both

deleted from CHICOM section.

Also tried hard to insert “the problem of” or “the question of” before

“Chinese” in introductory paragraph US section same change Mutatis

Mutandis in CHICOM section so it would read “with respect to the prob­

lem of Chinese in US Ambassador Johnson etc.” Finally compromised by

leaving agreed English text as is Chinese text to contain phrase this effect.

Ekvall and Clough feel he had valid Chinese Stylistic point.

At very end meeting said names of additional Americans released

in future would be notified to US through UK. I then replied I hoped

in accordance with announcement other cases would be expeditiously

handled and settled that during course of talks here he would inform

me as well as UK of names those released and said I would be prepared

report to him on our implementation statement. He carefully ignored

all reference to making any report here simply reiterating UK Charge

would be notified. Neither of us attempted further to pursue subject.

Next meeting September 14.

Gowen

709. From Johnson.

At 14th meeting today, after trying to get Wang to speak, I opened

by stating there was little I could add to what I said last time regarding

the inclusion of two phrases in text agreed announcement: “now”

in paragraphs one and “in any such case” in paragraphs 2 (A). I had

explained importance we attached to inclusion these two phrases in

text agreed announcement. I had hoped Wang would agree with me on

this text and that we could issue it today.

Wang replied he also wanted agree on text of agreement very

quickly. Two sides had identical opinion regarding major portion text

and it only remained to resolve two points of wording I had mentioned.

He continued both sides had mutually discussed text statement for

long time and each had put forward amendments in order make state­

ment consistent with actual situation and to facilitate return nationals

by this agreement. We should not at this final stage get into argument

preventing agreement.

Wang said regarding “now” in their part of statement, any words

must be consistent actual situation, therefore, not acceptable include

“now” in his part. In past years great numbers Americans returned

from China, indicating civilians always able return. Therefore, not rea­

sonable at final stage discussions insist “now” should be included his

part. If failed reach agreement on this point he did not see how they

could agree at all. They would consider carefully anything reasonable

but, as they indicated during course of talks, anything not consistent

with facts was not acceptable his side.

I said I understood him to say now only two points outstanding

were these two phrases, and he agreed. I stated I was prepared make

suggestion I hoped he would take. I willing delete “now” in both his

section and my section of statements.

Wang insisted word should be deleted his section and included

our section and this more reasonable and appropriate because this

was merely statement of fact affecting nationals both sides. In past

Chinese had no restrictions on departure American nationals and

overwhelming majority returned US. Those who remained were very

small handful. However, in America restrictions prevented return

Chinese students. He appreciated these restrictions now withdrawn.

However, to satisfy public on this point and show difference two situ­

ations it was important have word “now” in American section. There

were restrictions on Chinese students before, now they have been

raised and thus a change has been made. Status of nationals on two

sides different so two sections announcement should also reflect this

different status our nationals in past.

I replied I did not intend engage in long discussion, but if we intro­

duced idea our two sections in announcement should be different, this

opened up entirely new field and we would have to reconsider word­

ing whole paragraph. For instance, I had accepted “and will further

adopt” in paragraph one which I did not think necessary, but included

in order have same wording as his section. We would have to make this

and other changes if two sections not identical. I said I must make clear

that suggestion I made was maximum effort our part reach agreement

and issue announcement. I entirely unable accept his suggestion “now”

remain in our section and be deleted from his. I made my suggestion

only on condition that rest of text remained exactly the same and on

that basis we could issue announcement today.

Wang replied he also wanted promptly settle this question. He

said inclusion phrase “and will further adopt” in order to make two

paragraphs identical was reasonable and necessary. This phrase was

same in both sections because reason for it was same. It indicated that

in future if nationals two countries encountered difficulties, govern­

ments would assist them in departing. If this phrase were deleted gov­

ernments would not have to help nationals encountering difficulties

in future. He said he failed to see why not appropriate retain “now” in

only our paragraph.

I replied I understood he rejected my suggestion regarding dele­

tion “now”.

Wang smiled and said my suggestion resolved only half of problem.

I said I had made very clear I could not consider making this dif­

ference between two sections and suggested we agree on basis my sug­

gestion which I believed met both points of view.

Wang said we had raised two points of difference and that he would

be willing consider deletion “in any such case” from both sections if we

would consider his proposal regarding “now”. He believed meaning of

paragraph 2 (A) sufficiently clear without inclusion “in any such case”.

I said my suggestion regarding deletion “now” was based under­

standing remainder text would remain unchanged. I had met his objec­

tion word “now” and believed text should be issued with that change.

He might consider phrase “in any such case” unnecessary, but he said

it was consistent with rest of paragraph and because consistent, and

in order paragraph remain clear, I insisted that it must be included. I

said that at last meeting he did not object to principle behind “in any

such case”; thus after six weeks discussions we came down to one word

“now” and I had made suggestion it be deleted. I could see no reason

further discussion or delay agreement on text.

Wang said from outset they had wanted reach agreement. Then

suggested further compromise in which he would delete both “now”

and “in any such case” from his section and we would retain both in

ours. Thus desires both sides would be met and each would meet point

raised by other. Thus they had given consideration my suggestion.

I said this introduced even greater differences in two paragraphs

and as soon as we did this we would encounter whole new host of

problems. Actually only difference between us was the word “now” in

our section. I was entirely willing leave word in both sections or take

out of both sections and I left choice up to him.

Wang said we could also delete “in any such case” from both sec­

tions, but I insisted it must be retained. Wang then repeated his earlier

arguments and continued maintain his proposals were reasonable.

I said Americans to leave China all required obtain exit permits

whereas in US no exit permits required and thousands Chinese able

freely depart except group 120-odd whose restriction orders have

since been withdrawn. It would be extremely difficult try to reflect all

these facts in single sentence. I did not see any purpose in trying to

cover again all ground we had been over. I made suggestion quickly

this morning with idea it would enable us quickly reach agreement on

announcement. Wang said we will reach agreement if we are both will­

ing to do so. He suggested although his earlier proposal very reason­

able, he now willing consider deletion both phrases “now” and “in any

such case” from both sections. Thus both sections identical and he had

made substantial compromise.

I rejected his suggestion saying at beginning of meeting I had sug­

gested deletion “now” on understanding remainder statement would

remain unchanged and I could not agree deletion phrase “in any such

case” from our section.

Wang said my side might be satisfied but that his was not and

no purpose served continue argument. Main point was he wanted

announcement reflect exact situation as it was and solve question

return civilians. Under these circumstances, although he not satisfied

with two points I had raised, he would make greatest effort we could

expect of him and delete “now” in both sections and retain “in any

such case” in both. He said he could not go any further to meet my

request.

I accepted his proposal and asked whether remainder of text

would be same as my draft text of September 6. We exchanged texts

and after checking, he raised question why I had deleted word “respec­

tive” before “governments” in introductory paragraph.

I explained it deleted in order make smoother English text and not

to change meaning in any way. Following some discussion I agreed to

include it.

Wang then said in second paragraph Chinese text he had words

“the question of” preceding “Chinese”. I remarked that if we said “with

respect to the question of Chinese” instead of “with respect to Chinese”

it involved some difference in substance.

Wang explained it was necessary to use this wording in Chinese

because we were not discussing all the tens of thousands of Chinese in

the US but only the question of those who desired to return.

I said it was very clear as it stood, and addition of this phrase

introduced new ideas. It was very clear from introductory paragraph

we were discussing “measures” taken by respective governments and

obviously remainder announcement referred to these measures. If we

introduced word “problem” or “question” it would break-up central

thought which was “measures” taken by governments.

Wang asked if we agreed inclusion “the question of” in Chinese

text and leave English text as it was. I agreed. He then asked if title for

announcement could be made to read: “Agreed Announcement of the

Ambassadors of the USA and the PRC”. Our title “Agreed Announce­

ment” was very simple and not very formal.

I objected that such a change made title longer and said there was

virtue in simplicity. Full subject was already stated in opening para­

graph. However, after some discussion I agreed to use full title as given

in Chinese text.

At Wang’s request I initialed changes inked in on carbon copy Sep­

tember 6 draft and he furnished me with clean copy Chinese announce­

ment. He then said, “have we reached formal agreement?”

I replied “we have now agreed to release the announcement”.

Wang asked if we could release it simultaneously at 5 pm Geneva

time, as that was most convenient for Peiping. I said I was prepared

agree earlier hour but 5 pm acceptable.

Wang then read from a prepared statement. He said he was glad we

had finally reached agreement at our 14th meeting after long discussion.

In accordance with his earlier statements he wished to advise me of the

results of the reviews of cases of Americans who had committed crimes:

first, his government had decided upon the early release prior to com­

pletion of terms of their sentences of three Americans: Harold W. Rigney,

Walter A. Rickett, Levi A. Lovegren. Second, following seven Ameri­

cans would be deported: Lawrence Robert Buol, Frederick D. Gordon,

Joseph Eugene Hyde, James Gerald Joyce, Dilmus T. Kanady, Dorothy

­Middleton, Sarah Perkins. These 10 Americans who had violated laws of

China would be deported to Hong Kong within a few days.

He continued that, with respect to other American civilians, cases

would be individually reviewed in consideration of agreed announce­

ment and with regard to crimes committed by each one. We would be

advised from time to time of results these reviews through office of

Charge d’Affaires of UK in China.

I thanked him for this information and said I hoped in accordance

with announcement other cases would be expeditiously handled and

settled. I hoped that in addition to informing Charge of UK, Wang

would also inform me here during course of our talks.

He replied they were prepared inform us through UK. He added

he hoped US Government would help Chinese in US overcome diffi­

culties and depart.

I said I prepared tell him at these meetings steps we took to imple­

ment announcement.

He replied he happy agreement completed and they were prepared

faithfully to implement. He hoped from now on nationals of both sides

would in fact enjoy right of return to their homelands.

After close meeting he fervently shook my hand while expressing

pleasure we had reached agreement.

Gowen

715. From Johnson.

Request names and other information Americans imprisoned

Communist China from whom no letters received, no acknowledg­

ment packages delivered, and no other data on health or whereabouts.

Believe if I am able cite specific cases indicating failure Communists

provide even these most elementary facts despite their promises of

year ago, I will have additional argument support my requests com­

plete information Americans still imprisoned and press for their right

to communicate and their early release.

Latest material here obtained Hong Kong Despatch 141 and

­Deptel 705, February 25.

Gowen

Priority.

182. Circular Telegram 1631

Washington, September 12, 1955

163. Sent to: All American Diplomatic and Consular Posts.

For personal attention Chief of Mission from the Secretary.

Reports indicate widespread erroneous impression abroad that

Ambassadorial talks Geneva signify relaxation US opposition recogni­

tion or UN seating Communist China. US continues oppose recognition

Communist China. US recognizes and supports Government Republic

of China for reasons set forth CA 7316 of April 23.

Continued Communist military buildup South China coastal area

and direct and indirect support of threat of force and subversion against

Governments of Korea, Vietnam and Laos are serious unsettling factors

in general Far Eastern situation.

Hoover

Drafted by McConaughy and Osborn; cleared by Sebald, Robertson, and in draft by

Phleger. Approved in draft by Dulles on September 1 for release when the Agreed

Announcement was issued at Geneva. The time of transmission is illegible.

Letter No. 13

Washington, September 12, 1955

Dear Alex:

Congratulations on your achievement in bringing off the Agreed

Announcement in a form so acceptable to us. It was a masterly piece

of negotiation on your part. Everyone working on the subject here

is full of praise for you. The imprisoned Americans and their rela­

tives will certainly feel that they are permanently indebted to you. It

is an accomplishment in which you can justly take an immense satis­

faction. I wanted to tell you this over the phone on Saturday, but as

you no doubt understood, we felt that if the conversation were being

Official–­Informal.

monitored we would not want the extent of our elation to be clearly

apparent.

Friday and Saturday were days of furious activity. The stage was

all set by the close of business on Friday. We were concerned by the

extent of the press leaks here which we feared might actually jeopar­

dize the issuance of the Agreed Announcement. John Hightower of

the A.P. had practically the entire story on the ticker at noon on Fri­

day. He obviously had been in touch with someone who had read all

or virtually all of the telegrams. We are baffled and troubled by these

leaks. We are taking steps to reduce the distribution of the telegrams

to and from you. They have had entirely too wide distribution, up to

now having gone not only all over the Department but all over the

Government. Henceforth I would recommend that you mark all of

your telegrams other than completely non-sensitive routine factual

ones “limited distribution”.

Suydam’s background briefing of the press went well. The points

were effectively made and registered with the correspondents. Not all

of the accounts reflected this briefing but a number of influential papers

carried accounts which did.

We are meeting at 11: to consider instructions for your next meet­

ing on Wednesday. This undoubtedly will be a tough one, as will suc­

ceeding ones. I doubt if Wang actually expects to get much if anything

in the way of real substantive gains under Item Two from these Ambas­

sadorial talks, but he undoubtedly is going to press very forcefully for

immediate entry into Item Two. He will try hard to raise a number of

subjects which are high on their priority list. He will want to get his

debating points in the record and he will want to lay the groundwork

for urging a later meeting at a still higher level.

The disposition here still is to refuse to enter into any discus­

sions even of the topics which might be suitable for consideration

under Item Two until all the Americans are out. As set forth in my

last letter, it is the view that there is ample grist for the mill on the

implementation of Item One, for the Wednesday meeting and the one

after that. We will supply you with more information on the steps we

have taken both as to publicity for the Agreed Announcement, mea­

sures to assist the Indian Government in discharging its function, and

the movements of Chinese who have manifested a desire to return.

It is true that it takes two to carry on a discussion and if Wang is

absolutely adamant in refusing to say or listen to anything more on

Item One, we would be face to face with an impasse. How to avoid

a possible breakdown of the discussions if he takes an absolute rigid

negative position is a poser. We hope it will not come to this. We are

relying heavily on your negotiating skill; on a probable Communist

analysis that it is not in their interest to take an absolute intransigent

position at this stage which might lead to a rupture; and on the Good

Lord.

Good wishes and assurances of every support we can extend you.

We know you will need both.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

P.S. Enclosed is a document on Charles Miner’s difficulties at

Shanghai, which was left with me on September 9 by Mort Rosen. This

is for your background information. I do not know that you will want

to get down to such details as this in the talks, but you are free to use it

in your discretion in any way you wish.

Enclosure: Memorandum re Charles Minor.

713. For Johnson. Your 715.

Following are detained Americans from whom so far as we aware

no mail been received in United States despite assurances June 10 1954

Communists would arrange for exchange mail through Red Cross:

Dr. Bradshaw

Clifford

Proulx

Redmond.

FYI Defense affirms Downey Fecteau been heard from END FYI.

Despite many US requests through Geneva contact no spe­

cific information as to health these persons. Red Cross parcels been

addressed to all these persons but no acknowledgment from them. No

response to US Red Cross request that Chinese Communist Red Cross

confirm delivery other than perfunctory reply “packages delivered to

proper department” from Communist Red Cross.

No pertinent information above persons subsequent to material

you have.

Hoover

Drafted by Osborn; cleared by Glover (SCS) in substance and Robertson.

717. For Johnson.

Instructions for September 14 meeting.

1. Basic position remains as stated second paragraph Deptel 677.

2. While discussion concerning Item Two should be postponed if

possible until Item 1 completed and in any event should not be engaged

in until it clear Agreed Announcement initiated good faith, important

bear in mind necessity avoiding breakdown talks.

3. It appears to us here that avoidance Item II topics can best be

accomplished by taking positive position that urgent necessity exists

for detailing numerous steps called for on both sides in implementa­

tion Agreed Announcement. Progress in effectuating Item 1 necessary

preparation discussion Item 2.

4. You may make extensive statement on US implementation

responsibilities it has assumed under its announcement. You will be

given enumeration of US steps by separate telegram.

5. You should call for corresponding detailed account steps taken

by PRC fulfill its responsibilities. This might include report on invita­

tion office of UK Charge, listing measures facilitate contact American

citizens with him, itemization steps taken assure widespread publicity

for Announcement in places where it will become known to all detained

Americans, whereabouts all Americans who wish to leave, welfare jailed

Americans, progress 9 Americans already granted exit permits, status 3

other Americans not in jail who do not yet have exit permits, and move­

ments and approved travel routes Americans enroute out of country or

preparing depart.

6. There is no objection to a recess if desired by Wang, in which case

it should be by agreed announcement.

7. If Wang endeavors obtain priority for his proposed Item Two top­

ics by prematurely presenting a list to you at next meeting you should

counter by telling him that you have Item Two topic in your pocket

also (FYI missing American servicemen), but you are not presenting it

yet because time is not yet ripe and same restraint expected from him.

8. Meetings should not be oftener than twice a week.

Hoover

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Sebald, Phleger, and Hoover.

718. For Johnson.

Our 717 paragraph 4.

Following is enumeration of US steps in implementation Agreed

Announcement.

1. On September 11 Indian Ministry External Affairs informed of

Agreed Announcement by American Embassy New Delhi and for­

mally invited assume described role. Indian Ambassador Washington

informed September 10.

2. Official press release quoting Agreed Announcement issued by

cially assembled receive announcement and explanation thereof same

hour.

3. Announcement carried in full by all major US wire services

including AP, UP, and INS.

4. Announcement constituted leading news item September 11

papers all over US. Circulation American papers Sunday far greater

than any other morning of week. Announcement prominently carried

US Sunday newspapers numbering nearly 500 with circulation of over

45 million. Verbatim text announcement carried in major newspapers.

Substantially all Monday newspapers, numbering over 1,860, with cir­

culation of over 54 million, also gave wide publicity to announcement.

See Deptel 714 for further particulars on US press coverage.

5. Agreed Announcement prominently carried all nation wide

radio news broadcasts evening Saturday September 10 and all day Sep­

tember 11. Announcement also prominently featured television news

programs September 10 and 11.

6. It has been specifically verified that announcement was promi­

nently carried all newspapers in all US cities containing large Chinese

population, namely New York, San Francisco, Chicago, Washington

and Boston. Announcement obtained wide coverage in US areas where

Chinese students chiefly concentrated, namely Pacific Coast, Mid West,

and New England.

7. The Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of Jus­

tice, has been specifically apprised of the Announcement and arrange­

ments made for district directors of all I & NS districts throughout the

Drafted by McConaughy and Henderson (FE/P).

US be informed of Announcement and of the right of Chinese who

express desire return mainland China to communicate with Indian

Embassy if they wish to do so.

8. The Indian Government of course is aware that it is always free

disseminate any type public information it may desire in US including

full information concerning its function under Agreed Announcement,

without reference to US Government.

Hoover

722. From Johnson.

1) I opened this morning’s meeting with a prepared statement

along lines of Deptel 718 closing with hope Wang would give me simi­

lar detailed information on implementation announcement. He replied

with some general statements that wide publicity given in China and

proposed US “present official text agreed announcement to UK” and

they would do likewise with India “which would complete official pro­

cedures after which PRC would formally notify UK Charge in Peking”.

2) I replied by asking series questions on method whereby Amer­

icans in China unable to read Chinese would obtain information on

announcement, how those in jail would be informed, facilities for those

in jail communicate with UK Charge (particularly concerned this point

as still 4 persons in jail from whom no letters whatsoever received),

arrangements for UK Charge interview Americans in jail when in

accordance announcement US desires facts be investigated, meaning

“prescribed period” within which Fathers Gordon, Hyde and Joyce

ordered to leave, date and time 10 Americans notified last meeting will

arrive Hong Kong, and specific information on health and welfare each

American in jail not yet released.

3) Wang replied full text announcement would be carried in English

language publications in PRC, those in jail would have announcement

translated and read to them. Did not reply on freedom prisoners com­

municate with UK Charge, said investigations by Charge would be “in

accordance with terms of announcement”, would subsequently inform

me of anticipated dates of arrival Hong Kong released Americans and

on health and welfare those still imprisoned. He then returned to his

proposal formal text announcement be given UK by US and India by

PRC. PRC will then give full information to UK on their responsibilities

“entrusted” to them by US.

4) He then asked my assent to his speaking, on which I indicated

I had nothing further to say this morning and indicated no objection.

He then pulled out and read a long prepared statement to effect now

that “agreement” reached on item 1 should turn to item 2 under which

desired raise two points: US economic blockade and embargo and

preparation for “negotiations at a higher level on easing and elimina­

tion of tensions in the Taiwan area”. Also asked what I thought should

be discussed under item 2.

5) At close his statement I said I had “noted it” and stated that I

also had matters which I wished to discuss under item 2 “at the proper

time” but felt it was premature. “I cannot consider item 1 finally dis­

posed of until all Americans in PRC who desire return are able to do

so.” “Agreed announcement represented advance but way in which

carried out cannot but help influence atmosphere in which discussion

item 2 carried on.” Hoped we could quickly get to item 2.

6) Wang apparently surprised and not prepared for my position

which he characterized as very strange and regrettable. In much incon­

clusive give and take along these lines, I pointed out item 1 could have

been quickly and completely resolved if they had permitted all Americans

return but 19 Americans still detained, etc. In reply specific question as to

when I would consider it “proper time” proceed item 2, I stated “when it

is clear the terms agreed announcement being faithfully implemented.”

7) At end of meeting when usual question arose as to what to say to

press, he said “I will inform press of the two items I have raised and you

are free to tell them what you wish”. I misunderstood and interpreted his

statement as meaning only that he was going to tell the press we had dis­

cussed agenda items 1 and 2, and replied that I was going to inform press

simply that we had exchanged information on implementation agreed

announcement. On comparing notes my advisors after meeting I am

now clear that what he meant was that he was going to inform press two

subjects raised his prepared statement this morning which he has done.

Regret I did not realize this was his intention or I would have protested

as contrary spirit our agreement on private nature talks.

8) Next meeting Tuesday, September 20.

Gowen

724. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

1. There was no practicable way I could prevent Wang making his

statement on item two this morning’s meeting.

derstood I did not protest Wang’s unilateral public statement on item

two, am convinced he was under instructions and determined do so

in any event and my protest would not have been effective except for

record. Believe final result may have been useful as it enabled me make

statement here and thus serve publicly clarify issue upon which there

have been many conflicting press reports and much misunderstanding.

In view all circumstances would not plan directly raise issue during

course next meeting but at close meeting when usual question of what

press will be told arises will debate to extent seems necessary issue of

private nature of talks.

3. Also quite clear at this morning’s meeting that in spite precise

wording agreed announcement Wang still attempting maintain posi­

tion India to be “invited” by PRC to which U.S. has agreed, same posi­

tion mutatis mutandis with respect UK. I had made it very clear in

my opening prepared statement we had already “invited” India and

expected they would do same with respect UK, and since he was not

too well prepared on subject, I deliberately did not pursue debate with

thought would wait and see what PRC in fact does this regard by next

meeting and, if not accordance terms agreed announcement, would be

useful subject next meeting.

4. Wang’s attitude at today’s meeting was that of entire willingness

exchange information on implementation agreed announcement but at

same time inability see reason we should not also proceed with discus­

sion item two.

5. He will undoubtedly have strong prepared statement on entire

subject at next meeting and it will be important I be well prepared to

counter. I can again as I did today keep him engaged for period on

implementation agreed announcement but this does not stop him from

raising issue between us on timing discussion item two.

Distribution.

6. Will submit recommendation on tactics for next meeting in sub­

sequent message.

Gowen

725. From Johnson.

1. At 15th meeting today which lasted one and half hours, I opened

with prepared statement saying that as I had told him last meeting,

I was prepared fully report exact steps my government had taken to

implement agreed announcement. I  made very detailed statement

including following points: official press release giving full text issued

by Department September 10 and Washington press corps especially

invited to receive it. Full text carried all major US wire services which

serve virtually all daily newspapers in US. It constituted leading news

item September 11 when circulation Sunday papers far greater than any

other morning of week and I gave circulation figures. Stated announce­

ment carried in radio and television programs two days. Verified that

announcement given wide coverage cities with large Chinese popula­

tions and areas where Chinese students chiefly concentrated. Indian

Ambassador Washington informed Saturday and in Delhi Sunday GOI

informed and invited assume functions set forth in announcement.

Arrangements made Immigration and Naturalization Service inform

district directors rights Chinese desiring return. Concluded by saying

hoped he able give me similar detailed information steps taken his gov­

ernment to implement statements in agreed announcement. I added

correction in my statement ­September 6 that 83 Chinese have departed

departed from Hawaii making total 73. Had no way of knowing how

many of these people intended proceed China mainland.

2. Wang replied he noted my statement regarding dissemination

agreed announcement and that full text published all newspapers in US.

Said large circulation showed general public also greatly interested in

Limited Distribution.

talks here. He too had paid attention to articles carried American press

and found a number of newspaper comments on announcement which

were not appropriate. For instance, some said PRC invited UK to take

care of ­American nationals in China. This did not correctly reflect agree­

ment because PRC agreed UK would be invited to implement a portion

of agreement. Wang said he wished inform me full text carried all media

throughout China at specified time agreed upon and given prominent

headlines all newspapers so he believed all people could learn of news

and read announcements; radio stations broadcast full text in Chinese

and English.

3. Wang then proposed US Government present official text of

agreed announcement to UK and he would present same to GOI thus

completing official procedures regarding invitation of third powers.

After these official procedures concluded his government would for­

mally notify UK Charge in Peking.

4. I replied I noted his statement on publication announcement in

Chinese press and radio. I asked how it would be brought to atten­

tion of Americans many of whom do not understand ­Chinese. Was

there any English language newspaper which Americans read? Also

since Americans in jail do not have access to normal media of com­

munication, by what means would they be informed of terms agreed

announcement? We had informed GOI and invited it in accordance

with terms announcement to assume its functions in US. Apart from

whatever action we may take with reference to UK, I was interested to

know action his government had taken to invite UK perform its func­

tions under agreed announcement. I requested information on steps

taken to inform Americans in jail and permit them to communicate

freely with UK Charge. I particularly concerned on this point because I

understood during meetings last year that he had agreed all Americans

in jail would be permitted send and receive letters. However, still four

in jail from whom no letters whatsoever received. I found it hard believe

persons incarcerated so long would not want to write their friends and

relatives if given opportunity. I also asked what arrangements made

for UK Charge interview Americans when Charge received request

from imprisoned American and my government desired facts inves­

tigated. I asked what was “prescribed period” mentioned in NCNA

­September 11 announcement regarding release Fathers Gordon, Hyde

and Joyce. I requested dates and time when 10 Americans released

would arrive in Hong Kong. Also requested specific information on

health, welfare each detained American not yet released. Explained this

question raised several times in talks during past year but only infor­

mation we received was that all were in good health except Mrs. Brad­

shaw. However, we had learned several persons had been seriously ill.

5. Wang said his government gave agreement wide publicity

to inform Americans and not to prevent them from being informed.

Publications in English are available to them. In prisons there were

people who would read newspapers to Americans. All persons con­

cerned would certainly be informed without exception. He said

according to Chinese Red Cross 2,547 letters and 277 small parcels

handled for Americans in year ending June. Figure included letters

sent and received. Furthermore Chinese Government on many occa­

sions notified persons they could write their families and Chinese Red

Cross also offered deliver letters. Therefore all persons had full free­

dom send mail if they wished.

6. Wang said investigation of cases would be carried out according

provisions agreed announcement. Regarding third power implementa­

tion and functions he repeated his proposal US deliver formal complete

text to UK and PRC the same to GOI. Added of course his government

would give full information to UK Charge on carrying out functions

entrusted to it by US Government in agreed announcement. Proposed

formal text be handed promptly to third parties.

7. Wang said he would give information regarding times departure

those released and health persons in jail after communicating with his

government. He then asked if he could make a statement.

8. I replied I had nothing more to say today.

9. Wang then read prepared statement. (See following tel for full

report).

10. Following this statement I replied I had noted what he said

and I too would have matters I wished discuss with him at proper time

under agenda item two. I could not help but feel it premature enter

this discussion at present moment. Item one concerned return civilians

and I could not consider it finally disposed of until all Americans in his

country who desired return were able to do so. We had issued agreed

announcement which he assured me would permit them return expe­

ditiously. Way in which terms agreed announcement carried out could

not but influence atmosphere in which we discussed questions under

item two of agenda. I hoped possible very quickly establish atmosphere

and situation in which we could fruitfully and helpfully discuss these

other items. I considered information we exchanged this meeting on

implementation agreed announcement very useful and helpful.

11. Wang replied agenda provided two items: one, return civilians;

two, practical matters which he was discussing. This agenda based

on original US proposal. We had spent 40 days discussing first item

which resulted in enabling number Americans return and arrange­

ments for remainder would be made in accordance with agreement.

Now arrangement reached on first item we should go on to second.

Agreement must be implemented by both sides but implementation

could not be completed in a day or a week. He could not expect Chi­

nese civilians and students in US return in such short time. He failed

see purpose remaining on first item agenda after 40 days of discussion

and after reaching agreement. Under second item both sides could

raise questions at issue between two countries in accordance original

proposal of US which was confirmed at beginning of talks.

item one. At outset I suggested quick expeditious way resolve item one

was permit those who wanted to return to return. He did not find that

suggestion acceptable and I acceded to his position. Of those Americans

about whom we started our discussion August 2 there are still 19 not yet

able to return. We agreed on the agenda. I fully honor that agreement and

was prepared enter into discussions item two at proper time.

13. Wang asked what “proper time” meant and when could item

two be discussed.

14. I replied it was very simple matter. It would be when it was

clear terms announcement were being faithfully implemented. I stated

announcement says “further appropriate measures will be adopted so

they can expeditiously exercise their right to return”. He had informed

me names some Americans now being enabled to return and I hoped he

would soon be able inform me of others as well. My government intended

fully and faithfully carry out terms announcement and I would keep him

fully informed on measures taken to this end. He had told me some mea­

sures his government had taken. This was helpful and useful and I hoped

next meeting he could give me further information this regard.

15. Wang insisted he failed see connection between implementa­

tion of agreement and second item of agenda which we were going

to discuss. He said we have already discussed at great length means

for return of nationals of both sides and he could not see why we

remained on item one and did not enter on discussion item two. Did

we desire return to old ground covered in discussing return civilians?

He thought it would be meaningless if we returned to arguments on

item one because agreement reached and consent of both governments

had resolved and settled that question. He failed to see how we could

put aside item two and return to item one.

16. I replied I was as interested as he in item two but it was of

tremendous importance we have best possible atmosphere in which to

discuss these matters.

17. Wang said he thought my line of argument very peculiar and

regrettable. He was disappointed after we reached agreement on item

one we should put aside item two and return to item one.

18. I said we were not returning to item one but we were only still

discussing it. Agreed statement represented progress. I had no desire

go over old arguments and no such intention, but discussion of imple­

mentation was very useful and I had hoped he felt the same.

19. Wang said he thought discussion implementation agreement

useful but should not prevent discussion item two. He had presented

his views item two and hoped I would give consideration his views

next time. He asked if we should end meeting.

20. I suggested we meet again September 20 and asked what

announcement should be given to press.

21. Wang replied he would tell press he had raised two topics. We

would be free to tell them what we wished.

22. I said I would tell press we had exchanged information on

implementation of agreed announcement.

Gowen

726. From Johnson.

prepared statement:

2. Now having reached agreement on question return civilians

both sides to respective countries according to agenda, we should go

on to discussion settlement other practical matters of concern to both

sides. On basis same spirit negotiation and conciliation should be pos­

sible reach agreement quickly on this item also. He proposed each side

put forward questions which each thought involved relations between

two countries in order all could be considered. He then said he would

like to put forward two points.

3. First point was question of economic blockade and embargo

imposed on China by United States. This was a major factor leading

to tense relations between two countries. Shortly after PRC established

US instituted embargo. Outbreak Korean War was seized upon as fur­

ther pretext to intensify economic embargo and blockade. Such a policy

was extremely unreasonable and unjust. Now that Korean War stopped

long ago, less excuse than ever for continuation this policy which

Limited Distribution.

hindered improvement relations and created artificial barriers to trade

and economic relations among nations. Frankly raising this question

did not imply embargo caused formidable difficulties for Chinese, but

policy unreasonable and unjust and did not benefit friendly relations

between our countries and economic welfare [warfare] therefore should

be revoked. Since opening of talks many countries expressed hope we

could agree on lifting embargo. He hoped we could meet aspirations

these countries and improve relations between China and US.

4. Second point he wished raise was preparation for Sino-American

negotiations at higher level. Tension in Taiwan area key question between

China and US. Chinese Government had made series efforts ease ten­

sion Taiwan area. At Bandung Conference Chou En-lai stated Chinese

and American people were friendly, and Chinese did not want war with

United States. He proposed we sit down to negotiate elimination ten­

sions Taiwan area. Dulles stated July 26 press conference whatever dif­

ferences existed should not be settled by recourse to force which might

lead to international war. Wang said we should proceed with concrete

arrangements for negotiations to ease and eliminate tension in Taiwan

area. Obstacles could not be resolved in these talks but must be settled in

conferences at high level for which our talks should and could prepare.

5. Wang concluded saying easing tension required effort both

sides. Resolution these two questions would aid greatly in easing ten­

sions. He willing listen my views on these two and also on what should

be discussed and settled under agenda item two.

Gowen

729. From Johnson.

Word “conferences” in last sentence paragraph 4 my telegram 726

should be corrected read “conference”, that is singular not (repeat not)

plural.

Gowen

732. From Johnson.

Wang of intention Tsien depart Cleveland as I felt it preferable wait

determine whether he actually does depart. Would appreciate confir­

mation his departure for use next meeting together with information

on number other Chinese departing same ship.

2. Assume I will also be fully informed just prior to our next meet­

ing on situation with respect to assumption of functions under agreed

announcement by India and UK.

3. Believe it also useful if I could have information on publicity

given agreed announcement in Chinese language press in United States.

Gowen

Washington, September 15, 1955

728. For Johnson.

Following is text London’s 1034:

(Code Room please repeat London’s 1034, Control 7183)

Hoover

Drafted by McConaughy. The time of transmission is illegible.

Letter No. 8

Geneva, September 15, 1955

Dear Walter:

Thank you very much for your letter of September 12 which arrived

here yesterday. We get most excellent pouch service on your letters to

me and they are most timely and helpful. However, I am discouraged at

the time it seems to take my letters to reach you. I fear that most of them

are out of date and overtaken by events by the time they do arrive. I am

going to see what I can do from this end, but fear that there isn’t much

as we are up against complicated courier schedules.

Wang moved yesterday under item 2 much more decisively than

might have been expected. It is quite clear that by offering only the two

topics they hope to get out of this stage very quickly in order to pass on

to the Foreign Ministers’ meeting. With the exception of “no force” the

two items that we have to propose are of a very miniscule nature as far

as the length of the negotiations here are concerned. Chou’s proposal

for a Foreign Ministers’ meeting is their answer to our “no force” point,

and they will probably reply to “no force” proposals by saying that

this would be something for the “higher level” and attempt to avoid

discussion. Of course we can counter by making something acceptable

to us in the field of “no force” pre-condition for even discussion of a

higher level meeting. This, of course, carries with it the difficulty of

the more or less implied commitment to a higher level meeting if they

come through with anything remotely responsive to our request.

Related to all this, of course, is what we really want and expect to get

under “no force”. I would hope to be very clear on this before I would

start. I find it entirely impossible in my own mind to think through to any

logical demand on the Communists that would have effect of at least a

promise of a cease fire in the Formosa area without relating it to what we

could ask or obtain from the PRC in the same sphere.

With the paucity of subjects suggested by the PRC as well as the

paucity on our side, I wonder how much scope there is actually going

to be for discussions on what we are going to discuss under item 2.

We are faced with some real dilemmas. A flat refusal even to con­

sider a meeting at a higher level as a subject for discussion under

item 2 would, it seems to me, not be consistent with our tactics. On

the other hand, the longer it is left alive without challenge, the greater

the implication that we may agree to it. Eventually we have only two

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

choices: to turn it down; or expressedly, or impliedly, agree to it under

certain conditions. The question is what conditions we would estab­

lish. Of course the best tactic is to try to prevent it coming to a head

any time in the near future, but to do this I will need substance with

which to work. If we have a clearly defined goal under “no force”, we

could, of course, probably work this vein for a considerable period,

but our success in this would be considerably dependent on whether

the Communists saw, or thought they saw, a pot of gold of the higher

level meeting at the other end.

The only other vein I see that I could work is the embargo, and

that is entirely dependent on decisions taken back there. It is my

understanding that there was some discussion of this subject and, as

I urged the Secretary before I left, I think it of the highest importance,

if any shift in our position is going to take place, that the decision be

most closely held and given to me to trade with here.

I forgot to mention in my last letter that Wang had invited the

four of us to the gala opening of the Peking Opera here. He was very

correct in calling to see whether I would be willing to accept the invi­

tation, to which I replied that, although I would be glad to see the

opera, I could not accept his invitation to the opening and invitational

night where he and other officials would be present and there would

be inevitable publicity. He immediately accepted my position and sent

us tickets for the following night with the promise that there would

be no publicity over my presence. We went and he faithfully kept his

agreement. Incidentally it is an excellent show and magnificent pro­

paganda in Europe for them just because there is no overt propaganda

whatever in it.

I am returning the courtesy by sending him tickets for the New

York Philharmonic Orchestra concert here next week.

I wanted you and a few others concerned to know that I was doing

this and doing it every deliberately, with the thought this type of thing

will help me carry out our objectives in the difficult days ahead. I am

going to have little or nothing in the way of substance to give them,

but feel that by maintaining a reasonably easy personal relationship

to which he has been responsive, I can do much to avoid or postpone

a break when the going gets tough. I hope all of it will also keep them

guessing a little without committing us to anything.

With reference my remarks on the telephone that Washington sto­

ries were saying we had finished item one, even USIA went way out

on the limb on this. With our help the USIA man wrote a very careful

story which some bright boy in Washington saw fit to rewrite. I recom­

mend you take a look at the September 12 radio bulletin which carries

a September 11 story under a Geneva date line which says almost all

the wrong things and is far different from the story the USIA man filed

from here. After all our struggle on the phrase the lead says Americans

are going to be released “as soon as possible”. Then down in the story

it makes the flat statement “the announcement completed the first item

of business on their two point agenda”.

I can understand Wang’s confusion at yesterday’s meeting if, as is

likely, they had read this in our own official output.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Geneva, September 16, 1955, noon

733. From Johnson.

1. Anticipate that at next meeting Wang will insist on opening to

which I cannot object as he deferred to my insistence on opening last

meeting.

2. He may as promised at last meeting answer few of questions I

asked on implementation agreed announcement, dependent on devel­

opments at that time raise question “invitation” to third countries, and

then launch into attack on our refusal discuss item two at this time.

3. I will reiterate any unanswered questions on PRC implementa­

tion, deal as necessary with question “invitations”, give further info on

our implementation, and then deal with question of taking up agenda

item two.

4. I will appreciate Department’s suggestion or instructions on

how I handle questions of “invitations” and agenda item two.

5. On first question of “invitations” have choice of squarely meeting

issue if they show similar disposition or attempting avoid direct issue

in meeting while being careful not accept his position. We have made

our position entirely clear at last meeting as well as publicly, agreed

statement is also clear, and it might be that to engage in sharp debate

on this with Wang would give them pretext fail implement agreed

announcement particularly in view our position on discussion agenda

item two. I should be able avoid issue by avoiding further use of word

“invitation” simply stating fact both United Kingdom and India now

officially informed by US of agreed announcement, if they have done

same no reason United Kingdom and India should not assume func­

tions. However, believe we cannot finally decide how handle this until

we know what attitude India is taking with respect our invitation on

which I have no info here.

6. With respect second question of timing of discussion about

agenda item two will desire make carefully prepared statement and in

this regard would appreciate Department’s instructions in light what I

said in last meeting and my subsequent public statement.

7. Am confident I can avoid any question of a break at next meeting

but believe it important do maximum handle matter so as avoid ultima­

tum or challenge which could lead to freezing positions.

Gowen

Letter No. 14

Washington, September 16, 1955

Dear Alex:

You raise some basic questions in your letter No. 7 of September

7. Of course these questions had occurred to us and had already been

given some thought. But the answers are not easy and Messrs. Robert­

son and Phleger feel I should not write anything on policy questions to

you until the Secretary returns and gives us some guidance. He is due

back tomorrow the 17th from Duck Island. He leaves after the close of

business on the 19th for the opening of the UNGA Session in New York.

We hope to have some time with him over the week end. The telegram

containing the instructions to you for your Tuesday meeting will not be

drafted until after we get the benefit of the Secretary’s thinking. I hope to

be able to give you some helpful background thinking in my next letter

of Monday morning the 19th. We have prepared a summary of develop­

ments at Geneva since September 1 for the Secretary to read on the plane

enroute to Washington so that he will be fairly current when he gets here.

For your background information the Secretary will return to the Depart­

ment from New York on Friday, September 23. He will be absent again

from September 26 through September 28.

Informal.

We have been concerned about insuring that the Americans in

jail get word of the Agreed Announcement and can get in touch with

O’Neill. We are of course caught in a box because we must avoid giving

the Chinese Communists and the Indian Embassy access to Chinese in

this country other than those who express a wish to return to the Main­

land. We are considering sending individual letters to each of the 18

Americans still denied permission to leave, signed by Mr. Robertson, for

delivery by Wang Ping-nan with the request that he effect their delivery

to the addressees. The letter would read as follows: (attached).

We have some misgivings about this since it may give Wang an

opening wedge for insisting that you accept undesirable communica­

tions from him for delivery in this country. Please give us your reaction

to (1) the idea of direct Departmental communication with the detained

Americans, (2) the proposed mode of transmittal through Wang Ping-

nan and (3) the content of the draft letter which is attached. If you do

not like this proposal we would like your recommendations for alter­

native means of satisfying ourselves that all American have the word.

I have taken up your code clerk problem with senior adminis­

trative people in the Department. They asked me to tell you that two

regular code clerks who have just been assigned to European posts

are leaving Washington this week end for Geneva. They are assigned

elsewhere but our instructions read that they should stay on detail

at Geneva until further notice. The intention is to keep them there

as long as your talks continue. They are due to arrive in Geneva on

Monday. It is true that these two will merely take the place of two

others who have been detailed to Geneva who are going back to their

regular posts but the situation will be more stable since you can count

on having these people as long as you are there. This will give Geneva

a total of four people in the code room staff, and the specialists here

say that this is enough to give you good service on Saturday and

Sunday as well as some overtime on regular working days. The vol­

ume is down a lot since the Atomic Energy Conference ended. They

think the problem is essentially one of overtime rather than heavy

volume. They believe these four can handle the occasional peaks as

well as the overtime. Bob Stufflebeam asked me to assure you that the

Department has not dealt lightly with this problem. The seriousness

of it is recognized and a special effort has been made to solve it. The

administrative people are confronted with a chronic shortage of code

clerks coincident with an increase in volume in all geographic areas.

They feel that Gowen has chiefly been worried by the uncertainty of

the temporary assignments. That problem is now solved. You may

wish to pass the foregoing on to Gowen as coming from authoritative

administrative sources here, if he has not already received it by tele­

gram. If your talks are still going on around mid-October, you will be

more than amply covered for a big influx of code people will be going

in in preparation for the Foreign Minister’s Meeting, October 27.

The telephone exchange on Wednesday was very satisfactory from

our standpoint although we were sorry to have kept you waiting on the

line so long. You handled Wang’s unexpected move well and there is no

reason to worry about the slight misunderstanding of his intentions in

the course of the session. I would have expected Ralph or Doug to pass

you a note if they suspected that you did not get the purport of what

Wang intended to do, but it turned out all right. Under separate cover

we are sending you the five items you requested in your last letter.

We are instructing Drum to try to record very systematically the

stories of all the Americans who are now beginning to come out. The

same instructions will go to Japan. We are also going back over the old

records here in an effort to compile a complete story of the maltreat­

ment of Americans from the beginning. There may be no occasion to

use it at Geneva but we want to have it in reserve in readily useable

form in case it should be needed.

I take Wang’s sudden unilateral public move on the 14th as a bad

augury. I doubt if he would have made a public demand for moving

the talks to a higher level at that moment unless a Communist deci­

sion had been made which depreciated the value of further talks at the

­Ambassadorial level, from their standpoint. It may be increasingly dif­

ficult to keep the ball rolling. We will give you all the ammunition we

can before your next meeting.

Good luck and warmest regards,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

739. From Johnson.

1. Have just received letter from Wang referring his Sept. 14 pro­

posal US “should formally entrust UK” and PRC “should formally

entrust” GOI so as “to complete procedures of entrusting third powers”.

Limit Distribution.

Then PRC “should notify UK and US GOI extending their agreement to

respective third powers being entrusted assume functions stipulated”

in agreed announcement. Wang instructed inform me that after US “has

formally entrusted UK” PRC “will notify UK of its agreement to latter’s

being entrusted by USG to offer Americans who desire return various

assistance specified” in agreed announcement.

2. My notification to him at Sept 14 meeting US has invited GOI

assume functions can only be interpreted USG aware PRC “has previ­

ously indicated its readiness to GOI entrust India extend assistance in

matter concerning return Chinese nationals residing in US” during talks.

“I again indicated to you on many occasions that PRC would entrust GOI

extend assistance to Chinese nationals residing in US who desire return;

hence notification of USG to GOI means former’s agreement to GOI being

entrusted by PRC and PRC interprets and understand as such Sept. 11

notification of USG to GOI”.

3. “It must be pointed out that our side has taken into account of

difficult position in diplomatic relations in which USG finds, and has

acceded to your proposed text on entrusting of third powers in its pres­

ent form in agreed announcement. However, on concrete content with

regard to PRC’s entrusting GOI and USG entrusting UKG both sides

cannot have any other interpretation”.

4. “After publication agreed announcement American press

including USIS invariably made distorted interpretation at variance

with actual fact of text agreed announcement regarding entrusting of

third powers alleging PRC would entrust UKG on one hand and USG

would entrust GOI on other. USG ought not agree to such distorted

interpretation”.

5. Desire know “if USG has formally entrusted UKG and will

appreciate confirmation” by letter if done so will be able report his

government which will inform UKG of “its agreement to latter’s being

entrusted by USG”.

6. Comments follow.

Shillock

740. From Johnson.

1. Do not believe I should send written reply but should handle at

Tuesday meeting when I will refer to his letter and if he requests give

him copy my prepared remarks according to standing arrangements

between us.

what might have been problem. I suspect that if GOI also receives “invi­

tation” from PRC it has made identical reply to PRC. However, interest­

ing note neither in September 14 meeting nor in letter has Wang made

reference to any action taken by PRC with respect India. In any event

main points are US immediately took every possible action implement

announcement and with respect to portion of principal PRC interest all

action completed permit GOI function in US while UK apparently still

not able function in PRC. (In this connection would appreciate most

recent information available from O’Neill prior Tuesday’s meeting.)

3. Of course, I have not yet informed Wang of action we have also

taken with respect UK as I did not have that info at last meeting.

4. As parenthetical note with respect use of word “entrust” in

Wang’s letter Dept will recall discussion this word versus “invite” par­

ticularly para 13 Mytel 661. Believe Wang may have agreed to “invite”

in English text without fully realizing implications and is now trying

to recover lost ground. While use of word “entrust” in place of “invite”

would have been somewhat more advantageous to PRC position do not

see even this invalidates our position.

5. Suggest my reply to Wang be along following lines:

A. As I informed him Sept 14 USG has formally transmitted agreed

announcement to GOI and invited it undertake in US functions set

forth in announcement. GOI has formally replied accepting invitation.

B. USG has also transmitted agreed announcement to UKG and for­

mally requested it undertake in PRC functions set forth announcement.

C. USG has therefore taken all action required of it in order that

third countries concerned may undertake their functions. What action

has PRC taken?

Shillock

Distribution.

743. For Johnson. Urtel 732.

Following is summary of Chinese language press coverage for

5. New York papers, Chinese Journal, China Tribune, Chinese Nation­

alist Daily, United Journal, carried statement in entirety as carried by

United Press.

6. China Daily News, New York, Communist publication, has

representative in Geneva and published entire text as filed by their

correspondent.

7. Chicago papers not heard from yet. Los Angeles weekly Kwang

Tai did not carry item last week.

Dulles

Drafted by Jacobson (DRF); cleared by Pope (IAD) in substance, McConaughy, and

Lindbeck.

745. For Johnson.

Instructions for September 20 meeting.

1. Department approves your suggested oral reply to Wang ques­

tion invitation to GOI and UKG, as contained paragraph 5 your 740.

While question raised by Wang seems trivial and without merit, con­

sidering explicit language of Agreed Announcement, it would seem

desirable for you to explore fully with him subject of respective com­

munications to GOI and UKG. Department expects obtain further infor­

mation from British Embassy later in day regarding ability UK Mission

in Peiping to perform agreed function. Wang should be queried insis­

tently in regard to action taken by PRC with UK Mission in Peiping

until you are satisfied that necessary facilities accorded.

2. Department will send you separate report today on publicity for

Agreed Announcement in Chinese language newspapers in U.S.

3. Department has received note from Indian Embassy contain­

ing formal GOI acceptance role assigned to it. Indian Ambassador

calling at Department September 20 to discuss Indian Government

responsibilities under Agreed Announcement. UK has orally indi­

cated in answer to our formal note that it is prepared to accept func­

tion requested. Written confirmation expected shortly. We of course

do not object to PRC approaching GOI in same vein that we have

approached UKG. We consider it mandatory on PRC to approach UK

as we have approached GOI.

4. We hope to have additional information for you from I & NS in

time for tomorrow’s meeting on latest departures Chinese for Far East.

5. You are requested to raise question of unilateral public state­

ments. You should make it clear to Wang that you are not charging him

with act of bad faith on September 14, since it now appears that he did

give notice at last meeting that he intended issue statement. However

his statement of intention was not clearly understood by you at the

time and created necessity for you put out unilateral public statement.

You should propose that both sides get back to original agreement of

no unilateral public statements without clear understanding or explicit

advance notice.

McConaughy and Phleger; cleared by Sebald and in draft by Dulles.

6. If necessity develops you are authorized inform Wang at Tues­

day meeting that while Item One has priority on Agenda until imple­

mentation complete, you will be prepared at following meeting (not

before Sept. 24 but preferably following week) begin task of making

up Agenda under Item Two. You will propose that each side come

to following meeting with list of items which it wishes raise under

Item Two. Lists would be exchanged at that meeting. After interval

of about a week in which each side could consider items proposed

by other, meeting would be scheduled at which agreement would

be sought on topics to be considered under Item Two. At that meet­

ing effort would be made determine order in which topics would be

considered.

7. You should inform Wang at Tuesday meeting that request which

he has publicly made for talks at higher level is procedural and not sub­

stantive and cannot be considered by us as “practical matter at issue”.

Request does not fall within agreement regarding Geneva talks repre­

sented by mutually agreed communique of July 25. It would nullify the

agreement we now have to discuss “practical problems now at issue” at

the Ambassadorial level. We are not prepared substitute another forum

for this one nor to discuss or agree now as to what would happen when

current Geneva talks concluded which we would hope would be when

all practical matters at issue disposed of. Both sides should make max­

imum effort settle “practical matters now at issue” at Ambassadorial

level as already agreed.

8. You may remind Wang that during discussion topics for item

two we will feel free return to implementation Item One which will

always remain in priority position on agenda and we will continuously

observe such implementation. We have taken due note of fact that 7

of 29 imprisoned American have arrived Hong Kong. We confidently

anticipate early release of remainder as well as 12 Americans previ­

ously denied exit permits.

9. FYI ONLY. Topics we propose raise under Item Two are follow­

ing: (1) unaccounted for American servicemen from Korean war and (2)

renunciation of force. We consider proposing (3) “restitution of seized

American diplomatic and consular property on China mainland” and

request your comment on this item.

Dulles

750. For Johnson.

For completion our records forward exact text statements released

by you and Wang to press September 14.

Dulles

by McConaughy.

751. For Johnson.

Following is text of note received from Indian Embassy dated Sep­

tember 16:

QUOTE The Ambassador of India presents his compliments to

the Secretary of State and has the honour to acknowledge on behalf

of his Government the note dated 10th September, 1955, presented to

the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India extend­

ing the cordial invitation of the Government of the United States to

assume the functions described in the Agreed Announcement of the

Ambassadors of the United States of America and the People’s Repub­

lic of China concerning the repatriation from the United States of Chi­

nese nationals who express a desire to return to the People’s Republic

of China. The Ambassador has now been asked by his Government to

state that they have agreed to assume these functions. The Embassy

of India has been asked to carry out on behalf of the Government of

India the responsibilities which are to be discharged in the territory of

the United States.

­Priority. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Robertson and Sebald.

The Ambassador wishes to state that he proposed to provide both

in his Embassy in Washington, D. C. and in the two Consulates-General

of India in New York and San Francisco, necessary facilities for Chinese

nationals wishing to return to China to bring to notice any difficulties

which they might encounter.

The Ambassador of India avails himself of this opportunity to renew

to the Secretary of State the assurances of his highest consideration.

UNQUOTE

Dulles

752. For Johnson.

1. Re your telephone call to Robertson today, on reconsideration

Dept finds it difficult deal with only one phase Wang statement, thereby

tacitly implying it has no answer to remaining Wang charges. Dept has

decided to put out no repeat no press release on any aspect Wang state­

ment and believes that any reply should come from you. Matter is left

your discretion. If you decide take cognizance Wang statement with

press, it may take form either press release or backgrounder for press

as your judgment dictates. You might wish use something along fol­

lowing lines:

(A) Wang’s statement regrettably misconstrues motives and actions

U.S. Sept. 14 statement based on fact U.S. had already announced meas­

ures to implement Agreed Announcement whereas Chinese had not yet

indicated steps taken to release Americans except for those cases which

had been reviewed. Chicom indication of steps proposed for imple­

menting agreement appear to us to be first order of business and one

that U.S. has already fulfilled.

(B) There is no basis for Wang’s contention that U.S. has prevented

departure of Chinese. As of March 24 Immigration orders against depar­

ture from this country were outstanding for 129 technically trained

­Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Lindbeck; approved in draft by Robertson.

more are reported about to leave. All now free to leave.

2. Wang’s action today does not appear to call for any change in

your instructions (Deptel 745) except possibly in paragraph 5. If you

believe that in light Wang’s latest action we go too far in exonerat­

ing him from any imputation bad faith, you may wish to strengthen

tone of your presentation on unilateral public statements. Need for

emphatic representations on this question further confirmed by Wang’s

statement.

3. Immigration has not yet confirmed departure three Chinese,

including Tsien, on Cleveland, September 17.

4. British Embassy has had no recent word from O’Neill in Peiping.

We instructing Embassy London query Foreign Office as to whether

PRC has yet extended invitation to UK Charge, and as to actual and

prospective difficulties confronted by British Charge.

Dulles

744. From Johnson.

In reply press inquiries am informing them for background that

agreed statement following today’s meeting should not be interpreted

as representing any change in US position set forth my September 14

statement. Today’s statement merely expresses what is already public

knowledge, that is there is difference of view between Wang and myself

on timing discussion item two of agenda.

Shillock

745. From Johnson.

1. At today’s meeting two hours ten minutes, apparently on theory

best defense is offensive, Wang opened with statement accusing me of

violating understanding on private nature talks reaffirming desire to

keep talks private.

2. I replied with statement explaining my misunderstanding his

intention at last meeting, pointing out his statement disclosed substance

his remarks therefore required me make public substance our position.

Regretted his statement yesterday, noted I had made no response and

hoped “I will not have to do so”. Glad he agreed meetings should con­

tinue to be private. This followed by some give and take on whose fault

but reaffirmation of agreement on private nature talks.

adding only Indian Ambassador today discussing with Department

responsibilities being assumed.

4. There was then long give and take with Wang on one hand trying

twist my remarks into statement we had “invited” UK and “agreed” to

PRC invitation to GOI. I expressed surprise Wang’s effort make issue

out of this, pointed out clear language agreed announcement, and

emphasized substance of situation, that is, US had immediately taken

all action implement agreed announcement with respect to third coun­

tries, India now able function in US, UK apparently still not able func­

tion in PRC. Said it was imperative they take with UK action similar

that US had taken with GOI. Wang said PRC had extended “invita­

tion” to GOI and Nehru had announced in Parliament its acceptance.

Towards end I pressed hard for statement PRC would contact UK

Charge Peiping and do necessary permit UK immediately start func­

tioning. After unsuccessfully pressing me hard to say we had “invited”

UK in accordance with announcement he apparently chose to accept

my statement that we had informed UK and requested it undertake

functions and while avoiding direct reply my insistence that PRC con­

tact UK Charge, appeared to indicate they would do necessary permit

UK function.

5. I then made statement on publicity agreed announcement Chi­

nese press in US and referred to unanswered questions I had asked him

Limited Distribution.

in last meeting specifically pointing up health and welfare each Ameri­

can not released and information on agreed announcement to Americans

still in jail.

6. On health and welfare he countered by renewing demand for

names and addresses all Chinese in US but avoided direct reply to my

question as to whether he now refusing give me information on health

and welfare Americans in jail. With respect informing Americans in jail

he said “I told you last meeting what is done and that still holds”.

7. After some additional give and take along these lines during

which I expressed disappointment he had no information for me

today on implementation, I made statement accordance paragraph 7,

Deptel 745.

8. Wang made impromptu reply to effect that understanding at

outset of talks was that either side could bring up anything it consid­

ered be practical matter at issue, not possible settle all practical mat­

ters at issue these talks, therefore higher level meeting necessary. Such

meeting also desired by “some high American officials”. I made no

reply and he indicted nothing further say today, suggesting next meet­

ing Friday, September 23, to which I agreed.

9. There was then considerable discussion as to exact wording of

statement to press.

Shillock

1119. Foreign Office has drawn Embassy’s attention to commen­

tary in Peiping People’s Daily denouncing “distortion by USIS” of

US-CHICOM “agreement” of September 10 at Geneva. Although

involved and confused, commentary appears make two basic points:

(A) US delaying invitation to UK assume functions set forth in

announcement in order postpone consideration of “item 2”, and

(B) CHICOMS insist they, and not US, should invite Indians.

Re (A) Foreign Office has prepared for Macmillan’s signature reply

to Ambassador’s letter of September 13 (Embtel 1018) agreeing assume

functions. It is hoped reply can be delivered today. Foreign Office will

then be able inform press it has done so.

Re (B) Foreign Office notes that in the background statement read

to press in Washington on September 10 (substance of which was given

Foreign Office on basis Deptel 1363) US is to invite both UK and India

to assume their respective functions, although agreed announcement

was far from specific (and perhaps intentionally so) on this point.

Foreign Office requests informal and confidential clarification on

this point, including whether this ambiguity of language was accepted

by CHICOMS in apparent good faith and is now being aired by them,

perhaps, for political purposes.

New subject: Has Department any comment to make on points

made by O’Neill (Embtel 1034) especially paragraph 4.

Butterworth

747. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

1. Wang’s entire attitude throughout meeting was deliberately

much more brusque and in general harder than at any previous meet­

ing. This change in attitude was particularly marked in comparison

with last meeting with respect to his refusal to give us further info

on Americans and implementation announcement. Had feeling he

was acting under definite instructions regarding his tone and that at

last meeting he had promised more than Peiping willing deliver with

respect information on Americans.

Believe this change derives from a) our attitude on proceed­

ing to agenda item two; b) our attitude on “invitation” under agreed

announcement (possible Wang is in trouble with Chou over this point);

and c) our immediate and sharp reaction to his September 14 public

statement.

Distribution.

2. Although he continued press me throughout meeting start dis­

cussion agenda item two there was no move on his part to bring mat­

ters to a head and I felt no necessity of using authority given me in

para 7 Deptel 745 was of great assistance in keeping situation fluid. My

thought in permitting him for first time in several meetings to suggest

date for next meeting was to test his anxiety to move on and, in agree­

Deptel 745 at that meeting if it seems desirable do so.

3. Felt I was completely on top of “invitation” situation today and

that Wang fully realized weakness his position. Notable that today he

entirely avoided use of word “entrust” which so heavily employed his

letter. Doubt he will take further initiative this regard but we may want

do so dependent on developments with UK Charge Peiping by next

meeting.

Shillock

748. From Johnson.

Re telcon with Robertson, regret necessity replacing either Clough

or Forman at this time. Both have done excellent work and are very

helpful to me. Had hoped when replacement made he could have had

advantage intimate association over a period with Departmental work

on these talks. However, realize pressure work in GA may make ear­

lier action imperative. Balancing all considerations, including Depart­

ment’s needs and new phase talks entering here, believe best Clough

return. Hope whoever sent will be given maximum opportunity famil­

iarize self with Department’s thinking.

Shillock

Note: Delayed in transmission.

750. From Johnson. Re Deptel 752.

Press interest here Wang’s statement now dead and believe it not

desirable attempt revive. Our exchange at today’s meeting reaffirming

desire maintain privacy meetings makes press release inadvisable and

considering present composition press corps here backgrounder not

practicable. Press stories I have seen have reflected individual back­

ground guidances I gave on Wang initiating break in privacy talks,

talks arranged solely through UK, my September 14 statement answers

para 3 his statement, and picking up Suydam September 10 statement

para his statement.

Very much hope I can have by next meeting confirmation depar­

ture Tsien.

Shillock

751. From Johnson.

1. At 16th meeting today Wang asked if he could make first state­

ment. He said that at outset of talks we agreed abstain from making

public statements regarding proceedings to press without prior noti­

fication or agreement. He asked if we considered this agreement still

valid and said I had given to press a statement regarding disputed

points our last meeting and had even given a distorted interpretation.

After giving matter considerable thought he believed he could

not remain silent and therefore issued statement on September 19.

Limited Distribution.

Concluded by saying he hoped we would return to original agreement

regarding press releases.

2. I replied I was glad he mentioned subject as I had also intended

to do so. At close of last meeting he informed me he intended making

statement to press regarding two questions raised at meeting. I did not

understand he intended reveal substance his remarks on two points he

had introduced. Frankly what I thought he said was that we had dis­

cussed items one and two of agenda. However, when I learned of his

statement after meeting it seemed to me very definitely to go into sub­

stance his remarks and this necessitated my also releasing statement

going into substance our position. I did this in press release which I

made as brief and non-­controversial as possible. I was not alleging he

did not inform me but simply that I did not understand his intent. I

regretted he considered it necessary make a second statement to press. I

had made no response and hoped I would not have to do so. I was glad

to know he shared my feeling that our practice in past of not issuing

press releases on substance of talks here was right. Our ability keep

these matters private has been beneficial both parties and to progress

our talks. I would be entirely willing and hoped he would agree to pro­

ceed on same basis we have in past and not discuss substance our meet­

ings with press by unilateral public statements.

3. Wang replied he could not agree my explanation this regard. At

last meeting we agreed on release, his statement had been clear and

there could have been no misunderstanding.

His statement had been in conformity with our agreement and he

had made prior notification. What he said to press did not go beyond

scope of what he told me in meeting he would say. But my statement

was not in conformity with agreement. If US still desired keep situ­

ation as it was before, then he hoped there would be no recurrence

such action. Hoped in future we would adhere to agreement regarding

releases to press.

4. I said I could not agree my statement had been in violation our

agreement on private nature of talks. I told him I did not understand his

intention and, if I had, then I would have objected because his release

went into substance his remarks and I would have to make reply. Fur­

thermore, I reminded him that when I had proposed private nature

of talks I had also suggested that prior notice of unilateral statements

should be reasonable in time, for example a day or two before release.

I would give him such advance notice if I made a statement. I did not

believe useful purpose served pursue this subject further and hoped he

agreed abide by understanding in future as I intended so to do.

5. Wang said he had nothing more to say except that facts spoke

for themselves and could not be refuted. He then suggested we discuss

item two and said he would be happy to hear my comments on two

points he raised last time. Also in referring my earlier indication I had

reply his September 16 letter, said he would be glad receive reply.

6. I replied with prepared statement in which I said I had informed

him September 14 that US Government had formally transmitted to GOI

terms of agreed announcement and had invited GOI undertake in US

functions set forth in agreed announcement. US Government had received

formal reply from GOI saying it pleased accept invitation. Arrangements

made to discuss today with Indian Ambassador Washington carrying out

responsibilities assumed by GOI under agreed announcement. US Gov­

ernment also transmitted to Government UK terms agreed announce­

ment and formally requested UK undertake on behalf American nationals

in PRC functions set forth. UK indicated it was prepared undertake these

functions. US Government had therefore taken all action required in order

third powers might undertake their functions. I said I would appreciate

being informed what action PRC had taken this regard.

7. Wang said he noted my statement US Government had invited

GOI. He could not agree, because GOI was being invited by PRC and

not by US. Clearly provided in agreed announcement that PRC should

invite India take care Chinese nationals in US. If PRC invited GOI then

US should accept this arrangement and confirm that GOI assume func­

tions. It was not a question of GOI being invited by US. In same way

could not say PRC should invite UK. PRC could only agree to UK being

invited by US to carry out functions set forth in agreed announcement.

In our discussion and in text agreed announcement this point very clear

and allowed of no misinterpretation.

8. He stated US press and official USIS misrepresented and misin­

terpreted agreed announcement, alleging US will invite GOI and PRC

will invite UK. He could not agree to such distorted interpretation.

9. He continued by saying PRC had formally invited GOI take care

welfare of Chinese nationals in US. Nehru in statement made Indian

Parliament had said India had accepted this invitation from PRC. If US

Government has completed its formal invitation to UK, then PRC can

inform UK it agrees to UK performing functions set forth regarding

American nationals. However, PRC had made no formal contact with

UK because did not know if US had completed formal invitation to UK.

10. I said I was genuinely puzzled by his statement and had no

intention of reopening, as he appeared to desire, whole question our

negotiations on text agreed announcement. Latter is clear as can be on

this subject and US Government has done everything which could be

required of it in order agreed announcement could be put into effect. Here

I quoted pertinent sections agreed announcement adding I did not want

to engage in semantic argument over text but rather look at substance

of arrangement. At very outset of talks he indicated PRC wanted GOI

assume certain functions regarding Chinese in US who desire return. We

had agreed in announcement what these functions should be and they

were ones which had to be undertaken in the US. We had immediately

taken all action necessary to permit GOI undertake these functions. That

was substance of situation. We had done everything we could to permit

GOI undertake functions his government wanted and Indian Ambas­

sador was today discussing implementation announcement in US. In

contrast with US action, I understood from him that UK still was not in

position undertake functions agreed announcement in PRC. Imperative

whatever words might be used, his government take same action with

respect UK as we took with respect to India so that UK can undertake

functions under agreed announcement.

11. Wang asked whether UK was “invited” by US.

12. I repeated that UK had been formally requested undertake

functions set forth and this done even before our last meeting and very

promptly, as with other matters relating agreed announcement. I did

not know of this action at time of last meeting or I would have informed

him then.

13. Wang said, “Do I understand US invited UK and agreed to invi­

tation GOI by PRC”.

14. I said that was not what I had said.

15. Wang asked if what I meant was PRC had invited GOI and US

had invited UK, or was there difference of opinion between us.

16. I said I thought it important to get into substance situation

which was that US had done everything permit GOI undertake its func­

tions in US. I understood that was what he was interested in, and that

had been done.

17. Wang said he concerned with two points: one was invitation to

third government, and the other was agreement to this invitation. He

was ready agree my statement that UK invited by US but he wanted be

clear whether GOI being invited by PRC or US.

18. I said it was our clear understanding of agreed announce­

ment that we should invite GOI perform functions. At same time I had

no objection his government taking whatever action it desired with

respect GOI, and whatever words they used between them was up to

him. His government had suggested GOI undertake functions in US,

but, as we had discussed in previous meetings, third parties could

undertake functions only if authorized. Essential element is that each

government permit functions be undertaken within own territory. If we

invited someone to do something of course we agree to their doing it

and would assist them.

19. Wang said “to agree” and “to invite” were two different things.

If US had invited GOI, then it appeared US had invited both UK and

GOI. PRC had never invited UK to do anything. Merely said they

would agree to UK performing functions and assist them. He had indi­

cated when UK invited by US, then PRC would agree and assist. There

would be no differences of opinion if I meant GOI invited by PRC and

US would agree and assist, but if I meant GOI was invited by US, then

he would have to consider statement was intentional distortion and

misrepresentation of agreed announcement. If by my statement that US

formally informed UK I meant US had formally invited UK, and if I

formally decleared this to be so in this meeting, then his government

would contact UK and express agreement it assume functions set forth

in agreed announcement with assistance PRC.

20. I said we had formally notified both UK and GOI immediately

and wonder what more we could do to put agreed announcement into

effect.

21. Wang replied if my statement today meant that I was formally

notifying him US had completed invitation UK, then PRC would con­

tact UK and give assistance.

22. I asked if, whatever word was used by his government, his gov­

ernment would promptly take action with respect UK so that it could

promptly undertake functions under agreed announcement.

23. Wang said if we had completed invitation process PRC would

certainly do its part and that what he meant was if US had transmitted

formal text to UK.

24. I said this had been done.

25. Wang said, very well, that meant we had invited UK and that

PRC had not, but that PRC had only agreed.

26. I asked if PRC would contact office of UK Charge in Peiping.

27. He said as a matter of course they would do whatever was

required under the agreement.

28. I then told him I would like to inform him about the publicity

carried in Chinese language press in US regarding agreed announce­

ment. I said in New York full text announcement carried in five Chi­

nese papers, and gave names. In San Francisco text carried in Chinese

World while news and editorials carried two other papers. Since these

publications circulate freely throughout US it was assured even Chinese

in US who did not understand English could have access text agreed

announcement.

29. I said at last meeting I had raised several questions regarding

implementation of agreed announcement with respect to Americans

on China mainland. I would appreciate it if he could give me fuller

answers to my questions than he had ­been able to last time.

30. Wang said he had nothing to tell me beyond what he had said

in the last meeting because at that time he told me all he was able to.

31. I said I particularly wanted specific information on the health

and welfare of Americans not yet released.

32. Wang said he had nothing new to tell me. Reporting on the

condition of Americans in China was related to information on Chi­

nese in US on which he had received no information. He said he would

appreciate it if I could provide this information, and first of all provide

a list of their names and addresses. If I would give him information on

Chinese nationals then he would also give me information on Ameri­

cans in China.

33. I asked what nationals he wanted information about. As far as

I knew no Chinese nationals in the US were in jail.

34. Wang snapped that he wanted information on all his nationals

in the US including their names and addresses.

35. I asked if I understood him to say that his government was

unwilling to give us information on the health and welfare of Ameri­

cans in jail for which his government had a special responsibility and

whose names I had given him. I considered this very important. At last

meeting I had asked him how the Americans in jail who did not have

access usual forms of communication would be informed of agreed

announcement. I understood from him they would be informed by

persons reading and translating newspapers for them if they did not

understand Chinese language. Was he able to assure me this had been

done?

36. Wang replied this was an internal matter of concern to his gov­

ernment. He had already told me what was done and what he said still

holds. He added that health conditions of prisoners had already been

discussed during the talks between consular representatives. Also he

had informed me regarding implementation of agreed announcement

and notifying persons concerned and he would not repeat his remarks.

He hoped I would give him my opinion on the two items he had put

forward under agenda item two.

37. I said our first order of buiness was the return of nationals and

that I still considered it so. I had attempted fully, frankly and immedi­

ately inform him what we had done to implement agreed announce­

ment. Only by its implementation could we completely dispose of first

order of business we came here to discuss. I had hoped he could give

me information on implementation as he did at last meeting. I was dis­

appointed he had not given further information to me today. As he was

unable to do so, I said I wished refer briefly to that portion his state­

ment at last meeting and his public statement regarding talks at higher

level. I then read from prepared statement as follows:

38. A. “I simply want to say my government considers this to be a

procedural rather than a substantive matter. Therefore, it considers that

it cannot be properly included as a ‘practical matter at issue between

the two sides’ under the mutually agreed communique issued by our

two governments on July 25, and our agreed agenda.

B. I cannot but consider that such a proposal would nullify the

agreement we now have to discuss at the Ambassadorial level practical

problems at issue between our two governments.

C. My government is not prepared to substitute another forum for

this one. Neither is my government prepared now to discuss or agree

as to what will happen after our talks here have been concluded. We

would hope this would be when all practical matters at issue had been

disposed of. We feel that both sides should make a maximum effort

to settle ‘practical matters at issue’ in our talks here as already agreed

rather than propose another forum even before the two of us have

undertaken discussion of the second item of our agenda.”

39. Wang countered that according to the agreement at the outset

of our talks and with respect to his statement at the last meeting he

believed each side could raise issues it considered should be discussed

under item two. He had suggested two problems: embargo; second,

preparations for Sino-American negotiations at a higher level. He con­

sidered objective of talks was improvement relations two countries and

easing of tensions in Far East. Therefore, PRC did not consider that all

practical issues between US and China could be settled in these Ambas­

sadorial talks. He thought it would be more significant to refer these

issues to a meeting at a higher level. This proposal not only conformed

with desire two peoples and world public opinion but also conformed

with desire some high officials in US Government. Of course this was

his opinion regarding agenda item two and he was prepared to listen to

anything I wished to put forward.

40. Said I had nothing further to say this morning.

41. Wang said he had nothing further to say. He suggested we meet

again September 23.

42. In discussing release to press Wang suggested we issue state­

ment saying we had discussed (a) implementation of agreed announce­

ment and (b) item two.

43. I suggested we say we “discussed points of view with respect

to item two”.

44. We finally agreed on text Mytel 743.

Shillock

752. From Johnson. Deptel 757.

Name second Chinese listed apparently incomplete as received.

Confirm whether it Lee Cheng-Wu (repeat Lee Cheng-Wu).

Total number Chinese who departed US (repeat US) on Cleveland

September 17 would be useful to me for next meeting if available.

Helpful for me receive figures (not names) Chinese departing US

(repeat US) as promptly after their leaving as possible.

Shillock

Priority.

753. From Johnson.

erations to be taken into account with respect listing restitution seized

diplomatic and consular property:

A. Listing item will inevitably be interpreted by CHICOMS and oth­

ers as possibly remote but nevertheless definite step in contemplation

eventual recognition. From narrow standpoint continuation these talks

and release Americans this would be useful. Principal adverse factor to be

considered is effect in Taiwan.

B. What legal aspects may be; that is, can matter be handled with­

out sacrifice our position on GRC as de jure government of China?

C. CHICOMS may counter with item on release blocked accounts

in US.

Distribution.

D. CHICOMS may alternatively counter with position this not

“practical matter” unless and until recognition contemplated at which

time “will be easy to resolve”.

E. In unlikely event properties restored this would lead directly to

question UK representation US interests in PRC and reciprocal repre­

sentation PRC interests in US by GOI.

F. Have imperfect recollection concerning our returning title to

GRC properties acquired under surplus property agreement following

World War II. Am not clear what effect this would have on extent resti­

tution demand we would make on CHICOMS.

Shillock

758. From Johnson.

1. Subject Department’s suggestions, at Friday’s meeting I

plan give Wang all further available info on our implementation of

announcement, inform him departure Tsien, numbers additional Chi­

nese who have departed, etc. Would hope could make unqualified

statement Indian Embassy already functioning as envisaged agreed

announcement.

2. Will then make carefully prepared and balanced statement noting

progress thus far made with respect PRC implementation announcement

but with note being serious dissatisfaction with rate of progress release of

Americans in jail. Of 29 Americans in jail or under house arrest beginning

remain jail with no apparent steps taken effect their release. This is not

“expeditiously.”

3. Will also express dissatisfaction with his attitude at last meeting

on my request for info on health and welfare of Americans still in jail and

unanswered questions on implementation announcement.

4. Will also contrast our prompt action with respect India with

their dilatoriness with respect UK, working in latest available informa­

tion on this situation at time of meeting.

5. Will express regret thus far been unable turn to item two

because their slowness disposing these matters and express hope

they will promptly remedy situation. On timing discussions item

two would maintain note in second sentence para 14 Mytel 725, that

is “when it was clear terms agreed announcement being faithfully

implemented.”

6. I would not plan at this meeting to use authority contained paras

vent break, but would close on note of continued dissatisfaction and

waiting for them to act.

7. Wang will probably react sharply and meeting may well become

somewhat acrid but I feel it may be useful move at this time.

8. However in event that he informs me at meeting of release addi­

tional Americans and it also appears announcement has been imple­

mented with respect UK functions in PRC, I would respond with line

Shillock

761. For Johnson.

(a) Second name is Lee (or Li) Cheng-­wu.

(b) INS reports total 56 Chinese left Los Angeles September 17 by

ship (presumably on Cleveland) of whom 38 reported destined main­

land China.

(c) As of September 21, cumulative total of confirmed departures

of Chinese for Far East since July 11 is 380.

(d) FYI. Cumulative total of Chinese who have left U.S. for all des­

tinations during same period is 714. Recommend you not volunteer

latter figure to Wang unless you deem it has utility overriding unde­

sirable implication that Chicoms have legitimate interest in movements

all Chinese to other parts of world. End FYI.

Hoover

by Nagoski; cleared in draft by McConaughy.

215. Memorandum of Conversation, George and Robertson

Vienna, Georgia, September 21, 1955

SUBJECT

U.S.-Red China Geneva Talks

PARTICIPANTS

Senator Walter F. George

Walter S. Robertson, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

I arrived at Senator George’s office (in Vienna, Georgia) at 10: a.m.

EST and talked with him until 11: a.m., at which time a party of sev­

eral people arrived to see him by appointment. There was ample time,

however, for a complete review and discussion of the Geneva talks. I

opened the conversation by saying that the Secretary had wanted me

to come down to see him, to bring him up to date on the progress of

the Johnson-Wang talks, to explain the strategy we had followed and

planned to follow, to answer any questions he might have in mind, and

to receive any suggestions he cared to make.

I reviewed in some detail the situation with respect to Chinese stu­

dents in this country and of American nationals in China. Apparently,

he had not been entirely clear as to the facts of either situation and was

obviously interested in obtaining accurate information.

I reviewed the negotiations to date, calling his attention to the fact

that, despite Chou En-­lai’s public statement that the repatriation of

civilians could quickly be settled because of the fact that so few Amer­

icans were involved, it had taken six weeks and fourteen meetings of

dogged insistence to get the Reds’ public commitment to release all

civilians who desired to go home.

Senator George had not seen the full text of the September 10

Geneva announcement and read carefully, the copy I handed him. He

was very pleased with the implications of the wording but added that

in view of their protestations it was surprising that the Reds should

have taken six weeks to agree to the release of our nationals when two

weeks should have sufficed.

I then explained the respective positions of the Chinese Reds and

ourselves with respect to Item 2 of the agenda. I pointed out that the

subjects likely to be discussed under Item 2 would almost certainly gen­

erate emotional outbursts and prolonged deadlocks. We therefore felt

that we should not proceed to the discussion of other matters until we

Robertson.

were satisfied that the public commitment to free all Americans desiring

to come home was being implemented in good faith. Otherwise, their

release might be long delayed and conceivably jeopardized altogether.

Senator George agreed. He said we were entirely correct, in our long six

weeks of negotiations, to accept nothing less than a public agreement to

free all Americans and, further, that in his opinion we should not now

proceed with other discussions until we were certain that the 19 impris­

oned Americans had been notified of their rights under the agreement

and that the British Chargé had been given access to the prisoners.

I then referred to the Red Chinese proposal that plans for negoti­

ations at a higher level be a subject for discussion under Item 2 of the

agenda. This presented a good opening to refer to the Gonzales (United

Press) story in the “Washington Post” of September 12 in which Senator

George was quoted as renewing “his call for a Foreign Ministers meet­

ing between the United States and Red China later this year.” Upon

reading the clipping I handed him, Senator George remarked that as

usual the reporter had reported only part of what he had said. I also

informed him of Wang’s statement (at the September 20 meeting) jus­

tifying his request for a high-­level meeting on the ground that such

meeting was also desired by “some high American officials.” We both

agreed Wang was probably referring to the Gonzales story.

I explained our position that as Wang’s request for talks at a

higher level was procedural, not substantive, we could not consider

it “a practical matter at issue” falling within the agreement for the

Geneva talks represented by our mutually agreed communique of

July 25, that we are not prepared to nullify the agreement we now

have to discuss “practical matters at issue” at the ambassadorial level,

by substituting another forum for this one, and further that maximum

effort should now be made to settle “practical matters at issue” at

the ambassadorial level without prior commitment as to what would

happen when the current talks are concluded.

I informed Senator George of the two subjects we would push for

discussion. He did not recall that military personnel were still unac­

counted for and agreed that we should press for an accounting.

I reviewed the Red Chinese armistice violations in North Korea,

their covert activities in Indochina, and the war-­like preparations on the

mainland of China opposite Formosa, as reasons why it seemed to us

that “Renunciation of Force” was a sine qua non for present discussions

in Geneva.

Senator George heartily agreed that we should press for a renunci­

ation of force at the Ambassadorial level and stated further that, unless

the Communists would agree to renounce force in the settlement of the

Formosa problem, we should not consider a conference at the foreign

ministers level.

Senator George was obviously appreciative of my visit. Through­

out our discussions he was friendly, intensely interested and thor­

oughly cooperative in his attitude. He did not express a single dissent

from the positions we had taken or propose to take. As I left, he sent his

warm regards to the Secretary and asked me to assure him of his entire

approval of the course he was following.

I am certain that Senator George means to be helpful. However, he

is aging fast, has a poor memory and is an easy target for enterprising

reporters seeking a story. I do not believe he realizes that his telephone

interview with Gonzales was a violation of the promise he made the

Secretary some months ago to stop making public statements on del­

icate matters of foreign policy. Probably the best way to minimize his

getting off the track is to keep in constant contact with him.

No. 5

Geneva, September 21, 1955

REF

SUBJECT

Transmitting Letter Received from Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan Regarding Imple­

mentation of the Agreed Announcement

There is enclosed a copy of the full text of the translation of a letter

addressed to me in Chinese by Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan on Septem­

ber 16, 1955. The signed original of the Chinese letter was accompanied

by this translation which was evidently hastily done and contains some

inaccuracies. However, it has been checked with the Chinese text and

was found to be correct in its essential substance.

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

by Forman. Sent via air pouch.

Enclosure

Letter from Wang to Johnson

Geneva, September 16, 1955

Mr. U. Alexis Johnson:

At our September 14 meeting I informed you that the Chinese Gov­

ernment had published the full text of our Agreed Announcement at

the agreed time. I also proposed that the United States Government

should formally entrust the United Kingdom Government on the one

hand and the Chinese Government should formally entrust the Indian

Government on the other so as to complete the procedures of entrust­

ing the third powers. Then the Chinese Government should notify

the United Kingdom Government and the United States Government

should notify the Indian Government respectively extending their

agreement to the respective third powers being entrusted to assume the

functions stipulated in the Agreed Announcement of the Ambassadors

of China and the United States.

I am hereby instructed to inform you that after the United States

Government has formally entrusted the United Kingdom Government

the Chinese Government will notify the United Kingdom Government

of its agreement to the latter’s being entrusted by the United States

Government to offer the Americans who desire to return the various

assistance specified in our Agreed Announcement.

At the September 14 meeting you advised me that the United

States Embassy in New Delhi had informed the Indian Ministry of

External Affairs on September 11 and formally invited it to assume

the functions stipulated in the Announcement. This notification of the

United States Government can only be interpreted in the following

manner: The United States Government is aware that the Chinese

Government has previously indicated its readiness to the Indian Gov­

ernment to entrust India to extend assistance in the matter concerning

the return of Chinese nationals residing in the United States. During

these talks I again indicated to you on many occasions that the Chi­

nese Government would entrust the Indian Government to extend

assistance to Chinese nationals residing in the United States who

desire to return. Hence, the notification of the United States Govern­

ment to the Indian Government means the former’s agreement to the

Indian Government being entrusted by the Chinese Government and

the Chinese Government interprets and understands as such the Sep­

tember 11 notification of the United States Government to the Indian

Government.

It must be pointed out that our side has taken into account of

the difficult position in the diplomatic relations in which the United

States Government finds, and has acceded to your proposed text on the

entrusting of third powers in its present form in the Agreed Announce­

ment. However, on the concrete content with regard to the Chinese

Government’s entrusting the Indian Government and the United States

Government’s entrusting the United Kingdom Government both sides

cannot have any other interpretation.

After the publication of our Agreed Announcement the Amer­

ican press including the United States Information Service invari­

ably made distorted interpretation at variance with the actual fact

of the  text of the Agreed Announcement regarding the entrusting

of the third powers, alleging that the Chinese Government would

entrust the United Kingdom Government on the one hand and the

United States Government would entrust the Indian Government on

the other. The United States Government ought not to agree to such a

distorted interpretation.

We desire to know if the United States Government has formally

entrusted the United Kingdom Government and will appreciate a

confirmation in a reply letter to this effect if it has already done so,

so that I will be able to report promptly to my Government. Then

my Government will inform the United Kingdom Government of

its agreement to the latter’s being entrusted by the United States

Government.

(Signed) Wang Ping-­nan

Geneva, September 22, 1955, noon

6. Would appreciate any immediately available information

whether nine jailed Americans released from Communist China were

informed by prison officials of these negotiations or terms of agreed

announcement before their release. Wang has alleged remaining

­Priority. Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 760.

prisoners will be informed agreed announcement by having newspa­

pers read and if necessary translated to them.

Shillock

764. For Johnson.

(Code Room: Please repeat London’s 1119, Control No. 10430,

dated September 20, 1955)

Hoover

Acting

Drafted by McConaughy.

766. For Johnson. Your 758.

1. Your general course of action for September 23 meeting as pro­

posed reftel approved.

2. Department strongly endorses your intention make vigor­

ous representations regarding slow PRC implementation Agreed

Announcement, and totally unsatisfactory status PRC arrangements

for performance UK function. In fact such arrangements non-­existent

so far as US Government aware. Wang should be severely taxed with

PRC non-­compliance this obligation. It should be put to Wang that it

pressingly incumbent upon PRC afford conclusive evidence American

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and Phleger.

nationals, including those in jail, have been informed their rights under

Agreed Announcement and that Office of UK Chargé has been given

necessary advice and facilities by PRC. As to those in jail, we should

insist that UK Chargé be given access to them, since they have no access

to him. US Government does not care whether PRC calls this approach

to UK Government invitation, notification or request. US Government

unable see that this is more than mere quibble. Essential objective is

inform Americans and enable UK Chargé to act. We will not allow this

question rest until satisfaction afforded.

3. Department requesting Embassy London inform you by direct

cable if possible in time for tomorrow’s meeting whether written For­

eign Office reply yet received to our note of September 12, and whether

any word yet received by Foreign Office from PRC as to arrangements

for performance UK function. Our reply to London’s 1034 has been

delayed from day to day in anticipation early word from Peiping.

Replies to London’s 1034 and 1119 will be repeated you in any event

before tomorrow’s meeting.

4. Re paragraph 5 reftel concur most unlikely that discussion

anything in regard to Item Two can appropriately take place at next

meeting in view scope and seriousness our unanswered questions on

implementation Agreed Announcement.

5. Indian Ambassador called at Department September 20 to dis­

cuss Indian role. He reaffirmed Indian acceptance and satisfactorily

cleared up all questions of interpretation which had occurred to him.

Expressed appreciation for US assurances full cooperation. Said dis­

charge Indian function will begin promptly.

6. FYI. We are working on draft letter from you to Wang requesting

accounting for 450 missing American servicemen, and on renunciation

force study. These are for possible introduction next week or later.

7. Re your 753, Subject Secretary’s approval we have discarded idea

of raising subject seized US Government properties on China mainland

in course these talks. END FYI

8. Department believes we should concentrate efforts and atten­

tion on implementation Agreed Announcement. We question advisabil­

ity devoting emphasis to demands for reports on health and welfare

jailed Americans about which we could do nothing. Most constructive

approach problem health and welfare prisoners would be their release.

However, you may wish seek reason why Kanady has not yet departed

and why Sister Dugay apparently unable leave Shanghai on SS HUNAN

(Hong Kong’s 630). We are suggesting to Maryknoll Mission that it repeat

its orders to Bishop Walsh (your 761) apply for exit permit.

Hoover

1624. Your 1119. Department considers it mere Chinese Commu­

nist quibble whether GOI and UK should be “invited”, “notified” or

“requested” to perform allotted functions. Department naturally com­

municated with both GOI and UKG in regard U.S. interest in their func­

tions. It assumed PRC would do likewise.

PRC clearly obligated make arrangements necessary to enable UK

Government function. U.S. Government promptly discharged its obli­

gation to enable GOI to function.

Hoover

by McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and Robertson. Repeated to Geneva for Johnson as

telegram 772.

Washington, September 22, 1955

1625. Your 1034. Department considers that under Agreed

Announcement, O’Neill should have access to detained Americans if

they are not given unimpeded access to O’Neill. Imprisoned Americans

in special situation where they unable exercise their rights under Agreed

Announcement unless PRC provides special facilities for information and

communication. Good faith on part of PRC in implementation Agreed

Announcement calls for extraordinary treatment these unfortunate per­

sons. PRC has particular responsibility to these persons made helpless

by its action. Repeat priority direct to Johnson Geneva any information

from Foreign Office re provisions made by PRC for O’Neill to perform

agreed function.

Hoover

Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Robertson. Repeated Priority to Geneva for Johnson

as telegram 773. The time of transmission is illegible.

222. Memorandum of Conversation, Richards and Robertson

Washington, September 22, 1955

SUBJECT

U.S.-Red China Geneva Talks

PARTICIPANTS

Congressman James P. Richards

Walter S. Robertson, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Congressman Richards had luncheon today with me at the Carl­

ton Hotel. I briefed him at length on the status of our talks with the

Red Chinese in Geneva, explaining the strategy we had followed in the

negotiations to date, would follow for the present and intended fol­

lowing in the future, along substantially the same lines as reported in

my conversation with Senator George in Vienna, Georgia on yesterday,

September 21st.

Congressman Richards heartily approved our position, recom­

mended that we be unyielding in insisting that the British Chargé in

Peiping be permitted personal contact with our imprisoned citizens

before discussing any subjects under Item 2 of the agenda and further

that we insist upon the Communists carrying out the agreement to

discuss “practical matters” at the Ambassadorial level without any

commitment from us as to a later conference at the foreign ministers

level.

Congressman Richards repeatedly emphasized that while he could

not speak for the Senate that the House would give overwhelming

approval to a firm line at this time.

[text not declassified]

Congressman Richards expressed deep appreciation for our cour­

tesy in bringing him up to date on our Geneva discussions and said that

we could count upon his full support in the course we were now fol­

lowing. He expressed fear, however, that pressure upon the President

by some of our allies and certain groups in this country would be such

that we would be tempted to weaken on the strong positions we had

heretofore taken on trade, recognition and UN membership.

Robertson.

Letter No. 9

Geneva, September 22, 1955

Dear Walter:

First, let me thank you and all the others concerned for the instruc­

tions contained in Deptel 745. They were a model of clarity and gave

me enough latitude and alternative positions so that, on entering the

meeting, I felt completely confident of being able to meet any situation

that might arise.

Next, I refer to the suggestion contained in your letter of Septem­

ber 16 that individual letters signed by Mr. Robertson be sent to each

of the remaining Americans. I have serious doubts of the wisdom of

this, largely for the reason set forth in your letter. If I thought that by so

doing we might advance even by a single day the release of any of the

individuals, it would a somewhat different matter. However, I do not

see how it would do so and the only value might be in whatever lift it

would give to their morale. I intend to keep hammering at Wang on this

subject and we will see what the results will be. In the meantime my

alternative thought is that we suggest to each of the relatives who write

to the prisoners that they send them a copy of the Agreed Announce­

ment with one of their letters if they have not already done so. We

might send to each of them a mimeographed text for the purpose, but,

in order not to prejudice its delivery, would suggest that the relative not

mention this was being done at the Department’s instigation.

The code clerk problem is now very satisfactorily resolved through

your help as well as that of Mr. Carpenter with whom I raised the prob­

lem when he was through here last week. Please thank Bob Stufflebeam

for me. I know the problem that he faces.

I agree with the analysis that Wang’s unilateral public move on the

14th probably means that the Communists have made the decision that

further talks at this level have little or no value to them, and it will, there­

fore, become increasingly difficult to keep the ball rolling unless I am in a

position to introduce something that has even a slight substantive value

from their standpoint. All of this, of course, is related as well to the speed

with which we obtain the release of the remaining Americans.

I noted the policy information statement to USIA (Department’s

CA–2241, September 16) cautioned against the use of the term “agenda”.

Although this is a new thought to me, I see the Department’s point.

However, at least Wang and I have talked so much about agenda item

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A handwritten note on the letter indicates

it was received on September 26.

one and agenda item two, and have also used the term in our routine

communiques of meetings, that the vocabulary has been well estab­

lished and it seems to me now difficult to avoid the use of the term.

With kindest regards to all,

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

767. From Johnson.

1. As expected today’s meeting became very acrid. I opened with

long statement along lines my 758, closing with statement when PRC

has “by its action, demonstrated that it is expeditiously carrying out

terms of agreed announcement, way will be cleared for discussion

issues each side wishes bring up under item two”. Hoped PRC will act

promptly so can quickly proceed to those discussions.

2. Wang replied by “formally informing” me that on September 22

note was sent to UK Charge Peiping in reply to note received from him

stating “UK had accepted US invitation” and way therefore cleared for

UK act in PRC.

3. Ignored remainder my questions, general line being all these mat­

ters now for third power, agreed announcement disposed agenda item

one, PRC will faithfully implement, and launched into strong attack on

my mention of 19, no Americans detained, only criminals in jail, have

admitted crimes of espionage and subversion, do aliens in US have free­

dom carry out subversive activities, etc., etc., and then at some length

flatly accused US of raising these issues deliberately in order to stall on

discussion item two, difficult understand since US had made original

July 25 proposal, etc.

4. He then continued with statement replying to my statement last

meeting on higher level meeting (text by separate tel). There was then

much vigorous give and take during which I ignored his reply on higher

level meeting and while acknowledging his statement UK now finally

Limited Distribution.

able function, concentrated entirely on our dissatisfaction with imple­

mentation announcement. Of 29 Americans in jail when these talks

began 19 still there, this not “expeditious” release, no replies our request

for specific assurance each American in jail had been informed of agreed

announcement, freedom of communication with UK Charge, and ability

UK interview. These all problems of PRC implementation and not for UK

Charge. Stalling had been by PRC which unwilling to accept our original

proposal way to resolve item one was simply permit civilians return.

5. He expressed dissatisfaction I unwilling say anything this meeting

on item 2 and pressed me hard for commitment to discuss item 2 next

meeting, to which I expressed my strong dissatisfaction his lack of replies

on implementation announcement and refused make any commitment on

discussion item two. At close of meeting he stated that if at next meeting

we still refused discuss item two, “they would have to consider making a

public unilateral statement”.

6. Agreed on press communique identical with last meeting (Mytel

743) except for substitution “they continued to exchange information”

first portion second paragraph.

7. Next meeting Wednesday September 18.

Shillock

768. From Johnson.

Believe it important O’Neill be well informed on substance my

exchanges with Wang on implementation agreed announcement with

respect UK and that he follow up at Peiping particularly with respect

info on agreed announcement to Americans in jail, their freedom com­

municate with him and his ability interview them when US desires

have facts case investigated accordance agreed announcement.

Would hope that prior next meeting I could have full info on what­

ever has up to that time transpired between himself and PRC this regard.

Shillock

770. From Johnson.

1. Believe today’s meeting very useful in bringing home to PRC

depth our dissatisfaction on implementation agreed announcement

and making it unmistakably clear we continue expect prompt action

on remaining 19.

2. As of today Wang is somewhat in doubt as to what exactly we

intend to do with respect item two. Last meeting I dealt with something

they had raised under item two, today I refused to deal at all with item

two, and my remarks have been sufficiently ambiguous that they are

now not entirely clear as to whether our intent is flatly to refuse discuss

item two until all remaining Americans are released or something short

of that. However it cannot but be perfectly clear to them that we expect

additional performance. I did not feel that I could today debate, how­

ever lightly, his reply to my statement at last meeting on higher level

talks without weakening impression I was attempting create.

3. Do not believe I could state our position any more forcefully

than I did today without going to next step of flatly refusing enter any

substantive discussion item two until every American released. In pres­

ent atmosphere I would have to quickly reveal whether or not we pre­

pared maintain such position up to point of break.

4. Although he today avoided word “break” this was somewhat

implied in his threat make public statement if we continue through next

meeting our refusal discuss item two. Do not believe their impatience is

feigned and it would not be possible keep talks going solely on today’s

note useful and important though I feel it has been.

5. Question is what we do if by time of next meeting there has been

no additional performance on their part. Believe that some sort addi­

tional reply to his statement today on higher level meeting and line in

next meeting or two but problem will be where we go from there. With

our having already rejected one of his two items and we apparently hav­

ing only two items there is not going to be much scope for an agenda

argument. It would, under these circumstances seem to me to be our best

tactic to attempt to focus on a substantive exchange on “no force” for as

long as we could keeping their item of trade embargo on ice for as long

as we could.

Distribution.

6. It occurs to me that we may raise problems by attempting to

arrive at any formal agenda agreement on item two. For example, our

rejection of a higher level meeting as a suitable agenda item but our

acceptance of trade embargo may carry with it implication that we

are prepared to do something, however conditional, with respect to

latter. This implication might be avoided if no [omission in the origi­

nal—attempt?] was made to establish formal agenda. They in turn will

probably reject our item on persons missing from Korean War, or accept

it if we accept their item on higher level meeting. With respect to miss­

ing personnel from Korean War I find it difficult to formulate it as an

agenda item but am very clear that I could easily present simply as a list

of names and asking for a categorical yes or no as whether any are alive

in territory under their control.

ter from myself to Wang. I would prefer make presentation on missing

servicemen entirely informal and oral. With respect renunciation force

believe oral statement in meeting best form but could accordance our

standing arrangement give him copy my remarks this regard.

8. Depending upon nature my instructions for next meeting we

should be prepared for possibility Wang may implement his threat

issue public statement on our “stalling” on discussion item two. I will

submit draft for Department’s approval.

Shillock

772. From Johnson.

1. At 1715 meeting, lasting one hour forty-­five minutes, today

I opened with prepared statement.

2. I informed Wang that Dr. Tsien Shue-shen had departed Los

Angeles September 18, and 56 other Chinese had departed on same

ship. 151 others had departed by other means, so that cumulative total

of those who had left for Far East between July 11 and September 21

was 380.

Limited Distribution.

3. As I informed him at our last meeting, Indian Ambassador was

that day discussing with Department carrying out in US responsibilities

of GOI set forth in our agreed announcement. Those discussions were

quickly and successfully concluded and Ambassador informed Depart­

ment that Embassy of India was immediately undertaking to discharge

its functions in this regard.

4. I had given him foregoing information as further evidence that

my government was faithfully carrying out obligations it assumed in

issuing agreed announcement. As I had told him repeatedly, and as

agreed announcement confirmed, all Chinese in US who desired to

leave were free to do so. Furthermore my government promptly took all

necessary action so that GOI might undertake in US, at earliest possible

date, functions provided for under agreed announcement. My govern­

ment was taking every possible action faithfully and expeditiously to

fulfill obligations assumed under agreed announcement.

5. On other hand, I had only very limited information as to extent

his government was fulfilling obligations which it had assumed under

agreed announcement. In first place, although my government acted

immediately to permit GOI undertake in US its responsibilities under

agreed announcement, I did not have any information whether Gov­

ernment of the UK was yet able to carry out its responsibilities in his

country. I hoped he could give me definite information in this regard.

6. I said I was also disturbed by fact that at our last meeting he did

not give me any additional information concerning further appropriate

measures being taken by his government so that 19 Americans still in

jail could expeditiously exercise their right to return. Principal reason

that it took us so long to formulate and issue agreed announcement was

not only due to fact that his government refused release all Americans

detained in his country, but also because he had refused even to state

how long it would take before all Americans could be released. However,

he had said that if we could agree on and issue agreed announcement,

it would not only be possible to release a number of Americans imme­

diately, but that this would also facilitate release of the others. He had

assured me that his government would act promptly to complete review

of these additional cases. We had agreed on word “expeditiously” in

agreed announcement, Chinese equivalent of which he explained meant

“very quickly.” Although I had not been satisfied with lack of an express

statement on when all Americans would be allowed to leave his country,

I finally accepted his assurances that time would not be long.

7. Nearly two weeks had now passed since issuing of agreed

announcement. Of twenty-­two people on whom he had told me action

was being completed to permit their departure, nine had come out, and

we looked forward to early arrival of the others. However, with respect

to 19 others I have still heard nothing. I was beginning to be concerned

over his government’s interpretation of word “expeditiously.” Not only

had none of these 19 persons been released, but he had refused to tell

me anything about their present health and welfare, to confirm whether

they had been individually informed of terms of agreed announce­

ment, to say whether and how long they would be permitted to com­

municate with British Charge d’Affaires, or to say whether latter would

be permitted interview them. His refusal thus far give me this infor­

mation regarding implementation of agreed announcement increased

my concern over these 19 Americans and raised serious question in my

mind as to whether his government would permit these persons depart

“expeditiously” as provided in agreed announcement.

8. I said that at our 15th meeting he had said he regarded it as “pecu­

liar and regrettable” that I expressed unwillingness to begin discussion

of item two before it was clearly apparent that agreed announcement

issue under item one was being faithfully implemented. I could not agree

with him on this. It seemed to me that when two parties were attempting

to settle issues between them, only the faithful carrying out of obligations

assumed could establish essential basis of mutual confidence for going

on to settle other issues. Surely, it was not going to be possible for us

to settle other issues until each of us was satisfied that other party was

promptly and effectively implementing undertakings arrived at under

item one of agenda. Once his government had, by its action, demon­

strated that it was expeditiously carrying out terms of agreed announce­

ment this would clear path for discussion of issues which each side

wished bring up under item two. I hoped that his government would

promptly act with regard to this matter so that we could quickly proceed

to those discussions.

9. Wang said, first he wished formally inform me that in for­

mal note to his government, Government of UK had said it accepted

invitation of Government of US to take care of American nationals in

China. In formal reply to Government of UK on September 22 PRC had

agreed that UK would assume functions in China set forth in agreed

announcement.

10. He said after some 40 days of discussion agenda item one

regarding return of civilians we finally reached agreement and this item

had now been disposed of. Question now before us was faithful imple­

mentation of agreement by both sides. His government was entirely

willing to carry out agreement faithfully and he hoped US Government

would do same. After agreement had been concluded both sides respec­

tively invited third powers perform functions provided for. Therefore,

for implementation of agreed announcement in future we would espe­

cially rely on government of third powers entrusted by each side.

11. Reference had been made in my statement to the 19 Americans

who had committed crimes and to others being detained in his country.

He resolutely opposed allegation that Americans being detained. Only

US Government had illegally detained Chinese in US. Innocent Chinese

nationals had been illegally detained by US. This action was violation

of legal freedom of Chinese nationals and also violated practices under

international law. As to Americans in China his side had never detained

any of them. Those who were in prison had been prosecuted according

to Chinese law because they had violated Chinese law. Recently a num­

ber of Americans who had violated Chinese law had been released. He

was sure I was well aware of crimes they had committed in his country

because their account had been reported in newspapers. All of them had

admitted they had committed crimes and also admitted they were pun­

ished lightly. According to statements made by Americans themselves

they admitted they had carried out espionage. He asked if any aliens in

US had right to carry out subversive activities against US Government.

Were all those in US jails Americans, or were there also some aliens?

12. He said I had put forward repeated claims regarding the 19

Americans and that he had repeatedly made clear his government’s

stand. He had made clear his position in a spirit of maximum concili­

ation. His government had reviewed a number of cases, had released

a number and had advanced release of a number who had committed

crimes. As to remainder, he had made clear his government’s attitude

on way their cases would be handled and that had been made a mat­

ter of record in our talks. PRC willing to conduct reviews of cases in

light of agreement, in accordance with degree of each offense and also

taking into account improvement of relations between our two coun­

tries. When results these reviews available, his side would inform third

power concerned.

13. He said he had made very clear his government’s position on

countless occasions, but in spite of this I again put forward question of

nor to implementation of agreement. It was intentional stalling. We had

spent 40 days to reach agreement and after agreement two more weeks

had passed. It would not contribute to progress of talks if we now ret­

rogressed. This was an obstruction to our entering upon discussion

of item two. (He then made statement on higher level talks contained

immediately following tel.)

15. I replied I was pleased to note arrangement apparently being

made so that UK could undertake functions in his country as set forth

in agreed announcement.

16. I had to make it clear I could not consider that agenda item one

was finally disposed of until it had been made clear all Americans in his

country who desire to return had been enabled to do so. We had issued

agreed announcement which I expected would facilitate resolution

this question. We each undertook obligations in that announcement.

We each agreed third countries would have certain functions in each

of our countries. Third countries could be of some assistance, but there

were portions of announcement which could only be implemented by

our own governments. I had fully, frankly and completely informed

him immediately of action we had taken to implement announce­

ment. I thought it entirely reasonable that we should expect from his

side information regarding steps taken to implement announcement.

In announcement each government had stated it would further adopt

measures so that Chinese and Americans who desired to do so could

expeditiously exercise their right to return. He had asked whether all

Chinese in the US who desired to leave could immediately do so. My

answer was, yes. There was no action my government had not taken

which it could be expected to take in order to permit Chinese in the

US to return. I had already informed him of the numbers who had left

US for Far East. If any Chinese were still remaining in US today it was

entirely at their own choice.

17. Although he had said he could not accept my statement that

asking for information on how it was being implemented.

18. I continued that release of Americans in jail was something

over which third power could have no control. It was something

which only action by his government could resolve. I had asked him

few, simple, straightforward questions on aspects of implementation

on which I did not consider I had received satisfactory replies. I had

asked for specific information whether each American in jail had been

informed of terms agreed announcement. I understood there was

general arrangement for giving news to people in jail by which they

would normally have been informed. It certainly should be possible

for his government to let us know and confirm whether this had been

done with respect informing American prisoners of agreed announce­

ment. I had also asked for information on arrangements for such per­

sons to communicate with office UK Charge. It should certainly be

possible for him to tell me whether these arrangements had been made,

also whether arrangements had been made so that UK Charge could

interview these persons. These were all matters which we considered

very important in implementation of announcement.

19. I then said he had spoken of stalling. When we came here

August 1, I had proposed arrangement which would immediately and

quickly dispose of first item so that we could go on to second item. I

proposed simply that his government take same action as my govern­

ment: that is, any action necessary permit Americans leave. This would

have been simple, straightforward, natural way solve this problem. His

government did not see fit accept this proposal. I did not intend go

back over that argument, but delay was due entirely his government’s

unwillingness accept that reasonable, simple proposal. Of 29 Ameri­

cans in jail August 1, who [all?] were still there.

20. Wang replied since we now have agreement, question is imple­

mentation of agreement. There was no question about fact that meas­

ures would be further adopted as provided in agreed announcement.

He had made it very clear actions and measures his side had adopted

to implement agreement, and they showed that his side was earnestly

implementing agreement. This was a matter of common sense used in

implementing agreement. He was not a machine like a gramophone

to play the same record every time I asked. He wanted to point out

clearly that there was no provision in the agreement that any particular

individual would depart from China at a certain fixed year, month, day

or hour. If we had been able to arrive at an agreement providing for a

precise date and hour on which each individual would return, what

would have been the use of an agreement of the kind we concluded?

This agreement had concerned civilians and not the return of criminals

or law offenders. He stated I had said that all Chinese who desired

return could. However, how could they return in a matter of weeks?

He again requested me for a complete list of names and addresses of

his nationals so that his government could confirm whether those who

desired to return could actually do so.

21. He said delay in past during first phase of talks was entirely due

my insistence on return these criminals. My insistence and demands

contained an element of infringement on his sovereignty. The imple­

mentation of the agreement on the return of civilians could never be

made an obstacle to the discussion of item two. His side considered

this argument was an excuse and a pretext which he interpreted as an

attempt at intentional stalling. He could not see why we should again

return to our repeated discussion of item one.

22. He said we had come here for talks as a result proposal ini­

tiated by our side. Furthermore his side had accepted an agenda

which had been proposed by our side. He had come to talks to resolve

questions and to make progress. He was not here to further discuss

agreement concluded two weeks ago, and he could see no reason for

our stalling these talks. He had put forward two topics for discussion

under agenda item two. At last meeting I had given my opinion and

now he had commented on my opinion. I had said I would discuss

practical matters at issue between the two countries and he was pre­

pared to do likewise.

23. I replied he had said something which I wanted to be sure I

understood. Was it correct he considered terms of agreed announce­

ment did not apply to persons in prison in his country?

24. Wang said he did not say that agreed announcement did not

apply to persons in prison. Agreement concerned return of civilians

rather than return of persons who had committed crimes. Cases of

latter must necessarily be handled according to Chinese law. It was

a matter of course for a sovereign state to deal with these cases, as it

also conformed with practice in international law. Any demand that

these persons did not come under Chinese law was tantamount to an

unequal treaty known as extraterritoriality. A country which could be

so humiliated had perished forever.

25. I remarked I simply wanted to say that I had asked what I

thought are reasonable questions regarding implementation of agreed

announcement. I was sorry I could not say replies I had received had

been satisfactory. I had noted UK Charge now being able assume his

functions. I hoped at next meeting I would have replies to questions I

had raised today.

26. Wang asked if I had any comment regarding his proposals for

topics under item two.

27. I said I had no more to say today.

28. Wang asked if I could state whether next time I would be able

to comment on his proposals.

29. I replied I had nothing more to say than what I had said already.

30. Wang said he could not consider way these talks are being con­

ducted as satisfactory. Did I mean to say US was not willing to discuss

item two?

31. I stated I had not said that. I had made some remarks on subject

at last meeting.

32. Wang asked whether then I agreed to enter into discussion item

two at next meeting.

33. I asked if he would at next meeting give me answers to ques­

tions I had asked him today on implementation.

34. Wang said he had already replied to my questions. He had told

me that UK had been formally notified by his government. These talks

between the two countries had been initiated by the US. Communique

issued by two governments had confirmed the two items for agenda.

On August 1 we had agreed on these two items of agenda. At 14th

meeting we had reached agreement on first item. Talks should immedi­

ately proceed to second item after agreement reached on first. At 15th

meeting he had put forward two proposals to discuss under second

item. At 16th meeting US side had made observations on one of his two

proposals under second item. Today at 17th meeting I had not been

willing discuss second item at all. It seemed somewhat farcical to him

that such serious talks between our countries should be conducted this

way. If we were to go on like this he would have to consider it inten­

tional stalling and wasting of time on our part. If at next meeting US

still not in position to discuss item two, his side would have to consider

issuing a public unilateral statement to let public opinion pass on this

matter.

35. I said I had nothing more to say and suggested we meet again

September 28.

36. We agreed on statement for press identical with one issued fol­

lowing last meeting with addition word “continued” paragraph two.

Shillock

Geneva, September 23, 1955

773. From Johnson.

1. Following is full account Wang’s prepared statement referred to

in para 4 Mytel 767.

2. He said he was now going to make some observations regarding

two points he had raised at 15th meeting. He recalled that at last meeting

I had said that his proposal regarding preparations for Sino-American

negotiations at a higher level was a procedural and not a substantive

matter. He had indicated he could not agree with this position. Now he

wished to further clarify point of view of his side.

3. He said it had been stated in July 25 agreed announcement on

convening of these talks that they would be conducted “in order to aid

in settling matter repatriation civilians who desired return their respec­

tive countries and to facilitate further discussions and settlement of cer­

tain other practical matters now at issue between both sides.” At outset

of talks two items had been agreed upon for agenda on basis July 25

agreed announcement. Obviously item two had never meant to exclude

discussion and settling at conference on higher level those practical

matters this conference not able to solve. On the contrary it was the

function of these talks to make arrangement for practical and physi­

cal channels through which these practical matters might be solved.

Hence his proposal was consistent with both the agreed announcement

of July 25 and the agenda for these talks. It was of very great practical

significance to discuss the removal of tension between China and US in

Taiwan area. Importance this matter recognized by general public opin­

ion and many important leaders in US. If we had any concrete opin­

ions on relaxing tensions in Taiwan area he certainly would be glad

to hear them. When we came to a discussion of agenda item two each

side could raise problems it thought should be considered and so we

would be free to exchange views. He said I had approved this idea but

now nearly two weeks had passed since agreement reached on agreed

announcement and, while he had put forward two items for discussion,

I had today failed to express any views on them or to put forward any

ideas of my government.

Limited Distribution.

4. Wang said he could not but feel that this state of affairs was

unsatisfactory and he hoped I would put forward concrete views with­

out further delay.

Shillock

776. For Johnson.

Chicom propaganda on international subjects during past week

continued stress Communist efforts ease international tensions and

gave considerable attention Geneva talks. Peiping states agreement

item one welcomed by world opinion as “new event in Sino-US rela­

tions.” Nevertheless regarding Geneva talks, Peiping took occasion

criticize US on three points. US charged 1) with refusal move on to

item two of agenda before implementation of agreement item one;

2) of distorting agreement on item one; and 3) violating agreement

procedure releasing news. Peiping asserted these actions perpetrated

“with ulterior motives” for purpose “obstructing” talks and “prevent­

ing conciliation.”

Regarding first criticism Peiping harped on alleged US violation

“normal procedures of international conferences” stating that when

agreement reached on item one it “common sense” proceed to item two.

US “return” to item one portrayed as contrary to “unanimous wish of

peace-­loving people” and Times of India quoted to effect US stand “may

virtually block further progress.” US also accused attempting keep

item one open to put pressure on Peiping in conduct domestic matters

and prevent further negotiation since US has “5000” Chinese students

“return” of whom would require long time.

Criticism two maintained US had stated China would invite UK

assist return to US of Americans wishing return to US while US would

invite India. Peiping appeared to read into alleged USIS treatment indi­

cation US intends not repeat not invite UK and charged US with schem­

ing to stall current talks and “obstruct operation of agreement.”

by Jacobson; cleared by McConaughy and in IAD.

In third criticism Peiping claimed US had violated agreement news

release when US delegation unilaterally on evening after 15th meeting

reportedly released statement on “contents of the talks” together with

announcement that Johnson regarded it “premature” proceed to item

two. Peiping also gave much publicity two topics Chicoms introduced

for consideration under item two.

People’s Daily September 19 published article by one Stetson Kennedy,

identified as US writer, on “plight” Chinese students “forcibly detained”

in US. Article charged students treated “like criminals” through curtail­

ment movement, “relentless surveillance” and interrogations.

Taiwan receded further in background. Chiang reported forming

committee for return of 6,000 students from US in order gain control

over students and prevent foreign minister level talks between Chicoms

and US.

NCNA publicized “mass airlift exercise recently” of US Air Divi­

sion, saying US aircraft completed airlift of 18th Fighter-Bomber Wing

from Okinawa to “forward bases” on Taiwan. Same report charged US

had earlier increased jet fighter force on Taiwan, which now training

under “combat simulated conditions.”

Commenting on UNGA session Ta Kung Pao charged US has com­

pelled UN become tool of its “policy of strength.” Paper added UN

founded on principle “universal membership” and should be open

all countries and that through US “obstruction” 600 million Chinese

deprived of “legitimate rights.”

Dulles

777. For Johnson.

Chinese departures. In future telegrams this subject code word

FEDEP rpt FEDEP will mean cumulative total as of given date of con­

firmed departures Chinese nationals destined Far East since July 11.

Drafted by Nagoski; cleared in substance by Newton (Telegraph Branch).

Code word ALDEP rpt ALDEP will refer total for all destinations. Lat­

ter figure to continue FYI at your discretion.

Dulles

USITO 51. Joint State-USIA Message. For Johnson and Garnish.

View criticalness Geneva talks, Garnish stories for wireless file

will be accepted here as definitive subjected no editing that may distort

meaning on understanding clearance Ambassador Johnson obtained

all items filed on Talks.

Streibert

by Meiklejohn; cleared in USIA by Hutchinson, Zorthian, and Stephens and by Lindbeck,

and McConaughy.

232. Memorandum from Robertson to Dulles

Washington, September 23, 1955

SUBJECT

Conversations with Senator George and Congressman Richards

I visited Senator George at his office in Vienna, Georgia, on the 21st

and had luncheon with Congressman Richards here in Washington on

the 22nd. Memoranda of the conversations are attached.

­Robertson. The attachments are printed as Documents 215 and 222.

I briefed them both in detail on the subject of our talks with the

Red Chinese in Geneva. I explained the positions we had taken up to

the present and planned to take in the future. Both gentlemen expressed

unqualified approval of the course we were following. Both stated that

in their opinion we should not proceed to a discussion of “practical

matters” under item 2 until we were satisfied that our jailed citizens

in China had been notified of their rights under the agreement of Sep­

tember 10th and further that the British Chargé in Peiping had been

allowed personal communication with them.

They both agreed that we should insist that the Communists carry

out their agreement for the discussion of “practical matters” at issue at

the Ambassadorial level. Both agreed that the renunciation of force was

a proper subject for discussion under item 2.

Senator George emphasized that we should not consider a confer­

ence between you and Chou En-­lai until the Communists had publicly

renounced the use of force in the settlement of the Formosa problem.

I inferred from Congressman Richards’ conversation that he did not

consider that a foreign ministers conference was called for under any

conditions.

Letter No. 15

Washington, September 23, 1955

Dear Alex:

The threat of hurricane Ione caused the last courier plane to leave

Washington ahead of schedule and knocked out our September 19

pouch. Hence the long interval.

Despite the uncertainty as to when you will get into the substance

of Item Two, we are going ahead with work on our two items. Bill

Godel and Kelleher of Defense have worked up a draft letter from you

to Wang on the 450 missing servicemen which they are to submit to us

for our comments today. They say it is a forthright and fairly strong

presentation although it carefully avoids alleging that we have evi­

dence that any of the men are presently alive and in Communist hands.

Enclosed is a memo on this subject which we received from Defense

­Informal.

on the 16th. We understand this was drafted by Godel and it does not

accord in every respect with what Col. Monro, the Defense Prisoner

Officer, had told us the day before.

On the “renunciation of force”, we expect to work up a brief

study with the assistance of Mr. Phleger. It will be based on the

thinking of the Secretary which has been reflected in a number of his

speeches and conversations. It was touched on lightly in his UNGA

speech yesterday. We will follow this line closely but will try to elab­

orate somewhat on it. The Secretary read the latter half of your letter

No. 7, when we briefed him and received new guidance from him at his

home on September 18 right after his return from Duck Island. So the

Secretary is aware of the general nature of your forebodings about the

“no force” issue. In general we attach more weight than you apparently

have so far to the commitment we have from the GRC in the Exchange

of Notes of Dec. 10 pursuant to the Mutual Defense Treaty. Admittedly

this commitment has not prevented and will not prevent minor sea, air

and artillery incidents. But these are mere pin pricks which are going

to have to be considered as something which must be lived with in

the present situation. We must look to the central issue which is major

invocation of force for a general offensive purpose. On this we have

commitment from the Nationalists which ties in with our own renun­

ciation. We believe this should give you a somewhat stronger position

than you have recognized. But admittedly you would have to develop

a tactic for brushing aside the small incidents as trivial and inevitable,

as not essentially bearing on the central issue.

Mr. Robertson flew to Georgia to see Senator George on Sept. 21

and had a long luncheon talk with Cong. Richards yesterday. Both talks

were extremely satisfactory. They both expressed the very emphatic

view that we should not be drawn into any substantive discussions

of Item Two until all Americans have been informed of their right to

return and given access to the British Charge. Sen. George felt that

the position on a Foreign Ministers Conference attributed to him in

the newspapers on September 12 was inaccurate. He said that he had

never unequivocally advocated a meeting at the Foreign Minister level

in the present situation. He felt that the talks should be continued at the

Ambassadorial level which is appropriate for all the pending questions.

He felt that in no event should a high level meeting be considered so

long as the PRC has not renounced the use of force.

It will be a great help to us to get Ralph Clough back here. We

expect to send his orders as soon as we can line up an able officer from

Geneva or nearby post to help you on a part time basis. We would

expect him to take the notes at the meeting and help draft the reports

afterwards. We may have to rely on some of our friends to help us out

in view of the acute personnel shortage at all our Swiss posts.

Army and Defense are working on the Ekvall problem. They are

wondering how they can maintain the present basis, much less improve

the basis. But we hope to work it out.

would seem to answer the points raised in the first paragraph on page

two of your letter.

I know of no disposition to change the basic trade policy at this

time. Undoubtedly other countries are going to raise the question of

multilateral relaxation in the CG and COCOM meetings next month.

Admiral Delaney and Bob Barnett are already in London for a prepara­

tory discussion. Our position on the multilateral issue has not yet been

passed on by the highest level, and there may be a little more flexibility

than on the domestic total embargo policy.

Our FE/P are looking into the matter of the objectionable Sept. 12

radio bulletin put out by USIA. I don’t know how they got off base

on this, but we intend to find out. I am enclosing a study prepared by

Jacobson of DRF on “Reactions in Chinese Communities to the Geneva

Announcements”.

We were interested in the Peking Opera and the New York Philhar­

monic items. Mr. Robertson read your entire letter with interest.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Defense Memo on Missing Servicemen.

2. DRF Memo on Reactions in Chinese Communities to Geneva

Announcements.

7. From Johnson.

Nicholson, American Red Cross, would appreciate information

from you and/or Tomlin on whether American civilians recently

released from prison report having received packages transmitted at

Hong Kong through Red Cross channels.

Shillock

Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 775.

777. From Johnson.

ment to be issued here by “US spokesman” under circumstances set

forth that para. Statement might, of course, require some revision in

light developments at meeting but it would be important it be issued

immediately following any statement by Wang.

2. “The present series of talks between Ambassador Wang and

Ambassador Johnson were undertaken on the initiative of the United

States Government in the hope that this might bring about the release

of the Americans still detained in mainland China and thus provide

basis for discussing and settling other practical matters at issue between

the two sides. After more than five weeks of discussion, an agreed

announcement was issued on September 10, in which the PRC pub­

licly acknowledged that Americans in the PRC who desired to return

to the US were entitled to do so and committed itself to adopt further

appropriate measures ‘so that these persons could expeditiously exer­

cise their right to return’. In the same announcement, the PRC also set

Distribution.

forth certain functions which representatives of the UK in the PRC were

to undertake with respect to the departure of Americans who desired

to return to the US.

3. “The United States Government hoped and expected that this

clear commitment by the PRC would be promptly and faithfully imple­

mented and that the talks could then immediately proceed to the dis­

cussion of the other practical matters in accordance with the statement

of July 25 issued by the US Government and PRC. Unfortunately,

although nearly three weeks have passed since the issuance of the

agreed announcement, nineteen Americans still remain imprisoned in

the PRC and the PRC has refused to give any indication when they may

be able to return. This raises serious question as to how the PRC inter­

prets its commitment to allow these persons to ‘expeditiously exercise

their right to return.’

4. “The United States Government is also concerned because it

has not been possible, up to the present time, even to learn whether

and how the PRC is implementing its undertaking to arrange for the

United Kingdom to assist the return of Americans. It was not until

September 23, or 13 days after the issuance of the announcement, the

US was informed by the PRC that the UK had been enabled to under­

take its functions in the PRC. Furthermore, despite continued requests,

the PRC still declines to confirm whether all jailed Americans have

even been informed of the terms of the agreed announcement and

whether they will be granted access to the UK representative in the

PRC. It is particularly difficult to understand this situation in the light

of Mr. Chou En-­lai’s statement just prior the opening of these talks to

the effect that it would be easy to resolve the problem of Americans

in the PRC.

5. “The fact is that today—­more than 8 weeks since the start of the

talks—­only one-­third of the jailed Americans have been released.

6. “The United States Government, for its part, not only reiterated

in the agreed announcement its previous assurance that Chinese in the

US who desire to return to the PRC are free to do so, but also promptly

arranged for the GOI to undertake the functions set forth in the announce­

ment. The PRC has been kept currently informed of all steps being taken

by the US Government in this regard.

7. “The US continues to hope that the PRC will, for its part, quickly

take steps to implement its commitments so that these talks may

promptly move on to the discussion of other practical matters”.

Shillock

4. For Johnson.

Your 770. Following instructions for your September 28 meeting

have been personally cleared with the Secretary in New York.

1. You are to conduct discussions so that no legitimate basis given

for other side to break them off.

2. You should continue pressing implementation agenda item

one, pointing out failure to give information to Americans, etc., as dis­

closed Hong Kong’s 66 to Geneva and lack action remaining detained

Americans.

3. We note with satisfaction your refutation Wang’s attempt to con­

tend that imprisoned Americans not included agreed announcement.

Announcement applies to all (repeat all) American civilians without

distinction and Communists must be held absolutely to this.

4. After covering implementation item 1 you can proceed to dis­

cuss subjects for listing item two. You should note as subject we propose

(a) accounting for US military personnel and (b) renunciation of use of

force in Taiwan area. Continue maintain position high level talks out of

order on grounds set forth our 745. After discussion as to items for listing

agenda item 2 further consideration should then be put over until next

meeting, set as far in future as possible.

5. By separate telegram we are sending you substance statements on

accounting for military personnel and renunciation use of force. Request

your comments. These designed for use subsequent meetings but could

be used on emergency basis this meeting if you believe break imminent.

6. With respect to Wang’s item “question of embargo”, you are

authorized to accept it for listing, provided he accepts our items, and

subject to condition that item “renunciation of force” has priority.

Dulles

Repeated to the Department of State as telegram Dulte 1.

779. From Johnson.

1. Greatly appreciate instructions contained New York’s 4 repeated

Dept Dulte 1.

2. With respect second sentence para 4 suggest “possible presence

in PRC of missing US military personnel” for listing missing US mili­

tary personnel item.

3. This would be consistent with form presentation this subject I dis­

cussed while in Washington and with Hammarskjold (Mytel 257).

4. While I have not yet received statements mentioned para 5,

New York’s 4, believe that demand for “accounting” open to following

objections:

A. Question of “accounting” is primarily between UN and Com­

munist commands in Korea and thus subject for MAC.

B. Raising question as “accounting” gives CHICOMS opportunity

of rejecting question on foregoing grounds as not properly “practical

question” involving only US and PRC or introducing here our account­

ing for 21,000 Chinese.

C. Our raising question as “accounting” in these talks tends weaken

our position on UN character command in Korea and by making one

aspect Korean armistice implementation subject of US-PRC bilateral

conversations.

5. It seems to me type of presentation I have in mind which is fore­

cast by form I propose for listing not subject foregoing objections.

maintain position priority for both our subjects over only PRC subject

we willing accept. While I would of course do so in initial presenta­

tion do not see how I will be able maintain priority for “renunciation

of force” over “embargo” unless I concede lower position to “missing

military personnel”.

7. Would appreciate Department’s comments and instruction prior

to tomorrow’s meeting.

Shillock

Distribution.

Geneva, September 27, 1955, noon

780. From Johnson.

1. Nicholson AmRedCross who is here for League Executive Com­

mittee meeting called on me yesterday. He said CHICOMS as well as

Soviet bloc delegations were here in full force exuding sweetness and

light. Soviet delegation was attempting “team up” with US group and

suggesting “close cooperation”.

2. He mentioned to me possibility some resolution on Commie

holding prisoners as political hostages. Told him I could not speak for

Department on general subject but with respect CHICOMS suggested

most useful line for him in and out of meetings would be concentrate on

welfare aspects such as packages, mail etc., where CHICOM perform­

ance very unsatisfactory and matter was direct and immediate Red Cross

concern. Explained to him why I had not done so. Thought it would be

useful for him do so both from standpoint improving plight remaining

prisoners and offsetting pious expressions by CHICOM Red Cross group.

3. Also spoke to him concerning Czech attitude toward US on dis­

tribution flood relief grain last year.

4. He expressed appreciation my offer see and consult with him as

he considered desirable.

Shillock

784. From Johnson.

1. Frederic C. Harnden, Shanghai representative, First National

City Bank of New York is as far as I know only remaining foreigner

to London as telegram 558.

Communist China prevented from leaving at least in part because of

unsettled Communist claims against American company.

If Department approves, I believe it might strengthen Harnden’s

chances of receiving an exit permit if I mentioned his case to Wang

during a meeting in near future when atmosphere is reasonably good.

2. I would point out that cases of a number of American business­

men had been settled recently, permitting their departure; that while

he was a British subject and therefore not strictly our responsibility, he

represented an American bank and we felt a certain obligation to bring

his case to the attention of the PRC; and that it was hoped he might be

shown the same consideration in speedy handling of his case as others

had received in recent weeks. I would add I did not expect that Wang

and I should get into a discussion of details of case, but would hope he

could simply convey our interest to his government.

3. I have received a second request to take up Harnden’s case from

Carl Hayden, Vice President of the First National City Bank in Lon­

don. Suggest Department consult UK before advising me on action it

believes I should take.

Gowen

Dulte 3. Regarding Geneva 790 following is proposed as Niact

cable to Johnson: BEGIN TEXT. For Johnson.

Text statement sent you 790 about request for accounting US Mil­

itary personnel was drafted by Defense, and has not been cleared by

Department. Opening paragraph reciting that Department cleared is

in error. Statement will require further consideration and conferences

with Defense and draft sent you should not (repeat not) be used. You

should propose “accounting for US Military personnel” as one of sub­

jects for listing Agenda item 2 leaving until later meeting more precise

formulation regarding which we will further advise you. Request your

comments Defense draft.

END TEXT.

Dulles

789. Verbatim text. For Johnson.

New York’s 4, paragraph 5. Following is text of statement on

renunciation use of force:

“One of the practical matters for discussion between us is that we

should reciprocally renounce the use of force to achieve our policies

when they conflict. The U.S. and the PRC confront each other with poli­

cies which are in certain respects incompatible. This fact need not, how­

ever, mean armed conflict, and the most important single thing we can

do is first of all to be sure that it will not lead to armed conflict.

Then and only then can other matters causing tension between the

parties in the Taiwan area and the Far East be hopefully discussed.

It is not suggested that either of us should renounce any policy

objectives which we consider we are legitimately entitled to achieve,

but only that we renounce the use of force to implement these policies.

Neither of us wants to negotiate under the threat of force. The free

discussion of differences, and their fair and equitable solution, become

impossible under the overhanging threat that force may be resorted to

when one party does not agree with the other.

The United States as a member of the United Nations has agreed

to refrain in its international relations from the threat or use of force.

This has been its policy for many years and is its guiding principle of

conduct in the Far East, as throughout the world.

The use of force to achieve national objectives does not accord with

accepted standards of conduct under international law.

The Government of the League of Nations, the Kellogg-Briand

Treaties, and the Charter of the United Nations reflect the universal

view of the civilized community of nations that the use of force as an

instrument of national policy violates international law, constitutes a

threat to international peace, and prejudices the interests of the entire

world community.

There are in the world today many situations which tempt those

who have force to use it to achieve what they believe to be legitimate

policy objectives. Many countries are abnormally divided or con­

tain what some consider to be abnormal intrusions. Nevertheless,

the responsible governments of the world have in each of these cases

Phleger and McConaughy; statement revised and approved by Dulles.

renounced the use of force to achieve what they believe to be legitimate

and even urgent goals.

It is an essential foundation and preliminary to the success of the

discussions under Item 2 that it first be made clear that the parties

to these discussions renounce the use of force to make the policies of

either prevail over those of the other. That particularly applies to the

Taiwan area.

The acceptance of this principle does not involve third parties,

or the justice or injustice of conflicting claims. It only involves recog­

nizing and agreeing to abide by accepted standards of international

conduct.

We ask, therefore, as a first matter for discussion under Agenda

Item 2, assurance that your side will not resort to the use of force in the

Taiwan area except defensively. The U.S. would be prepared to give

a corresponding assurance. These reciprocal assurances will make it

appropriate for us to pass on to the discussion of other matters with a

better hope of coming to constructive conclusions.”

Hoover

790. For Johnson.

New York’s 4, paragraph 5. Following is text of statement which

has been cleared with Defense regarding unaccounted for American

military personnel.

“On July 16, 1952, the Foreign Minister of the PRC notified the Swiss

Government that the Government of the PRC had decided to recognize

the Geneva Conventions of 1949 on Treatment of Prisoners of War.

“On July 27, 1953, the responsible leaders of the communist

forces in Korea signed the Armistice Agreement which resulted in

the cessation of hostilities in Korea and provided clear agreement

on the handling of prisoners of war, including the specific require­

ment of each side to furnish a full and complete accounting on all

Distribution. Repeated Niact to USUN as telegram Tedul 5. Drafted by Godel (Defense)

and Osborn; cleared by Godel in draft, McConaughy, and Sebald.

prisoners of war and deceased combatants of which either side had

any knowledge.

“The terms of the Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War and the

solemn obligations accruing to the communist forces in Korea under

the Armistice Agreement have, in part, been ignored and violated by

those forces and by your government during the intervening period.

“September 27, 1955, was the second anniversary of the final date

established by the Armistice Agreement for the delivery and account­

ing of all personnel captured as a result of the Korean War. The UN

Command in accordance with the provisions of the Armistice Agree­

ment and the provisions of the Geneva Conventions on prisoners of

war has rendered a full accounting of all prisoners of war and deceased

combatants of which it has knowledge. Your Government, however,

has continued to hold personnel who were so captured.

“I hand you herewith a list of 450 names comprised exclusively

of persons who have spoken over the communist radio, have been

referred to in communist broadcasting, have been actually listed by the

communist side as being captives, have written letters from communist

prison camps, have been seen in communist prisons, or have been seen

in communist territory, either in China or in North Korea.

“I therefore reiterate the previous demands made upon your gov­

ernment to render an accounting forthwith of American military per­

sonnel on this list and of any others known to you.”

New York note that any changes which Secretary and Phleger may

wish to make should be wired Niact direct Johnson.

Hoover

797. For Johnson.

Your 777. Suggested text approved for use in contingency stated

with changes noted below:

tion. Drafted by McConaughy and Osborn.

Change last clause in first sentence, paragraph two to read QUOTE

and thus facilitate discussion and settlement of other practical matters

at issue between the two sides UNQUOTE.

Change figure in latter part second sentence paragraph 3 to read

eighteen instead of nineteen.

FYI Our records show only eighteen actually in jail following

departure all ten named September 10 list.

Hoover

Washington, September 27, 1955

798. For Johnson. Deptel 790.

Statement based on Defense draft about which Department still

has some reservations. Statement will require further consideration

and conferences with Defense and draft sent you should not repeat

not be used. You should propose QUOTE Accounting for U.S. Person­

nel UNQUOTE as one of subjects for listing Agenda Item 2 leaving

until later meeting more precise formulation regarding which we will

further advise you. You may concede lower priority on agenda for

this topic in your discretion. Request your comments on statement.

Hoover

tribution. Repeated to USUN as telegram Tedul 7. Drafted by McConaughy based on

telephone conversation with Phleger and on telegram Dulte 3 (Document 240).

790. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened this morning’s meeting with long prepared state­

ment to effect agreed announcement completed agenda item one, we

were entangling agenda items one and two, if our intent was delay dis­

cussion agenda item two until all remaining Americans released “this

sure to fail”, will not submit to threats, etc., etc., suggested if we had

any “specific opinion” on implementation announcement PRC willing

give consideration and that discussion thereof be referred to assistants.

Will inform UK results of reviews as completed. Criticism US imple­

mentation, 76 who applied for departure whose names we previously

gave him 42 not yet returned, none has returned who left since begin­

ning of talks, knows of no one who has left US to return to China except

Tsien, students fearful to apply for departure, etc. Our attitude will

“impair the improvement of Sino-American relations and is bound to

have a bad effect on our lenient way of solving the problem remaining

Americans”.

2. I replied with long statement stating no need spend much time

on these subjects if he would give me straightforward answers to my

straightforward and simple questions on implementation, unless were

willing to keep each other fully informed on implementation will be

difficult to make progress discussion other matters, implementation too

important to leave to assistants, then refuted his statements on Chinese

students in US, welcomed statement they willing give consideration

suggestions on implementation, pointed out my repeated questions

this regard, repeated them and also reframed as suggestions asking

for specific replies, in referring statement on threats said I could not

understand how my questions on implementation could be interpreted

as threats, he could be certain we would not respond to threats, PRC

should be absolutely clear we not willing trade fate remaining persons

for political concessions. Three weeks since agreed announcement and

not one of 19 yet released, our concern increases with passage of time

no information on this vital point, only prompt full and faithful imple­

mentation announcement can dispose agenda item one, only imple­

mentation words of announcement can dispose of problem return of

Americans, until this accomplished first item of agenda remains first

Limited Distribution.

order of business, have returned to it today and will continue to return

to it as long as questions remain.

3. I then took note of fact 10 imprisoned Americans arrived in

Hong Kong and some of 12 had also arrived and in expectation PRC

will act expeditiously with remaining 19 and further effort demonstrate

our desire talks should progress, desired discuss with him today topics

which we should discuss under agenda item two. Referred my rejection

of higher level meeting and put forward two subjects “renunciation of

use of force for achievement national objectives” and “accounting for

US personnel”. Consider renunciation of force of fundamental impor­

tance to discussion agenda item two, should therefore be discussed

before economic embargo. Therefore suggested subjects in order of (a)

accounting US personnel (b) renunciation of force and (c) economic

embargo.

4. In reply Wang reiterated previous points on implementation

and then referring my suggestion renunciation of force as topic read

short prepared statement which was largely non sequitur in terms of

what I had said but repeated usual Communist line “not wanting war

with US, PRC had renounced force in international relations, tension

in Formosa Straits, caused by presence US forces” etc. All this could be

resolved only by higher level meeting. Expressed puzzlement by what

I meant under subject “accounting for US personnel”, said thought this

taken care of under agenda item one.

5. In reply I returned to implementation repeating my questions

and again also reframing as suggestions asking for reply next meet­

ing. Then briefly discussed higher level meeting repeating previous

position and adding his proposal indicated pessimism which I did

not share on what two of us should be able to accomplish. Pointed

out I had presented our two items in as neutral terms as possible and

would be prepared subsequently discuss them.

6. He then stated prepared to continue discussion next meeting but

wanted to make clear had not committed himself on subjects or their

order. I agreed and he accepted my proposal for Wednesday, October 5

for next meeting.

7. He tried hard obtain press communique omitting reference to

discussion implementation agreed announcement but we finally agreed

upon communique identical with that of last meeting. He said would

not regard this as precedent for communique next meeting.

Gowen

CWO/FED

791. From Johnson.

1. Today’s meeting left situation in very satisfactorily confused

state with respect agenda item two which should provide consider­

able scope for further discussion. Wang was not prepared for type of

approach I made to subject and was obviously confused as to what I

meant by item on “accounting for US personnel.” (Part of difficulty was

there is no satisfactory Chinese term for “accounting” in sense we have

used it here.)

2. In absence decision on our part concerning form of presenta­

tion this subject I avoided any effort enlighten him which would have

required my entering into substantive aspects. I simply said it was

quite different from what we had been discussing under agenda item

one and he did not press me further. However, by next meeting he will

be certain to have connected this with our previous public statements

on subject and be prepared to handle.

3. He was prepared to handle statement from me on renunciation

of force which included an attack on CHICOM policies, was somewhat

nonplussed that I did not make any such statement but felt he had to

say something.

4. As sidelight NCNA correspondent told other correspondents

while meeting was going on that “if there was no progress” CHICOMS

would have public statement and US would probably also have one.

Thus appears they were fully prepared for public debate although

probably not break and were forestalled by our tactics.

5. Will subsequently submit recommendations for handling next

meeting.

Gowen

CWO/FED.

Distribution.

Geneva, September 28, 1955

793. From Johnson.

1. I am strongly opposed to general approach as well as entire tone

of draft statement contained Deptel 790. It might be useful as public

propaganda document, I might well use some of the material it con­

tains in the give and take of debate, but as an initial approach to subject

it cannot produce any favoarble results. It could only result in a retro­

gression to Panmunjom rhetoric which I have thus far been successful

in avoiding here and prejudice attainment of our other objectives in

these talks.

approach primarily on implementation of armistice logically leads

opening other aspects of armistice and starting us down a road on

which armistice tends become bilateral PRC-US matter rather than UN

matter.

3. Subject is at best difficult handle constructively but it seems to

me that type of approach I have had in mind less subject to forego­

ing difficulties. We know some of 450 as well as others subsequently

released at Panmunjom were at one time in PRC, we know Downey

and Fecteau were produced after long months of silence, it is perfectly

natural and clearly a bilateral PRC-US matter to ask whether any of

450 are now in territory under their control or whether they know any­

thing about them.

4. Will submit draft for Department’s approval.

Gowen

Distribution.

Geneva, September 28, 1955

794. From Johnson.

1. I feel statement on renunciation of force contained Deptel 789

is truly outstanding and if Department agrees would like hand Wang

copy when it is made.

2. Presume Department recognizes that in context at moment ref­

erence to “other matters” in last sentence will insofar as PRC concerned

suggest economic embargo. While we have rejected discussion higher

level meeting it may nevertheless carry some implication in this regard

as well. Am not suggesting any change but only pointing out implica­

tion I believe statement will carry for PRC.

3. Depending on outcome our discussion on order subjects under

agenda item two first portion first sentence last paragraph might

require slight revision.

4. Although I will subsequently submit suggestions on handling

next meeting my present inclination is to take advantage of any oppor­

tunity I might have at that meeting to make this statement in context of

supporting priority for discussion this ­subject.

5. For my background only would appreciate being informed

whether Department envisions suggested assurances might follow pat­

tern of “agreed announcement.”

Gowen

Distribution.

795. From Johnson.

with long, prepared statement. He said that after reaching agreement

on first item of agenda more than half month had passed. In accord­

ance with suggestion our side he had tabled two subjects for discussion

under agenda item two: 1) question of embargo, 2) preparations for

Sino-American negotiations at a higher level. However, our side was

still “entangling” talks on agenda item one. We had failed present our

position on his points and also failed present our concrete views on

subjects to be discussed under “practical matters.” This position of ours

he considered entirely unsatisfactory.

2. He said I had mentioned at last meeting provision in agreed

announcement that our governments would “adopt appropriate meas­

ures” to enable persons return their countries. I had also raised ques­

tion those Americans who had violated laws in China. I had expressed

hope his government would act promptly to implement this provision

so that we could in our talks enter promptly upon discussion agenda

item two. Had I meant to imply by these statements that only when all

Americans had been released would we discuss and settle the ques­

tions under item two? If this were so, his side could not agree to it. In

discussion on return of civilians he had repeatedly stated that cases

Americans must be dealt with individually and in accordance with

Chinese juridical processes taking into account the seriousness of the

individual offenses. Only in a state of improved relations between our

two countries could his government make its lenient policy toward the

law-­breaking Americans more lenient. He had made these statements

formally and they were in the record of meeting and only after they

had been made was agreement reached on agenda item one. Further­

more, during the discussion I had “demanded” release of all Ameri­

cans in China within specified time. He had categorically rejected this

demand as infringement on China’s sovereignty, this had been for­

mally entered in record of meeting, and only after that had agreement

been reached.

3. He said now agreement had been reached and no use to go

back over that discussion. His side would faithfully implement agree­

ment. But to use implementation of agreed announcement as excuse to

Distribution.

obstruct discussion and settlement of practical matters under agenda

item two would not result in any good, but rather do harm. Peoples

Republic of China was not going to be brought into submission by

whatever threat we might make.

4. Agreement on item one had been reached and at that time he had

provided specific information on Americans who would be permitted

to leave and on law violators whose cases had been reviewed. Those

Americans permitted to depart had personal affairs to attend to and

they could leave at their discretion, as some had already left. All 10 who

had violated laws and were to have been sent out of the country had

left. Since beginning of talks 33 Americans had returned or were going

to return as result action his side. Remaining handful Americans who

had violated laws would have their cases reviewed in light of agree­

ment and within framework of Chinese juridical procedure. Results of

review their cases would be given UK.

5. He continued that there was no justification for entangling talks

over question Chinese implementation of agreement. On contrary our

side should make active efforts implement agreement. During talks I

had given him names 76 Chinese who had applied depart US but not

permitted do so. 42 of these had not yet returned. Although our side

had said all restrictions removed, nevertheless he knew of no one else

who had left US to return to China except Tsien. I had said between

mit list of names so PRC had no means making check. I had admitted

Chinese students afraid apply INS for permission leave US because

feared being rejected. Evidently many Chinese still do not have cour­

age apply to depart because of long period threats and intimidation.

PRC had great number of nationals in US and whether they could exer­

cise right to return would be test whether US faithfully implementing

agreement. Up to now PRC had not seen any actual outcome from all

my statements.

6. He said I was still trying entangle talks on first item and ham­

per discussion of second item. Frankly, such an approach impaired

improvement of Sino-American relations and was bound to have bad

effect on lenient way PRC solving problem remaining Americans.

7. He said I had raised detailed questions last meeting on func­

tions of third powers under agreement. These functions were clearly

set forth in agreed announcement, but if I wished put forward specific

opinions on details of functions, and if opinions reasonable, he would

consider them. He suggested that such specific opinions on implemen­

tation agreed announcement be reserved for meeting of assistants so

as not to interfere with discussion second item in these talks. People in

all countries in world unanimously called for discussion second item

agenda immediately following agreement on first thereby contributing

to easing tensions and improving relations between two countries. He

had put forward two subjects for discussion: lifting of embargo was

demand voiced by many countries, and preparation for Sino-American

negotiations at higher level was desired by people many countries as

well as by high officials of US. He hoped we could enter upon discus­

sion these problems without delay and he would be glad to hear any

positive views I might put forward on agenda item two.

8. I replied I pleased note his statement he would consider any

specific opinion we wished put forward regarding implementation

announcement. In previous meetings I had put forward a few simple

questions on implementation which carried with them clear implication

of suggestions. I did not want any more than he did to spend our time

on these subjects and I did not think we need do so. Questions I had pre­

viously asked were simple and straightforward and they required only

simple and straightforward answers. Unless we were willing to keep

each other fully and frankly informed on steps our governments had

taken it was going to be very difficult to discuss successfully other mat­

ters. I thought these matters too important to be referred to our assist­

ants, but hoped we could quickly complete their discussion between the

two of us.

9. I said he had mentioned certain matters regarding our imple­

mentation of agreed announcement upon which I wished to comment

briefly. He said I had admitted students in US afraid make application

to depart. I could not imagine what statement I had made which could

be so interpreted and I rejected that implication from any statements I

may have made. He stated some students did not have courage now

apply depart but I could not see what he referred to, because it was not

necessary for them to make application to any government agency to

depart. In addition, arrangement with Indian Government in full effect

and any student had full right communicate with Embassy GOI if he

thought his right depart being interfered with. He had spoken of list

I gave him of 76 Chinese against whom restraining orders had been

lifted and said 42 of 76 not yet returned. I did not know of any Chinese

in US who desired to return who was now prevented from doing so. I

had no information whether any of 42 had postponed their departure

or had changed their minds. Maybe, as had been said in NCNA broad­

cast September 20, some these Chinese wanted postpone departure in

order complete work or studies in US. Whatever reason, basic fact was

Chinese in US free to do what they wished. If there were other aspects

our implementation of announcement he wished discuss I would cer­

tainly be glad discuss with him.

10. I said one question I had raised previous meeting concerned

ability Americans imprisoned to learn of terms agreed announcement.

I had understood from him there were arrangements for reading and

translating newspapers to persons in prison and that they would thus

learn of terms of agreed announcement. I asked simply for confirmation

that this had been done. My concern this regard had increased because

learned most Americans recently released either did not hear about or

received only fragmentary account of terms agreed announcement.

One American recently released who had heard of agreed announce­

ment was refused his request see full text. Therefore, framing matter

in terms he had suggested this morning, I wished suggest his govern­

ment confirm to me whether or not in fact each individual American

in prison had been fully and specifically informed of terms agreed

announcement.

11. I said another question I had raised was simply whether Amer­

icans would be permitted to communicate with or otherwise have

access to UK Charge, and particularly if he would be able interview

them in accordance with terms agreed announcement if my govern­

ment wanted facts in case investigated. Again framing this question

as specific suggestion in accordance his proposal, I wanted specifically

ask that this be done. I had hoped at this meeting he would give me

specific answers to these two questions which were perfectly simple

and straightforward.

12. I said most important of all I wished ask again what steps

his government taken to enable remaining 19 imprisoned Americans

expeditiously exercise their right return. He had said his government

would not be forced into taking action by means of threats. I did not

understand why he interpreted my statement on this matter as threat.

I had not during these talks ever made any threat and I did not intend

to do so. Certain statements had been made in agreed announcement

and I was merely asking for information on how they were being

implemented. Equally, he could be certain that I would not respond

to threats. I had made clear and wanted to repeat, I was not willing

trade fate these persons in prison for political concessions on our part.

I wanted make entirely clear that any thought on part his government

of delaying release these prisoners in order obtain political concessions

was doomed to failure.

13. I added that I had never said that only when all Americans

were released would I enter into discussion agenda item two; I merely

asked how agreed announcement was being implemented. It seemed

to me that delay by his government in implementing agreed announce­

ment with respect release these Americans was inevitably entangling

these two subjects. There certainly was no intent or desire on my part

to entangle them. Nearly three weeks had passed since announcement

issued and not one of remaining 19 persons had been released. It was

perfectly natural my government’s concern increased with passage of

time and no information on this vital point.

14. I said only prompt, full and faithful implementation agreed

announcement could dispose of agenda item one. Self evident that

words of announcement in themselves dispose of nothing. Only imple­

mentation of words in announcement could dispose of problem return

of Americans. Until this accomplished I had to continue consider that

first item agenda remained our first order of business. I had returned

to it and would continue return to it as long as there remained question

with respect implementation agreed announcement.

15. I said I had, however, taken note of fact that 10 Americans

whose release he informed me of September 10 had arrived Hong Kong

and that some of 12 Americans whose exit permits he had promised

had also departed. Therefore, in expectation his government would act

expeditiously on remaining 19 Americans and thus dispose of agenda

item one, and in further effort demonstrate my government’s earnest

desire these talks should progress I desired today to discuss with him

topics we should discuss under agenda item two.

16. I said he had proposed two subjects one of which my govern­

ment considered procedural matter which could not be considered

practical matter at issue between our two countries. My government

desired put forward two subjects: one was “renunciation of use of force

for achievement of national objectives” and other was “accounting for

US personnel.”

17. Wang asked for repetition subject headings and then asked

what we had in mind under second heading.

18. I replied we would get to that when we discussed the topic. I then

continued by saying my government considered subject of renunciation

force of fundamental importance to our discussions under agenda item

two and that this subject should therefore be discussed before subject

he termed economic embargo. I suggested we agree to discuss subjects

each had raised in following order: (a) accounting for US personnel,

(b) renunciation use of force for achievement national objectives, and

(c) economic embargo.

19. Wang replied he had made it clear many times his side willing

implement faithfully agreement under agenda item one and his side

certainly would do things according to agreement. It provided that

agreed announcement should be given wide publicity, object of which

was to inform everyone about it, and PRC was giving wide publicity

in this manner. If I had concrete opinions on agreed announcement,

provided they were reasonable, he suggested assistants both sides hold

meeting to discuss them. In past US had taken steps detain and obstruct

departure Chinese students and these measures had left deep impres­

sion on minds of students. Therefore, in future necessary US in fact

faithfully implement provisions agreed announcement so that these

persons could in fact freely return to homeland.

20. Wang said he had clearly stated many times principles gov­

erning handling by his government of cases 19 Americans who had

committed crimes. If US Government refused respect Chinese law and

insisted on unconditional return these persons this idea doomed failure

and would never succeed.

21. Then referring frequently to prepared statement Wang said topic

he suggested on preparations for higher level meeting was not proce­

dural matter but most important matter of substance in relations of two

countries. He could not agree to removal of subject from agenda. Regard­

ing our proposal on so-­called renunciation of force he said his govern­

ment fully endorsed principle no recourse to force or threat of force in

international relations. China did not intend to resort to force against US

or any other state. State of tension in Taiwan area was not at all caused by

Chinese threat use force against US. Tension on contrary was caused by

US use force against Chinese territory of Taiwan. Therefore, in line with

the principle of non-­recourse to force the point in question was not one to

be solved by declaration by Chinese not to use force against its own ter­

ritory, but rather by removal of US forces from Chinese territory, China

had not made withdrawal of American forces from Taiwan a prerequisite

for Sino-American conversations on easing tensions in Taiwan area as

that would have blocked efforts to have negotiations.

22. He said he did not deny that tense situation in Taiwan area might

lead to extremely grave danger of conflict between China and US. It was

precisely for this reason he had proposed that our talks should make

preparations for convening conference at higher level. Major problem of

easing and limiting tension between China and the US should be dis­

cussed at higher level. In this conference at higher level both sides should

raise questions which could be discussed to ease tensions in Taiwan area.

23. Wang said my second subject of “accounting for US personnel”

had been dealt with under agenda item one and, therfore, there was no

point in raising again so-­called accounting for Americans. Moreover,

they had at very beginning of talks given full list of all Americans in

China so there was no point at all in having a continuous accounting on

Americans in China.

24. I said that I had put forward what he had termed concrete opin­

ions regarding the implementation of the announcement. First sugges­

tion I made was that he should confirm that 19 remaining Americans

be given full text agreed announcement in language they understood.

Second suggestion was that we be assured arrangements established so

19 could communicate or otherwise have access to UK Charge. Third

suggestion was that, if in accordance terms agreed announcement US

wanted facts investigated, UK Charge would be permitted interview

these Americans who desired return. I hoped at next meeting he could

give me definite answers on these suggestions. I believed it could be

done quickly and need not involve our assistants. I added if he had any

specific questions or suggestions regarding US implementation agreed

announcement I certainly would be glad consider them. I hoped his

suggestions would be concrete and specific, as mine had been.

25. I said I found it difficult understand his position regarding dis­

cussion of higher level meeting. I could not see how higher level meeting

in itself was practical matter between our governments. Both our gov­

ernments had agreed to have the two of us meet here as representatives

of our respective governments to discuss “practical matters” as second

part our talks. It seemed to me his suggestion meant that we had decided,

even before we had discussed these questions, that it was not possible for

us to make progress and therefore higher level meeting must be called.

I did not see why we needed to be so pessimistic. I had faith and hope

when I came, and I hoped he had same, that two of us as Ambassadors

representing our governments would be able to make progress these two

questions. I still had such hope and would earnestly strive best my abil­

ity realize that hope. Question higher level meeting could arise only after

our talks here had been concluded. My government not prepared now to

discuss or agree to what would happen after our meetings here had been

completed. Therefore we did not agree higher level meeting was suitable

subject discussion item two.

26. I said I frankly puzzled by his statement on my suggestion

we should include renunciation of force as a subject for discussion. I

had not made demands on his government and I had framed subject

for discussion in just as neutral terms as I could. I simply wanted call

attention fact subject framed in somewhat different manner than he

implied in his statement. I said I expected have more to say this sub­

ject at next meeting. Similarly, I had tried to frame subject of account­

ing for US personnel in as neutral a manner as I could. What I had

in mind was entirely separate from what we had discussed under

agenda item one. I would be prepared at our next meeting to discuss

it with him in detail.

27. Wang said he agreed to continue discussion these subjects at

next meeting. He said this did not mean he agreed to inclusion these two

subjects under agenda item two and he thought order for discussion of

subjects still open and no definite arrangement made.

28. I agreed and suggested meeting Wednesday, October 5.

29. In discussion over press release Wang suggested statement

eliminating all mention implementation agreed announcement and

saying simply we discussed agenda item two. When I said it would be

more appropriate use same announcement used last time, he countered

with suggestion we omit all reference to subjects discussed and simply

state that we met and give date next meeting.

30. I stated if we said anything different at all it would arouse a

great deal of press speculation which we both wanted to reduce. If we

used previous statement, newspapers would not speculate, and it was

also a factual statement.

31. Wang objected that if we went on making same statement pub­

lic would think we were making no progress.

32. I said we had made identical statement after each meeting for

40 days and public saw eventually we had made progress.

33. Wang agreed to use same statement but on condition it would

not be precedent for using it again after next meeting.

34. I said we could discuss that at end of next meeting.

Gowen

796. From Johnson.

Department’s unnumbered Niact September 28 correcting text

­Deptel 798 not received until 5 p.m. Geneva time. As will be seen from

report today’s meeting (Mytel 795, paragraph 6) I used phraseology

“accounting for US personnel.” Although I was bothered by omission of

“military”, there was no time for confirmation. Believe I was successful

in skirting around subject and I can pick up matter at next meeting.

Gowen

797. From Johnson.

sentation I feel should be made on subject missing military personnel.

2. I desire to discuss with you today the question of what I have

termed missing US military personnel. With respect to those missing

from the Korean War there have been many discussions of the subject

in the MAC. I have no desire or intent to repeat or duplicate those dis­

cussions with which I assume you are fully familiar but only to discuss

with you those aspects which clearly come within the category of a

practical question between the two of us.

3. I simply want to point out the fact the responsible leaders of the

forces on your side entered into an armistice agreement which clearly

provided that full and complete accounting be provided on all pris­

oners of war and deceased combatants of which they had knowledge.

When the prisoner of war exchange was completed there remained

many hundreds of US personnel of the United Nations Command who

it was definitely known or there was solid reason to believe were at one

time prisoners of your side but who were not returned or otherwise

accounted for. The military authorities of my country have by tremen­

dous effort gradually accumulated information with regard to many

of these individuals so that the number unaccounted for has been

gradually reduced. In some few cases this information was obtained

from your side or determined upon the basis of bodies returned by

your side. However, there remain about 450 persons on whom it has

not been possible to obtain any firm information whatever concerning

their fate or present whereabouts. There is no way that the military

authorities of my country can definitely inform the families of these

men whether they are dead or alive or what their fate may have been.

4. In many of these cases their names were at one time listed as

prisoners of war in publications in your country, the names of others

have in various connections been broadcast over your radio, some were

actually identified as having spoken over the radio, some had at one

time written letters from prison camps and others were known and

seen in prison camps by prisoners who were subsequently returned.

5. However, even more important from the standpoint of my dis­

cussion with you, it is quite possible that some of these persons were

Distribution.

taken into your country for it is definitely known from prisoners who

were subsequently returned that such movements did take place. Fur­

thermore, there have been cases of Americans, not known to my gov­

ernment to be in your country, and later revealed by your government

to be held there.

6. My purpose in reviewing all of these facts is not to engage in

controversy with you over them but only to point out that the author­

ities in my country and the families of these men have a sound basis

for believing that at least some of these persons have been in territory

under your control outside of Korea.

7. I therefore, am giving you a list of the names of these persons

with the request that your government conduct a thorough investiga­

tion to determine whether any of them are in your country or whether

your government is in the possession of any information whatever con­

cerning any of the persons listed.

8. I am not unmindful of the fact that early in these talks you gave

me a list of various categories of Americans in your country, but it

is possible that some persons on this list may be considered by your

authorities to be in a different category or they may otherwise have

information with regard to them.

9. I am also giving you a list of the names of the 11 Naval and

Coast Guard personnel lost off Swatow whom we discussed last year in

the hope that since that time your authorities may have obtained some

information with regard to these men.

10. I do not ask that you give me any reply with regard to this mat­

ter today but only that in due course you inform me of the results of

your government’s investigation.

Gowen

798. From Johnson.

1. One of questions we face for next meeting is whether by that time

there have been any releases of remaining 19 Americans and what we do

Distribution.

if there are not. Latter even will of course require very strong renewal my

stress on implementation. If one or more released before next meeting

presentation on implementation could be milder and could show more

disposition move on to discussion topics under item two.

2. In any event major subject will undoubtedly continue be his

insistence on inclusion higher level meeting. I will of course stick to our

position but would appreciate Department’s suggestions on any fur­

ther debating points it feels I might make. Can without difficulty keep

discussion going on this subject for at least next meeting but we should

be looking ahead to probability deadlock will develop over this point.

3. As stated my telegram 794 believe it may be useful for me make

renunciation of force statement at next meeting if opportunity devel­

ops. Believe this would assist in keeping situation fluid without giving

away anything to CHICOMS.

4. My present plan is not to go into any detailed presentation miss­

ing military personnel at next meeting but only touch on it as required

to support its inclusion as subject for discussion.

5. Hope Department will assure I promptly receive any infor­

mation CHICOMS may give O’Neill on releases or other aspects

implementation.

Gowen

253. Letter from Clough to McConaughy

Letter No. 10

Geneva, September 29, 1955

Dear Walter:

Alex took off at 4: a.m. by automobile for Prague. Since we

had worked until 11: p.m. getting off yesterday’s telegrams, he was

unable to write the usual weekly letter to you and asked me to get a

note into the pouch in explanation. He expects to leave Prague for the

return trip on Sunday, arriving here late Monday night. He hopes that

you will repeat to him in Prague any important telegrams.

Actually, there is nothing on the substance of the talks to be added

to yesterday’s telegrams. We tried to cover the situation as thoroughly

Informal. Clough signed the original “Ralph.” A handwritten note on the letter indicates

it was received on October 3.

as we could. The discussion is developing very much as anticipated

and our principal worry at the moment, as pointed out in the telegrams,

is how to prevent a complete deadlock from arising over our refusal to

admit the “higher level conference” as a subject for discussion.

I am glad to know that arrangements are underway for bringing

me back to Washington. This has been a most interesting and useful

experience for me and I am, in some ways, reluctant to leave at this

point. However, as we seem to be moving toward a one meeting a week

schedule, there really is not enough work here to justify keeping two

officers away from CA when you are so short-­handed.

Bob Ekvall was glad to know that you were consulting with

Defense on trying to improve his position here. At the moment, his

orders have expired and he is technically AWOL, so some action will

have to be taken rather quickly.

Doug and I have been reading with interest the despatches from

Taipei and Hong Kong which you have been sending. We also appre­

ciate the trouble you took in rounding up the collection of documents

that we had asked you for. They will be helpful to us as we move fur­

ther into the next phase of the talks.

Best regards,

Ralph N. Clough

86. Verbatim text. For the Ambassador.

Deptel 789. First paragraph draft statement on renunciation use of

force, amended to read as follows:

“One of the practical matters for discussion between us is that each

of us should renounce the use of force to achieve our policies when

they conflict. The United States and the PRC confront each other with

policies which are in certain respects incompatible. This fact need not,

however, mean armed conflict, and the most important single thing we

can do is first of all to be sure that it will not lead to armed conflict.”

Distribution. Repeated Priority to Geneva for Johnson as telegram 805. Drafted by

­McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and Phleger.

Amend final paragraph to read as follows:

“We ask, therefore, as a first matter for discussion under Item 2,

a declaration that your side will not resort to the use of force in the

Taiwan area except defensively. The United States would be prepared

to make a corresponding declaration. These declarations will make it

appropriate for us to pass on to the discussion of other matters with a

better hope of coming to constructive conclusions.”

Dulles

809. For Johnson.

Peter Colm of DRF being detailed Geneva assist Johnson. Arrive

about October 11. Clough should return Department as soon as

practicable.

Dulles

to Prague for the Ambassador as telegram 89. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Furnas (R)

and Yager (DRF) in draft and by Capella (FE/EX) and Sebald.

Letter No. 16

Washington, September 30, 1955

Dear Alex:

of our efforts to get out the instructions for your September 28 meet­

ing. The drafting and clearance of the instructions was a complicated

­Informal.

business with the Secretary first in Ottawa, then in New York; and with

Herman Phleger also in New York part of the time.

The “renunciation of force” statement started with an excellent

Phleger framework which was fleshed out by the Secretary. This morning

we are telegraphing you some minor revisions in the first and last para­

graphs. The intent of these changes, as you will immediately see, is to get

away from any remote implication of a non-­aggression pact or indeed

any sort of bilateral agreement with the Chinese Communists. Anything

which smacks of a pact or executive agreement with the Chinese Commu­

nists is of course out of the question. We are thinking in terms of separate

unilateral public declarations and not pledges or assurances to each other.

We feel reasonably confident that you are on a good wicket now

and that there will be plenty to talk about. It is hard to see how Wang

can reject this item out of hand. My guess is that he may try to maneu­

ver in the direction of something resembling the famous “Five Princi­

ples”; or try to make a false distinction between “international” and

“internal” resort to force in the Taiwan area.

We have had a difficult time with Defense on the confused prob­

lem of the unaccounted for military personnel. So far as have not been

able to get what we consider a consistent statement of principle or posi­

tion out of them. In one document they will make sweeping claims and

assert that the claims can be supported; in another they will indicate

they do not have much basis for any very positive allegations. They

blow first hot and then cold. We still do not understand what criteria

they have applied in determining what names should go on the list.

They seem to have conclusive evidence that some of the people on the

list are dead. In some cases the bodies presumably have been recovered.

In other cases, the personnel apparently were never in the custody of

the Communist side, having been lost over the high seas. On the other

hand, it seems that some of the names which were on the original list

of 970 should not have been dropped. A case came to our attention this

week where an officer was last seen alive in a prison camp by fellow

American officers. His name was dropped from the list merely because

he was in bad shape from injuries and gangrene and the Americans

thought be could not have lasted much longer. This was a lay opinion,

not a medical opinion. Defense did not stop with a presumptive find­

ing of death, in this case, but made a definitive finding of death. It is

incomprehensible to us and gives us misgivings about the whole sub­

ject. But the casualty determinations are not within our province and

there is not much we can appropriately do about it. It is a dilemma. We

are trying to arrange a meeting today with Deputy Defense Secretary

Robertson, General Erskine and Bill Godel to get Defense clearance of a

draft presentation for you to make to Wang on this subject. It represents

a considerable departure from the text contained in our 790, which was

basically a Defense document, modified slightly but unsatisfactorily by

us. The new draft follows more the approach recommended in your 797

but is somewhat firmer in tone. We have to bear in mind U.S. consid­

erations of course, Congressional as well as Pentagon, & could not go

quite as far in the direction of mildness as you suggested.

You handled Wang at the 18th meeting on September 28 with con­

summate skill. Satisfaction at the adroitness with which you met every

situation is expressed on every side. No one is unmindful of the fact it

takes two to keep a discussion going and that Wang has it within his

power to bring the talks to a close at any time. But we now assume that

this is not likely to happen in the immediate future. Peiping would be

in a highly vulnerable position if it broke while our renunciation of

force statement is up for consideration.

You will not be surprised to learn that the President’s illness has

given the continuation of these talks added importance in the eyes of

the Secretary.

Various prominent newspaper and publishing people are putting

redoubled pressure on the Department to give them passports for travel

to Communist China. The influence mustered by some of these people

makes their demands difficult to resist. No one is thinking in terms of

dropping the barriers of course. But it has occurred to the Secretary that it

might be useful to intimate publicly that in view of the Agreed Announce­

ment which assures the early departure of all detained Americans we

are considering validating the passports of some of the newspaper and

publishing fraternity who have applied to travel to mainland China. It

would be added that of course no actual travel to mainland China could

be approved until all the detained Americans are out, but it is assumed

that this is a matter of only a short time in view of the explicit terms of

the Agreed Announcement. The thinking here is that this might be added

bait to the Chinese Communists to proceed rapidly with the release of all

the remaining Americans. We know that they are very anxious to arrange

visits by various newspaper people and authors to the PRC. Of course,

we could not introduce travel as an agenda item on our side at Geneva,

but a little restrained publicity along this line outside of Geneva might

strengthen your hand. Do you have any comments?

We do not much relish the trade embargo item on the Agenda, but

since it would come after the renunciation of force, we do not anticipate

that we will have to cross that bridge any time soon. If it ever comes up,

we can seize the opportunity to present the rationale behind our trade

controls.

We are troubled at the conspicuous absence of any release announce­

ments since September 10.

The blunt tie-­in by Wang of further releases with Item 2 progress

gives us forebodings, as does the conversation of O’Neill with Chang

Han-­fu in Peiping a week ago.

We still have no word of any arrangement for British Embassy con­

tact with the detained Americans.

The Indian Embassy here says it is making no arrangements for

travel of Chinese to the PRC until it receives assurances of reimburse­

ment from the PRC for travel funds advanced.

You will be glad to know that Hubert Graves is reassigned to the

British Embassy here as Minister to handle Far Eastern matters. He

is arriving next week. Rob Scott left on Wednesday for Singapore via

London.

After a lot of discussion and some confusion we have arranged to

send Peter Colm of DRF to assist you thus releasing Ralph Clough to

help me in the chronic jam which I confront. Colm is one of the ablest

and quickest men in DRF. He has been following all the documents on

the talks closely. We will see that he gets something of the thinking of

the people who are closest to the talks here before he leaves. We would

have preferred to send one of our own CA men—Osborn or Comis­

key—for the sake of the experience, but in view of the backlog of work

here it could not be justified. It would make no sense to largely cancel

out the return of Clough.

[text not declassified]

I hope you have a good interlude at Prague and return refreshed

to the fray.

Warmest regards,

Walter P. McConaughy

819. For Johnson.

OIR review Chicom propaganda:

Chicom propaganda on international subjects during week end­

ing September 30 gave only slight attention Geneva talks in contrast

to previous weeks. General tone comment on US appeared somewhat

more hostile. US denounced for obstructing Chicom admission to UN,

by Jacobson; cleared by McConaughy.

violating Geneva spirit, seeking intensify cold war and continuing rely

on “policy of strength.”

Regarding Geneva talks NCNA September 23 gave brief account

of meetings stating that delegations had “exchanged views” regarding

item two of agenda. NCNA announced September 24 that PRC had

“approved” US invitation to UK.

Taiwan issue given slight attention during past week. Ta Kung Pao,

September 25, stated CPR willing to negotiate “international question”

of Taiwan, but US “reluctant” to negotiate. NCNA September 25 reiter­

ated familiar charge US policy re: Taiwan based on “aggressive princi­

ples” and represents interference Chinese internal affairs. Liberation of

Taiwan stressed as task for Chinese youth at recent conference of Young

Activists in Peiping.

Major attention past week focussed following topics:

1) UN membership. People’s Daily editorial September 24 accused US

of “obstructing” admission Communist China to UN, in “open viola­

tion” of Geneva spirit and asserted admission PRC to UN essential for

further easing international tension and solution major international

problems.

2) Dulles speech to UN (September 22). NCNA commentary Sep­

tember 25 interpreted speech as indicating continued US reliance on

“policy of strength”; accused US of “departing from spirit of Geneva”

and seeking intensify cold war. Secretary’s comments on Taiwan cited

as evidence US policy still based on “principles of aggression.” Secre­

tary’s account Geneva talks criticized as deliberate effort “distort sig­

nificance” of Chinese action in releasing 11 Americans.

on Shigemitsu visit to US revived familiar theme that US seeking to

remilitarize Japan and use Japan as base for “aggression.” Shigemitsu

policy seen based on “making China a hypothetical enemy of Japan,”

and on complete subservience of Japan to US. NCNA saw possibility

Japanese troops would be sent abroad, to Korea or Taiwan. Also noted

possibility of Japanese alliance with Taiwan and ROK commenting

such action would be evidence of “intended aggression” against PRC.

4) East-West trade. People’s Daily September 28 noted that easing of

world tensions had created new prospects for promotion of East-West

trade; saw good prospects for development of trade between China

and the West. Expressed hope that forthcoming Ministers Conference

would adopt specific measures for removal of “artificial barriers” to

trade.

Dulles

823. For Johnson.

1. You are reminded that your basic instruction provides that no

legitimate basis be given for Wang break off talks.

2. Failure Communists to implement agreed announcement

should be strongly pressed. British report no RPT no word from any

imprisoned Americans so far and no RPT no indication of Chinese

Communist disposition to give detained Americans access to Brit­

ish Charge. In view conspicuous absence of any Chinese Commu­

nist move to carry out terms of Agreed Announcement as regards

remaining detained Americans 3½ weeks after Agreed Announce­

ment issued, Communist non-­compliance with their obligation under

Agreed Announcement should be principal topic next meeting. You

should call Wang’s attention appropriate portions London’s 1212 and

1312 to Dept. Ask for explanation of evident inability imprisoned

Americans communicate with O’Neill. Make it clear that in our view

Announcement not being implemented by PRC and that Chinese

Communist neglect so far to give imprisoned Americans benefit of

Agreed Announcement makes it meaningless. Anyone in jail would

certainly desire to be repatriated and in fact we know that at least 15

of imprisoned Americans applied for exit permits even before they

were seized and imprisoned by the Chinese Communists.

3. You have authority to discuss subjects which might consti­

tute Item Two and order of priority. First priority should be renun­

ciation of force. Accounting for US military personnel should be

placed next but may be placed below PRC item on QTE question of

embargo UNQTE. If in your judgment it should be done, you are

given discretionary authority to make revised presentation which

has been telegraphed to you on renunciation of force, although it

may be preferable hold off on this until following meeting. We must

insure that presentation on military personnel is made at some

stage but this can be put over until another meeting if you consider

that this may safely be done. (Text revised presentation telegraphed

separately.)

Limit Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Sebald; cleared in substance by Phleger.

Department believes that you have sufficient material spelling out

our rejection of Communist subject QTE negotiations at a higher level

UNQTE.

4. Next meeting should be as far in advance as reasonably possible.

Dulles

Following is text of presentation on “accounting for U.S. military

personnel” which Department and Defense have agreed upon:

“Dear Mr. Ambassador:

“My Government has, since the conclusion of the Armistice in

Korea undertaken a careful and complete analysis of all of its casualty

figures and of the ultimate disposition of all unaccounted-for members

of its Armed Forces who served in Korea.

“The American servicemen for whom no accounting has been

obtained total 450 persons. Each of these was last seen or last heard of

under circumstances indicating that he was either captured or killed

in action by forces of the opposing side, and that he or his remains

should be in the custody or possession of the opposing side. The names

of many of these persons were at one time listed as prisoners of war

in publications in your country, the names of others have been broad­

cast over your radio, some were actually identified as having spoken

over the radio, some wrote letters from prison camps and others were

known and seen in prison camps by prisoners who were subsequently

returned. It is definitely known that some prisoners were taken into

your country. Furthermore, there have been cases of Americans not

known to my Government to be in your country, and later revealed by

your Government to be held there.

by McConaughy and Osborn; cleared in draft in Defense and by Sebald and Phleger.

“Repeated efforts have been made by my Government, through

the United Nations Command and the Military Armistice Commission,

to obtain an accounting for these 450 men of the United States Armed

Forces. These efforts have elicited no satisfactory response, despite

the clear obligation of the side of your Government under the Korean

Armistice Agreement to provide a full and complete accounting on

all prisoners of war and deceased combatants of which it had knowl­

edge. The failure of your Government to respond to my Government’s

requests, thus preventing the military authorities of my country from

definitely informing the families of the fate of these men, has caused

deep concern to the American people, and has thus created a real and

grave matter of concern between our two sides.

“Apart from the question of the members of the United States Armed

Forces who served in Korea, there remains the question of the fate of the

accounting for the fate of each of these men.

“Enclosures:

List of 450 servicemen.

List of 11 Naval and Coast Guardsmen.”

End letter.

Dulles

Letter No. 17

Washington, October 3, 1955

Dear Alex:

We are pushing hard to get something out to you today for the

October 5 meeting. I feel it is not fair to make you wait until the last day

preceding the meeting, especially since I believe the time spread now

is six hours since Washington reverted to Standard Time on Septem­

ber 25. We think the telegrams will give you adequate guidance and

sufficient leeway. There will be considerable for you to say on the non-­

implementation of the Agreed Announcement. The amended statement

on the use of force item will undoubtedly lead to extensive comments.

The item on unaccounted for U.S. military personnel can be dropped

to a spot below the embargo item if this seems advisable to you. We

are now thrashing out with Defense a final version of the statement

on the unaccounted for personnel. Every word is important and there

is quite a bit of give-­and-­take with Defense on it. Defense is naturally

concerned at the reaction in this country, especially among the relatives

and Congress. When we got the corrected copy of your recommended

draft (about half of which had been omitted in the original garbled text

of your message) we found much in it that was useful and telling. So

we worked out a draft which represents a meld of our revised text and

what we consider the best of yours. This is being cleared with Defense

urgently now and we hope to be able to get it to you by the close of

business today unless Defense raises further objections.

The British are doing their best to be helpful on the problem of

access and assistance to the imprisoned Americans. They are being

brought into the picture increasingly. I am seeing Barbara Salt of the Brit­

ish Embassy (who is handling Far Eastern matters until Hubert Graves

gets here) every two or three days. I am giving her a pretty full rundown

on your discussions with Wang on the implementation of Item One. The

substance of this is being telegraphed to O’Neill in Peiping, who feels

that he will be in a better position to determine what tack he should take

there if he has this for his confidential background. About September

formal inquiry to the Chinese as to whether the imprisoned Americans

will have access to him. He is awaiting our reaction to this problem. We

must consider whether a formal inquiry would tend to encourage the

Chinese to take a negative position. It is a difficult question for we do

need to know definitely what their position on this critical issue will be.

O’Neill fears that we are going to have no way of establishing that the

Americans wish to return and wish to get in touch with him. He feels

that we are at the mercy of the Chinese Communists on this and that we

can not prove violation of the Agreed Announcement. He thinks we are

dependent on Chinese Communist good faith. O’Neill feels that perhaps

you can clear up these issues with Wang better than he can in Peiping. He

points out that “you have some bargaining counters at Geneva,” while

he has none in Peiping. I would like your reaction as to whether we

should run the risk of having a show down with them at Peiping on the

granting of access to O’Neill. I have reminded the British that all of the

Americans except Redmond, Downey and Fecteau are known to have

applied for exit permits before they were arrested. This establishes that

they have expressed a desire to return to the U.S. However, it is true that

this was done long before the Agreed Announcement. They have had no

opportunity to reaffirm their desire since then.

The pouch is closing. Regards and may fortune favor you.

Sincerely yours,

“by way” to read “by Wang”.

804. From Johnson.

1. Although first para Deptel 824 speaks of “presentation” text

is drafted in form of letter. Unless otherwise instructed will assume

Department concurs my view should be oral presentation and will

make slight changes necessary for this form.

2. Again desire call attention to fact that by basing our approach on

“accounting for” rather than presence in territory under control PRC as

Distribution.

suggested draft Mytel 797 we provide better basis for PRC introduce

demand for “accounting for 21,000”.

3. If this form approach retained desire to amend first portion last

sentence third para of statement to read “this failure of your side has

prevented the military authorities of my country etc”. Such wording

broadens statement so that “failure” refers both to armistice obligations

and lack of response to requests through MAC while also avoiding erro­

neous implication “requests” have been from USG to PRC Government.

4. With respect 11 Naval and Coast Guard personnel must make

some reference to our discussion same subject last year. Suggest adding

“which case we discussed last year” to first sentence penultimate para

statement and adding sentence to end same para “I would hope you

would now be able to give me some info with respect to these eleven

men”.

Gowen

No. 7 

Geneva, October 4, 1955

SUBJECT

Dispute over Interpretation of Word “Invite” in Paragraph (2) of “Agreed

Announcement”

In view of the fact that the Chinese Communists chose to make

an issue, both in the meetings in Geneva and in their propaganda, of

the interpretation of Paragraph (2) of the Agreed Announcement of

September 10, 1955, and the possibility that the point may have some

importance in the future, I have thought it advisable to review the

negotiations and subsequent developments related to the wording of

that paragraph.

The point in question was the interpretation of the first sentence

in Paragraph 2 of the Agreed Announcement, which reads as follows:

(U.S. Section)

“2. The Government of the Republic of India will be invited to

assist in the return to the People’s Republic of China of those Chinese

who desire to do so as follows:”

air pouch. Drafted by Johnson and Clough. Brackets are in the original.

(PRC Section)

“2. The Government of the United Kingdom will be invited to

assist in the return to the United States of those Americans who desire

to do so as follows:”

Enclosure No. 1 shows the wording of this sentence proposed by

each side during the course of the negotiations.

It is readily apparent from a perusal of these successive propos­

als that each side clung consistently to its point of view throughout

the negotiations, at least up to the time that the final wording was

agreed upon. The Chinese side sought a wording which either stated or

implied that the PRC would entrust India with the function of assisting

the return of Chinese from the United States, to which the United States

would agree. In like manner, the United States would entrust to the U.K.

the function of assisting the return of Americans from China, to which

the PRC would agree. We consistently opposed this wording, proposing

instead a statement to the effect that the United States would authorize

India to act in the United States, while the PRC would authorize the

U.K. to act there. Nothing was said in the United States texts or in my

statements to Wang concerning the action to be taken by the PRC with

respect to India or the U.S. with respect to the U.K.

These apparently irreconcilable positions were held to tenaciously

by both sides until the crucial 12th meeting of August 31. It was at this

meeting that the compromise wording was agreed on, whereby we

agreed to drop the word authorize as well as the specific mention that

the action would be taken by the U.S. and the PRC and Wang agreed

to drop the words entrusted and agrees. The compromise word agreed

on was invited—“India (or the U.K.) will be invited . . .”, without speci­

fying except by implication who was to do the inviting. Wang retained

in his Chinese text the word wei t’o, which he had formerly translated

entrust, but which, he explained, also meant to invite.

It seemed to me and to my advisers at the time that this was an agree­

ment on wording rather than a full meeting of minds on substance. Each

side could interpret the new, somewhat ambiguous wording in its own

way and neither was compelled to retreat from its basic position. Each

side was left free to approach both the U.K. and India and describe these

actions in terms appropriate to its own interpretation of Paragraph 2.

I feel sure that in accepting the compromise wording, Wang was

not under any illusion that we had abandoned our position. The fact

that he chose to retain a Chinese word in his text which means entrust

and only very imperfectly translates the English word invite clearly

suggests that he had accepted the idea that each side would interpret

Paragraph 2 in its own way.

Thus, it appeared, following the August 31 meeting, that once the

Agreed Announcement was issued each party would take the action

it considered necessary to enable the third countries to assume their

functions. It would not be necessary to debate, either in the meetings or

publicly, who was inviting whom.

The first indication that Wang was going to make an issue of the

interpretation of Paragraph 2 came in the 15th meeting on September

14, the first one following the issuance of the Agreed Announcement.

At that meeting I informed Wang that the United States had invited the

Government of India to undertake the functions set forth in the Agreed

Announcement and asked him what action his government had taken

with respect to the United Kingdom. He was apparently caught unpre­

pared by our prompt action with respect to India, as he did not say that

the PRC had extended an invitation to India. The best he could do was

to propose that the U.S. and the PRC deliver to the U.K. and the GOI,

respectively, official texts of the Agreed Announcement, which would

“complete the official procedures regarding invitation of third pow­

ers”. He also complained that some press accounts were distorting the

meaning of the Announcement by alleging that the U.S. was to invite

the GOI and the PRC the U.K.

Before the next meeting (the 16th on September 20) it became obvi­

ous that the PRC was prepared to argue vigorously for its interpretation

of Paragraph 2. A commentary, entitled “Forbid the Misinterpretation

of an Agreement” appeared in the Jen Min Jih Pao on September 16,

which alleged that the USIS was distorting the Agreed Announcement

by stating that it was the U.S. which should invite India and the PRC

which should invite the U.K. The commentary rejected this interpre­

tation, declaring that the “attempt” by the USIS to “juggle the facts to

hoodwink world opinion” was “not a very smart trick”.

On the same day, September 16, Wang, acting under instructions

from his government, sent me a letter (my despatch No. 5, September

the U.S. had formally invited India and declared that this statement

would be interpreted and understood by the PRC as meaning that the

U.S. agreed to India’s assuming the functions entrusted to it by the PRC.

At the same time he asked me to inform him whether the U.S. had for­

mally “entrusted the United Kingdom”, adding that when this had been

done, the PRC would notify the U.K. of its agreement.

At the 16th meeting, on September 20, Wang sought persistently,

but unsuccessfully, to get me to agree to his interpretation. Finally, he

accepted my statement that the U.S. had requested the U.K. to assume

the functions set forth in the Agreed Announcement choosing to inter­

pret it as a formal invitation and said that the PRC would notify the U.K.

of its agreement. He also stated at this meeting, for the first time, that the

PRC had formally invited the GOI. Although it must have been clear to

Wang after this meeting that the difference of interpretation of Paragraph

2 remained as sharp as ever, he and his government apparently decided

to make the best of it, for the issue has not been raised again.

A possible explanation of the PRC’s decision to make an issue of the

interpretation of Paragraph 2 is that both Wang and his government

thought the U.S. was interested only in getting a satisfactory wording in

the published Announcement and would tacitly accede in the execution

of the Announcement to the position maintained by the PRC. Some sup­

port is lent this hypothesis by the following statement in Wang’s letter:

“It must be pointed out that our side has taken into account the

difficult position in diplomatic relations in which the U.S. Government

finds [itself,] and has acceded to your proposed text on the entrusting

of third powers in its present form in the Agreed Announcement. How­

ever, on the concrete content with regard to the Chinese Government’s

entrusting the Indian Government and the U.S. Government entrusting

the U.K. Government, both sides cannot have any other interpretation.”

If Wang and his government did actually believe that the U.S. was

interested primarily in words rather than substance, it would have

been natural for the PRC to react with surprise and indignation when it

discovered its belief ill-­founded.

It is hard to believe that Wang himself, at least, held any such

opinion. He had listened at length to our reasons for insisting that the

U.S. Government authorize the GOI to act in the U.S. In agreeing on the

somewhat ambiguous wording of Paragraph 2 using the word invited

we were careful to give Wang no cause to infer that we had yielded

to his view of what actually should be done with respect to the third

countries.

The most likely explanation of what happened, in my opinion,

is that Wang, possibly not appreciating the clear implication of the

English text, failed to inform his government accurately of the situ­

ation. The fact that he had retained in the Chinese text the word wei

t’o (to entrust) as a translation of the verb to invite may have mis­

led Peiping into believing that we had, in substance, accepted their

position. Wang may have failed to take sufficiently into account the

fact that the Chinese text would be read only in China, while the rest

of the world would interpret the Agreed Announcement according

to the English text. In the meeting on September 20 Wang certainly

gave every appearance of a man who had been caught off base and

was trying desperately to retrieve his error.

Possibly the key to the incident lies in the timing of the actions

taken by the two sides. It happened that I was able to inform Wang on

September 14 that we had invited the GOI to assume its functions in

the U.S., but was unable to tell him at that time what we had done with

respect to the U.K. The PRC Government may have assumed that we

were attempting to force it to invite the U.K. for the purpose either of

compelling it to accept our interpretation of Paragraph 2 or as a pretext

to delay going on to Item 2 of the Agenda.

The Jen Min Jih Pao commentary suggests that something of this

sort was in the minds of responsible persons in Peiping, for it alleges

that the USIS interpretation “gives the impression that the U.S. Govern­

ment is unwilling to act according to the agreement by commissioning

a third country [i.e., the U.K.] to assist, but would like to make China

responsible for this matter”. The same commentary goes on to warn

that “should the U.S. fail to commission the Government of the U.K.,

the execution of the agreement would be hampered”.

It may be that had I been able on September 14 to inform Wang

of our action regarding the U.K., the issue would never have attained

the proportions that it did, for that would have removed from their

minds the unfounded suspicion that we did not propose to act at all

with respect to the U.K.

Whatever may be the true reason for the Chinese acting the way

they did, one thing is certain—­in accepting our compromise wording

for Paragraph 2 of the Agreed Announcement Wang burned his fingers,

and he will be much more cautious in the future.

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Enclosure

“Invitation” to Third Country—Comparison of Successive Texts

August 2

Wang proposed that China and U.S. each entrust third

country of own choice to take charge of affairs of

nationals of each country, first of all their return.

August 11

Chinese draft—“The People’s Republic of China and

the United States of America will each entrust the

Republic of India and the United Kingdom respectively

with the charge of the affairs of the return of civilians of

the respective countries residing in the other.”

August 16

U.S. draft—“The Embassy of the Republic of India in

the United States will be authorized to assist the return

to the China mainland of those Chinese nationals who

desire to do so.”

(same wording, mutatis mutandis, in Chinese section)

August 18

Chinese draft—“The People’s Republic of China agrees

that the Office of the Charge d’Affaires of the United

Kingdom in the People’s Republic of China will be

authorized to assist the return to the United States of

those American nationals who desire to do so.”

(same wording, mutatis mutandis, in U.S. section)

August 23

U.S. draft—“The United States will authorize the Gov­

ernment of the Republic of India to assist the return to

the People’s Republic of China of those Chinese who

desire to do so.”

(same wording, mutatis mutandis, in Chinese section)

August 25

Chinese draft—“The People’s Republic of China agrees

that the Government of the United Kingdom will be

entrusted to assist in the return to the United States of

America of those Americans who desire to do so.”

(same wording, mutatis mutandis, in U.S. section)

August 31

U.S. draft—“The United States will authorize the Gov­

ernment of the Republic of India to assist the return to

the People’s Republic of China of those Chinese who

desire to do so.”

(same wording, mutatis mutandis, in Chinese section)

September 6

U.S. draft—“The Government of the Republic of India

will be invited to assist in the return to the People’s

Republic of China of those Chinese who desire to do so.”

(same wording, mutatis mutandis, in Chinese section)

September 10

Agreed Announcement—­same as above

811. From Johnson.

1. Two and one-­half hour meeting this morning. At opening I

referred to questions and/or suggestions on implementation I had raised

last meeting and hoped Wang had replies this morning. He launched into

long prepared statement terming discussion of item two “thus far unsat­

isfactory”, were spending time on “details” concerning agreed announce­

ment and I was raising questions in this regard to “prevent discussion

Limited Distribution.

substance item two”. Renewed suggestions be discussed by assistants or

through UK Charge Peking.

2. Then referring to my suggestion on subjects we discuss under

item two stated “each side may raise subjects it considers should be

discussed and not necessary to limit subjects or to fix their order”.

There is no necessity carry on any prolonged argument on subjects to

be discussed, “will not agree removal any subjects”, then went on with

long justification for discussion higher level meeting largely repeating

previous line. He then referred my two subjects stating he had already

given me list all Americans in China including military personnel, if

by raising subject I intended imply more Americans in China “this was

sheer fabrication”, we have not given them list of Chinese in US, if there

is to be any accounting of personnel up to us to do accounting.

3. Then turned to renunciation of force, should distinguish between

civil conflicts which outside scope of these talks and international dis­

putes. “Even in civil conflicts China had striven for peaceful solutions

when circumstances permit.” “Chiang clique under wings of foreign

forces has refused peaceful settlement and carries on harassing activi­

ties;” China has consistently upheld peaceful settlement international

disputes, consistently supported principles UN Charter on peaceful

settlement international disputes, references to Bandung, Five Princi­

ples, etc. “Chinese do not want to fight with US” and Dulles said no

fighting in Taiwan area between Americans and Chinese. Therefore

no question cease-fire between China and US. US is one using force

achieve national objectives, Taiwan is Chinese territory, was restored

to China World War II and yet US encroaches on and occupies and has

said it will use force prevent liberation. PRC wishes discuss withdrawal

all US forces from Taiwan and coastal islands. If I fully empowered dis­

cuss and settle this question he ready to do likewise. In closing referred

my statement previous meeting I had faith and hope and said he shared

but “we would have to strive harder and prove our desires by deeds”.

4. I said I first wanted to deal with implementation. I did not want

to spend time on details, did not see why it was necessary. All that was

required were simple answers to my simple questions, could be disposed

of in few minutes. In reply his suggestion on UK taking up questions

Peiping, pointed out agreed announcement had two aspects: one, actions

to be taken by our governments which were intergovernmental matters

between us, and two, functions third powers. Words of agreed announce­

ment resolved nothing, only implementation resolved questions. Some

of questions I had raised also taken up by UK in Peiping but no satis­

factory replies. Repeated in full three questions on whether Americans

in jail informed of text announcement, their access to UK Charge, and

authority UK Charge interview them. Said simple affirmative answers

would immediately dispose of these questions here. Difficult understand

why he couldn’t give me simple answers, pointing out his failure to do

so was what was delaying talks. Then made detailed statement point­

ing out none of remaining 19 yet released, could not consider this faith­

ful implementation of announcement, PRC failure give benefit agreed

announcement 10 imprisoned Americans makes it meaningless as far as

Americans in PRC desiring return are concerned. In view of continued

delay becoming more concerned over his statement September 23 meet­

ing implying persons in jail not covered by provisions agreed announce­

ment, could not accept any such construction and asked for confirmation

all American civilians whether or not in jail covered by announcement.

Could not agree to his implied interpretation our not insisting on definite

time limit for release constituted agreement to indefinite delay in release.

Must insist implementation agreed announcement provisions tor expe­

ditious departure all Americans who desire to return including those still

imprisoned. His continued reference to improved relations as factor in

release could not but be interpreted as intent disregard explicit terms of

announcement and “to hold these human beings as hostages for political

advantage”. My government had promptly implemented announcement

and had not and would not attach political conditions to carrying it out.

Chinese have been and still were free to leave. Failure his government

match our promptness in implementation was what was slowing prog­

ress talks. Referring his previous statements on pressure, did not see why

it was submission to pressure for PRC “to do what it publicly declared in

our agreed announcement it was going to do”.

5. He objected all my remarks as falling into item one and again

raising matters which already discussed and settled. PRC would

“faithfully carry out agreement but would not allow any distorted

interpretation” of announcement. Will continue review cases but

action must be accordance Chinese law, cases will be reviewed “in

light of the agreement, degree of the offense, conduct and improve­

ment of relations.” There was then much give and take until he clari­

fied and corrected interpretation of previous statement by saying cases

Americans being reviewed “accordance” agreed announcement and,

in light of discussion, I interpret as being satisfactory statement that

all Americans including those in prison included within announce­

ment. I also pressed him hard on other three questions and although

his answer vague and unsatisfactory with respect to specific assur­

ance each American in prison had been informed of announcement,

reiterated previous assurances wide publicity included measures to

assure every American informed. In spite continual pressure he flatly

refused answer other two questions saying this not the place for dis­

cussion. After long and unsuccessful prodding I expressed hope he

would assure me UK Charge would promptly be given replies. He

kept repeating he had nothing more to say.

6. I then referred to remainder his statement and said I wished to

study and give detailed reply later. However I pointed out my sugges­

tion on order of discussion of subjects was designed to contribute to

orderly progress. I defined what I meant by US personnel by stating

this concerned American military personnel still missing from Korean

hostilities concerning whom there was reason to believe his authori­

ties had information. Then said considered renunciation of force most

important, therefore probably should be discussed first, and I would be

prepared say more on subject next meeting. Then repeated arguments

against higher level meeting stating nothing he had said this morning

had changed my mind.

7. He replied stating question US military personnel had been fully

covered at Panmunjom, no reason for raising it here, and if we did so he

reserved right raise question of US accounting for personnel detained

in Korean War. Repeated his arguments on higher level meeting as well

as statement that if I had full authority deal with “important and out­

standing questions arising in the Taiwan area” he was ready to discuss.

8. I agreed his proposal next meeting Saturday, October 8. There

was then considerable argument on press communique, he insist­

ing communique be confined to statement we had continued discuss

agenda item two, and I insisting on previous communique. We finally

agreed on simply stating we had met and give time next meeting.

Gowen

815. From Johnson.

1. In spite of his efforts at today’s meeting to avoid being drawn

into discussion of implementation Wang could not refrain from some

replies and thus again let himself be trapped into such discussion. In

fact outside of his opening statement probably 85 per cent of today’s

discussion was devoted to implementation. However towards end he

realized what he had done and is going to be much more cautious and

difficult this regard at next meeting.

Distribution.

2. However, he has neatly avoided being drawn into any discus­

sion of “agenda” under Item 2. They have divided our purpose this

regard and it is difficult to argue with his position which is substan­

tially that either of us can bring up any subject within agenda Item 2 he

wishes any time he wishes. We find ourselves on the other side of our

usual controversy in this regard when dealing with Communists.

3. Felt it was in our best interest to agree to Saturday meeting. Nei­

ther of us has thus far opposed other’s proposal for date of meeting.

While we have tacitly alternated on suggested date for next meeting I

had in fact made suggestion at both of last two preceding meetings and

he well realized it was past his “turn” at today’s meeting. Also I felt that

as I was successful in getting through today’s meeting without use any

of additional material Department has authorized under Item 2 I was

in relatively good position for Saturday meeting.

4. With respect implementation feel that I was successful today in

obtaining full retreat by Wang from his previous implication announce­

ment did not apply imprisoned Americans. Feel I pressed other ques­

tions at today’s meeting give O’Neill excellent basis for formal approach

on unanswered questions affecting UK functions and I hope he will

promptly follow up.

Gowen

817. From Johnson.

1. Two of problems I face with respect to next meeting are Wang’s

probable refusal be drawn into any discussion implementation and

his already expressed refusal be drawn into discussion of an “agenda”

under item two. Have managed maintain present line for almost one

month with negative results thus far on return additional Americans.

Within narrow frame of obtaining return Americans I would be inclined

to continue on and harden our present line up to point of threatening

Distribution.

take issue to public and facing break if necessary. However within large

frame of reference this is not practical.

2. Therefore, my inclination for next meeting or two is try out tactic

of what might be termed softening our line by omitting all reference to

implementation and concentrating on renunciation of force. I do not

see we lose anything by this and hope we might gain something with

respect release Americans. I have in every possible way expressed our

dissatisfaction with implementation and have thoroughly preserved

my ability return to it at any time. If this tactic produces no favorable

results on release Americans during course next meeting or two I am

in a position to return to implementation in stronger terms than ever.

3. Renunciation of force is nothing they desire discuss and it

gives them nothing. My thought would be to open next meeting with

prepared statement, giving Wang a copy, and see where this leads. It

is also an excellent reply to his statement at today’s meeting to which

I would attempt no direct reply at this time.

4. With respect to future offer for consideration thought that I

might at some time suggest either of us could at end these talks bring

up any procedural matters we considered appropriate and any dis­

cussion higher level meeting should be deferred until that time. This

would be consistent our present position and still keep pot of gold

dangling. Unless we do something this nature seems to me in spite

our best efforts going to become increasingly clear to CHICOMS that

there is nothing for them in item two. We must postpone as long as

possible their coming to this conclusion, and this is becoming increas­

ingly difficult.

Gowen

818. From Johnson.

NCNA correspondent here has today apparently dropped line

imprisoned Americans not covered by agreed announcement. Is now

feeding line cases being reviewed and “pressure” on CHICOMs release

raises problem of face, making action difficult.

Gowen

819. From Johnson.

to questions I had asked him last meeting.

2. Wang read from long prepared statement. He said he believed

both of us recognized our discussion agenda item two thus far had been

unsatisfactory. It had been nearly a month since agreement on return of

civilians from both sides concluded, but we were still spending time on

details of implementation thus preventing us from proceeding to dis­

cussion agenda item two. At last meeting I had raised questions which

went into details of implementation of agreement. Such questions

might well be put to Chinese Government in accordance with terms of

agreement by third state entrusted with functions. In our case it would

be United Kingdom. Since both sides had entrusted respective third

states perform functions, we should trust Embassy or office of Charge

of third states to handle detailed questions on implementation of agree­

ment instead of interfering with our talks here.

3. Wang said he could not agree with way questions on implemen­

tation being used by me to prevent discussion substance of item two.

He had suggested at last meeting that our assistants get together to

discuss details of implementation and consider any reasonable sug­

gestions I might wish make. I had turned down proposal, however, so

under circumstances he thought questions on implementation should

be addressed to Chinese Government through UK Charge.

4. He said I had also put forward two subjects under agenda item

two and had raised question of order of subjects. He had indicated he

could not agree to removal any of his subjects nor to any fixed order

for discussion. There was no necessity for carrying on prolonged

Limited Distribution.

argument on such procedural questions. Under agenda item two

“other practical matters” we had agreed each side could raise any

question it thought should be discussed so that there would be free

expression of opinions. Therefore, it was not necessary limit subjects

for discussion nor to fix order. Both sides could express opinions on

all subjects raised and proceed take action first on points on which we

able reach accord. Thus we would keep from falling into controversy

over procedural matters and not hinder talks from making further

progress.

5. He said on September 14 he had put forward two subjects

for discussion under agenda item two: “question of embargo” and

“preparations for Sino-American negotiations at a higher level.” He

had explained what he meant by two subjects. He could not agree

that higher level meeting was not a “practical matter.” I had said at

last meeting his suggestion appeared to imply a decision even before

discussion at this level that it impossible for us settle practical mat­

ters in these talks. His suggestions, on contrary, did not contain this

implication at all. His proposal that each side could raise any sub­

ject it wished discuss should have removed any misunderstanding

this score. Opinion his side it more practical to negotiate at a higher

level such major questions as easing and eliminating tension between

China and US in Taiwan area. It was definitely practical matter and

fit subject for these talks to arrange such practical and feasible chan­

nels as might be needed to settle issues of outstanding importance

between China and US.

6. Wang continued by saying I had maintained a higher level meet­

ing could only be held after these talks. His side had also envisaged that

the higher level meeting should come after these talks were completed.

That was no reason we should not arrange for convening higher level

conference here. If we fail to make arrangement here it would make con­

vening higher level conference more difficult.

7. He said he also wanted to know my opinion on question of

embargo. I had stated last meeting I had two subjects: accounting for

US personnel and renunciation of use of force. However, I had not

given any explanation of these two subjects. He found it hard to under­

stand why subject “so-­called accounting” had been raised. At outset of

talks on agenda item one he had given list 87 Americans which repre­

sented all Americans in China. It included all Americans both civilian

and military. If by raising subject I had intended imply there were still

more Americans in China this was sheer fabrication which his side not

able accept. Up to now our side had not submitted to his side list of all

Chinese in US. If there was to be any accounting at all it was up to our

side give him complete list Chinese.

8. Wang said with respect to question renunciation of force, we

should distinguish between civil war (internal conflicts) and interna­

tional disputes. Civil conflicts clearly would fall outside terms of ref­

erence these talks. But even with respect to civil conflicts China had

striven for peaceful solutions when circumstances permitted. Fact was

that Chiang clique under wings of foreign forces had refused peaceful

settlement and carried on harassing activities. Wang’s side could not

stand by and do nothing.

9. He said that with respect to international disputes, they had

always upheld their settlement by negotiation. China in association

with other countries had initiated the Five Principles of Peaceful

­Coexistence. They had consistently supported the provisions of Charter

of United Nations concerning settlement of disputes by peaceful means

and calling for no recourse to force. During Asian African conference in

Bandung China had explicitly stated its position this regard and joined

with others in issuing statements. With respect Sino-­American relations

Chou En-­lai had repeatedly and explicitly stated that there was no war

between China and United States, that Chinese people did not want to

fight with America, and we should sit down and negotiate. Secretary

of State Dulles had also said that no fighting going on in Taiwan area

between Chinese and Americans. Therefore, there was no question of

arranging cease-­fire between China and America.

10. He said if we were to discuss renunciation of force that it was pre­

cisely US which was using force to achieve national objectives. Taiwan

was Chinese territory. It was restored to China after World War II. And

yet US had encroached upon it, and occupied it and would use force to

prevent liberation of Taiwan and islands off coast China. If we discussed

question then we would have to discuss withdrawal all US forces from

Taiwan and islands. They had recognized that it would be very difficult

to settle this question in these talks so they did not raise it. However, if

we wished to discuss it here and I had full authority to discuss and settle

this problem he was ready to discuss it with me.

11. He concluded saying that in previous meeting I had said I had

faith and hope that two of us would make progress on practical matters

and would strive to do so. He warmly welcomed this statement and

assured me he would strive to best his ability realize that hope. Mean­

while, he wanted point out in all frankness that if we were to realize

hope of both of us we would have to strive harder than before, and both

should prove desire we had expressed by our actual deeds.

12. In reply I said he had made a long statement and I wanted to

carefully study and consider it. But first I wanted to deal with question

of implementation agreed announcement. He had expressed desire not

to spend too much time on details and I certainly agree as I had told him

at last meeting. Furthermore, I did not see why it should be necessary

for us to do so. He had suggested that these be dealt with through UK

Charge or Indian Embassy. I wanted point out agreed announcement

provided for certain actions to be taken by our respective governments

and provided for other functions to be performed by other countries.

Those matters which according to agreed announcement concerned

actions by our governments were an intergovernmental matter between

us. Words of agreed announcement resolved nothing, but only imple­

mentation of these words would resolve problem with which we were

concerned under agenda item one. Some of questions I had raised had

also been raised by UK Charge in Peking but satisfactory replies had

not been received by him.

13. In addition to question of 19 Americans in jail, I had raised three

simple questions at several meetings. In accordance with his sugges­

tion I had rephrased these questions in the form of suggestions which

he had said his government would be willing to consider. These three

suggestions were simply: (1) I asked whether or not he could confirm

that Americans in jail had been given text of agreed announcement in

language they could understand. We had received no information from

UK Charge confirming this done. It seemed very simple matter and he

could simply answer with yes which would dispose of this question. (2)

I asked whether or not those persons in jail could freely communicate

with or otherwise have access to UK Charge in accordance with terms

agreed announcement. Again very simple affirmative answer could

dispose of this question here. (3) I asked whether or not UK Charge

would be permitted interview persons who desired return if under

agreed announcement US wanted facts in any such case investigated.

Again simple affirmative answer would dispose this question here.

14. I considered these matters of implementation of announce­

ment ones which concerned both our governments. These questions

had also been raised by UK Charge and replies satisfactory to US had

not been received through him. I found it difficult understand why I

could not have answers to these simple questions. Difficult understand

why his government appeared be moving so slowly in implementing

agreed announcement and thus delaying our talks here. Best way make

progress would be for his government implement announcement and

for him frankly inform me here in this regard. At last meeting he had

assured me that his government would faithfully carry out agreed

announcement. He told me that cases of remaining 19 Americans were

being reviewed individually and that British Charge would be notified

of results of these reviews. Yet, up to present time, I did not know of

a single such case which has been reported to British Charge, despite

fact a month had passed since issuance of agreed announcement. I

found difficult see how this was “faithful implementation” of the

announcement. Apparent failure his government, up to the present, to

give benefit of agreed announcement to imprisoned Americans made it

meaningless as far as Americans in his country were concerned.

15. I said in view of his government’s continued delay in permitting

any of 19 Americans to return, I was becoming more concerned over a

statement which he made at our 17th meeting on September 23. He had

said that agreed announcement concerned civilians, and not those he

termed criminals or persons who had violated laws. He implied that

persons in jail were not “civilians” and therefore not covered by pro­

visions of agreed announcement. He did not mention nor even hint at

such an interpretation of agreed announcement during course of our

discussions prior to September 10 and I wanted to make it clear that I

could not accept any such construction of announcement. I asked him

to confirm to me that agreed announcement applied to all American

civilians whether or not they were in his jails.

16. I said that at our last meeting also he had referred to my pro­

posal, made during course of our discussions, that he specify a defi­

nite period of time within which all Americans in his country would

be allowed to leave. As he had pointed out, he refused to specify any

length of time. I had expressed to him a number of times my govern­

ment’s dissatisfaction with his government’s refusal to accede to this

reasonable proposal. Nevertheless, in interest of advancing these talks

and on basis of his assurances that imprisoned Americans would be

released expeditiously, my government did consent to issuance of

the agreed announcement, even in absence of a specific time limit for

release of Americans. His remarks at last meeting made it appear he

interpreted my government’s concession in not insisting on a definite

time limit as constituting agreement to indefinite delay by his govern­

ment in releasing Americans. I emphatically rejected any such inter­

pretation and stated clearly and unequivocally that my government

considered that agreed announcement provided for expeditious depar­

ture from his country of all Americans who desired to return to United

States, including those Americans still imprisoned.

17. I said he had also repeated several times at our last meeting

that only improved relations between our two countries could enable

his government to take “more lenient” attitude toward Americans in

prison. It was difficult for us not to interpret this as an intent by his gov­

ernment to disregard explicit terms of our announcement and to hold

these human beings as hostages for political advantage.

18. I said my government had issued agreed announcement in

good faith, promptly and energetically began to implement it and

fully expected that his government would do same. My government

attached no political conditions to its carrying out of terms announce­

ment and does not intend to do so. Chinese were permitted to leave

United States freely even before issuance of agreed announcement and

since that time have continued to depart freely. From July 11 to October

3, 402 Chinese left United States for Far East.

19. I said he had accused my government of intentionally stalling

in order not to begin discussion of subjects introduced under agenda

item two. I did not see any basis for such an accusation. My government

acted with great promptness to implement agreed announcement and

thus cleared way for promptly going on to item two. It was only failure

of his government to act with equal promptness which had resulted in

slowing progress of talks. If stalling was involved, it should be obvious

that that was where fault lay.

20. I said he had also implied that if his government were to release

all Americans promptly, this would be submitting to pressure. I did

not see how carrying out promptly an obligation which a government

had freely and publicly accepted could be regarded as submitting to

pressure. My government certainly did not consider it was submitting

to pressure in setting up arrangements for India to assist departure of

Chinese from the US and taking other action it had taken with respect

to Chinese in the US. Why should it be considered any more submis­

sion to pressure for his government to do what it publicly declared in

our agreed announcement it was going to do?

21. I said I would comment later on some other points raised in

remainder his statement.

22. Wang replied he considered all remarks I had just made

belonged in field agenda item one which we had already covered in

our discussion and to which his side had already replied. Regarding

implementation agreement he had repeatedly said his side would

carry out agreement faithfully. However he would not allow any dis­

torted interpretation of agreement question return of Americans in

prison had to be dealt with according Chinese law. His side would

continue review cases these people but action on part his government

could only be carried out in light of conditions which he had told me.

That is their cases would be reviewed by taking into account degree

of their offenses, their conduct, and improvement relations between

two countries in light of agreement we had reached. Only under such

circumstances would it be possible his government adopt measures

more lenient than present very lenient measures being taken. He

could not agree to changing legal procedures of China and conditions

he had informed me of and demand that Chinese Government do cer­

tain things unconditionally.

23. Wang said with respect question details implementation agree­

ment he had suggested assistants both sides hold meetings at which

our side could put forward any reasonable suggestion it wished. As

he had said in statement this morning these questions might also be

raised by UK Charge with his government. In his view if we continued

entangle talks in such details it would not contribute to progress in our

talks. Fault for stalling talks which prevented a full exchange of views

on agenda item two was not theirs and they were not satisfied with

state of things.

24. I said I was not satisfied either. I had asked him again in this

meeting questions which I had asked in previous meetings. Instead of

discussing where these questions should be discussed, referring them

to third country or referring them to our assistants, these questions

could be disposed of in a few minutes between us. He had spoken of

my distorting the interpretation of announcement. If I had distorted it

in any way that was what I wanted to know. I had asked him to confirm

to me whether his government interpreted announcement to apply to

all civilians whether or not they were in prison. This was vital matter

between our two governments and not one which could be dealt with

by assistants or third powers. Other three questions I had asked him

had also been raised by UK Charge in Peiping and he had not received

any satisfactory replies to them. Certainly Wang could simply say yes,

Americans in prison had been given text agreed announcement in lan­

guage which they understood. Certainly he could say yes those Ameri­

cans have been given freedom communicate with UK Charge. Certainly

he could say yes UK Charge would be permitted interview these per­

sons who desired return if my government wanted facts in their cases to

be investigated. I did not see why we spent so much time on this matter

either but I did not see why direct replies should be avoided. I never

suggested that action his government took to implement announce­

ment should disregard Chinese legal processes and it was assumed

that his government had taken this into consideration when he agreed

announcement. Again I wished to say I had made no demands. I was

merely asking how announcement was being implemented.

25. Wang said he had already answered some of questions I had

raised previously and this was not place for discussing other questions.

If we continued to put forward all questions dealt with in our meet­

ings in past he would have to say these questions were being used to

stall progress of meetings. If we discuss questions which should not

belong within field of discussion in this meeting then their discussion

for even one minute was a waste of time. He could not understand why

we repeat work which could be done by the third states after we had

entrusted these third states in accordance with agreed announcement.

If we had any reasonable suggestions these could be raised in a meeting

of assistants instead of continuing discussion here and thus preventing

progress. No necessity discuss these questions at this meeting because

if I felt I had reasonable suggestions to make we might as well arrange

special meeting of assistants to consider any reasonable suggestions.

26. Wang said since 15th meeting we had held four sessions and

discussion agenda item two was still in beginning stage so easy see

why he was dissatisfied with progress of talks. He hoped at meeting

of Ambassadors when we had limited time at our disposal we would

not bring up over and over again those questions we had dealt with

in past. If we went on this way it would prevent discussion of major

issues we came here to discuss. Points I have raised had been dealt with

by his side many times. Remaining Americans who had violated laws

were only handful and they would be dealt with in light of agreement

reached, in accordance with Chinese legal procedures, and considering

the seriousness of their crimes and their conduct. Individual reviews of

their cases would be made and when completed his side would inform

UK which was third country entrusted by our side. It not necessary for

us to discuss at this meeting questions of this nature.

27. I asked if it was correct that his government did consider terms

of agreed announcement applied to all American civilians including

prisoners.

28. Wang said he had already replied to this question and he could

not make any interpretation beyond his statement.

29. I said it was very simple question but I had difficulty interpret­

ing his reply. All I had asked for was clarification.

30. Wang asked if I was not clear about answers he had given me.

31. I said no, I was not.

32. Wang read again from prepared text which he said was

only reply he could give because it was in conformity with agreed

announcement.

33. I asked whether phrase “in light of agreement” could be trans­

lated as “in accordance with agreement.” At that point there was some

discussion between interpreters during which it appeared “in light of”

should from beginning have been translated “in accordance with.”

34. I said I had no intention of belaboring point but he had said

he had also answered my other questions. If he had done so in previ­

ous meetings I may have missed his answers. I asked if he felt he had

answered my other questions.

35. Wang replied he had answered some of them.

36. I said I could not recall when.

37. Wang said I might refer to record of meetings.

38. I said I had done so and I could not find his answers. I had no

intention of belaboring point, but I wanted to know if each American

had received text of agreed announcement in English.

39. Wang said this question had been answered in past.

40. Was answer “yes”?

41. He said, “yes, of course.” It was provided that agreed announce­

ment be given wide publicity.

42. I said may be some did not see announcement and there was

special responsibility on part his government to see that those in prison

had been given copies of announcement. I simply wanted to know if

that had been done.

43. Wang said he had told me that agreed announcement provided

for wide publicity which meant that everyone should know about it.

He had told me his side was faithfully carrying out agreement. This

question was one of those which arose out of implementation of agree­

ment. Didn’t I trust them to faithfully implement agreement?

44. I said I was not raising question of trust and accepted his state­

ment. I naturally had a question because some of those Americans

released from prison had not heard of agreed announcement. I merely

wanted him to assure me that the appropriate authorities in his country

had made sure the text of agreed announcement was given to prisoners.

I was willing accept his assurances this had been done.

45. Wang said his side would implement fully anything required

of them by agreed announcement. He did not believe information on

which I had based my statement was accurate.

46. I replied I had merely passed on to him information which those

who had been released had given to us. I hoped he would assure him­

self that others had been informed. I hoped I could accept his statement

regarding implementation of agreed announcement as indicating per­

sons in jail would have freedom to communicate with UK Charge and

that he would be permitted to interview them. UK Charge had received

no communication from any of individuals concerned although almost

one month had now passed since agreed announcement issued. This

was difficult for us to understand.

47. Following long pause Wang said he had nothing to say in this

regard. He asked if I had anything to say on points he had raised.

48. I asked if he were unable to give me an answer to these two

questions. I did not want to discuss them at length.

49. Wang said he did not consider it necessary to answer these

questions here. As he had suggested, they could be handled in a meet­

ing of assistants or through third powers.

50. I said these questions had already been raised by UK Charge

and no replies received. I hoped he could assure me that replies would

be received by UK Charge promptly. If he received replies it would not

be necessary raise questions here.

51. Wang said he had nothing to say.

52. I said this was very disappointing to me. Regarding remainder

of his statement I wished to study it carefully because it was long and

I would reply in detail at next meeting. I would hope at next meeting

question implementation would be satisfactorily resolved so not neces­

sary to spend time on that.

53. I said I had made suggestion last meeting regarding subjects we

might discuss and order in which we might discuss them. It seemed me

it would contribute to orderly progress our discussion if we had some

understanding regarding order we would discuss questions. Regarding

item on accounting for US personnel I had in mind question of military

personnel still missing from Korean hostilities concerning whom my

government had reason believe authorities in his country might have

some information. However I considered problem of renunciation of

force as most important and most fundamental subject with which we

had to deal. Therefore, I considered we should discuss that first and we

would be prepared at next meeting to go into that subject.

54. I said I welcomed his statement that he shared my hope we

could make progress in dealing with some of these problems here. I

believed we could. It seemed to me, only after we saw what progress

we were able to make here, that question of what would happen after

these meetings would arise. I had given my thoughts regarding dis­

cussion of meeting at higher level and what he had said in that regard

did not change my view previously expressed that this was procedural

matter. I honestly did not see how question of where or in what forum

we discussed these issues between us was an issue in itself. These were

two different matters. First was practical questions between two coun­

tries. Entirely apart from these was where they should be discussed and

by whom. My government had agreed to our discussing these practical

questions here. I could not see how proposal of another place to discuss

these questions was in itself a practical matter, and nothing he had said

had served to change my mind on this. I desired to make a careful reply

to rest of his statement at next meeting.

55. Wang said by item “accounting for personnel” had I in mind

personnel in Korea conflict?

56. I said American personnel.

57. Wang said he thought there was no reason for raising this ques­

tion which had already become famous because of discussions regard­

ing it at Kaesong and Panmunjom. He felt it regrettable that questions

of Korean War which had already been discussed were being put for­

ward at this meeting. If there was to be any talk about accounting for

personnel it was for United States to account for personnel it detained

in Korean War. If I wanted to raise this question he would also reserve

right raise similar question of this nature.

58. Wang said he could not accept our contention that discussion

preparations for higher level meeting was merely procedural matter.

He had in mind that issues outstanding importance between China

and US would be more practically discussed between two govern­

ments at higher level. This did not mean that higher level confer­

ence would replace our talks, but simply that there were number of

questions which could be more appropriately discussed in certain

forums at certain places. He said an illustration was fact that before

our talks started here, contacts were made between our consular

representatives. The American side had proposed these contacts be

raised to Ambassadorial level because it was found that there were

some questions which could not be settled by consular representa­

tives and which could be resolved in a conference at Ambassado­

rial level. His side considered there were still other questions which

could be more practically resolved in higher level conference. If I had

full authority to resolve important and outstanding questions arising

in Taiwan area, then he was ready discuss these questions with me.

At next meeting when I made more detailed reply he would com­

ment further.

59. I said I had nothing more.

60. Wang proposed we meet again October 8 and I agreed.

61. I said I would like to issue the same press statement we had

made after last meeting.

62. Wang said he had indicated he would not agree to issue any

more statements similar to one after last meeting. He suggested a state­

ment saying we continued discussion on second item of agenda and

omitting any reference to agenda item one. He added this form was

exactly similar to press releases during discussion agenda item one and

suggested we might use it for entire period of discussion agenda item

two.

63. I said I did not want to go back over our substantive discus­

sion, this release was not entirely factual because we had also discussed

implementation of agreed announcement.

64. Wang said implementation of agreed announcement was sup­

plementary question and not main issue. Furthermore implementation

was not listed on agenda, therefore, no justification for including state­

ment on implementation item one.

65. I said I disagreed because I considered implementation agreed

announcement as major item and whether or not he agreed in this posi­

tion, it was one I had taken at meeting. I was unable agree with his

suggestion and if he was unable accept mine may be best follow his

suggestion last meeting we say nothing about subjects discussed.

66. He agreed to release: “The Ambassadors of the United States

of America and the People’s Republic of China held their 19th meeting

today. The next meeting will be held at 10 am Saturday, October 8.”

Gowen

834. For Johnson.

Penultimate paragraph Department’s 826.

Father McGuire of NCWC advises Belgian priest’s report not

based on recent contact with Walsh. Walsh’s superior sent him telegram

September 23 instructing him leave Red China and report travel plans

soonest. Although no word yet from Walsh, McGuire assures us Walsh

will comply these instructions.

Dulles

Drafted by Nagoski.

838. For Johnson.

1. Omission of any reference at next meeting to serious Chinese

Communist dereliction in implementation Agreed Announcement

would result in failure to reflect our continuous concern at absence any

evidence Chinese Communist good faith in last four weeks. It would

be inappropriate to conceal our preoccupation with this all-­important

issue at any meeting while Chinese Communist compliance remains

incomplete. We wish keep box score on detained Americans constantly

before Wang until all released.

2. However we recognize that repetitive debate on this question at

next meeting might be counterproductive. You are authorized to con­

fine your remarks on this subject to a short but emphatic recall of total

Chinese Communist non-­performance since September 10. Remind

Wang that British Charge d’Affaires so far has been entirely unable

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger and by Sebald.

perform any functions envisaged for him under Agreed Announce­

ment; register our profound dissatisfaction and concern; state that there

has been no announcement of release any Americans in last four weeks

although QUOTE expeditious UNQUOTE release pledged; and end

with observation that we shall continually scrutinize record of Chinese

Communist performance or non-­performance most closely.

3. After making this brief statement and without insisting on fur­

ther discussion, you may then proceed with renunciation of force item.

Presentation of statement approved. Material for your use in later dis­

cussions now being prepared.

4. It is not essential to fix a rigid order of all agenda items under Point

Two at next meeting although this may serve as subject for discussion.

5. We have requested Foreign Office to instruct O’Neill to put your

three unanswered questions to Chinese Communist Foreign Office

through formal approach. Text of our memorandum to British being

sent you separately.

6. Meetings only three or four days apart are too frequent. FYI Other

demands on Secretary and senior officers Department are so heavy

that Geneva developments cannot be appraised and new instructions

approved at such short intervals. In future endeavor arrange minimum

one week interval.

Dulles

Letter No. 11

Geneva, October 6, 1955

Dear Walter:

I have received both your letters No. 16 and No. 17 and found them

very interesting and helpful. I know the time these take from your hec­

tic day, but want you to know that from my standpoint it is well worth

while.

I was sorry to miss writing you last week, but just could not make

it and felt I had thoroughly covered the situation in my telegrams. At

the last minute I decided to drive to Prague in the new Oldsmobile I

had delivered to me here. Left at 5 a.m. and got to Prague at 9 p.m.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

clocking exactly 635 miles on the speedometer. I drove back on Mon­

day the same way, but do not think I will repeat as it is pretty strenu­

ous. However, I was very glad I went. Harold Vedeler has just arrived

up there as Counselor and we had a good chance to talk things over.

Also made a lot of calls including the Acting Foreign Minister, picked

up much information, and made arrangements with the Czechs for

Vedeler to start on the extensive economic negotiations which I had

been hoping to carry out but which could not wait any longer. Also

made arrangements for me to keep track of the negotiations here. There

will come a time when I should probably go up there for about a week

to help out. Found to my surprise the Czech press and radio are report­

ing my movements in considerable detail.

While I think of it, would you ask Newt to send to me here the FE

and UN tear sheets from the Daily Summary that he has been sending

to Prague. I will find them very useful here.

As I indicated in my telegram, I felt the renunciation of force

statement to be a masterpiece and am anxious to use it. I was sorely

tempted to do so at yesterday’s meeting but as I got along all right

without it decided to hold off in pursuance of the objective of string­

ing things out.

As I have also indicated I am still far from happy with the miss­

ing military personnel statement although it is an enormous improve­

ment over the first draft you sent me. I hope that I did not ruffle too

many feelings in my comments on it, but I wanted to make it abso­

lutely clear that I had no doubt it was just the wrong way to go about

things. Frankly, I do not see why we have to let Defense have such a

big voice in exactly how I handle the matter here. It does not seem to

me that is their business. They should give us the problem and the

information and then it should primarily be our decision on how it is

handled. It seems to me that too much attention is being paid to the

public aspects of my presentation. After all the meetings are closed,

there should not be any occasion to make the details of what I say

on the subject public, and when publicity is given to the matter it

can be handled in way we and Defense desire. It still does not seem

to me that a sterile rehash of the Panmunjom approach is the way to

go about the matter in this forum. I was, therefore, seeking for some

new approach in a maximum effort to achieve some results rather

than approaching the matter from the standpoint of building up a

public record that looks good on paper to the “give them hell” school

of thought. I am sorry, but I wanted to get this off my chest, and hav­

ing said it will go ahead and do what I am told. It probably does not

make too much difference as we are not likely to get anything in any

event. Perhaps it might have the good effect of goading them into

raising the subject of the 21,000 and this could furnish material for

much discussion.

Incidentally, I fully share your concern over the detailed material I

have available to support my position on the 450 and hope I am never

forced into details.

There is another subject I have never raised in my telegrams on which

I would appreciate some word in a telegram if you do not agree with my

understanding. It has not yet arisen in our meetings but may well do so.

Even accepting our present position on a list of subjects for discussion

under item two, I do not interpret this as precluding the raising of other

subjects by either side during the course of the talks. We, of course, do

not in any way commit ourselves in advance to discuss any subject, but

it seems to me that either side can raise any subject it might desire. We

might change our mind about old subjects, or something entirely new

might come up which it would be desired I raise here. In any event it

seems to me consistent with our position that we not close the door to the

raising of new subjects.

I believe that the suggestion with regard to giving some restrained

publicity to the possibility of travel to the PRC when detained Americans

are out to be excellent. You will recall that in my dinner conversations

with Wang he showed considerable interest in this and believe that it is

a very definite bait for them. I would think it well that anything that is

said not be in too black and white terms; i.e., not to say that never will

any passport be issued until all Americans are out, but rather somewhat

blandly to assume that implementation of the Agreed Announcement

will shortly be completed and then passports could in appropriate cases

be validated.

Incidentally, I thought the Secretary’s press conference statement

on Tuesday was excellent and very helpful. Just as a small note I have

got some ribbing from the correspondents here that after all my expla­

nations of the difference between an “Agreed Announcement” and

an “Agreement”, the Secretary uses “Agreement” in his statement

although I feel his usage was entirely unexceptional.

I am also sorry about all the confusion with the CAS man and

Colm. He was a very nice fellow and I hope that CAS does not feel

I was ungracious, as it certainly was kind of them to offer to help. As

I told you, he stoutly said CAS had no desire to keep him here to gather

background although I made it entirely clear to him that he was entirely

welcome to do so and I would give him full cooperation.

I do appreciate your successful efforts to get my instructions to

me at least the day before the meeting although I know the problem

this represents at times. For a time I was receiving them on the morn­

ing of the meeting and this makes things pretty tight for me. One of

the difficulties with this is the danger that because of decoding diffi­

culties I would miss something. One morning I had to go to a meet­

ing with the knowledge that there was a NIACT for me which they

had not yet been able to unscramble as it required servicing by the

Department. Fortunately, it did not turn out to be anything of great

importance for that particular meeting but it gave me a very uneasy

feeling for the time being.

I am very glad that you have established direct contact with the UK

Embassy in Washington so as to keep them fully informed on matters of

direct concern to them. It seems to me very important that O’Neill and

I know very promptly and fully what the other is doing. Give Hubert

Graves my very best. It is a comfort to know that he is back.

I think I have rather fully covered the major questions in my tele­

grams and will not repeat them here. I hope shortly to receive the

Department’s study on renunciation of force. The prepared statement

gives me an excellent opening but am anxious to have the full back­

ground of our thinking.

If and when we ever get around to “embargo”, I wonder whether

a simple explanation of the rationale behind our trade controls is going

to be the best approach. It seems to me we have a choice between a

presentation that assumes they are never in our minds going to qualify

for any relaxation, or that there are certain standards which if they met

we would consider relaxation. We have also got to be clear as to when

we are talking about our total embargo, the CHINCOM level and the

Soviet level.

As you know I never did feel that we were going to obtain any

quick or mass release of the remaining Americans, and still feel it is

going to be a long slow process. If there were no compulsion to keep

the talks going, there would be many things we could do which might

or might not be successful. However, I do not see how I can go much

farther than I have and still keep them going. There is no doubt their

asking price for the release of all of the remainder is something on the

embargo, but most important of all the Foreign Ministers’ meeting. It

is a dirty business on their part, but that is the way they are playing

the game. How much less they would settle for remains to be seen.

If we are going to keep the talks going, I do not see much choice but

to keep postponing as long as possible any final conclusion on their

part they are going to get nothing out of them. I think Americans will

begin shortly to trickle out but doubt that we are going to get them

all any time soon. Perhaps the Secretary can use Molotov during the

Foreign Ministers’ Conference here quietly to bring some pressure on

them. However, the difficulty is what we are able impliedly to prom­

ise or threaten. I do not see we have much ammunition in the way of

threats, neither do I see we are able to say much in the way of implied

promises. The only real weapon we have is using the pressure of for­

eign opinion on their performance under the Agreed Announcement

and I think the time is approaching that we should do so. I do not

think public opinion is too much of a factor. I think we might con­

sider rather fully briefing our Ambassadors in such countries as India,

Indonesia, Burma, Moscow, etc. so that they could at suitable oppor­

tunities point out to the government leaders there how the CHICOMS

are failing to live up to their pledged word and this would filter back

to Peiping.

I wonder how we will organize things when the Secretary is here

for the Foreign Ministers’ Conference. It will be important that things

not operate so as to tend to cut you and Walter out, and hope that you

will discuss it with the Secretary before he leaves.

Your praise of my handling of things is most generous and heart­

ening, but I hope you will be equally frank in passing on any criticisms

that you feel should be considered. I know that there are many opinions

on how to handle something like this and it is only by my sifting out

as many of them as possible that I can reach what I hope are sound

conclusions.

All the best.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. I would appreciate your continuing to pass on anything you

pick up on what is happening with respect to the Indian arrangement.

I suppose they will get a certain number of approaches from persons

hoping to get a free ride home.

841. For Johnson. Deptel 809.

Telegraph Clough’s departure date. In absence special consider­

ations not known to Department, request he endeavor depart immedi­

ately after reports completed October 3 meeting.

Dulles

Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in FE/EX and by Sebald.

847. For Johnson.

Chicom attention to Geneva talks and Taiwan issue during past

week slightly increased over previous week, but still relatively small in

proportion total propaganda output. General tone Peiping propaganda

continues to be rather hostile to US. US accused of delaying talks and

having “negative attitude” at Geneva. US also again accused of causing

tension in Taiwan area. However Peiping reiterates need for “peaceful

international environment” and willingness hold direct talks on Tai­

wan issue with US.

Main commentary on Geneva talks given by Observer PEOPLE’S

DAILY October 3 alleged US does “not want fast progress in discussions.”

Concerning Americans still held on mainland observer stated that “all

cases of Americans who have committed crimes in China must be dealt

with individually according to Chinese legal procedures.” This asserted to

be “inviolable sovereign right” of China. Peiping will inform US through

UK as to “results of investigations.” Turning to question of Chinese nation­

als in US observer commented there were still many in US who did not

dare apply for return China due to “long years of intimidation and perse­

cution.” US willingness permit return would be test of US “sincerity.”

Major commentaries on Taiwan issue given in speeches celebrat­

ing National Day October 1. Order of Day from Min of Defense P’eng

Te-­huai ordered troops “be prepared for combat duty at all times,”

and stressed need for continued vigilance against “traitorous Chiang

clique on Taiwan . . . plotting to stage a counterrevolutionary return” to

mainland; Emphasized progress made in strengthening armed forces;

Stated that China needed “peaceful international environment for long

period,” in order build socialism; Outlined basic aims of Chicom for­

eign policy as establishment normal relations all countries, easing of

tensions, attainment peaceful coexistence; Reaffirmed Chicom willing­

ness strengthen Geneva spirit and hold direct talks US on Taiwan issue

and reiterated Peiping’s determination liberate Taiwan.

Chou En-­lai speech Sept. 29 at National Day celebration banquet

noted growing world demand for relaxation tension and peaceful coex­

istence and stated Chinese people need peaceful environment to build

their nation. Chi Ambassador Moscow Liu Hsiao in PRAVDA article

Drafted by Jacobson; cleared in CA and IAD.

October 1 stated Peiping “consistently defends need to solve all inter­

national questions by peaceful means.”

Article by Louis Saillant, WFTU Secty Gen, appearing Peiping

DAILY WORKER Oct. 3 stressed importance Summit conference as land­

mark in easing tensions and as factor causing “retreat” of those advo­

cating positions of strength. But added that many unsettled problems

remain including Taiwan Korea and Indochina and this no time for com­

placent optimism.

Dulles

852. For Johnson.

August 3 lists 25 in jail. Seven of these since released, making balance

still in jail 18. Comment.

Dulles

Drafted by Nagoski.

Geneva, October 8, 1955, midnight

833. From Johnson.

1. This morning’s meeting one hour twenty minutes. I led off

with relatively brief but pointed statement on dissatisfaction with

Limited Distribution.

implementation, then made statement on renunciation of force giving

Wang a copy.

2. Wang then made very long prepared statement replying my

charges at last meeting on implementation, saying nothing new and

rehashing old statements on item two. Alleged I had violated secrecy

of talks by informing press I had raised subject missing military

personnel.

3. In reply my brief rebuttal pointing out best my knowledge UK

Charge had no answers questions on implementation, replied so far as

he knew no “formal” approach from UK Charge.

4. He made brief ad lib reply our renunciation of force statement

using same arguments as previous meetings.

5. I replied briefly emphasizing importance and carefully considered

character our statement, made no charges against PRC, did not propose

his government say anything my government not prepared to say, was

made in most earnest desire contribute progress these talks, and was put

forward as earnest, constructive effort deal with problems he and I called

upon deal with here. Asked for careful study and considered reply by his

government.

6. He asked I be prepared next meeting discuss embargo. I pointed

out my statement today dealt with timing discussion this subject.

In reply he again rejected any concept of fixed order of discussion. I

pointed out today’s statement dealt with matter from important sub­

stantive aspect rather than procedural.

7. With respect allegation on leaks to press replied both he and

I knew reports were not accurate, therefore clearly did not originate

with me but were probably assumptions based on earlier public state­

ments made in US even before beginning these talks. He did not pursue

subject.

8. Next meeting Friday, October 14.

Gowen

835. From Johnson. Deptel 852.

Communists list 19 Americans “who have committed crimes”. All

in jail except Mrs. Bradshaw who apparently removed from jail due

deterioration her health, but still held under some sort bond or guar­

antee arrangement and is therefore under restraint. Wang has never

corrected me on use this figure and has in fact used it himself. (My

telegram 795, paragraph 20). Her situation with respect to departure

is therefore exactly same as 18 others; that is, she cannot depart until

favorable review of her “criminal” case. I cannot of course accept

Wang’s terminology and my use of “Americans in jail” is I believe rea­

sonably accurate and also seems acceptable to him.

For purposes of any public statement it would be best speak of 18

in jail and one accused of crime and under house arrest.

Gowen

836. From Johnson.

1. Today’s meeting held no surprises except at amount of time

Wang devoted to answering my charges on implementation. Contrary

to my expectation he was prepared for violent debate with me on this.

However I believe our tactics worked out well. They threw him off bal­

ance and at the same time permitted us make our point without becom­

ing involved in possibly counterproductive discussion.

Distribution.

2. Should have noted in Mytel 833 that during course of complaints

our implementation to effect we have not given him names of Chinese

departing from US for Far East he stated they were going to ask Indians

investigate matter. Presumption was were going request Indians obtain

from US names of Chinese departing for Far East “so that they could

check.” I did not pick up this obvious effort enlarge Indian functions

beyond scope agreed announcement as I thought it preferable to see

whether GOI attempts to act on request. If GOI acts believe we should

be prepared immediately and categorically point out to GOI request for

such info beyond agreed scope GOI functions. If feasible would believe

it preferable informally intimate this to GOI before any request received

and attempt encourage GOI turn down request on own responsibility.

3. As far as next meeting is concerned believe my tactic must be to

do everything possible keep issue focused on renunciation of force as

first and essential question. If his reply to my statement today shows

any flicker of constructive response I would endeavor pin down and

clarify by questions but avoid any substantive reply. If he repeats old

line on Taiwan I would propose point to today’s statement that renun­

ciation of force essential foundation and preliminary to success discus­

sion this or any other his matters under item two.

4. Handling of implementation will depend on what if anything

has developed in Peiping by time next meeting.

5. I do not for time being propose use statement on missing mili­

tary personnel but will be alert immediately do so if it appears could

not safely be further postponed.

Gowen

837. From Johnson.

1. I opened 20th meeting today with a prepared statement saying

I was anxious for our discussions to move ahead. I regretted as much

Limited Distribution.

as he did that at every meeting I had to devote time to discussion of

implementation of agreed announcement. I had to remind him again

that it was only his government’s failure to act promptly to implement

agreed announcement which made this necessary.

2. In four weeks since September 10 his government had failed to

release single one of 19 Americans whose cases, he assured me, were to

be “expeditiously’’ reviewed. United Kingdom Charge had so far been

entirely unable perform any of functions envisaged for him in agreed

announcement. Neither had Wang been willing to assure me here

whether Charge would in fact be enabled by Wang’s government per­

form these functions.

3. I said my government was profoundly dissatisfied with his gov­

ernment’s failure to implement agreed announcement. We could not but

conclude that announcement had thus far been meaningless with respect

to these 19 Americans. It was very disappointing that four weeks had

passed without any improvement whatsoever in this unsatisfactory sit­

uation. I wanted assure him that my government would continue to be

concerned so long as Americans in his country were not allowed expedi­

tiously to exercise their right to return, as provided in agreed announce­

ment, and would scrutinize most closely his government’s performance

this regard.

4. I had brought up this matter of implementation of agreed

announcement before any other subject this morning again to indi­

cate how important it was for progress of our talks here. I wanted him

to know that these questions on implementation must continue to be

uppermost in my mind and that I could not devote my full attention

to other matters before us so long as Americans were denied their

right to return.

5. I pointed out that at our last meeting Wang had made some

remarks with respect to my proposal that under our second agenda

item we first discuss question of renunciation of force for achievement

of national objectives. Said from his remarks I believed he might not

have had clear idea of what I had in mind this regard. In accordance

with what I had told him at last meeting, I was prepared today to

amplify and more fully explain this proposal.

6. I then read full text statement renunciation of force (Deptels 789

and 805) and handed Wang copy.

7. Wang then read from long prepared statement. He said I had

alleged his government had not acted promptly on implementation

agreement and thus delayed our talks. He could not accept this allega­

tion. Already five meetings had been held since agreement reached on

return of civilians of both sides. At first meeting following agreement his

side introduced two subjects for discussion in accordance with agreed

agenda and our side had complained that it was premature discuss these

before carrying out of agreed announcement. At two succeeding meet­

ings I had not only failed present positive views regarding his sugges­

tions but also failed put forward subjects I thought should be discussed.

I had not put forward my subjects until September 28 but even then I had

not given explanation of them. At meeting October 5 I had refused enter

into substantive discussion on subjects put forward.

8. He said our side had in these five meetings also repeatedly

raised questions which should have been raised by third powers and

thus had prevented talks from making further progress. This I had

done in spite of specific provisions regarding functions third powers

in agreed announcement and in spite fact US had asked UK to assist

in return of Americans in China to which his side had agreed. Nev­

ertheless, in interest forestalling further hindrances, his side had sug­

gested our questions on implementation agreement might be taken up

by assistants. However, I had also turned down this reasonable sug­

gestion. Now it was very clear and permitted of no distortion where

responsibility for delay of talks lay.

9. He said that all allegations his government had not acted

promptly on implementation agreement were without factual basis.

Upon reaching agreement he had informed me of results reviews cases

Americans who had violated laws. Chinese Government took appro­

priate measures in accordance with agreement and in line with Chinese

legal procedures and had advanced release of 10 Americans who had

since left country. With respect remaining Americans who had violated

laws in China his side would adhere promise review individual cases

in accordance Chinese legal procedure and report results to US through

UK. But cases these Americans must be dealt with in accordance Chi­

nese legal procedure. Any demand release them within specified period

time or under some other cloak would be categorically rejected by his

side and they would steadfastly refuse comply in any way with such

demands which violated agreement.

10. He said, during period from beginning of consular talks to issu­

ance agreement, his side had given concrete information on departure 27

Americans who had returned to US. Furthermore, since ­Ambassadorial

talks began he had given me information on 33 ­Americans who “should

or may” leave China, and bulk these had already left. These facts proved

his side would make good whatever they said. As for Americans who

had not yet departed, it was left to their own discretion when they would

depart. If I had any further questions, I could communicate them to UK

Charge. At outset these talks his side had made available to me list of all

Americans in China, but I had failed make available to him information

concerning all Chinese in US.

11. Wang said during contacts past year and in present talks my

side had given him names 103 Chinese who had applied leave United

States but were prevented from doing so by US Government. However,

up to present 47 of these had not left United States and this showed

my side had failed implement agreement. I had said 402 Chinese left

between July 11 and October 3, but I had failed provide names so they

had no means check up on these persons. His side was going to request

GOI as third power entrusted under agreed announcement to make

investigation this regard.

12. Wang said in spite his dissatisfaction on return Chinese he had

not obstructed progress of talks for that reason. On other hand, I contin­

ued entangle talks with question implementation and he bound to ask

if my side was unwilling discuss second item agenda.

13. Regarding his two subjects Wang said my side had not expressed

specific opinion on question of embargo. American policy of embargo

had been major factor in leading to tension between China and US and

in preventing economic development and trade of many countries. He

could not understand why I not able express opinion on this question.

14. Wang asked how I could consider his subject of preparations

for higher level negotiations was anything but practical matter. It was

certainly practical matter which should be settled. Arranging practi­

cal and physical channel for settlement and easing of tension between

China and US in Taiwan area was certainly practical matter. I had said

only after we had seen what progress we could make here could we

then talk about what to do next. Did I mean to impose a prerequisite on

holding of higher level negotiations?

15. He said that on question missing US military personnel he had

repeatedly pointed out his side had accounted for all Americans in

China including military personnel my side. No justification whatso­

ever and fabrication without basis for me to demand his side account

for US military personnel missing in Korea. I must be aware reply this

question already given in appropriate organ in Korea.

16. Wang said he bound point out after last meeting I had violated

agreement on privacy these talks by discussing with newspaper men

what our side had introduced as first item of agenda, namely miss­

ing personnel. This action would compel him consider making public

statement on this question.

17. Wang then commented extemporaneously on my statement

regarding renunciation of force. He said he had given specific opinion

on this question when he put forward his two subjects for discussion

and again in subsequent meetings. Since foundation his government

its foreign policy had always been peaceful policy. It was well known

his government together with other governments had initiated Five

Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. They were resolutely opposed set­

tlement disputes by force and always upheld principle peaceful nego­

tiation for settlement international disputes. In same manner they

upheld principle of negotiation for peaceful settlement of disputes

between China and United States. Cooperation between these two

countries would not only benefit peoples of two countries but also

serve cause world peace. Chinese people were friendly to Americans

and they did not want war with American people.

18. He said if renunciation of force was to be subject discussion it

was clearly known Chinese never applied any force to American terri­

tory. China had never sent armed forces to Honolulu or San Francisco.

On contrary Americans had sent armed forces to Taiwan which was

Chinese territory.

I had said US as member of UN adhered to principles of Charter

and I had also listed a number of other international treaties. China had

always fully supported principles of UN Charter despite fact China still

obstructed from being restored to her rightful place in UN. However,

there was no provision in Charter of UN or in international law for

one state to interfere in internal affairs of other states or to use force to

occupy territory of other states.

19. He said there was a distinction between international disputes

and civil conflicts. Taiwan was Chinese territory and liberation of Tai­

wan was an exercise of sovereign and territorial rights. All actions

which involved forceful occupation of Taiwan and used force to inter­

fere with liberation of Taiwan by Chinese people violated principles

of UN and international law. Chinese people would continue oppose

any such action. He concluded saying he would comment on remain­

der my statement later.

20. I said with respect to implementation agreed announcement I

had today again set forth my government’s views and would not take

time to repeat them. I simply wanted to say that matter could have been

disposed of in few minutes if I could have received answers to few sim­

ple questions I had asked. To best my knowledge UK Charge in Peking

had also received no answers to these questions.

21. I said he had asked whether or not I was willing to discuss

subjects under agenda item two. The answer was certainly yes. I had

given him at some length and several times my opinion on one of his

subjects. I had indicated my willingness to discuss his other point as

well. This morning I had given him a very carefully prepared and very

carefully considered statement with respect our point on renunciation

of force. I wanted to emphasize this was very important statement. It

was made in most earnest desire that it would contribute to progress

our discussions here. I wanted point out my statement had made no

charges against his government, also it did not propose his government

should say anything which my government was not prepared to say. It

was put forward as constructive and earnest effort to deal with prob­

lems we were called upon to deal with here. I hoped his government

would give thought to statement before our next meeting and hoped at

that time I could have his very considered views on statement.

22. He had raised question of press statement. I assured him I did

not give any information to press regarding our last meeting. It should

be quite apparent from newspaper stories themselves that information

they published was not accurate. Newspaper articles which I saw had

said I presented and discussed in detail the question of missing military

personnel. We both knew that was not correct. I could only assume

that in light public statements and discussion this subject, which had

taken place in United States even before these talks, that newspaper

men assumed that was what we had discussed. I certainly gave them

no information whatsoever.

23. Wang said I had stated UK Charge in Peking not able perform

his functions and that he had not received replies to questions he had

raised. This was not accurate. As he understood situation ­British Charge

had not up to that time made formal approach to Chinese Government.

If UK Charge formally contacted Chinese Government regarding UK

functions assumed under agreed announcement, Wang’s government

would certainly be available to him. Chinese Government willing con­

sider any proposal which reasonable and served improve relations

between China and the US and thus facilitated progress our talks.

24. I said I had no more to say and hoped at next meeting to have

his government’s very considered views on statement I had made this

morning. I suggested we meet again Friday, October 14.

25. Wang said he hoped I would be able to give concrete views

concerning embargo question introduced by his side.

26. I replied our view on timing discussion of that question was

contained in statement I made this morning.

27. Wang said he could not agree to any fixed order of discussion.

His side would continue to comment on our subjects and hoped we

would do likewise. He agreed date for next meeting.

28. I said point I had made on timing was not made in procedural

sense but in substantive sense.

29. We agreed without discussion on press release identical last

meeting.

Gowen

Letter No. 18

Washington, October 10, 1955

Dear Alex:

I have just taken Peter Colm, who is leaving for Geneva tomorrow

morning, in to meet Messrs. Robertson and Sebald and to get a sense of

Mr. Robertson’s reaction to the course of the talks. He should be able to

give you something of the feel of things at this end. He has not seen the

Secretary but I don’t think there is any particular new development in

the Secretary’s thinking to be conveyed to you at the moment. Every­

one seems to be well satisfied with your conduct of last week’s meet­

ings. The feeling is that the lines which you have blocked out yourself

for the near future are sound.

The feeling in FE is that it will be desirable for you to make your

presentation on “unaccounted for military personnel” at the next meet­

ing. American public opinion demands that a high priority be given

to this item. We cannot afford to take any chance on some untoward

development causing us to fail to get this on the record. Hence it may

be necessary to present this before touching on the trade embargo ques­

tion. We do not see that there is anything to lose by putting the military

personnel statement in now, particularly since we are trending in the

direction of a more flexible and less systematic approach to the Agenda

items under Point Two. With a less formalized treatment of the Agenda

list under Point Two presumably topics may become intermingled and

reverted to.

After talks with D’Orlandi, the COCOM and CHINCOM Chair­

man, we are more than ever convinced that the present time would be

highly inopportune for relaxation in the multilateral system of trade

controls. It is significant that D’Orlandi was strongly of this opinion.

The Japanese Ambassador Iguchi has indicated to us that the Japanese

Government may not be as strongly committed to a program of relax­

ation as we are sometimes led to believe. The critical time of decision

will probably be at the CG meeting at Paris early in December. With

strong U.S. leadership at that time we may be successful in holding

the line. But it cannot be done without aggressive U.S. leadership.

Pressure will have to be exerted on the French and British particularly.

All this indicates that any disposition to give on the embargo question

at Geneva before December will be premature. In any event we do

not have the say unilaterally on multilateral controls. As for our own

­Informal.

complete domestic embargo, that policy is fixed by NSC decision and

I know of no disposition in any responsible quarter to urge an abrupt

change in that policy.

Bill Sebald is working with Judge Phleger on additional material

on the renunciation of use of force. This material is aimed for your

use in the course of detailed discussions on the item, assuming that a

detailed discussion stage will be reached eventually.

The foregoing thoughts on the missing personnel item and the

trade embargo are of course subject to confirmation by official tele­

gram. We have not yet cleared with the Secretary.

I presume O’Neill will put your three questions formally to the

Chinese Communists today or tomorrow. The Foreign Office instructed

him to do so (subject to his concurrence) on October 7.

We have told the British we do not like O’Neill’s suggestion that

he refer to the PRC promise to notify him of the result of trials of Amer­

icans, and inform the PRC authorities that he looks forward to early

notification of reduction of sentence in all cases.

This sounds too much like accepting the PRC thesis, and giving up

on the implementation of the Agreed Announcement.

We are looking forward to the arrival of Ralph Clough this after­

noon. No doubt we will get a better feel of the current atmosphere from

him, although I must say that your telegrams have given us a very full

and complete picture. We have felt that we have almost had a front

center seat.

Regards,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

1. Re your mention paragraph 2 of cases which QUOTE were to

be expeditiously reviewed UNQUOTE, Department prefers that you

tion. Repeated to London. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger.

adhere strictly to language of Agreed Announcement that Americans

may QUOTE expeditiously UNQUOTE exercise their right return U.S.

Department aware that Wang made frequent mention of review of

cases in discussion leading up to Agreed Announcement but this has no

bearing on obligations of PRC under Agreed Announcement. Endeavor

avoid any statement which might be construed as implying U.S. tacitly

recognizes Wang’s talking points as modifying in any way explicit PRC

commitments under Agreed Announcement.

2. FYI. We have informed British Embassy we do not repeat not

wish O’Neill to follow up on his tentative suggestion that he might

press PRC Foreign Office for expedited notification of trial of remain­

ing Americans and reduction of sentences. Our reason for rejection this

suggestion same as above.

Murphy

870. For Johnson.

Guidance for 21st meeting October 14.

1. You should again place on record US dissatisfaction with con­

tinued Chinese Communist non-­implementation Agreed Announce­

ment. Recall that approximately five weeks have passed since Agreed

Announcement issued, with no action on remaining detained Amer­

icans. The Americans have not been allowed exercise expeditiously

their right to return, a right expressly recognized by PRC in Agreed

Announcement. PRC has not carried out its publicly assumed obliga­

tion adopt measures necessary to enable Americans exercise their right.

No detained American, so far as US Government can ascertain, has yet

been allowed see British Charge Peiping or any other British diplomatic

or consular representative. British Charge has been unable perform any

function whatever under Agreed Announcement. British Charge has

been given no information other than statement that all Americans

have been informed of Agreed Announcement. His request for partic­

ulars as to when, where and how imprisoned Americans were notified

has not been answered.

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger and Sebald.

October 12 news release attributed to Peoples’ Daily alleging that

“the Chinese side is faithfully carrying out the Agreement” appears to

represent attempt cover up PRC non-­compliance by directing attention

to 47 Americans who have not applied for exit permits “who can leave

China at any time”. The Agreed Announcement deals with those who

want to leave, not those who do not. Implication in later paragraph this

news release that Agreed Announcement provides for examination case of

Americans, one by one, is not supported by language of Announcement.

US Government can only conclude that PRC is deliberately misleading

public as to its obligations and actions under Agreed Announcement.

Record shows that PRC so far has evaded rather than implemented

requirements of Agreed Announcement. US Government bound to take

increasingly serious view PRC failure implement provisions Agreed

Announcement if this failure should be further protracted.

2. Department will send you for possible introduction at later meet­

ing text draft parallel declarations renouncing use of force particularly

in Taiwan area. If Wang adopts anticipated line that Taiwan is domestic

issue and only necessity is that US forces withdraw from Taiwan area

you may wish reply along following general line:

“US and PRC views status Taiwan and US relationship to area

differ sharply. Immediate and urgent problem is not attempt reconcile

these views, but remove danger of resort to force which might provoke

international conflict. It is impossible freely negotiate under threat of

force. Only if this threat removed is there any hope of constructive solu­

tion of basic political problems.”

3. You are given discretion as to whether you should make presen­

tation on unaccounted for military personnel at 21st meeting. Essential

that this presentation be made at some point.

4. While Department does not insist on rigid adherence fixed order

agenda items under Point 2, it is US position that there is no basis for con­

structive exchange views on trade embargo question while threat of use

of military force by PRC remains. Hence, there is no point in discussing

this issue in absence renunciation use force by PRC. It is believed post­

ponement discussion this item should be put on this practical basis. In

taking this position, however, you need not object to Wang presentation

this item.

5. While it would be our purpose to avoid any discussion of the

embargo item until after we have gotten some positive assurances about

renunciation of force, you are authorized, if you deem it necessary to

keep conversations going, to indicate that we recognize that the formula­

tion of declaration on renunciation of force is a matter of delicacy which

would require considerable thought and that while any positive conclu­

sion on the matter of trade would inherently have to depend greatly on

the Chicom response on renunciation of force, nevertheless while the

Chicoms are considering the renunciation of force matter we would be

willing to hear their views about trade, particularly:

(1) Are they referring to the US total ban on Chicom trade?

(2) Are they referring to restrictions on strategic materials as

administered by CHINCOM?

(3) Are they proposing modification of UN resolution adopted

during Korean War?

Dulles

855. From Johnson. Re Deptel 869.

1. I would think it desirable that whenever opportunity arises,

such as in reply to Chang Han-­fu’s question on O’Neill’s interpreta­

tion of agreement, O’Neill should state UK interprets portion of agreed

announcement reading “and will further adopt appropriate measures

so they can expeditiously exercise their right to return” to mean exactly

what it says. Appreciate that probably neither O’Neill nor UK would

desire become deeply involved at this stage in our controversy with

CHICOMS their implementation this point. However believe UK

would desire avoid any implication it agrees with CHICOM interpreta­

tion and lay best possible basis for invoking this portion announcement

in representations in individual cases.

2. In view continued CHICOM vagueness on delivery text anno­

uncement to imprisoned Americans suggest consideration be given

have O’Neill invoke portion of announcement stating UK Charge may

also give publicity to request facilities have copy personally handed

by member his office to each imprisoned American in event refusal he

could request delivery letter from him containing text announcement,

and information on how to communicate with him, to each prisoner.

3. Department will desire consider this from standpoint any prece­

dent it may establish for Indian functions in US but it appears to me we

could without harm agree to same interpretation by Indians if question

were raised.

Limited Distribution.

4. In general believe O’Neill should avoid any implication UK

considers its special functions under announcement to be primarily

“welfare” in nature and that CHICOMS have implemented announce­

ment with respect imprisoned Americans if some “welfare” functions

conceded to UK. Believe he should concentrate maximum possible

on the “assist in the return” aspects invoking “expeditiously” as

appropriate.

Gowen

856. From Johnson.

In reply press inquiries here concerning NCNA October 12 arti­

cle quoted FBIS 121355Z particularly concerning “47 Americans” am

replying for background that mention these persons entirely irrelevant

and is attempt befog issues as announcement concerns persons who

desire return. Am stating figure 47 only approximately correct as there

are possibly other civilians particularly dual nationals. Am stating that

47 include 16 non-­repats, American wives Chinese, children, and per­

sons who have been working for CHICOMS. Am referring inquiries on

names to Department. Understand that most of names have in past in

one way or another been made available to press but believe any info

this character should come from Department.

Gowen

Letter No. 12

Geneva, October 13, 1955

Dear Walter:

Yesterday I received your letter of October 10. This will be a very

short note as I have little to add to what I have already said.

Peter Colm has arrived and I am very glad to have him. He seems

like a good man.

Received my instructions this morning for 21st meeting and again

feel that they are excellent. I greatly appreciate your getting them to me

in time to ponder a little before the meeting.

I do not plan to tie my presentation on implementation to their

newspaper articles or broadcasts. I have avoided this as it simply

opens the door for Wang to throw USIS and American newspapers

at me, and he can almost always find something to quote to serve his

purpose. In any event the articles so closely follow his presentation

in the meetings that there are ample statements by him to which I

can tie.

I am a little concerned by the questions it is suggested that I ask

him, if necessary, under paragraph 5 of the Department’s 870. It seems

to me that I should avoid any implication that such multilateral sub­

jects as Chincom and U.N. resolutions could be discussed here, or

that these are matters within the control of the U.S. However, I think

the idea of asking the questions is very good but will try to formulate

something along these lines for use, if necessary, which avoids what I

believe are the undesirable implications of the questions as presently

framed.

I fear that the presentation of unaccounted for military personnel

at this stage would fuzz my position on priority for renunciation of

force, and I am, therefore, reluctant to make it at tomorrow’s meeting.

On the other hand, I don’t want Wang to so freeze his position on this

that he is obliged to reject the lists when I hand them to him. Therefore,

I will play it by ear and make the decision at the meeting as to what I

will do.

Chincom people have been very helpful in giving me infor­

mation on their present negotiations in Paris. Certainly the present

moment would be the worst possible time to release the Chincom

controls, but I can see that the pressures are extremely strong. What

I have trouble thinking through is how effectively to relate what

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

may or may not happen in these talks to how things are handled in

Chincom.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

864. From Johnson.

Would appreciate prompt extension by Defense of Colonel Ekvall’s

orders which expired September 20.

Gowen

865. From Johnson.

1. One hour forty minute meeting this morning. Wang opened

with long prepared statement dealing exclusively with my last week’s

statement on renunciation of force. While relatively mild in tone con­

sisted almost entirely rehash previous positions. Said key to situation

was withdrawal US forces from Taiwan. Our proposal was “abuse of

principle non-­recourse to force”. “Are you willing to discuss question

withdrawal US forces from Taiwan?” Liberation Taiwan “cannot be

made subject present talks”.

Limited Distribution.

2. I replied with statement on implementation along lines Dep­

tel 870 and then expressed disappointment lack of responsiveness his

statement our proposal. I then made statement using material latter

portion para 2 Deptel 870 and pertinent material previous statement on

renunciation force. There was then some give and take during which

both of us largely reiterated previous statements. However he did not

challenge my statement that I hoped I could interpret his remarks as

meaning he did not entirely reject our proposal. Towards end he gave

me opening which I used to close on theme of implementation.

3. At close I proposed normal schedule weekly meetings and he

agreed subject next meeting being Thursday. Understanding is subse­

quent meetings will be on Thursdays.

4. Am departing for Prague tomorrow morning returning Tuesday.

Gowen

867. From Johnson.

1. Notable aspect today’s meeting was Wang’s willingness dis­

cuss exclusively, albeit negatively, our renunciation of force proposal.

He made no effort whatever force any discussion either of his items

and his reaction to my renewed discussion of implementation was very

mild. In fact as will be seen from full meeting record, during give and

take he perhaps somewhat inadvertently gave us credit for full imple­

mentation agreed announcement. He also readily agreed to my pro­

posal for normally weekly meetings. His manner and tone of delivery

of his opening statement was also mild and again full record of meeting

prepared on basis his interpreter’s translation give somewhat harder

impression than original Chinese.

2. There was no need to and I felt it undesirable make presentation

on missing military personnel at today’s meeting.

­Limited Distribution.

3. While using it as a peg on which to hang his criticism of US

policy, Wang’s presentation today shows a disposition to acquiesce in

discussion around our renunciation of force proposal which we should

try to explain.

4. His reply today was to be expected. Stripped of propaganda

verbiage one of his theses appears to be that presence of US forces in

Taiwan is in itself “threat of force.” He is taking an obviously extreme

bargaining position in asking for withdrawal US forces from Taiwan

and one of our problems will be to probe for their real position for as

long as possible while at same time not running into a deadlock or in

any way sacrificing our position on renunciation of force or scope these

talks.

5. Parliamentary situation is such that he will be expecting fairly

comprehensive statement from me at next meeting. Believe statement

must include at least some refutation his charges on “American aggres­

sion against Taiwan.”

Gowen

869. From Johnson.

1. During today’s Ambassadorial talks Chen Shih-­wu of NCNA

talked with several correspondents, particularly agency men and about

half British, individually or in groups. Gist his comments as reported to

Garnish by participants follows:

2. Said Wang going to tell me today they cannot discuss renunci­

ation of use of force until these other questions settled: Seventh Fleet,

blockade, Formosa, embargo. Said these are subjects for FonMins and

their settlement would make question of renunciation of force timely.

3. According to another correspondent, Chen referred to Chou state­

ment that question has international and national aspects. Under former

he mentioned UniStates interference, Seventh Fleet, blockade, embargo

and UniStates military advisors on Formosa. Said must remove this

interference. Under national aspect he mentioned liberation Taiwan by

peaceful means, said Chou already has pointed out he ready to negoti­

ate with Taiwan authorities without hard and fast conditions. To query

whether “authorities” meant Nationalists or Taiwanese Chen said Chou

did not (repeat not) want commit himself but added some Chiang people

ready to negotiate. To further query Chen refused commit himself that

this meant any member GRC ready negotiate.

4. Responding to correspondent’s other questions, Chen said talks

making progress though slowly and spirit good. Said talks will continue

through FonMins conference and Dulles’ presence may give impetus to

them. Expressed doubt Wang will try to see Dulles.

5. Chen said talks now approaching crucial stage, with subjects of

such scope and importance that they belong on FonMins level.

6. To question about nineteen jailed Americans Chen said I always

raise question as matter of routine. Added this no longer matter for

Ambassadors at all but matter for British Charge to settle. Also said

missing military personnel matter does not (repeat not) belong in

Geneva talks.

Gowen

871. From Johnson.

In discussing missing military personnel I will desire to have avail­

able for use as may seem appropriate a few of as good examples as

possible reasons we believe Chinese Communists have some informa­

tion on these men. Unfortunately information I have available here is in

most cases too vague for effective use in debate.

Request Department ask Defense endeavor supply me any more

concrete information from CHICOM, other Communist, or neutral

sources that may be available in a few good exemplary cases such as

following:

Army Sgt Casimire T. Demoll. What were dates and facts in reports

of IRC, Peking Radio, and reported source National Guardian?

Army PFC James Howell. What was date and content China

monthly review report?

Army Corporal John E. Jennings. What were dates and contents

China monthly review and IRC reports?

Similar info on few Air Force and Marine personnel would also

be helpful. For example more detailed info on “enemy broadcast over

Radio Peiping” mentioned file Air Force First Lieutenant Scott A. Holz

would be useful.

Would appreciate some information by next meeting if possible.

Gowen

872. From Johnson.

pared comments on my statement on renunciation of force. He stated

that to carry on useful and sensible discussion, civil conflicts within

either China or the US must be distinguished from international dis­

putes. Former are obviously not within competence of present talks.

Issues between Chinese people and Chiang Kai-­shek clique cannot be

made subjects of these talks. It is inadmissible to introduce question of

right of Chinese people to liberate own territory Taiwan in execution of

sovereign rights.

2. He continued that in regard to international disputes, People’s

Republic of China had from its inception always stood for peaceful set­

tlement and had opposed infringements of territorial integrity by threat

or use of force. China’s conduct in international relations had demon­

strated that it was faithful to this stand. He drew attention to “univer­

sally recognized role” of China in Korean and Indochinese armistices

and to “Five Principles,” on the basis of which he stated China had

established relations of friendly cooperation with many countries. He

stated that at Asian-African Conference China together with others

adopted decisions affirming these principles.

Limited Distribution.

3. In regard to Sino-US relations, Wang stated that Premier Chou

had repeatedly declared that China did not want war with US and

that China and US should sit down and enter into negotiations. This,

he stated, was objective of introducing into present talks question of

higher level Sino-US negotiations.

also to my statement at last meeting that US as member of UN had

agreed to refrain from threat or use of force. Wang stated that he wel­

comed my statement to this effect on behalf of my government, and

that he very much desired that this principle should become guiding

principle of US in Far East and rest of world. He stated that there was

no dispute between China and US regarding the principles guiding

United Nations. Question was how these principles could be concretely

implemented. In this connection he cited Taiwan situation.

5. He stated that Taiwan was Chinese territory and that this was spe­

cifically provided in solemn international agreements in which US had

participated. Wang quoted a statement of January 5, 1950 by President

Truman to effect that US Government had always stood for good faith

in international relations and specifically in Formosa (Taiwan) situation,

that in Cairo Declaration of 1943 the US, UK, and China had announced

objective of restoring to China territory stolen by Japan from China,

such as Formosa, that US was a signatory to Potsdam Declaration which

declared that the terms of the Cairo Declaration shall be carried out, that

the provisions of the Potsdam Declaration were accepted by Japan at

time of surrender, and that for four years the US and other powers had

accepted the authority of Chinese authorities over Formosa. Wang stated

that President Truman had added that US had no predatory designs on

Formosa or other Chinese territory and that US desired to avoid courses

of action leading to involvement in civil disputes in China.

6. However, Wang stated, the US now occupies Taiwan with its

armed forces and has openly declared it would use force to encroach

upon Chinese territorial integrity. He declared that this was origin of

tension in Taiwan area and that China had never used or threatened

force to encroach on territorial integrity of the US. China had repeat­

edly stated that China and US should respect each other’s sovereignty

and territorial integrity and settle disputes between each other by

negotiations.

7. He said that since I had stated at last meeting that US had agreed

to refrain from threat or use of force, it followed that US should with­

draw its armed forces from China’s Taiwan. Wang declared that he

would like to know whether US was prepared to do so.

8. Wang stated that at last meeting I had failed to mention fact that

US had used force against China’s Taiwan, had dodged the question

of US withdrawal, and had unreasonably tried to introduce question

of renunciation of force against China’s Taiwan. Chinese Government,

circumstances permitting, would seek liberation of Taiwan by peaceful

means. However, the question falls within framework of China’s sover­

eignty and internal affairs and cannot be made subject of present talks.

9. Wang closed his prepared comments with statement that ques­

tion of America’s withdrawal from Taiwan area should be discussed

and that he would like to hear my views on this question.

10. In reply I stated that before commenting on his statement I must

first bring to his attention my government’s dissatisfaction with his

government’s continued delay in implementing agreed announcement

with respect to remaining 19 Americans in prison. I stated that so far as

my government had been able to ascertain, no American in prison had

even been permitted to communicate with or see UK Charge in Peking

or any other British diplomatic or consular representative. I stated that

there could be no doubt that these Americans desired to return.

11. I continued that futhermore almost five weeks had passed since

announcement was issued and that I had hoped he would have some

information for me today. However, thus far government has not taken

appropriate measures mentioned in agreed announcement which

would permit these 19 Americans to exercise expeditiously their right to

return. This right was expressly set forth in the agreed announcement.

12. I said that in discussing this question at previous meetings,

Wang had continued to mention his government’s request for a list

of all Americans in US and had continued to mention supposed time

it would take for the many Chinese in the US to return to his coun­

try. I said he had also referred to the 47 Americans in his country who

had not applied for exit permits. In this connection, I pointed out that

agreed scope of our discussions on this point and agreed announce­

ment concerned only persons who desired to return.

13. I stated that I raised these points again in order to indicate to

Wang reasons why my government feared his government was evad­

ing rather than implementing the provisions of the agreed announce­

ment. I declared that it should be evident that my government was

bound to take an increasingly serious view of his government’s failure

to implement provisions of agreed announcement with respect to these

differed widely on status of Taiwan and on my government’s relations

to Taiwan. I said that there was no use in pretending that these differ­

ences did not exist or that they could be easily resolved. I said that my

suggestion did not involve third parties or question of justice or injus­

tice of conflicting claims in the area.

16. I stated that immediate and urgent problem we faced was

not to reconcile conflicting views but to remove danger that a resort

to force in the area might evoke international conflict. I stated that I

believed Wang himself had previously recognized that this possibility

existed. I said that these questions were grave and complicated and

that negotiating their solution would take time and patience.

17. I pointed out that neither of us wanted to negotiate under

threat of force and that there was hope of a constructive solution to the

basic problems of the area only if threat of force were removed. I stated

that the fact that our policies differed need not mean armed conflict. I

stated that many countries were abnormally divided and that many

governments faced situations which they considered abnormal intru­

sions into their territory. I pointed out that responsible governments

nevertheless had renounced use of force in achievement of what they

considered urgent and legitimate objectives of national policy. I stated

that my suggestion did not call upon either his government or mine

to renounce their objectives, but simply suggested we renounce use of

force to implement our policies. I stated that this was to me an emi­

nently reasonable, simple, and straightforward proposal which could

provide the basis for constructive solutions to other problems.

18. I concluded by expressing hope that Wang’s government would

again consider suggestion we had made and that such reconsideration

might lead to progress in the talks.

19. Wang replied that he could not agree to what I had said con­

cerning his government’s continued delay in implementing the agreed

announcement. (Wang’s interpreter initially said “continued failure”

but corrected this to “continued delay.” Ekvall states that “continued

stalling” would have been more accurate English.)

20. Wang said that during discussion of first item of agenda before

and after agreement was reached, his side had devoted great efforts to

question of returning Americans from China. He said that this did not

include only “ordinary” Americans but also Americans who had com­

mitted offenses. He stated that his side was still faithfully implementing

the agreement on return of civilians. He said that there was therefore

no reason to charge that his government had delayed in implementing

agreed announcement and that he could not agree to this unjustified

charge.

21. Wang continued with comments on my preliminary views on

his opening statement. He said that it was wrong that there should be

difference of view between China and US on status of Taiwan since

status of Taiwan was very clear and precise. He said that Taiwan was

indisputably an inalienable part of Chinese territory. He then expressed

agreement with me that on this question disputes did exist between our

two sides. He expressed agreement also that the Taiwan situation had

“led to a grave and explosive situation” and that there was “danger of

the situation being enlarged.” He said that this was why it was neces­

sary to call Sino-US conference to discuss situation in Taiwan area.

22. He said that while he agreed discuss this problem, he could not

but trace “root causes” leading to present grave situation. He stated

that failure find these causes would be similar to patient in whom doc­

tor fails find cause of illness. Wang cited Chinese proverb that doctor

should make prescription according to illness of patient. He said that

failure to find cause of illness makes cure impossible.

23. Wang stated that his government had always opposed resort

to force and has stood for peaceful settlement of problems. He agreed

with me that negotiations cannot be conducted under threat of force.

He said that if we are to discuss threat of force, we have to ask who is

threatening whom. Wang declared that he considered that American

armed forces which occupy Taiwan are precisely threat in question.

24. Wang said that I had said that it is necessary to renounce use of

force to prevent situation from leading to armed conflict. Wang declared

that as he had stated this morning his side welcomed this point of view.

However, a mere statement outlining principles does not solve prob­

lem. Wang stated that if US were to withdraw its armed forces from

area, it would show that US is sincere in this regard. Wang stated that

therefore he hoped after consideration of his proposal I would express

my views on this point. He concluded by stating that such withdrawal

would indicate that present talks can really solve questions and are not

mere discussions. He said he hoped this was case.

25. I replied that questions Wang had raised are complicated and

that I still did not see why he rejected my suggestion. I stated that I

hoped I was right in interpreting Wang’s remarks as not a complete

rejection of my proposal. I said that first and simple thing we can do

is to say to each other that we would not resort to use of force except

defensively. I stated that I agreed that this would not by itself solve

basic problems in area, but that it would remove danger of conflict and

establish atmosphere in which we can freely negotiate and in which

there would be hope of finding solutions to basic problems.

26. Wang replied that we can certainly consider that a mere state­

ment would not remove danger or resolve disputes between China and

US in area. Only actual deeds by US will convince people that ques­

tions are being resolved. Wang cited example of return of Chinese in

US. He said that if merely a statement had been made that they would

be able to return without action, the Chinese would not have been able

to return. Basic cause underlying failure of Chinese to return from US

was existence of restricting order by US Government against them.

Only after American Government rescinded restricting orders were

basic difficulties involved in return resolved. Wang said that when the

US rescinded these orders, his side expressed welcome to this action

because those orders were unreasonable and because it was reasonable

they should be rescinded.

27. Wang said that same is true in Taiwan area. Cause of tension

in area is chiefly because US has used force in area. He stated that his

side considered such action inconsistent with UN Charter and that if

US would withdraw all its armed forces it would naturally change sit­

uation in area. Only by doing so would it convince people of practical

significance of American proposal on renunciation of force.

28. I replied that I could not refrain from pointing out that we did

not make agreed announcement until we were fully prepared imple­

ment it. I agreed to his thesis that mere statements do not solve prob­

lems. We did not make the statement that all Chinese were free to

depart until they were in fact able to do so. This led me to my point in

regard to remaining imprisoned Americans. I stated that only action by

his government can permit them to leave. I had hoped and expected

that they would be able to leave expeditiously. However, almost five

weeks had passed since the announcement. I recalled that he had used

many words in our discussion of time Americans would be able to

leave, including “very quickly” and other such terms. I said “expedi­

tiously” had finally been decided upon, and yet in five weeks not one

of nineteen has been able to leave. I stated that I failed to see how this

can be termed expeditiously.

29. Wang replied that he had nothing more to say.

30. I stated that I had a suggestion to make on timing of the talks.

I pointed out that we have been meeting at irregular intervals and that

both of us had other responsibilities as well. I stated that talks were

entering phase of utmost gravity and importance and that I and my

government wanted time carefully to consider course of talks here. In

light of this, I suggested that we normally meet once a week. I said

Friday or any other day would suit me but did not exclude occasional

more frequent meetings if we considered desirable.

31. Wang immediately concurred in my suggestion, requesting

that meetings take place on Thursdays for time being. We agreed to

release customary statement to press.

Gowen

886. For Johnson. Your 864.

Defense arranging assign Ekvall European post and detail Geneva

for duration talks. Letter from Godel enroute.

Dulles

by Clough.

Letter No. 19

Washington, October 14, 1955

Dear Alex:

singular interest and gave us some very valuable sidelights on some

of your collateral problems as well as on your general thinking. Walter

Robertson, Herman Phleger and Bill Sebald have all read your letter

and commented on its particular interest and value.

I have discussed with Rod O’Connor the problem of coordinating

the Departmental direction of your talks while the Foreign Ministers

Conference is going on. It will be difficult, with the Secretary and Judge

Phleger in Geneva, and Robertson, Sebald and myself here. Rod is sure

that the Secretary will want to see you from time to time in Geneva,

notwithstanding the great pressure of affairs directly related to the

Conference. Judge Phleger will also be tied up with the business of the

Conference, but naturally will wish to keep close to your negotiations.

The regular work on your instructions will almost have to be done

from here since our Delegation at Geneva will not have the time, the

FE personnel or the files. (As you probably have heard, the Secretary

has decided not to take any FE personnel or to engage in discussions

of FE subjects. Molotov may be allowed to bring up some FE subjects if

Informal. McConaughy initialed the original “WPM.”

he insists, but he will have to do the talking and our Delegation would

only listen.) We expect to present a recommendation to the Secretary

on Monday for coordination of the direction of the talks while the Con­

ference is going on. We are passing on to the Secretary your expression

of hope that he may be able in some way to use Molotov during the

Conference quietly to bring some pressure on the PRC to release the

detained Americans. We don’t know yet what if anything may be pos­

sible along this line.

You will have noted the conspicuous absence in our telegram of

any response to your suggestion that we not rule out the introduc­

tion of procedural questions near the end of the talks. We appreciated

that this might look like “a pot of gold” which could help to keep the

talks going. But there is no inclination here now to take a position on

this in our telegrams. The Secretary was quite specific in his talk with

Foreign Minister George Yeh on Oct. 4 (a copy of the memorandum

of conversation is being pouched to you), and on other occasions as

to his aversion to the idea of a higher level Conference, his intention

to avoid it, and his belief that there is nothing appropriate for discus­

sion which cannot be handled in your conversations. Of course this

does not preclude us from keeping the Chinese Communists guess­

ing a little, but on principle there are arguments against seeming to

equivocate.

Incidentally the Secretary was quite frank with George Yeh in

spelling out to him the extent to which the continuation of the talks is

in the interest of the GRC. I think it may tend to soften the criticism of

the talks which has been coming out of governmental quarters in Taipei

although I doubt if the tone of the Taiwan Press will be changed much.

We have noted your query as to whether it might be permissible

for either side to raise new subjects under Item Two. There will be some

response to this query by early next week either in my next letter on the

17th or in a telegram.

Yesterday I gave Joy of the British Embassy the observations con­

tained in your 855 concerning O’Neill’s responsibilities. We endorsed

your suggestions and requested that they be relayed to O’Neill with

a recommendation that he act on them if he and the British Foreign

Office perceive no objection. The British are being quite diligent on

the implementation problem although they are somewhat concerned

now at apparent leaks to the press (Reuters and AP) which hint at the

difficulties O’Neill is encountering. I do not know the source of the

information which the press is obtaining. I doubt if there is much of a

leak since the information is somewhat garbled. Also the stories may

indirectly be somewhat helpful rather than harmful since they will add

a bit to the public pressure on the PRC to act. Still we must respect Brit­

ish wishes where the protection of their reporting is concerned, so we

are taking steps to limit the distribution in the Department of O’Neill’s

reports on his conversations with the PRC Foreign Office. There is great

interest among the press in O’Neill’s efforts so our P and FE/P people

are somewhat on the spot, as is the British Embassy here.

We are hoping that some additional pressure will be exerted on

Peiping through U Nu. The Secretary sent him a good strong message

in response to U Nu’s extraordinary appeal for a higher level Confer­

ence. We assume of course that U Nu will pass on to Chou En-­lai the

text of the Secretary’s reply. We have endeavored to capitalize on this

probability. There is a chance that U Nu will associate himself to some

extent with our expression of dissatisfaction over the failure of the PRC

to implement the Agreed Announcement. A copy of this exchange of

messages will be sent to you.

Mr. Robertson is making a speech at Davidson College, North Car­

olina tomorrow which will have some pretty explicit things to say on

the question of implementation of the Agreed Announcement, and on

the need for a PRC renunciation of the use of force. We think that this

speech will fit well into our strategy. Some very specific questions are

posed in this speech. You will get a copy.

On the renunciation of force item, we may have unintentionally

misled you somewhat in talking about a “study”. Nothing as elaborate

as what that probably signifies to you is underway here. What is being

worked on by Bill Sebald and Judge Phleger is a draft declaration pro­

claiming the renunciation of the use of force, except defensively, with

specific reference to the Taiwan area. The form would be analogous

to that of the Agreed Announcement of September 10: —­two parallel

unilateral statements or declarations. The Secretary and Mr. Robert­

son had some reservations about the first draft and a new version is

now in the works. It would be quite simple—­only a half a page or so.

We hope a draft of this will be ready to send you some time next week

for your comments. With the help of Doug Forman and Peter Colm

you probably will be able to prepare all the material you will need for

expanding on the subject in the course of discussions. Your men cer­

tainly have more time to work on this than anybody in CA. However,

it is true that they may be somewhat handicapped by not having the

feel of all the current thinking here. We hope that Ralph Clough or

someone else who is well qualified can be given a few hours of free

time in which he can work up some argumentation under informed

guidance.

On the embargo question, you may have sensed that the Secre­

tary himself drafted numbered paragraph 5 of your instructions dated

October 12, Deptel 870. There seems to be a good chance that we can

get some negotiating value from drawing the Chinese Communists out

as to just what aspects of the so-­called “embargo” they are complaining

about. We are troubled by the pressure from the British and the French,

and to a much lesser extent the Japanese, for relaxing the COCOM con­

trols and abolishing the differential altogether between CHINCOM and

COCOM. Kalijarvi and Barbour met with Robertson on this yesterday.

EUR and E are more pessimistic than FE on the possibility of maintain­

ing the higher level of Chinese controls for the present. It is clear that

it would be very poor tactics for us to throw away our China control

cards now without getting anything in return. We believe we can hold

the Japanese in line and we are going to urge the Secretary to make a

strong approach to ­Macmillan and Pinay in the tripartite talks preced­

ing Geneva. Probably the Secretary is the only one who would be able

to prevail on the French and British to stay in line. If this can be done

our hand will be much strengthened with the Chinese Communists.

Undoubtedly the trade controls are the one really effective pressure we

are able to exert. We are convinced that those who minimize the value

of the higher level of China controls are mistaken. FE is making its own

recommendations to the Secretary on the subject. They differ somewhat

from those of EUR and E.

We are glad that you expressed your views with complete frank­

ness on the various draft documents on the question of the unaccounted

for military personnel. It goes without saying that complete candor

both here and in Geneva is essential. There is no hypersensitivity here

or among the Pentagon people who are working on this subject, and

we know you do not suffer from this affliction either. We want you to

react with complete candor and we are doing the same. It is natural that

somewhat more weight should be given to the importance of the record

here than you would give it in Geneva. While there is plenty of room

for argument as to what is the best tack from the standpoint of getting

a cooperative response out of the Chinese Communists, I do not think

the final version telegraphed from here is actually provocative. Since it

is probably a sad fact that we are not going to get any satisfaction out of

the Chinese Communists in any event on a single one of these names, it

may be just as well to adhere to the stronger text.

We were glad to get Ralph Clough back on the 10th. He has already

been of inestimable help to me in the regular work of the office as well

as on Geneva matters.

I am surprised to learn that Colonel Ekvall’s new orders have not

gone out yet. We had understood from Bill Godel and from Colonel

Rasmussen that everything was all squared away for him to be detailed

as Assistant Military Attache. We wrote a letter some time ago confirm­

ing the continued need for his services and requesting an extension of

his assignment. We were assured that this was all that was needed. I

will have Ralph check again with the Pentagon today.

Bill Sebald sends his regards and tells you he hopes to find a few

minutes some time soon to write you a note.

Regards and continued commendation for steering a good course.

As ever,

WPM

P.S. Please send one carbon copy of your letters in the future, if

convenient.

900. For Johnson.

Chicom propaganda on international issues during past week con­

tinued maintain hostile attitude toward US, accusing US of obstruct­

ing Geneva talks and pursuing policies in Far East contrary spirit of

Geneva. US said to be still relying on force to achieve objectives. NCNA

commentary on Dulles Legion speech October 10 asserts US request for

Chicom renunciation of force tantamount demand Chicom renounce

sovereignty over Taiwan.

Geneva talks received more attention than previous week. Peo­

ple’s Daily “Observer” editorials October 12 and 13 accused US of

obstructing talks and failing take “any steps conforming to Geneva

spirit.” October 13 editorial focused on question US military person­

nel missing in Korea. Editorial charged publicity given this subject

in US press raises question US willingness abide by agreement on

press release procedures, and hinted if issue is raised by US, Chinese

side will have “ample reason” raise issue of 14,000 POWs “forcibly

detained” by US.

Peiping publicized return from America October 8 of jet propul­

sion expert Chien Hsueh-­sen and Li Cheng-­wu. Alleged Chien and Li

by Dawson; approved in IAD and CA.

had been “illegally arrested” in 1950 and “searched” by US officials on

exit from US Sept. 17. Couple feted in Canton October 9.

Comment on Taiwan during week relatively slight, consisting

largely of broadcasts beamed to Taiwan, concerning US “exploitation”

of Taiwanese. NCNA Oct. 8 noted Taiwan press reports of build-­up

in MAAG staff Taiwan and stepped-­up US training program. Peiping

commentary on Dulles speech October 10 charged US holding Taiwan

“by force,” while demanding China renounce force. Reiterated usual

line that “liberation” internal affair, while US “use of force” in Taiwan

area an international issue requiring negotiation.

Commentaries on Hoover trip noted pace of Japanese rearmament

being quickened at US instigation and accused US of plans send Japa­

nese troops abroad, to further US “aggression” in Asia.

Question of “normalizing” relations between China and Japan

apparently discussed at some length by Mao and Chou in interviews

with Japanese Diet members visiting Peiping, October 3. Account of

interviews given in Hong Kong and Japanese press indicate Chicoms

now seeking restoration “normal relations” prior discussion outstand­

ing issues. Chou reported to have offered “normalized” relations, with­

out conditions, and to have taken conciliatory line on question Japanese

relations with Taiwan, stating Peiping would not insist on rupture prior

to talks. Mao reported to have promised release of Jap “war criminals,”

once state of war ended with Japan. Mao and Chou also reported to

have suggested inauguration of talks on “normalization” of relations,

at ambassadorial level, or higher, and Chou reported to have renewed

invitation to Hatoyama visit Peiping. NCNA October 13 accused Jap­

anese government of turning deaf ear to Peiping’s efforts to normalize

Sino-Japanese relations.

Daily editorial October 12 hailed withdrawal six Chicom divisions

from Korea as “major contribution to promotion peaceful settlement

Korea question.”

Dulles

Letter No. 20

Washington, October 17, 1955

Dear Alex:

This letter will be short since not much has transpired since I wrote

you on the 14th.

The Secretary has noted that it would seem at some point we should

try to smoke out the Chinese Communists by asking them whether the

matters they have proposed constituted the only matters they have at

issue with the U.S. The Secretary observes that the purpose of the talks

was to discuss such matters and he thinks we might ask that they should

bring out everything that is in their minds. Otherwise the talks cannot

serve their agreed purpose.

The foregoing is related to your remarks about whether the raising

of other subjects by either side is precluded. I do not believe that any­

one on our side thinks that as of now the raising of subjects other than

the four mentioned under Item Two is ruled out. The only question is

whether a deadline should be established for the introduction of new

subjects.

Some of Judge Phleger’s people and also Ralph Clough, are

working on material for your possible use in connection with the

renunciation of force item. We are in something of a dilema in that any

elaboration of our position on support of the GRC, the Mutual Defense

Treaty, the Mission of the 7th Fleet, and the presence of MAAG units

in Taiwan tends to get us involved in a discussion involving the essen­

tial interests if not the rights of the GRC. Yet avoidance of all mention

of these matters and of our position on the juridical status of Taiwan

puts us in a false position of seeming to have no defensible position

and nothing to say in response to Wang’s ripostes. It would look as if

our position were entirely defensive and untenable. It would almost

seem that we were ashamed to even attempt to defend our position.

Somehow we must work out a means of addressing forthrightly our

basis stance without getting bogged down in a counter productive

dispute.

I am enclosing a copy of an important speech which Mr. Robertson

made at Davidson College on October 15. This will be of considerable

background use to you. You will note that our problems are specifically

dealt with beginning on the bottom of Page 5, running through Page 9.

This speech is being given heavy play by the VOA throughout the FE

Official–­Informal.

although it was not carried as a State Department press release. We

expect to put it in the State Department Bulletin soon.

The Secretary is still taking a firm position against travel of Ameri­

can correspondents to Communist China while the 19 are still held. He

reaffirmed this position to a CBS Executive recently. The pressure for

immediate relaxation is undiminished.

The pouch is closing. We are meeting this afternoon on the guid­

ance for your Thursday meeting. We hope to get this out tomorrow

so you will have time to assimilate the telegram and come back at us

if necessary before your meeting. You did well to get the meetings

established on a weekly schedule without any adverse reaction from

Wang.

Krishna Menon saw the Secretary alone on the 15th. I do not have

any report on what transpired yet. I hope we can send a report on any­

thing of direct interest within the next few days.

Good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosure:

Speech of Mr. Robertson

914. For Johnson.

Guidance for 22nd meeting October 20.

1. You should continue stress emphatically US dissatisfaction with

PRC failure implement Agreed Announcement along lines Deptel 870

numbered paragraph 1. Situation remains unchanged regarding nine­

teen Americans and ability UK Charge carry out his agreed functions.

Conviction growing in US that Americans being held as hostages for

political purposes. As evidence hardening of US public opinion you

should quote verbatim New York Times editorial October 17 which

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and Sebald; cleared by Phleger and McConaughy and

in draft by Dulles.

illustrates growing concern US over Chinese failure implement their

agreement. (Deptel 910) US Government seriously concerned by PRC’s

continued evasion its express commitments, which cannot fail have

unfavorable effect on other aspects these talks.

2. At last meeting Wang introduced subjects such as status Taiwan

and presence US forces in area on which US and PRC hold different

views. These not subjects which can be usefully discussed under pres­

ent conditions. Remind Wang that fundamental and pressing need

is for both parties renounce use force so as to remove threat of war.

Whenever Wang attempts divert discussion to other topics you should

endeavor bring it back to this simple basic proposition.

3. With reference Wang’s demand that US withdraw its forces from

Taiwan area you should point out that this is in effect a demand that US

change its policy and abandon those whom it has pledged to defend

from attack, under threat that armed force will be used if US does not

accede to that demand. US does not intend yield to threat of force. Force

is not an admissible means settling differences between us. US is not

demanding that PRC alter its views and objectives. We only ask that

both sides declare their willingness renounce force. Then and only then

can differences be freely discussed.

4. Discretion on unaccounted-­for military personnel continues in

accordance with Deptel 870 paragraph 3 and on embargo accordance

paragraph 5 same telegram.

5. As opportunity arises endeavor smoke out Wang on what other

issues PRC may wish discuss under Item 2 so that we may know of all

questions Chinese Communists want settled. Purpose questions raised

latter paragraph is to lay basis for our inability solve embargo item uni­

laterally (your letter Oct. 13).

6. While Secretary in Geneva, responsibility for issuance your

regular instructions will remain in Department. Telegraph promptly

any instructions you may receive direct from Secretary in order keep

Department fully informed. Department will keep Secretary informed

of all instructions to you.

Dulles

915. For Johnson.

Following draft declaration on renunciation of force has not repeat

not received final approval in Department but is transmitted for your

comments:

QUOTE

Agreed Announcement

of the Ambassadors of the United States of America and

the People’s Republic of China

The Ambassadors of the United States of America and the People’s

Republic of China in the discussion of the practical matters at issue between

the two sides have agreed to announce the following declarations:

Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan informed Ambassador U. Alexis

Johnson that:

In general, and with particular reference to the Taiwan area, The

People’s Republic of China renounces the use of force, except in indi­

vidual and collective self defense.

Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson informed Ambassador Wang Ping-­

nan that:

In general, and with particular reference to the Taiwan area, the

United States renounces the use of force, except in individual and col­

lective self defense.

UNQUOTE

Dulles

Clough; cleared by Dulles in draft and by McConaughy, Sebald, and Phleger.

Geneva, October 19, 1955, noon

896. From Johnson.

2. For following reasons I question desirability quoting newspaper

editorial in meeting:

A. I open door to Wang quoting back to me as expressions US pub­

lic opinion other American newspaper editorials favoring higher level

meeting, even recognition, admission to UN, et cetera. (He can always

find something our press quote against me while we can be sure we

will never find anything CHICOM press quote against him.)

B. While cited editorial is excellent and I have in past and will

continue make its principal points, my quoting it in meeting con­

stitutes degree of endorsement which may require me to defend in

detail. For example while phrase “Red China” is perfectly proper

in context editorial and even public statements in US, it is type of

phrase which I have thus far avoided in meeting and if Wang were

to use corresponding Communist phrases in characterizing US Gov­

ernment or its officers I would expect immediately call him on it.

Next, reference in fourth sentence editorial to “still larger number

supposedly free to leave” presumably refers to “47”.

I do not believe we have any evidence or even indication sup­

port implication these persons most of whom probably working for

CHICOMs desire to leave or are being prevented from leaving. In fact

at last meeting I rejected Wang’s efforts confuse issue with this group.

While editorial speaks of “top level” meeting “between Secretary of

State Dulles and Red Chinese Premier Chou En-­lai” Wang has spoken

only of “higher level” meeting and while implication of Dulles-Chou

meeting is clear it has never been specifically identified as such.

C. It seems to me I weaken my position as spokesman in these

negotiations for a representative government presumably able to speak

for and assess public opinion much better than any newspaper by for­

mally introducing a newspaper editorial to support our position. He

will be able throw back at me my previous statements early in negoti­

ations on undesirability using press as authoritative source. (See 11th

paragraph Mytel 354).

3. I can and will in meeting strongly make point on hardening of US

public opinion because CHICOM failure implement announcements.

Distribution.

CHICOMs closely follow US press and well know which papers are

authoritative and influential, and will well know accuracy my state­

ments without my reading editorials to them.

4. Therefore believe best use this and similar editorials in repetition

to China by VOA and inclusion in Wireless Bulletin which they able

closely follow.

Gowen

931. For Johnson. Deptel 914.

Second sentence para 5 should follow first sentence para 4.

Dulles

by Sebald.

934. For Johnson.

Your 896. Department leaves to your discretion use of New York

Times editorial Oct. 17. If you prefer you may cite principal points that

editorial as widely representative American opinion without identify­

ing with New York Times.

VOA requested give prominent play to this editorial in its Far East­

ern output.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger, Sebald, and Henderson.

Letter No. 13

Geneva, October 19, 1955

Dear Walter:

Your letter of October 14 was here when I returned yesterday after­

noon. Your letter of October 17 arrived today. As always they are tre­

mendously helpful and appreciated.

With the pouch going out tomorrow noon and my having a meet­

ing at the same time, there is not much that I can write at this time. I

have been steadily at work all day on my material for tomorrow’s meet­

ing on the basis of Deptel 914. I very much hope that you agree with

me on the use of the New York Times editorial on which I sent you a

message this morning as soon as I had read the instructions. Otherwise

I felt the instructions were excellent and very helpful.

I am bothered by the absence of any word whatever from O’Neill

and hope that something will arrive before tomorrow morning’s meet­

ing so that I do not go out on any limbs.

I thought the Secretary’s press conference statement yesterday was

excellent. I am glad that he brought out the extent to which we are actu­

ally on Item 2 although it has necessitated my doing a little explaining

to correspondents here with whom I have thus far been less forthcom­

ing in this regard.

I do not expect anything dramatic in tomorrow’s meeting and will

try to write you more fully on Friday. With the Foreign Ministers’ Con­

ference opening, we will be able to take advantage of much more fre­

quent pouch service.

I will probably return again to Prague on Saturday, again coming

back here on Tuesday with the expectation of remaining here steadily

during all or most of the Foreign Ministers’ Conference.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Oct. 20

P.S. Have just come back from today’s meeting & this must go into

pouch. Think meeting went as well as could be expected & think I made

some progress on [illegible in the original] with which we [illegible in the

original] with implementation problem. Would not be surprised if we got a

few out before opening Fonmin conference next Thursday. Suggested to UN

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

they take initiative in moving our meetings to another area in same building

so that we are entirely out of Fonmin area where we are now meeting.

UAJ

300. Letter from Robertson to Erskine

Washington, October 19, 1955

Dear General Erskine:

I refer to our previous correspondence regarding unaccounted-for

United States Military personnel and our exchanges of views regard­

ing the accounting to be demanded at Geneva by Ambassador Johnson

from the Chinese Communist representative.

It appears that the Chinese Communist representative may respond

to Ambassador Johnson’s request for an accounting by making a coun­

terdemand for an accounting for Chinese military personnel, including

those who, in accordance with the Armistice Agreement, chose not to

be repatriated.

I believe that our chances for favorable action on the release of

the imprisoned civilians, as well as on our demand for this account­

ing, will be improved if we are able to render as full an accounting as

possible for any list the Chinese Communist representative may sub­

mit. I understand an extensive accounting for Chinese personnel on

lists previously submitted by the Communist side through the Military

Armistice Commission in Korea has already been prepared, but not

handed over to the Communists because of their refusal to account for

our side’s unaccounted-­for personnel.

I would appreciate receiving from you any general suggestions

and comments you may have as to how Ambassador Johnson might be

instructed to respond to a Chinese Communist demand for an account­

ing for their personnel from the Korean War. I would also like to know

your estimate, based on past Communist demands through the MAC,

of the probable size and breakdown of the list which the Chinese Com­

munist representative may submit, together with our position and

capabilities with respect to furnishing the desired recounting.

Sincerely yours,

Walter S. Robertson

Assistant Secretary

Osborn on October 17.

910. From Johnson.

1. Two hour twenty minute meeting this morning, somewhat over

hour of which devoted to implementation.

2. I made prepared statement along lines para one Deptel 914

and including info on O’Neill’s inability perform functions contained

Deptel 933.

3. During considerable give and take in which he said nothing

new, I strongly stressed to Wang increasing seriousness present situa­

tion, increasingly unfavorable effect it would have on other aspects these

talks, referred to increasingly hard tone American press and read por­

tion of letter I had received from mother of Father Houle. Theme was

Americans believe announcement meant what it said and as time passes

with no results in this our first common public act, he must expect strong

reaction. Conviction 19 being held for political purposes strengthened

by continued reference PRC public statements on “improvement of rela­

tions” as factor in timing release. Believe I was successful in some degree

impressing on him seriousness with which we view situation.

4. I then made prepared statement on renunciation of force along

ment to effect our proposal was abuse non-­recourse to force principle

in international relations to prevent their exercise of sovereign rights

in Taiwan, Taiwan was domestic problem, discussion inadmissible in

scope these talks and mere statement principle cannot resolve tension

in Taiwan area. Deeds, that is US withdrawal from Taiwan, required.

Repeated theme “circumstances permitting Chinese Government will­

ing to strive for liberation Taiwan by peaceful means”. In give and

take he regularly spoke of “American invasion and armed occupation

of Taiwan”. Rejected any parallel between Taiwan situation and other

divided countries. PRC “will never recognize status quo”.

5. I ignored challenge our policy and kept coming back to theme

first and fundamental step was non-­recourse to force declaration to

which his reiterated reply was withdrawal US forces in implementa­

tion US acceptance of principle non-­recourse to force or threat of force.

6. Next meeting Thursday October 27.

7. I am departing for Prague Saturday returning Geneva Tuesday.

Goze

Limited Distribution.

915. From Johnson. Joint State USIA message.

Garnish informs me he has been assigned full time as Chief USIS

Coverage Team FONMIN Conference, and is departing Geneva imme­

diately thereafter for home leave. No information here on arrival his

successor but appears may be at least few weeks. With mass arrival

correspondents for FONMIN Conference it can be expected will be

considerable increase in demands on information officer for my talks.

Thus important information officer with clear responsibility my talks

be available not later than October 26. From policy standpoint would

not think it desirable such officer be actively identified with FONMIN

Conference. Would appreciate Department promptly discussing appro­

priate action with USIA.

Gowen

921. From Johnson. ReDeptel 915.

1. In general I think it important that whatever our minimum posi­

tion on text of declaration may be we start with something more so as

to preserve bargaining room. Would never be able convince Wang our

first position was final position and first text should have some negoti­

ating latitude built into it.

2. At same time do not believe text this declaration can be made

framework for negotiations on subject to same degree as was possible

with agreed announcement on release civilians. That is, do not rpt not

believe it would be productive introduce any text unless and until

Distribution.

negotiations reached point appeared some agreement in principle in

sight.

3. I perceive no objection to draft text but have difficulty in visu­

alizing at this stage how negotiations thereon might develop. In event

some agreement in principle is reached it is possible CHICOMS may

desire inclusion some language in their section reaffirming their posi­

tion on Taiwan etc. This of course would open door for us to insist on

inclusion counter-­balancing statements our section. CHICOMS also

likely insist on inclusion UN Charter language from article 2 para 4 on

“international” and “threat” use of force.

4. Have no further comments at this time.

Gowen

922. From Johnson.

1. 22nd meeting today lasted two hours and twenty minutes.

I opened with prepared statement as follows:

A. Mr. Ambassador, I first wish to discuss with you this morning

question of implementation of announcement with regard to return of

civilians which we issued on September tenth. This Saturday six weeks

will have passed since that announcement was issued. In our last few

meetings I have expressed to you increasing concern over delay by your

government in implementing that announcement. At our last meeting I

stated that it should be evident that my government was bound to take

increasingly serious view of your government’s failure to implement

announcement with respect to 19 Americans in jail if this failure should

be further protracted. However, I have not taken up valuable time at

these meetings to discuss this matter in detail.

B. I have done this in deference to your wish that we should pro­

ceed to discussion of matters under agenda item 2 as rapidly as possi­

ble. This is my desire too, but you must understand that in order for

discussion of these complex subjects to proceed with some hope of

Limited Distribution.

success, there must be present an atmosphere of mutual confidence and

assurance that agreements reached will be carried out.

C. This atmosphere of mutual confidence is rapidly and seriously

being jeopardized by your government’s failure to implement agreed

announcement with respect to remaining imprisoned Americans, as

well as by continued inability of UK Charge in Peking to carry out func­

tions envisaged in announcement. When agreed announcement was

released, people of United States and world promptly took it to mean

simply what it said. They believed that Americans in your country who

wanted to return would be permitted expeditiously to exercise their

right to do so, this encouraged American people and my government

and me to believe that we could promptly go on to fruitful discussion

of other matters at issue between our two countries. We hoped and

expected that in this atmosphere it would be possible to move ahead on

these other important and difficult matters.

D. I must in interest of our talks frankly tell you that favorable

atmosphere created by issuance of the announcement is being rapidly

dissipated. Up to now no action whatever has been taken to permit

return of remaining 19 Americans. Furthermore, you told me that your

government would promptly consider suggestions with regard details

of implementation submitted by British Charge in Peking. Although

more than five weeks have now passed since I first raised these ques­

tions here with you and several weeks have passed since British Charge

raised these same questions with your government, he still has not even

received reply. Nor has any imprisoned American been permitted by

your government even to communicate with him. This is causing seri­

ous doubt in my country concerning willingness of your government

faithfully and promptly to carry out this, our first common public act.

Feeling is gaining ground that cases of these Americans are not being

handled in light of agreed announcement, but rather that these individ­

uals are being held as hostages for political purposes. I would not be

honest if I did not tell you that continuation of this situation cannot fail

to have an unfavorabe effect on other aspects of these talk.

E. If this is to be result of our issuing an agreed announcement, it

would have, perhaps, been better if it had never been issued. However,

I am very reluctant to come to this conclusion. I want to believe that

your government will take action to complete carrying out of its com­

mitment and thereby restore an atmosphere in which it will be possible

to make further progress in these talks.

F. Before turning to any other matters this morning, I would like to

hear what you have to say with regard to this situation.

2. Wang replied that he regarded my again raising question of

implementation regrettable. He could not accept my statement that his

government had neglected implementation of agreed announcement.

There were still Chinese nationals in US who desire to return but have

not been able to do so. His government had not received lists of names

even of those individuals I had informed him had departed US. Wang

said that this was not satisfactory.

3. He continued by stating that 66 American nationals remain in

China, including 47 “civilians”. Any of these “civilians” who desire to

return to US may do so in accordance with agreement. As to another

19 who have “committed offenses”, Wang said that he had previously

indicated that his government is willing to review case of each of these

people in accordance with Chinese law.

4. Wang said that “alleged doubt” in US concerning willingness

of his government to carry out agreement is not justified, and that he

opposed strongly “alleged statement” that remaining 19  are held as

hostages. He termed this “deliberate distortion of facts”.

5. He said that each side had invited third country and that all mat­

ters concerning implementation should be referred to these countries.

It is unnecessary further to bring up matter in these talks. If matter is

further raised in these talks, he cannot but take it as questioning their

good faith in implementation of agreed announcement.

6. Wang stated that his side was not raising question of US imple­

mentation in spite of its dissatisfaction on return of Chinese nationals

in US. He stated he would not raise question of good faith of US in

carrying out agreement.

7. I replied that advantage of our meeting was informal atmo­

sphere without publicity that enabled us to talk frankly with each other.

I stated that I hoped we would be able to continue to do so. I told him

that what I had said this morning was motivated by earnest desire to

explain frankly situation in my country in regard to talks. I told him

that if he is dissatisfied with progress of returning Chinese nationals

from US he should tell me so frankly.

8. I stated that to best of my knowledge no Chinese national who

wants to return is being prevented from returning by any action by

my government. I said that any Chinese national who feels he is being

hindered is free to communicate with Indian Embassy, and that we had

previously stated that we would accept representations from Indan

Embassy on behalf of any such nationals. I said that I knew of no case

thus far in which such representations had been received and that we

would act promptly should any such case arise.

9. I said that case of 19 Americans is entirely different. I said that

only action by Wang’s government can permit them to leave. Whatever

he may feel concerning justice or injustice of my statements regarding

public opinion in US, it is fact that has to be considered. I am sure his

government follows US press and knows statements I made are not

based on figment my imagination.

10. I said that press releases by official agencies of his government

have done much to feed feeling that these Americans being held as

hostages. These press releases and statements continued to speak of

improvement in relatons as factor in release of these Americans.

11. I said that American press and public are putting same inter­

pretation on these statements that I had told him in earlier meetings

I could not but place on similar statements he had made. I said that I am

very disturbed about this situation.

12. I told him that I earnestly hoped this situation can be corrected

and that atmosphere created by agreed announcement can be restored.

I said I greatly feared consequences of continuation of present situation,

and that I was saying this not to be provocative or to make threats, but

simply in order to share frankly with him trend of opinion in my coun­

try with its inevitable consequences on the talks.

13. Wang replied that he shared my view that we should speak

frankly in these talks. However, frank exchanges should facilitate rather

than hinder progress of talks. Insofar as public opinion is concerned,

there is also public opinion in his country. In his country “public opin­

ion is truly representative of opinion of Chinese people”, and this fact

could not be distorted in any way.

14. He said that our positions in these discussions must be based

on genuine facts. If our deliberations were based on inaccurate spec­

ulations, we could not possibly come to correct conclusions. In same

manner he hoped that there would be conciliatory attitude in public

opinion. This required efforts on both sides.

15. I replied that I agreed that discussion should be based on facts,

and that I was trying to explain fact regarding situation in my country.

I said I hoped he and his government would earnestly consider what

I had said because it was said to facilitate talks.

16. I said I wished to stress the fact that people in my coun­

try expected agreed announcement to lead to expeditious return of

detained Americans and that adverse reaction of disappointment was

increasing with time. I said that as personal touch I had letter from lady

in my own home town, Mrs. Houle, mother of Father Houle. I read

excerpts from letter, expressing Mrs. Houle’s expectation at time of

announcement her son would promptly return and increasing disap­

pointment at no word on his return.

17. I concluded that it was hard for me to answer letters like that,

but that I would not pursue subject further this morning.

18. Wang replied that there are people who express same feelings

in letters to him and that there have been various views concerning

the advance release of Americans who have committed offenses. He

said that questions have been raised why such people who have been

unfriendly to China and carried out acts against it should be released

early. He said he did not propose to deal further with this point.

19. I next presented prepared statement on renunciation of force

as follows:

A. Mr. Ambassador I have very carefully studied remarks which

you made at our last meeting concerning proposal of my government

that each of us should renounce use of force to achieve our policies

when they conflict and specifically that both sides declare that they

would not resort to use of force in Taiwan area except defensively.

B. During your discussion at our last meeting you introduced

several subjects, in particular that of status of Taiwan and presence

of United States forces in that area. These are subjects upon whch our

respective governments hold different views. I have carefully avoided

attempting to force on you views of my government with regard to

these complex matters. Although my government is entirely convinced

of rightness and justness of its position with regard to these matters, it

is not now asking your government to accept our views. My govern­

ment full well recognizes that its views are different from those of your

government and that each of our governments has policies which are in

certain respects incompatible with each other.

C. On other hand I have noted your demand that my government

should withdraw its forces from Taiwan area. In effect you are demand­

ing that United States should change its policy and that my govern­

ment should abandon those whom it has solemnly pledged to defend

from attack. You state that your government will, if circumstances per­

mit, seek what you term the liberation of Taiwan by peaceful means.

I cannot but read into your statement the clear implication that if you

are not able by peaceful means to achieve your national objectives with

respect to Taiwan area, you will resort to force. What you seem in effect

to be saying is that you will use peaceful means as long as your national

objectives can thereby be achieved but that if they cannot be achieved

by such means, you threaten to use force. Therefore, it seems to me that

what you in effect have said is that if United States does not accede to

your government’s demand that my government change its policies,

your government threatens use of armed force.

D. Just so that we may be entirely clear, I want to say very frankly

and very bluntly that United States does not intend to yield to threat

of force.

E. My government does not consider that force is admissible means

of settling differneces between us. My government is not demanding

that your government alter its views or its objectives. Proposal which I

have made is only that both sides declare their willingness to renounce

force to implement these policies. Then and only then can these dif­

ferences between us be freely and hopefully discussed. They cannot

be usefully discussed under present conditions in which one party is

threatening use of force if its views do not fully prevail.

F. I have sought to determine aspects of this principle on which

we agree and hope that whatever common ground we do have may

be extended and provide a sufficient base for making declarations

which I have suggested. Solemn duty which both of us have toward

our respective governments and peoples is to attempt to widen area of

whatever agreement exists between us and to narrow and eventually

eliminate areas of disagreement. You have stated that your government

is in agreement with my government regarding principles of United

Nations Charter with respect to use of force. However, if I understand

your remarks correctly, your government is not willing to apply those

principles to situation in Taiwan area. As I pointed out in my statement

at our 20th meeting, there are many countries in world today which

are abnormally divided. In each of these cases resort to force by one

side or other cannot but result in war. A determination that such sit­

uations should not be permitted to bring about war has been voiced

by responsible governments. In such an atmosphere there can be hope

that equitable, just and peaceful solutions can, with patience, be found.

Such solutions are impossible in atmosphere of overwhelming threat

of one side to resort to force if its views do not prevail. Only when

threat of force is removed can there be hope of coming to constructive

conclusions.

G. I fail to see why or upon what moral or legal basis your govern­

ment considers that situation in Taiwan area differs from these other

situations. I fail to see why your government considers that it should be

entitled to disregard accepted standards of international conduct with

regard to this particular situation.

H. I again most earnestly express hope that your government will

be able to agree with mine upon this simple but fundamental principle

so that other matters can be discussed with a better hope of reaching

constructive conclusions.

20. Wang replied with prepared statement. He said that he had pre­

viously pointed out that principle of non-­recourse to force must not

be abused with respect to China’s exercise of its sovereign rights to its

own territory of Taiwan. He said that Chinese Government has already

stated that “circumstances permitting it will strive to liberate Taiwan by

peaceful means”. However, this Chinese domestic affair is not within

scope of our present talks.

21. He said that second agenda item covered only practical mat­

ters at issue between China and US and that I had repeatedly indicated

that discussion could involve only China and US. Hence he considered

domestic affairs of China or US could not be made subjects of talks.

22. He stated that as he had previously pointed out, China has

always advocated peaceful solutions of international disputes rather

than recourse to force and that China is opposed threat or use of force

to undermine sovereignty and territorial integrity of any state. He said

that I had stated that US as member of UN agreed to refrain from threat

or use of force in international relations. He stated that US by using

force against China’s Taiwan has already broken principle of non-­

employment of force in international relations.

23. At approximately this point Wang abandoned his manuscript

and continued extemporaneously. He said that mere statement of prin­

ciple cannot resolve tension in Taiwan area. Practical question is how

US is going to implement principle by actual deeds.

24. He could not accept the way I had raised question of status of

Taiwan. Taiwan is Chinese territory and this cannot be disputed. That

question has been settled long ago. Taiwan is as much Chinese territory

as New York is American territory and cannot be separated from China.

25. He said that I had on one hand proposed to make announce­

ment regarding renunciation of use of force. On other hand, I had

openly made a statement this morning concerning justice of use of force

by US in Taiwan area. If such American use of force is justifiable one is

bound to question significance of Cairo Declaration, of Potsdam Agree­

ment on which signature of US President is affixed, of public statements

by American Presidents, and of UN Charter stipulations. If American

use of force against Taiwan is justified, what was meaning of resistance

against Japanese aggression. If American use of force against Taiwan

is termed justified we are bound to say it is making farce of normally

accepted standards of international law.

26. Wang stated that he also wished to say frankly that US armed

occupation of Taiwan is not merely threat to security of China but also

threat to security and peace in Far East. Chinese people consistently

advocated peaceful settlement of international disputes and opposed

settlement by force, but they will never yield to threat of force and will

never recognize status quo.

27. He said that examples of divided nations that I had cited can

never explain or justify American armed occupation of Taiwan.

28. He said that chief cause of tension lies in fact that US used force

in the area. Such use of force greatly threatens China and other con­

tries in that area. That was why it was necessary to carry on talks here.

Purpose of talks is to improve relations between China and US and to

ease tense situation in Far East. He said that if as proposed by China

US applies principle of non-­recourse to force and withdraws its armed

forces from Taiwan area, then it would not only improve relations

between our two countries, but at same time greatly reduce tension in

that part of world.

29. He concluded by stating that the question in what manner

China will liberate Taiwan is solely a domestic affair and not for dis­

cussion here and that Chinese people resolutely oppose any state that

tries to interfere in their domestic affairs. He reserved comments on

remaining parts of my statement for the next meeting.

30. I replied that if one government were entirely to concede to the

views of another government, many situations would be resolved, but

only in a one-­sided manner. What governments can do is to say that dif­

ferences must not lead them to war and that they will discuss problems

in peaceful atmosphere free from threat of force from either side. I said

that I was proposing no more at the moment. I was not asking him to

concede to our point of view, but simply asking that we agree we will

not fight over our points of view. Then we would be able to discuss

other matters with a better hope of finding solutions.

31. Wang replied that of course we were trying to find better solu­

tions in our talks and that it was certainly correct when I said that differ­

ent points of view should not lead to war. He said that as he has stated on

many occasions and as Premier Chou En-­lai has also stated, Chinese peo­

ple are friendly to the American people and do not wish to fight Amer­

icans. However the present situation can be described as dagger thrust

into the body of China. Those who suffer are Chinese people.

32. Wang said that I had stated that no government can resolve

a dispute with another government entirely in accord with its own

views. He said he recognized that each party to a dispute has its own

reasons, but one cannot say all reasons are correct. That is why it is nec­

essary to have international law and standards of conduct such as UN

Charter. That means each state must respect territorial integrity and

sovereignty of other governments. If any government could interfere in

internal affairs of other states in disregard of international law, outlook

of world would indeed not be optimistic.

33. I replied that if his government was determined that the situ­

ation should not lead to war and if, as I had told him, my government

is so determined, why should it not be possible for us simply to say so.

34. Wang replied that if declaration of renunciation of use of force

is to be made then why cannot US specifically withdraw its armed

forces from this area. He cited a Chinese proverb: only a person’s deeds

can verify a person’s words. Only deeds give effect to words.

35. I replied that Wang was asking the US to abandon solemnly

pledged words and agreements with others and to change its policies

in area. I said I was not excluding discussion of other subjects but I was

simply saying that we cannot discuss such subjects unless we have said

we will not let differences lead us to war. That is fundamental to any

fruitful discussion of differences. If his government shared my govern­

ment’s determination that differences should not lead to war, I saw no

reason why we should not say so. Once we had done this, we could

have better hope in discussing other matters.

36. Wang replied that US is member of UN, and that he was asking

US to abide by solemn pledge it has made in UN Charter and other

international documents to which it is signatory. He said that if that

spirit can be specifically implemented with deeds, we can expect prog­

ress in the world.

37. I added that there were two indisputable facts: one, there is

a dispute between us; and, two, the spirit of the UN Charter is that

disputes shall not be settled by recourse to force. I said that regarding

our specific dispute, we were willing to state we would not resort to

force. If his government would say the same thing, then we could start

talking about the dispute in an atmosphere free from threat of force by

either side.

38. Wang replied that if the US would withdraw its armed forces

from Taiwan, it would certainly create peaceful atmosphere. He said

that he hoped I would very carefully study his propsal and put forward

constructive views.

39. I said I had nothing to add at this time. The meeting concluded

with confirmation our previous agreement that the next meeting would

be Thursday, October 27, and that the usual statement would be made

to the press.

Gowen

Geneva, October 21, 1955, noon

924. From Johnson.

1. At yesterday’s as well as preceding meeting Wang was relaxed

and made no effort force pace of meeting or press discussion his sub­

jects. Yesterday words “higher level meeting” or “trade embargo” were

not mentioned even obliquely. His entire attitude last two meetings as

well as readiness with which he agreed my proposal for weekly meet­

ings give general impression of willingness, at least for time being, per­

mit talks continue at leisurely pace without making effort bring any

­Limited Distribution.

issues to head. This represents sharp contrast to his attitude at begin­

ning discussion item two.

2. It may be they have now reached conclusion it is in their interest

keep talks going more or less indefinitely even though they obtain no

concrete results. On other hand their present tactics might be related

to FonMin meeting and may undergo change following that meeting.

3. Possibility that should be considered is that, if their present

desire is to keep talks going for their own sake even though no con­

crete results obtained, they may estimate our only interest in talks is

to obtain release of Americans and when that is accomplished we will

cut them off. They may thus be estimating that it is necessary for them

continue hold some Americans to accomplish even limited objective of

continuation talks. Not sure how we can meet this possibility but will

be alert for any opportunity to confirm this theory and do what I can

to refute.

4. Wang will probably make opening statement next meeting reply­

ing my statement yesterday’s meeting on renunciation force. Question

is what I can usefully say in reply other than reiterating points already

made.

Gowen

966. For Johnson.

General tone of Peiping propaganda during week ending

­October  20 continued hostile toward US. Commentary on Dulles

speech of October 10 accused Secretary of trying to “undermine the

cordial atmosphere” Summit Conference and seeking to “sabotage”

coming Big Four Ministers Conference. US accused of continuing to

rely on force to achieve “aggressive” goals and of showing off atomic

power to maintain tension. US said to be converting Japan into “atomic

war base,” and frantically trying to subvert PRC.

Attention given to Geneva talks past week relatively slight. NCNA

October 19 gave brief summary Dulles press conference October 18

Drafted by Dawson (DRF); cleared in IAD and CA.

without comment. NCNA October 20 quoting Special Correspondent

Ch’en Shih-­wu, accused US of “consistently obstructing and delaying

discussion” of substantive issues under Item 2 by unilateral disclosure

of “controversial issues” to press, and by press fabrications. NCNA

cited as example of latter, NY Times article October 15 quoting NCNA

representative in Geneva to effect that Wang instructed not to discuss

renunciation of force prior to discussion trade embargo and Seventh

Fleet removal. Accused Times correspondent of adopting “hostile

attitude” toward talks, and hinted he has close connections with US

Consulate.

On Taiwan issue, NCNA October 17 stated US still creating ten­

sion Taiwan area, hence continued need for “vigilance”; stressed need

to “prepare for liberation of Taiwan,” while Geneva talks continue.

People’s Daily editorial October 19 stated “Chinese people willing to

strive to liberate Taiwan by peaceful means.” Cited Tibet as example

of “peaceful liberation.” Contrasted US “use of force” in Taiwan area,

with Chinese peaceful intentions. Concluded that “If Dulles principle

of renouncing force is to have practical significance, US should discard

use of force . . . and materially contribute to easing of tension in Taiwan

area.”

Considerable attention in Peiping press during past week to

need for early “normalization” relations with Japan. Address by Liu

Shao-­ch’i to group Diet members October 16 followed general line

established by Chou-­Mao interviews October 3—i.e., achieve “normal­

ization” first, then settle specific issues. Liu called for early holding of

“diplomatic negotiations” with Japanese government and continued

expansion of informal contacts, through trade, cultural, and parlia­

mentary missions. Liu address followed by joint communique Octo­

ber 17 calling for “positive efforts” normalize relations; relaxation of

COCOM controls; increased cultural contacts. Mao Tse-­tung quoted by

Reuters as having told Japanese Diet members he was willing to visit

Japan or US if invitation offered and would extend return invitation

to Hatoyama. Mao reported as having said that international situation

“might change” hence he sought to promote friendship with all coun­

tries. Meanwhile Peiping continued take harsh line toward Hatoyama

government strongly protesting Japanese decision send 150 Chinese

residents of Japan to Taiwan and hinting this was due to “American

influence.”

Dulles

Letter No. 14

Geneva, October 21, 1955

Dear Walter:

I do not know when this letter will reach you but I hope that it may

be of some value in contributing to your more long range thinking back

there. It is very much in the nature of “thinking aloud” and represents

distillation of many “bull sessions” we have had here on the subject.

We have now for several meetings discussed primarily renunciation

of force. One of the things about which we have been puzzling is why

Wang has been so willing to drop his subjects and at least talk around our

subject. One theory, which I set forth in my telegram 924 of today, is that

they are willing to see the talks kept going either more or less indefinitely

or at least through the Foreign Ministers’ Conference and do not desire to

take any steps that would tend to bring matters to a head.

Another theory we have been discussing since I sent my telegram

is that they see in this subject possibility of pressing their undoubted

desire for the withdrawal of our forces from the Taiwan area within

such a framework, whereas they full well realize that its introduction as

a subject by them would have been rejected by us as outside the scope

of these talks.

This leads me to an attempt to analyze what their thinking may be

with respect to our renunciation of force proposal. Despite its surface

appearances, I believe the Chinese Communists may well view the pro­

posal as very unequal from their standpoint. They may well feel that it

would require them to make substantial political concessions while we

are making virtually none.

It would not increase the assurances which they now have from

us against military attack contained in our treaty with the GRC, our

general obligations under the UN Charter and our public statements.

At the same time we would continue to maintain in close proximity to

them our present heavy preponderance of air and sea power.

Also, the Chinese Communists may estimate that such a declara­

tion would carry with it for them the following other disadvantages:

a) It would carry with it a tacit acknowledgment of the existence

of the GRC far more than any other act they have thus far taken. The

PRC is in a much stronger international position than any of the rump

Communist governments in other divided countries which for the most

part have no status outside the Communist bloc. The tacit recognition

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

that a no force declaration would give to the status quo, and the GRC

as a government which claims sovereignty over all of China and is rec­

ognized by most free world countries, would greatly weaken the PRC

claim as the only government of China and the government entitled to

occupy China’s seat in the UN.

b) The renunciation of force declaration by the PRC would virtu­

ally eliminate the possibility of its obtaining even the offshore islands in

the foreseeable future. PRC estimates that there is a good possibility it

could attack those islands without too serious risk of U.S. intervention

and without serious political loss. It also estimates that if the U.S. were

to intervene to prevent capture of the offshore islands and any consid­

erable hostilities should develop therefrom, the PRC would have con­

siderable political support in Asia as well as elsewhere, while the U.S.

would tend to become politically isolated on this issue.

c) The renunciation of force declaration would be interpreted in Tai­

wan and by the overseas Chinese as an acceptance of the status quo by

the PRC and would, therefore, greatly increase the difficulties of PRC sub­

version of Taiwan and decrease PRC influence among overseas Chinese.

d) Such a bilateral declaration would not bind the GRC or bring

about any cessation of GRC harassment of the mainland and shipping

destined for the PRC.

The only factors that I perceive that might move them toward mak­

ing such a declaration are the following:

a) It would contribute to their current diplomatic peace offensive.

b) It would increase pressure on U.S. to agree to a higher level

meeting and, in turn, speed up relaxation of trade controls, member­

ship in the UN, etc.

c) If they genuinely fear that the U.S. intends to put Chiang back

on the mainland, they would enter into the declaration in the hope that

it would tie our hands.

d) They could use such declaration to bring pressure on us to

restrain GRC from its harassing tactics.

None of the foregoing points seems very persuasive to me from

their standpoint, and I doubt if they outweigh what they consider to be

the disadvantages. My estimate of the situation at present is that I see

little or no possibility of their entering into such a declaration unless

it were accompanied by the withdrawal of our forces from Taiwan or,

much less likely, a firm commitment to a Foreign Ministers’ meeting.

I would not even be sure that they would enter into it even if both

things were done. I am also not sure where Quemoy and Matsu might

fit in. I certainly thus far have not perceived any support for the oft

repeated thesis that a ceasefire could be obtained in the Formosa Strait

if Matsu and Quemoy were turned over to them. However, by stretch­

ing things a bit, one might be able to read into Wang’s remarks thus far

that they would be willing to agree to renunciation of force declaration

in exchange for withdrawal of U.S. forces from Taiwan. He has never

defined or been specific about this. I am not sure whether he is talking

just about the air unit which we have stationed there, which is, I under­

stand, our only tactical unit on the island, or whether he is talking about

the whole complex of the MAAG and the Seventh Fleet.

It might be, as indicated in my today’s telegram, that they are will­

ing to keep these talks going indefinitely as an alternative to making

decisions on these problems which are even more difficult for them than

for us. However, it is too early to come to any firm conclusion on this.

I am not sure where all of this leads us but simply wanted fully to

share with you some of our talk on the subject. If the opportunity arises,

I hope to talk some of these things through with the Secretary while he

is here, but before doing so would appreciate having FE reactions to

some of these hypotheses.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. In case you haven’t seen it, I thought you would be amused at

the enclosed FBIS. You should have somebody get out the original New

York Times story to which it refers.

Letter No. 21

Washington, October 21, 1955

Dear Alex:

The Secretary is due to arrive in Geneva on Wednesday afternoon,

October 26. I have just talked to Rod O’Connor for the second time

regarding contacts with you. We think the arrangement for the handling

of your instructions during the Foreign Ministers Conference should

work all right. The regular instructions to you will continue to be han­

dled in the Department, but will be repeated to the Secretary in the

TEDUL series. We will take particular pains to get these instructions out

on the Tuesday before the Thursday meetings, so there will be time for

the Secretary to amend or comment on the instructions if he wishes to do

so. It would be well for you to give the Secretary’s staff in Geneva a copy

of all your messages to the Department simultaneously with the dispatch

of the messages. This in addition to the arrangement for you to inform

us of any instructions you receive direct from the Secretary should give

us a pretty complete cross-­check. In addition, there may be some direct

exchanges between the Secretary and/or Herman Phleger in Geneva and

the Department on policy considerations involved in your instructions.

There will always be a risk of some confusion or misunderstanding in a

situation like this but we hope that this arrangement will give us maxi­

mum insurance against any serious crossing of the wires.

Ralph Clough has had Joe Nagoski prepare an up-­to-­date box score

on the status of the 76 Chinese in this country who were mentioned to

Wang. It is enclosed as of possible background use to you.

The mild and cautious tone of the Secretary’s remarks about the

Geneva talks at his Press Conference on October 18 has created an

impression in some quarters that we are not particularly dissatisfied

with the PRC’s record of implementation of the Agreed Announcement,

and that a Foreign Ministers’ level meeting might be seriously consid­

ered immediately after your talks are terminated. Senator Knowland

telephoned from California on October 19 to express his surprise over

the press reports on the Secretary’s remarks and to go on record as being

opposed to any discussions under Item 2 “until the 19 Americans rotting

in Communist jails have been released”. He thought we had abandoned

our firm position. Mr. Robertson explained that we had not abandoned

Item 1 and would not do so until the last civilian was released. He also

pointed out that the only substantive discussion under Item 2 concerned

the renunciation of force, which was our topic. The discussion of this

topic was in our interest and in no way indicated a weakening of our

position or a concession to the Communist viewpoint.

We are doing what we can to counter any impression abroad that

we are satisfied with Chinese Communist performance under the

Agreed Announcement, that we are about ready for a Dulles-­Chou En-­

lai meeting, or that our stand on the recognition issue has changed.

We are sending you a memorandum of the latest conversation

between Ambassador Koo and Mr. Robertson on this subject which

took place October 20.

The British Embassy here is giving us somewhat fuller abstracts

of O’Neill’s reports than the Foreign Office in London is giving to our

Embassy there. There is some duplication involved since you are receiv­

ing this material both from London and from us. We would like to have

an indication from you as to whether the somewhat greater detail you

get in our telegrams justifies the added expense.

We are awaiting your reaction to the short and simple draft decla­

ration on renunciation of force. It may not be the best form of statement

to propose to Wang but it is a starter anyway. We want to avoid high-­

flown language suggestive of a treaty. So it will have to be short and

simple. We feel we must get in a specific inclusion of the area of Taiwan

without diluting the force of the general statement. This creates some­

thing of a dilemma for us. The introduction of the “collective” reference

is an added complication.

The report of the 22nd meeting yesterday indicates that you are

just about on the merry-­go-­round in the discussion of the renunciation

of the use of force. There is a need for introduction of new material

to avoid repetition ad nauseam of the hackneyed phrases. It seems to

me we must rebut in some way the Communist canard that we are in

military occupation of Taiwan. How to do this without getting side-­

tracked, and without being led into matters dealing with the rights and

essential interests of the GRC, is a poser.

A good sojourn in Prague, and I hope that you won’t mind being

deprived of the limelight during the Foreign Ministers Conference.

Regards,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosure:

Status of 76 Chinese

980. For Johnson.

Your 915. USIA detailing Lawrence Howse, Press Attache at Paris,

as your press officer.

Hoover

Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Henderson.

Tedul 8. From Robertson.

1. We have been considering in what way Johnson might bring

about three week recess in talks to prevent Wang and Chinese Commu­

nists from exploiting increased status and prestige which would result

from continuation Johnson-­Wang conversations simultaneously with

Foreign Ministers Conference.

2. If release of Americans were sole objective of talks, we would

favor very forceful presentation our case at this point, including public

statement, and insistence on three-­week recess as method of exerting

pressure on Communists and demonstrating we do not propose con­

tinue talking indefinitely with representative of government which

failing to live up to its express commitments. However, this tactic

would make it very difficult for us to resume talks if Communists

failed to act within three-­week period. To do so would be interpreted

as weakness by Communists and would certainly be criticized in US.

Alternative would be indefinite recess at least until such time as Com­

munists decided release some Americans. Results this tactic probably

would not be consonant with one of major objectives, namely, keeping

talks going.

3. It would be possible, however, for Johnson to present recess

proposal in manner giving least impression of pressure and with

due regard for Chinese Communist considerations of face. He would

point out to Wang that Wang himself had emphasized need for time to

carry out judicial processes required in release of Americans and that

we were therefore proposing three-­weeks’ recess for this purpose. He

would seek Wang’s concurrence in recess and would not insist if Wang

objected. It is problematical whether Wang would agree and whether, if

he did, any Americans would in consequence be released, but this tactic

would avoid risks to major objective of talks which are inherent in that

proposed in paragraph 2.

4. A third alternative would be to have Johnson make forceful

statement expressing US dissatisfaction at Chinese Communist non-­

performance and informing Wang that if no action on Americans had

taken place by following meeting we would be compelled to consider

making public statement. This type of threat once used by Wang on us

Distribution. Repeated Priority to Geneva for Johnson as telegram 981. Drafted by

Clough; cleared in draft by Robertson and Sebald and in S/S.

and implications would not be lost on him. It involves some risk, but

has advantage of giving Chinese Communists chance to act before any

public exchange of recriminations had occurred.

5. We have also considered whether time has not arrived to take

harder line in our conversations with Wang even if this would cause a

deterioration in tone of talks. Public and Congressional opinion hard­

ening here in face continued inaction on release of Americans by Chi­

nese Communists.

6. Would appreciate early reply so Johnson can be instructed prior

to October 27 meeting.

Hoover

957. From Johnson.

Have just returned and seen Robertson’s Tedul 8 repeated Geneva

981 and have following comments:

1. Re para 1 reference telegram, while I am not in best position

to judge it does not seem clear to me CHICOMS obtain any increased

status and prestige from continuation talks during FonMin confer­

ence. In fact would seem to me talks at only Ambassadorial level with

CHICOMS while four Foreign Ministers meeting same city does not

give CHICOMS any special advantage they not already deriving from

talks and may be somewhat our advantage.

2. Re para 2, am convinced that at least for time-­being public pres­

sure, and particularly to extent of recessing talks, on CHICOMS would

be counterproductive in expediting releases.

3. Para 3, Wang is never going to agree to any recess for purpose

allowing time completing “judicial processes” for release.

4. I believe there is much merit in third alternative set forth para 4.

However in order set stage to obtain maximum benefit suggest follow­

ing course of action:

Priority Niact to Paris eyes only for Dulles as telegram 132.

(A) At October 27 meeting I would make presentation on missing

military personnel and would suggest to Wang agreed communique fol­

lowing meeting would include statement we had continued discussion

implementation agreed announcement and under item two U.S. had

introduced topics renunciation force and missing military personnel and,

as previously stated, PRC had introduced trade embargo and FonMin

meeting. I would expect Wang reject whereupon I would inform him I

would issue unilateral statement along similar lines except that I would

omit reference to two PRC topics. Purpose of this would be supplement

Secretary’s October 18 press conference statement and make clear to

world opinion US reasonableness in entering into discussion item two

even though PRC had not implemented agreed announcement.

(B) At November 3 meeting I would make threat of public state­

ment on our dissatisfaction with implementation and

(C) If necessary would implement the threat at November 10

meeting which would be just two months from issuance agreed

announcement and during midst Foreign Ministers Conference.

Gowen

Attachment

Note to Barnes

Washington, October 26, 1955

Mr. Barnes

Mr. Cladouhas of FE would like two extra copies of the attached.

He said that they needed one for Mr. Sebald, one for Mr. McConaughy

and one for himself. He wanted to know why they only got one and I

told him that was usually the practice on eyes only and he said it wasn’t

that he had received as many as 4 copies of one, but on checking it was

one slugged E.O. for Robertson, etc.

Approve ____ OK_____

Disapprove ____________

Attachment

Note from Barnes to Murphy

Washington, October 25, 1955

G—Mr. Murphy

Action has been sent to:

FE—Mr. Robertson

Robert G. Barnes

989. For Johnson.

FYI Senator George delivered following confidential letter to Sec­

retary shortly before his departure on 21st:

QUOTE On the eve of your departure for the Geneva Conference,

permit me, as Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, to

wish you a pleasant and a successful conference.

I hope it may be of some help to you to know that as Chairman of

the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and as far as I am authorized

to speak for the Committee, my position is that there are some matters

before the ambassadorial conferees that ought to be concluded before

any further steps are taken.

The Chinese Communists first should release the American pris­

oners they have promised to free and they should give some account­

ing of the 450 soldiers who remain unaccounted for after the Korean

War.

If they will do these things and make a public pledge to give up the

use of force in any settlement of the Formosa issue, then we should be

prepared to go ahead with a high level conference.

With my cordial regards to you for a pleasant trip and a safe return,

I am UNQUOTE.

Hoover

tion. Drafted by McConaughy.

Washington, October 25, 1955

996. For Johnson.

Partial guidance for October 27 meeting:

1. On renunciation of force item, although it is undesirable for you

to engage in extensive debate with Wang in Defense US policy regard­

ing Taiwan, his accusation that US has occupied Taiwan by force of

arms cannot be permitted rest unchallenged. You should briefly and

factually state our position: that Taiwan is seat of GRC which we rec­

ognize; that US has signed Mutual Defense Treaty with GRC under

which we assumed obligations to assist in defense of Taiwan against

outside attack; and that such units of US armed forces as are stationed

on Taiwan are there in accordance with treaty provisions and with full

consent of GRC. To describe this situation as “US armed occupation of

Taiwan” is distortion of truth.

You should then reiterate, along lines followed last meeting, that

in best interests both countries and world at large urgent requirement

is not to sit in Geneva arguing whose position right and whose wrong,

but for both parties renounce use of force to settle differences, with par­

ticular reference to Taiwan area.

2. Your 957 approve your recommendation that statement on

unaccounted-­for military personnel be presented.

3. Awaiting reply from Secretary before sending additional instruc­

tions concerning manner of presentation item on release Americans.

Hoover

Distribution. Repeated Priority to Paris as telegram Tedul 11. Drafted by Clough; cleared

by Barnes and ­McConaughy and in draft by Sebald.

962. From Johnson.

Would appreciate some reply my 871 prior to tomorrow’s WPP

Meeting.

Gowen

Priority.

Dulte 12. For next meeting agree your guidance in Geneva 996.

Suggest that forceful statement be made about failure implement dec­

laration about repatriation, then present statement on unaccounted-­for

military personnel and continue on item renunciation of force. Do not

believe advisable suggest recess of talks, in view of risks, at least at this

time, or to give notice we will make public statement. These tactics can

be considered later.

Dulles

1003. For Johnson. Your 962.

Defense unable supply specific information requested your 871

from Washington files. Have asked Army to have search made of more

complete files stored Kansas City.

Hoover

­Priority. Drafted by Clough.

In absence other instructions from Secretary or last minute favor­

able news regarding detained Americans, lead off 23rd meeting

with renewed demand for prompt PRC compliance terms of Agreed

Announcement. Follow lines your statement last meeting reported

your 922, but make tone somewhat more insistent in view passage

additional week with no performance. Remind Wang that American

Government and people have been extremely patient in waiting for

PRC to carry out Agreed Announcement, but as time continues pass

with no action whatsoever, not even authorization for nineteen impris­

oned Americans to communicate with British Charge or be seen by

him, patience wearing thin.

Hoover

­Distribution. Repeated to Geneva as telegram Tedul 18. Drafted by Clough and McCo­

naughy; cleared by Sebald and in S/S.

968. From Johnson.

Following is text draft “agreed statement” submitted by Wang at

today’s meeting:

1. Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan on behalf of the Government of

the People’s Republic of China and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson on

behalf of the Government of the United States of America jointly state

that,

Nations, “all members shall settle their international disputes by peace­

ful means in such a manner that international peace and security, and

justice, are not endangered”; and

members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or

use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of

any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the

United Nations”;

4. The People’s Republic of China and the United States of America

are agreed that they should settle disputes between their two countries

by peaceful means without resorting to the threat or use of force; and

5. In order to realize their common desire the People’s Republic of

China and the United States of America have decided to hold a Foreign

Ministers’ conference to negotiate a solution of the question of easing

and eliminating the tense situation in the Taiwan area.

Dulles

Limited Distribution.

970. From Johnson.

1. Two hour forty-­five minute meeting this morning opened by

Wang with somewhat milder rehash CHICOM position on Taiwan

which avoided renewal demand for US withdrawal and ended with

presentation draft statement transmitted by separate tel.

2. I replied with statement along lines para one Deptel 996 and

stated I would study and reply later concerning his draft statement.

3. He replied with long ad lib statement “rejecting” my statement

on Taiwan. After some sparring and give and take I tried to probe fur­

ther for meaning para 4 his draft statement to determine whether it

was any move toward meeting our position on renunciation of force in

Taiwan area. While his replies followed Chou En-­lai formula they were

somewhat more ambiguous than previously. Replying to my specific

question he stated para 4 “included disputes between US and China

in Taiwan area”. My specific probing on significance his continued use

“conditions permitting” with respect “liberation” Taiwan led to no

definite conclusion.

4. I then reverted to implementation in brief but strong terms to

which he replied my information was not current with respect ability

UK carry out its functions and rejected in harder terms than previously

my raising question these meetings. He rebuffed all my efforts deter­

mine what he meant by my information not current.

5. I then made statement on missing military personnel in accord­

ance Deptels 824 and 828. In reply he read prepared statement “rejecting

assertion 450 Americans still allegedly being held” and flatly refused

accept lists.

6. I replied by pointing out I had not alleged 450 “still being held”

but was asking for information with regard to their fate. I then cited as

example case of Army PFC. Paul E. Craig, pointing out his specific men­

tion in Peiping broadcast and that they could not deny they had info

with regard to him. If he were dead, all we were asking was when and

where. There was then long and increasingly acrimonious discussion

which I centered around facts in Craig case and humanitarian aspects.

He rehashed position on fourteen thousand and reiterated entire matter

should be taken up in MAC. He claimed he had answered our query by

giving us list all Americans in China, including list last year all those

Limited Distribution.

who had died in China. He made direct request for information on

fourteen thousand. I pointed out no relation between 14,000 and list

450, the case 14,000 analogous to Americans who remained their side

and went to PRC. I said his refusal accept list was not in keeping with

spirit our talks and made repeated efforts get him accept. After I had

pushed him into tight corner by continually coming back to Craig case,

he simply clammed up and refused to say anything more. It was clear

he was under categorical instructions not to accept list and nothing I

said was going to change this fact. Meeting closed on this very hard

note with my reserving right revert to matter.

7. Next meeting November 3.

Gowen

Suggest DRF may be able obtain some of information required

from its files of FBIS. Need texts of CHICOM broadcast or press item

with precise date and source. For possible use next meeting require

data on:

Paul E. Craig, Army, Peiping broadcast 27 June 1951.

Casimire T. Demoll, Army, Peiping boradcast 22 June 1951.

Myron Johnson, Army, Peiping broadcast 29 June 1951.

Russel F. Morris, Army, China Monthly Review August 1951.

William D. Schofder, Jr., Army, Peiping broadcast 23 June 1951.

Gerald G. Schuring, Army, (possibly Peiping) broadcast 7 May 1951.

William R. Seggie, Army, (possibly Peiping) broadcast 22 June 1951.

For subsequent use require data on any others on list of 450 miss­

ing personnel.

Gowen

994. From Johnson.

Wang’s office today sent over revised English translation of draft

he handed me yesterday which contains following changes from text

given Mytel 968.

A) Title change from “agreed statement” to “agreed announcement”.

B) “State that” end para one changed to “declare”.

para 3”.

D) First portion para 3 changed to “and in accordance with article

2, para 4”.

E) Para 4 “are agreed” changed to “agree”, and “and” at end of

para deleted.

F) All of para 5 changed to read as follows: “In order to realize

their common desire, the People’s Republic of China and the United

States of America decide to hold a conference of Foreign Ministers to

settle through negotiations the question of relaxing and eliminating the

tension in Taiwan area.”

Gowen

Distribution.

Letter No. 15 

Geneva, October 28, 1955

Dear Walter:

I hope to take advantage of the more frequent pouch service for the

next few weeks.

The Secretary arrived Wednesday evening, and Herman Phleger

immediately got in touch with me to show me the message which he

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A handwritten note on the letter indicates

it was received on November 2.

and the Secretary drafted on the plane on the way over replying to your

981. I made no suggestions for any changes and they sent it off imme­

diately Niact at about 8 p.m. Geneva time, but I was sorry to see from

your 1013 that it had apparently not arrived.

The Secretary asked to see me the same evening and I had some

general discussion with him, primarily on the trade question. I gath­

ered that he had talked with Macmillan on the CHINCOM question

and that he had come to the conclusion that some drop in the CHIN­

COM level, toward but not all the way to a COCOM level, is shortly

inevitable. (I understand a telegram on the subject went from Paris to

the Department but I have not seen it.) We had some general discussion

on how this could be tied in with my talks here but came to no conclu­

sion, except that I gathered that it is the Secretary’s desire that if this

development is in any event going to take place, I should attempt to

capitalize on it here. I told him that, without expressing any opinion on

whether or not the level should or should not be dropped, my strong

feeling was that if we had come to the conclusion that it was going to

be dropped, I thought it important solely from my standpoint here that

it would appear we had agreed, or at least acquiesced, rather than that

it had happened in spite of our opposition.

If I am going to make any capital out of it here, it would be import­

ant that Wang and I have had at least some discussion of the subject

prior to any reduction becoming known to the Chinese Communists.

Obviously I cannot and would not in any sense negotiate with him on

the level of CHINCOM controls, but believe I could at the most inti­

mate a causal relationship. It seems to me that this would assist in the

objective of keeping these talks going by giving the Chinese Commu­

nists a feeling that the talks were not entirely devoid of results for them.

It just might also help somewhat in release of Americans.

Yesterday’s meeting went about as expected except for Wang’s

introduction of his draft agreed statement. It is clearly a very clever

piece of work, and if published, would have much public appeal. As

I noted in my 970, I feel that it does represent some slight advance

inasmuch as it relates some form of renunciation of force to a Foreign

Ministers’ meeting rather them to the previous position on withdrawal

of U.S. forces from the Taiwan area. Of course, this latter objective is

merely deferred to the Foreign Ministers’ Conference.

I am very provoked at Wang’s attitude yesterday—sitting back

and smugly telling me that he knew something I didn’t know with

regard to implementation but would not tell me what. It was only

after I got back to the hotel after the meeting that I learned that the

press tickers reported the release of Harriet Mills and Father Proulx. I

was put in a somewhat foolish position at the meeting by not know­

ing this. This was probably their intent. Technically I have no basis for

real objection, as under the Agreed Announcement there is no obliga­

tion on their part to inform me here (nor to inform O’Neill, for that

matter), but it is hardly in the spirit of relationship which I have been

trying to establish with Wang. Of course he was under instructions,

and it is clear that their objective is to make clear that these releases

are their unilateral act and that any credit in the matter will go only

to the British. They are not going to let me obtain any credit by giving

out the announcement here.

What I am disturbed by and am sending you a telegram on is that

from Hong Kong’s 84, sent Department 883, it appears O’Neill was

informed of these releases on October 26, but I had no word here until

Hong Kong’s 84 was received today.

The missing military personnel item went about as I expected. I was

sorely tempted to put it off as it was late, we had already exchanged

many recriminations on our occupation of Taiwan and implementa­

tion, and the atmosphere was poor. However I decided to get it over

with and, as it turned out and was to be expected, he was under clear

instructions and no matter when or how I did it, the result was going to

be the same. I felt that I was able to back him into a corner for whatever

satisfaction there was to be derived from that. I don’t think we should

drop the subject too quickly or easily, but feel that we are not going to

get any real satisfaction. I should think that, in light of our discussion at

yesterday’s meeting, we might consider again also pushing the matter

in the MAC.

Herman Phleger has just been in while I have been dictating this

letter. We have been having some preliminary discussion of Wang’s

draft agreed statement of yesterday. He talked with the Secretary a lit­

tle about it during the course of yesterday’s Foreign Ministers’ meeting.

We are seeing the Secretary this afternoon. I will save any comments,

as I presume the Secretary will want to send you a message during the

course of the day on the subject.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

999. From Johnson.

1. Believe that at next meeting I should not and need not enter into

any detailed reply to his draft agreed announcement. However believe

it would be useful to ask him additional questions and would appreci­

ate Department’s suggestions in this regard.

2. With respect implementation believe circumstances call for some

different approach for at least one meeting and I suggest my line be to

note release Mills and Proulx and express hope this signifies all others

will be following shortly.

3. Believe I should follow up missing military personnel item tak­

ing another name and pressing in same manner as with Craig’s case

last meeting but without again attempting force him accept lists unless

appears he willing accept. Hope reply Mytel 977 will contain well doc­

umented facts on at least one additional name.

4. In order capitalize on probability some action will take place in

next few months to remove some items from CHINCOM control list,

suggest I invite his views on trade embargo in context para 5 Deptel

870, asking questions outlined therein as seems useful. I would offer to

accept any material he desires give me this regard contrasting with his

refusal accept list missing military personnel. Request Department’s

comments on desirability my soliciting at this or subsequent meeting

views on specific items present CHINCOM list they consider non-­

strategic and in whose removal from list they particularly interested for

non-­military purposes.

Gowen

­Limited Distribution.

1053. For Johnson. Also for the Secretary. Guidance for November 3

Meeting.

1. Implementation Agreed Announcement: Note that two of nine­

teen Americans now released and inform Wang U.S. Government

expects this to be followed by expeditious release remainder, as pro­

vided in Agreed Announcement. Point out that although PRC has now

recognized in principle right of British Charge to correspond with and

visit jailed Americans, he has been subjected to regulations which so

circumscribe his freedom of action as to make it impossible carry out

effectively his functions under Agreed Announcement. There is no jus­

tification for applying to British Charge regulations intended for “pris­

oners’ receiving and corresponding with relatives.” No restrictions

imposed on Indian Ambassador in carrying out his functions under

Agreed Announcement in US. Call Wang’s attention to specific regu­

lations which interfere with Charge’s functions such as prohibition on

speaking to prisoner about his case which would prevent investigation

facts provided for in Agreed Announcement.

2. Unaccounted for military personnel: present lists again, using

argumentation similar last meeting, emphasizing this unquestionably

an issue between us and therefore appropriate subject for inclusion in

talks. Additional material individual cases being forwarded. Prepare

ground for possibly reading lists to Wang next meeting if he still refuses

accept.

3. Renunciation of force: Again reject Wang’s allegations that

U.S. occupying Taiwan, violating UN Charter, etc. Inform him that

although PRC’s willingness to consider renunciation of force is contri­

bution to progress of talks, his draft statement unacceptable. It com­

pletely avoids main issue, which is that both sides renounce use of

force, with particular reference to Taiwan area. Paragraphs 2 and 3

deal exclusively with renunciation of force in international disputes

and Wang has clearly indicated PRC would not consider itself pre­

vented by these provisions from using force against Taiwan. What­

ever language chosen for declarations must be applicable to situation,

which one party considers solely domestic issue and other does not.

Both must pledge not to use force in this situation, except defen­

sively. Paragraph 5 introduces extraneous subject, Foreign Ministers

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy, in draft by Sebald, and in S/S.

Conference, which as previously pointed out, not considered suitable

subject for discussion these talks.

4. In view information contained Deptel 1052 endeavor discuss our

draft (Deptel 915) with Secretary and Phleger with view introducing it

as counter proposal at Nov. 3 meeting.

Hoover

FOR JOHNSON.

Hoover

McAuliffe (S/S).

Letter No. 22

Washington, October 29, 1955

Dear Alex:

on October 24. Your No. 14 successfully visualizes the issues as the

Chinese Communists probably see them. Your analysis seems to us

generally valid. It casts a rather novel and revealing light on vari­

ous aspects of the renunciation of force question. We would depart

from your analysis only in giving more weight to the attraction of the

“renunciation of force” item to the PRC which stems from their capa­

bility to exploit it for their own purposes by espousing a perverted but

rather plausible form of renunciation of force declaration. Admittedly

we have the benefit of hindsight in making this observation. Mr. Rob­

ertson commented after reading the letter that your exposition of the

probable Chinese Communist reasoning constituted the best possible

reinforcement of the argument for pressing vigorously our demand

for a bona fide renunciation of force declaration, with specific inclusion

of the area of Taiwan.

Presumably Wang’s draft represents only an opening bargaining

position, but I personally am skeptical as to how much “give” is built

into the draft. I am inclined to think that the PRC would not accept

any language clearly at variance with its position that Taiwan is a

domestic issue. We find Wang’s draft to be solidly based on the con­

stantly reiterated Chinese Communist position. On analysis it reflects

no concession whatever, although it is so cleverly drafted as to give

the impression to the superficial observer that it represents a reason­

ably complete renunciation of force. We fear it would commend itself

to a lot of unthinking and partially informed people and therefore

may spell trouble for us.

The instructions for the next meeting which we are drafting will

point out, in very general terms, the respects in which paragraphs two

through five are unacceptable to us. We haven’t yet made up our minds

as to when a U.S. draft should be submitted. The thinking is that it

should be very soon. Wang has in a sense already stolen the ball from

us and made a run with it, by getting in his draft ahead of ours. He has

to some extent seized the initiative on our own item. We don’t have

final agreement yet on the language of our draft, but we should have it

soon. The willingness of Wang to debate the renunciation of force item

provides a lot of grist for the mill, even though the grinding may be a

trying process.

We have given the British Embassy here the text of Wang’s draft. We

decided that it would be helpful to have O’Neill’s estimate of Chinese

Communist tactics in the light of this document. His comments so far

have impressed us as shrewd and perceptive. We have kept the British

very fully informed on the discussions regarding the Agreed Announce­

ment. This has tended to let them in on other aspects of the discussion to

a somewhat greater extent than would normally be the case.

Enclosed is the full text of the telegram from O’Neill giving the

PRC rules and regulations governing visits to the imprisoned Amer­

icans, together with O’Neill’s report of his conversation with Chang

Han-­fu on October 26, when the rules were handed to him. This is as

promised in our 1031. In my conversations with Joy here I have encour­

aged the British to take a somewhat stronger line in opposition to any

such rules and regulations as applied to the Americans covered by the

Agreed Announcement. The British are somewhat inclined to regard

these rules as representing a rather satisfactory advance in the situation.

They tend to overlook or minimize the fact that O’Neill’s contact with

the Americans should be governed by the provisions of the Agreed

Announcement, not a penal or POW code. Hubert Graves remarked

that the rules seemed to him to represent a considerable advance over

the rules applied by the Japanese to enemy aliens during World War II.

This is the sort of irrelevancy which we regret to hear from the British.

I am also enclosing a copy of O’Neill’s report on the announced

release of Harriet Mills and Father Proulx. We are mystified by the

delay in the arrival of these two Americans in Hong Kong. We still

assume that they will come out shortly.

I discussed with Joy the embarrassment (your 987) that resulted

from the failure to get word to you before your Oct. 27 meeting of

O’Neill’s conversation with Chang Han-­fu, when he received the rules

and regulations regarding visits and the word of the impending release

of Mills and Proulx. This interview took place on the evening of Octo­

ber 26 (about noon on Oct. 26, Geneva time). This was almost a full

day before your meeting and with prompt service you would have had

the word in time. O’Neill did get his message out Wednesday night. It

was received by the British Foreign Office fairly promptly. It reached

the British Embassy here, marked Priority, on the evening of the 26th,

Washington time. If Joy had been notified by the Embassy duty officer,

he would have telephoned me and you would have had the informa­

tion before your meeting. Unfortunately the duty officer did not see the

urgency, and took it upon himself to disregard the priority marking.

Joy did not see or hear of the message until the opening of business on

Thursday, the 27th, which was too late to do us any good. It seems that

the Chinese tried to time their release of this information so as to make

it difficult for you to receive the news before the meeting. Their hopes

were realized, through a failure in the British Embassy here. I have

pointed out to Joy the awkward position in which you were placed as

a result. I mentioned particularly the fact that it gave Wang a talking

point in support of his contention that these implementation matters

should not be discussed in Geneva. The British are taking special meas­

ures to insure that a similar slip will not happen again. A special alert

will be in effect on Wednesdays, day and night.

Enclosed is what sketchy material we have been able to obtain

from Defense on the cases of certain of the missing servicemen, as

requested by you. The information we are able to get from Defense on

this subject is still inadequate and the handling unsatisfactory. They tell

us that they will have to go to central files in another city for some of the

needed material and that this material will probably not add anything

to what is already known. Monroe has been out of town for some days.

He is due to return on the 31st and we may be able to get a little help

from him then.

We have had a lot of difficulty in trying to resolve Ekvall’s status.

The Department of the Army and Defense have wanted to use Ekvall’s

case as a lever to obtain a permanent additional slot for an Assistant

Army Attache in Berne. Any enlargement of the Service Attache staff is

strongly opposed by Miss Willis and EUR. Defense feels that at the very

least State would pay Ekvall’s per diem and there is some merit in this

argument. However they have mentioned their belief that he should

get $25. per day, which seems out of all proportion. And it would not

solve his family problem. We have explored the possibility of assigning

either Stanley or Al Harding from DRF to take Ekvall’s place about six

weeks hence. This might be possible but we suspect you would pre­

fer to retain Ekvall, with whom you are accustomed to working. It is

embarrassing for us to have to depend on the Army for an interpreter

in a diplomatic negotiation, especially when we are not able to let the

Pentagon in on the direction of the negotiations, as they would like. As

of now I am hopeful that we can solve the problem by getting Defense

to assign Ekvall to an Army command in Heidelberg, Bonn or Paris,

with temporary duty in Geneva. This should be acceptable to Defense,

but Army G–­2 may object.

The courier service to Geneva is almost daily during the Foreign

Ministers’ Conference so you will be hearing from us a bit more fre­

quently. I hope you are having an opportunity for some talks with the

Secretary and Herman Phleger.

Regards and good luck,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Six communications from British Embassy, Washington, based

on reports from British Charge, Peiping.

2. Letter from Lt. Col. Monroe, with attachments regarding certain

unaccounted for military personnel.

Dulte 34. Re Deptel 1053 to Johnson.

Johnson should express expectation this will be followed by expedi­

tious release remainder. Agree Johnson should express dissatisfaction

with CHICOM regulations along lines Department’s guidance taking

into consideration what further information may be received from

O’Neill with respect visits by time next meeting.

2. Paragraph 2. Concur except suggest leave to Johnson’s discre­

tion whether it would be desirable again present lists this meeting or

attempt read lists. Important he have information to present of at least

one additional case where clear individual was in Chinese custody.

posal of agreed statement on renunciation of force until we have probed

meaning of CHICOM proposal. Think at next meeting Johnson should

probe meaning and application of Chinese proposal including ques­

tions designed to bring out points mentioned latter part paragraph 4

Urtel. Would expect Wang might postpone replies to some questions to

next following meeting and thus give us additional time.

4. We are being hard pressed here to agree accept that level

CHICOM control should be identical with Soviet Bloc control levels

and that these should be reduced and we must anticipate that within

near future we will be faced with irresistible demands such reduc­

tion. Therefore important to utilize this bargaining point in CHICOM

discussion and believe Johnson should at next meeting use authority

given him in paragraph 5 of Ourtel 870 to him.

Dulles

FBIS check negative.

Nine of names and serial numbers you mention are cited in 1951

issues of China Monthly Review published Shanghai which carried reg­

ular feature: “New List of American POW’s”. This heading always fol­

lowed by explanatory note of which August issue typical: “Following

names of American POW’s are additions to lists published in May, June

and July issues of Review. These names have been compiled from files of

New China News Agency (Hsinhua) and do not constitute an official list,

being only names of POW’s who have broadcast statements over Peking

Radio or who have asked Chinese correspondents in Korea to publish their

names so that their families may learn that they are prisoners.—Editor.”

Citations, August issue: Craig, Demoll, Howell, Jennings, Johnson,

Morris, Seggie, Schonder. June issue: Schuring. Morris cited also in The

Shanghai News, June 30, 1951, as POW.

Research these and other names continuing in Chinese language

press. State whether you want evidential publications airpouched to you.

Hoover

by Nagoski.

Washington, October 31, 1955

Tedul 42. Re Dulte 34.

reftel.

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared in S/S and in draft by Sebald.

The time of transmission is illegible.

2. Your paragraph 3. Our recommendation, which is herein

renewed, that US draft declaration be introduced next meeting based

on following considerations: (a) Undesirable allow Wang draft remain

sole basis for negotiation. Renunciation of force is our item, not his. By

his action he has seized initiative from us and to some extent placed

us on defensive. Our best counter action and our best refutation of his

draft appears to us to be immediate submission of US draft which is

natural outgrowth of our initial presentation; (b) so long as Wang draft

is only one in hands British and Indians, their thinking likely to crys­

tallize in terms that draft. We believe we can counteract this tendency

only by presenting our draft and also furnishing copies on informal

basis these governments; (c) Deptel 1052 paragraph 8 indicates Chou

En-­lai endeavoring to press initiative gained by presentation first draft

on renunciation of force and strongly implies tactics on our part sug­

gestive of stalling may play into Chinese Communist hands.

Believe above considerations outweigh advantage of gaining time.

trasted with Wang draft’s fatness provides necessary negotiating lati­

tude. So long as we do not sacrifice essence of our draft we can afford

make certain concessions in direction accepting addition of state­

ments general principle although not specific language that Wang has

presented.

4. Your paragraph 4. Concur advisability initiating embargo discus­

believe probing should be strictly confined at this stage to context

Deptel 870 paragraph 5, avoiding discussion specific commodities.

Any such indication we prepared enter into bilateral negotiations with

Chinese Communists in direction of reducing controls would greatly

weaken our position in current and forthcoming negotiations with Brit­

ish and French. Chinese Communists could be expected promptly leak

such information to British and French for this purpose.

Repeat to Johnson.

Hoover

1027. From Johnson. Re Deptel 1064.

Pouch publications where available.

Gowen

1079. For Johnson.

Peiping propaganda on international issues during week con­

tinues to accuse US of obstructing ambassadorial talks, intensifying

military preparations and seeking prolong cold war. General tone not

quite as hostile as previous week. Coverage on Taiwan issue somewhat

increased with renewed emphasis on theme of “peaceful liberation.”

New element injected by warning to Portuguese government that Chi­

nese would “definitely recover” Macau but would prefer to use peace­

ful means.

NCNA commentary October 22 Geneva Ambassadorial talks

focussed on POW issue, demanding that US account for 21,000 Chinese-­

Korean POW’s “abducted” by UN Command. Hong Kong press Octo­

ber 28 reported that Chou had told British Quaker group that US

insistence on repatriation all Americans before discussion other issues

was “unacceptable” to Peiping; Chou also quoted as having expressed

hope that present talks will lead to higher level talks on Taiwan issue.

NCNA continues to urge convening of Far Eastern Conference with

“wide representation Asian countries” to discuss “pressing issues.”

Peiping commentary on Big Four Ministers conference character­

ized by tone of guarded optimism. Conditions said to be favorable but

­Dawson; cleared in IAD and CA.

“influential forces” in US alleged to be seeking to prolong cold war

tensions.

Peiping international broadcasts on Taiwan revived emphasis on

Chou En-­lai formula for “peaceful liberation” with Tibet again cited as

example. TA KUNG PAO October 25 cited Chou statements of May 13

and July 30 regarding talks with “responsible local authorities” on Tai­

wan. NCNA October 26 explained that such negotiations would be of

nature of negotiations between “central and local government” and

methods should be chosen by “Chinese people themselves.”

Portuguese plans to celebrate 400th anniversary of rule in Macau

provoked bitter propaganda blast from Peiping. People’s Daily Octo­

ber 26 issued stern warning to effect that “Macau is Chinese territory

and Chinese people have right to demand its recovery.” Stated that Chi­

nese people would “not long tolerate” Portuguese occupation. Mass

rally held Canton October 27 marked by speeches demanding cessation

of “provocations” by Portuguese Government and accusing Portuguese

authorities in Macau of “sheltering” Nationalist agents and collaborat­

ing with US and Taiwan in effort “sabotage” ChiCom regime. Added

however that “Chinese people” favored settlement Macau question by

“peaceful means.”

Other highlights week were Peiping’s overtures to Philippines

and Italy in line with recent effort “normalize” relations with non-­

Communist countries and isolate US. According to Manila press

Chou En-­lai held interview with Filipino correspondents October 23

at which he asserted Taiwan’s liberation “inevitable” and urged

that Philippine Government conclude treaty of non-­aggression with

Peiping based on Chou-­Nehru Five Principles and Bandung Ten Prin­

ciples. ChiCom press October 25 stated that time was now ripe for

establishment of diplomatic relations with Italy and suggested that

negotiations for same be tied to discussions for extension of trade and

cultural relations.

NCNA commentary on Japan accused Hatoyama government

of protracting talks with USSR and of adopting “passive attitude” on

subject of normalizing relations with north Korea. NCNA commentary

on Diem government referendum views it as US plot to undermine

Geneva agreements and turn south Vietnam into separate state.

Hoover

Letter No. 16

Geneva, November 1, 1955

Dear Walter:

Herman Phleger and I had dinner with the Secretary Friday eve­

ning during which we discussed the Chinese draft in a general and

preliminary way but without coming to any conclusions. The Secretary

has apparently not made up his mind on how he wants to handle it,

and clearly wanted to have time to think about it, which was difficult

with the extreme pressure on him of other events here. Therefore, in

the telegram of suggestions for the next meeting, which I sent you on

Saturday, I suggested that we not get into any detailed discussion.

The Secretary was also obviously very anxious that I get started on

the trade embargo item, and, hence, my suggestion in that regard. I also

want you to know that it was the Secretary’s thought that I should query

Wang with regard to specific items on the CHINCOM list, set forth in

the last sentence of my 999. I told him that I had serious doubts about

the desirability of this, but put it up in my telegram as my own query

so that the Department would not feel any inhibitions in commenting

on it. I have talked to Goodkind about it but he was understandably

very reluctant to commit himself on the policy considerations involved.

He saw no objection from the purely technical CHINCOM standpoint.

It has been a big help to have Goodkind and Doherty here to get

myself thoroughly briefed on all aspects of CHINCOM controls, as it

is a subject with which I was not familiar in detail. I want to let both

you and Walter know that, except for the foregoing background against

which I sent my 999, it represented only my own thoughts and I deliber­

ately avoided showing it to or discussing it with the Secretary, because

I feel that he should have the advantage of thoughts and recommen­

dations of you and Walter in each case before making up his mind. I

do not feel it right that my temporary proximity to him here should

operate so as to cause him to give any undue weight to my opinions

and without having FE opinions in front of him. This gets to be a little

difficult, but I want you to know that I have it very much in mind, as I

know he does. I am sorry that my 999 crossed with your 1053. I sent it

priority quite early Saturday morning and do not understand why you

did not have it prior to sending your 1053. However, I believe it worked

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The postscript is handwritten. A handwrit­

ten note on the letter indicates it was received on November 2.

out all right as the Secretary had both messages in front of him yester­

day and he and Herman did up a Dulte on the subject to you.

The one specific question which I particularly desired to, and did,

discuss with the Secretary and Herman Friday evening was this: As I

told him, it seemed to me that in the context of our talks my continued

reference to “other matters” which could be more hopefully discussed

following a satisfactory renunciation of force statement included, in

Wang’s mind, the presence of our forces in the Taiwan area. As I told

the Secretary, I have very carefully avoided any specific statements and

have carefully kept to simply the “other matters” formula. Wang has

also not pressed me to be specific in this regard but he might well do

so. In any event I want it to be clear in my own mind as to whether we

would admit to discussion of the presence of our forces in the Taiwan

area as an “other matter” if there were the satisfactory renunciation of

force statement. Admitting to discussion, of course, would not carry

with it any implication that we might be willing to agree with their

demand for withdrawal or otherwise accept their point of view. How­

ever, I said it seemed to me that it would, as Herman phrases it, carry

with it an implication of willingness to “bargain in good faith” and not

simply sit and say “No”. I particularly raised the question as to whether

any such discussion would be within the agreed scope of our talks or

whether it would be something involving the rights and interests of the

GRC and, therefore, outside the scope of our talks.

I believe the Secretary’s view can be summarized as follows: We

cannot, of course, give any consideration, under present conditions, to

withdrawal of all of our forces from the Taiwan area. Apart from any

other considerations, the presence of at least symbolic forces is essential

for the maintenance of morale on Taiwan. However, the United States

has no desire to maintain forces in forward positions except as we con­

sider essential in the light of our estimate of security situation in the

particular area. This policy has been demonstrated by a reduction of

strength in Korea and Japan. Similarly, the forces we maintain in the

Taiwan area will be dependent upon our estimate of the security situ­

ation in that area. If the Chinese Communists unequivocally renounce

force in the Taiwan area and otherwise demonstrate their peaceful

intent, it could be expected we would give consideration to unilateral

reduction in whatever strength is being maintained by us in the area.

This would be a purely unilateral act on our part and not subject in any

sense to agreement with the Chinese Communists. Such decisions on

our part do not involve the rights or interests of the GRC nor our agree­

ments with the GRC. Therefore, “discussion” of the subject with PRC in

the light of the foregoing could be admitted to.

The foregoing is merely my reconstruction of dinner conversation

in which the Secretary was simply thinking out loud, and I am passing

it on to you simply in that context.

The Secretary has taken with him on his trip to Madrid today the

renunciation of force file, including the PRC draft and the Depart­

ment’s draft. One aspect of the PRC draft that I am not clear on how I

am going to handle in debate is that the 4th paragraph is very cleverly

and carefully confined to disputes between PRC and the US. Thus,

it is strictly within the agreed scope of our talks. What we want, of

course, is for their renunciation to include the GRC, including Que­

moy and Matsu. How do I justify this within the agreed scope of our

talks? Is this not something which involves the rights and interests

of the GRC and PRC-­GRC relations? Another factor that occurs to

me is if the PRC has renounced force as between itself and the US,

how could it attack Taiwan as long as US forces are there without

clearly breaching its renunciation of force with the US? Of course this

leaves Quemoy and Matsu out. The Foreign Ministers’ Conference is,

of course, easy to handle as they are in an insupportable position in

attempting to make any renunciation of force conditional upon the

Foreign Ministers’ Conference.

I am sure of only one thing: there is room for much and long dis­

cussion during which I will need all the ideas that you can give me.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. I have just read & briefly discussed with Herman your Tedul

42. Herman very much feels I should not introduce any [illegible in

original] draft at this meeting & that we can [illegible in original] fac­

tors mentioned in para 2 Tedul 42 by circulating our original statement

on renunciation of force. However, as Secretary does not return until

late tonight we will not be able to obtain his decision until tomorrow

morning.

Geneva, November 2, 1955, noon

1033. From Johnson.

[text not declassified] correspondent has informed me in confidence

he has learned that CHICOMS here have told Yugoslav UNESCO rep

now in Geneva that they are very unhappy with Soviet maneuvers in

Middle East as it is spoiling atmosphere for working out their plans in

FE. CHICOMS are supposed to have so informed Soviets.

[text not declassified] who is reliable believes story is correct. My

recollection is not certain as to whether Yugoslav was rep UNESCO or

other such UN organization.

Gowen

1036. From Johnson. Reference: Deptel 1078.

Presume Department will request UK instruct O’Neill immedi­

ately attempt arrange visit to Downey. I do not see how any question

priority is involved and would hope O’Neill would in interview partic­

ularly attempt test CHICOM regulation on “discussion case in which

prisoner involved”.

In this connection Department and O’Neill should have in mind

usual Communist (as well as former Japanese and some European)

practice of keeping prisoner incommunicado until “investigation”

case completed. As Downey has been tried and sentenced such con­

sideration should under any circumstances no longer apply his case.

Also should note fact censor passed Downey’s letter specifically asking

“to discuss his case”.

Gowen

Limited Distribution.

Letter No. 23

Washington, November 2, 1955

Dear Alex:

This will be a short note, mainly to submit a few factual items.

Indian Ambassador Mehta saw Mr. Robertson on October 27 to dis­

cuss certain phases of the Indian Embassy’s function under the Agreed

Announcement. A memorandum of the conversation is enclosed. The

Indians are inclined to bring up various hair-­splitting points although

fundamentally they are obviously satisfied that all Chinese in this

country are free to return to the Mainland if they wish to do so. Mehta

seemed worried by what he termed evidence of fear on the part of

several Chinese who have made preliminary inquiries, mostly by tele­

phone, of the Indian Embassy here and the Indian Consulate General

in New York. He seems to think they fear a certain intimidation of some

sort, as if they think they will be penalized in some way if their interest

to return to the Mainland should be known. He wants us to find some

means of giving reassurance to Chinese who may be deterred by vague

fears from contacting the Indian Embassy. We pointed out to Mehta that

there is no possible reason for any Chinese fearing any action by the

U.S. Government if he should express a wish to return to the Mainland.

We do not know of any further action which we could take to make

their complete freedom to depart more explicit. Mehta also brought up

the question of Chinese who are dual nationals. He wanted to know if

Chinese with a valid claim to both American and Chinese citizenship

are covered. He also inquired about native American wives and minor

children of Chinese who wished to return and take their families with

them. These questions seemed to be largely hypothetical at this stage.

Hubert Graves on yesterday brought in O’Neill’s message of Octo­

ber 31 reporting the receipt of a letter from Downey. We see no reason

why O’Neill should not play this straight and seek to interview Downey

immediately. We are informing the British Embassy to this effect today.

We are also replying to numbered paragraph 3 of O’Neill’s comments

on the release of Mills and Proulx, which we received from the British

Embassy on October 28. (We sent you this document as an enclosure

to my last letter.) Our reply will recommend that O’Neill proceed to

dispatch immediately an identical letter to each prisoner. This letter

will reiterate the terms of the Agreed Announcement, and confirm the

readiness of the British Embassy in Peking to contact the addressee. We

Official–­Informal.

will give O’Neill a certain amount of latitude in drafting the letter so

as to enable him to get around the objection that any repetition of the

Agreed Announcement would seem to indicate a lack of confidence in

the assurances that Chou En-­lai personally gave to O’Neill that each

American had been notified. We do not know what O’Neill meant by

saying that “I do not think the Chinese will allow me to act until they

have confirmation that Indians in United States will receive reciprocal

rights”. We are asking for clarification of this.

Chon En-­lai’s conversation with O’Neill of October 29 is undoubt­

edly of considerable significance. We take it as signifying that the PRC

is likely to increase the pressure for a higher level conference and that

our difficulties in indefinitely maintaining the conversations at the

present level will increase.

You will be interested to know that Joe Alsop remarked to me on

yesterday that our tactic of dragging out the talks, and our motivation

for doing so, were transparently clear to him. He said that Krishna

Menon had revealed in a recent conversation with him that he (Menon)

also saw this clearly. Naturally Alsop thinks the Chinese Communists

see this with increasing clearness, and are likely to manifest growing

impatience.

I hope you get some conclusive word from the Secretary on our

guidance for your next meeting in time for you to map out your cam­

paign without undue haste. His visit to Madrid probably complicated

matters somewhat for you. I suppose there is not now much chance of

submitting our draft on renunciation of force at the next meeting, but

we would hope that it could be done on November 10 at the latest.

Our people are working actively with Colonel Monroe of Defense

on assembling the information on the best cases among the 450. It is

slow and frustrating business.

Do you have in your files a copy of the DRF Intelligence Report

Taiwan”?2 This is useful background historical material. We will send

you a copy at once if you do not already have it. This study shows that

back in the 30’s the Chinese Communists pretty consistently took the

stand that Taiwan should be independent and was not a part of China.

Regards and good fortune to you,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosure

Secretary feels our draft agreed announcement too “bare” for intro­

duction as counterproposal today’s meeting and there was not sufficient

time to obtain your comments on new draft we have prepared here. I am

transmitting new draft by separate telegram for your comments.

Gowen

Geneva, November 3, 1955, noon

1048. From Johnson.

Following is suggested redraft of agreed announcement on renun­

ciation of force which has been shown to the Secretary and Phleger and

has their general concurrence. However desire to receive Department’s

comments. In particular desire comments on inclusion phrase “to

achieve its national policy objectives when this would threaten interna­

tional peace” in last two paragraphs. There is some thought this might

be omitted from first draft presented to Wang and possibly retained for

later introduction during course negotiations.

1. The Ambassadors of the United States of America and the Peo­

ple’s Republic of China in the discussion of the practical matters at issue

between the two sides have recognized that the two countries confront

each other with policies which are in certain respects incompatible.

Their governments are determined, however, that their first objective

will be to see that these differences do not lead to armed conflict.

2. Their determination not to resort to war does not mean that either

government must renounce any policy objectives which it considers it

is legitimately entitled to achieve or renounce the right of individual or

Distribution.

collective self-­defense. It does mean that neither will initiate the use of

force to implement its policies.

3. Their determination not to resort to the use of force to make the

policies of either party prevail over those of the other does not involve

the interests of third parties nor does it involve the justice or injustice of

conflicting claims.

4. They recognize the basic principle that the use of force to achieve

national objectives does not accord with accepted standards of conduct

under international law if it constitutes a threat to international peace

and security and justice.

5. Furthermore, they recognize that the determination not to resort

to the threat or use of force is essential to the just settlement of disputes

by peaceful means, for negotiations cannot achieve fair and equitable

solutions if conducted under the overhanging threat that force may be

resorted to when one party does not agree with the other.

6. Accordingly; Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson informed Ambassa­

dor Wang Ping-­nan that: in general, and with particular reference to the

Taiwan area, the USA renounces the use of force to achieve its national

policy objectives when this would threaten international peace, except

in individual and collective self-­defense.

7. Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan informed Ambassador U. Alexis

Johnson that: in general, and with particular reference to the Taiwan

area, the PRC renounces the use of force to achieve its national policy

objectives when this would threaten international peace, except in indi­

vidual and collective self-­defense.

Gowen

1054. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting.

It will be noted that although I did not present any counterdraft I

kept very much in mind considerations mentioned para 2 Tedul 42 and

Distribution.

accordingly my presentation focused around our formulation renunci­

ation of force.

Wang did not attempt force issue of his draft and I would charac­

terize his discussion as somewhat desultory, giving an impression of

willingness to “mark time” for today. Believe this probably related to

maneuvers reported Deptel 1052.

With respect missing military personnel suggest consideration

be given to making fresh approach to MAC which takes account my

exchanges here with Wang on subject. I might drop subject for meeting or

two here while we see whether any progress can now be made in MAC.

Gowen

1056. From Johnson.

1. I opened twenty-­fourth meeting today by presenting prepared

statement on implementation of item one, as follows:

A. Mr. Ambassador, I was pleased to learn after our last meeting

that two imprisoned Americans had been released—Miss Harriet Mills

and Father Armand Proulx. It is encouraging to see that appropriate

measures have been taken to permit return of two of 19 Americans. I ear­

nestly hope and expect that release of these 2 will be followed by expe­

ditious release of the remainder as provided in agreed announcement.

B. I was also gratified to learn that day before our last meeting

British Charge in Peking was informed that he could, in accordance

with agreed announcement, visit and correspond with Americans in

prison. This is another gratifying indication that some steps are being

taken to implement agreed announcement and to enable UK Charge to

undertake his functions.

C. I must add, however, that I was surprpsed that British Charges

visits and correspondence with imprisoned Americans is to be in con­

formity with “rules and regulations governing prisoners’ receiving

and corresponding with relatives.” Of course, British Charge is not

relative but official of his govt charged under agreed announcement

Limited Distribution.

with specific official functions. I expect that he will not be restricted by

these regulations in performance of his official functions under agreed

announcement.

D. As I have informed you at our previous meetings, Indian

Embassy was fully authorized to undertake its functions in US imme­

diately following issuance of agreed announcement. Of course we,

too, have regulations governing visits by families to prisoners. How­

ever, my govt has authorized me to inform you that no restrictions are

imposed on Indian Ambassador in carrying out his functions under

agreed announcement.

E. Important fact, of course, in all this discussion of the details of

implementation is that in our agreed announcement on September 10

we stated that all those who wanted to return were free to do so and

that appropriate measures could be taken to enable them to do so

expeditiously.

2. Wang replied that he had been telling me for long time his govt

would be faithful in implementing agreed announcement and that

third state would be able to carry out functions.

3. I continued with extemporaneous statement on renunciation of

force. I acknowledged receipt of revised English version and stated we

were continuing study of his draft agreed announcement.

4. I said renunciation of force was subject on which it was import­

ant there be full understanding between us. It was not an area in which

problems could be resolved by unclear or cloudy language that may

mean one thing to one side, another thing to the other side.

5. I said we both recognized that we faced practical situation in

Taiwan area. My govt is determined insofar as it lies within its powers

that there be no hostilities. If his govt has same determination, question

of possibility of hostilities arising in area can be resolved.

6. I said in considering his draft agreed announcement, I would

like to be able to inform my govt exactly to what degree it meets points

raised in statement I made at time of raising this subject. In that state­

ment I had said to use force to achieve national objectives does not

accord with accepted standards of conduct under international law. I

had cited instances and examples in which this principle was enun­

ciated. I had said US has in past and is willing again to enunciate this

principle.

7. I said question I would like to be able to answer to my govt is

whether or not draft is intended incorporate this principle.

8. I said I had also noted in draft announcement inclusion of

agreement on meeting of Foreign Ministers of our two countries. This

appeared to link question of declaration that force not be used to settle

disputes with a particular form of negotiations. These two things are

quite different from one another. If principle non-­recourse to force is

sound, it is sound for its own sake and not proper to link it with any

particular form of negotiation. Neither UN Charter, portions of which

he had quoted, nor any other principle I know of, states problems must

be negotiated between Foreign Ministers of countries.

9. I said UN Charter and other statements this subject refer to peace­

ful settlement disputes. Many ways of peacefully settling disputes and

many channels through which negotiations between govts can be carried

on for purpose peacefully settling disputes. As we both knew, normal

channel is between Ambassadors or between Ambassador and Foreign

Office.

10. I said my govt had suggested the present talks for purpose

peacefully discussing and settling disputes. I did not see how question

of another level of talks arose until we had completed the talks here.

11. I said the important point was that whatever words were used

or whatever form we adopted, it be perfectly clear that neither of us

would use force in Taiwan area.

12. I said that in my original statement I had said we should both

of us clearly renounce force to make policies of either of us prevail over

those of other. We considered that this applied particularly to Taiwan

area.

13. I said this involved no third parties, nor did it involve justice or

injustice of conflicting claims.

14. I said I would appreciate his observations on whether his

announcement intended to cover points I had raised in my original

statement, which was proposal his side declare it would not resort to

force in Taiwan area except defensively. As I had said at time, US pre­

pared make corresponding declaration.

15. I concluded that whatever answer he might give me would be

of great help in considering his proposal.

16. Wang replied that he shared my view that purpose of talks is

to settle disputes between two countries peacefully, and in particular

disputes in Taiwan area.

17. Wang continued with prepared statement on this subject, which

he elaborated extemporaneously. He said that I had said at the previous

meeting that Taiwan had been restored to China from Japan. That is

exactly what former President Truman said in statement of January 5,

1950. No matter what was then Chinese Govt, no one can deny Taiwan

is Chinese territory. As this is case, liberation of Taiwan cannot but be

admitted as domestic affair of China.

18. Wang said US cannot cover up US armed encroachment Taiwan

and interference Chinese People’s liberation Taiwan and coastal islands

by concluding treaty with Chiang Kai-­shek clique. Nevertheless I had

gone so far as to try to mix up civil conflict in China with international

matters by invoking treaty. His side could never accept this. Wang said

I had stated I had no intent debate conflicting policies Taiwan in order

to avoid long futile controversy. However, if we to discuss how non-­

recourse to force may be applied to Sino-­US dispute in area, we cannot

evade fact US resorting to threat and use of force. That fact gave rise to

Sino-­US dispute in area, which is pressing for solution.

20. Wang said he had repeatedly pointed out that in discussing

principle of non-­recourse to force, distinction must be made between

internal conflict and international dispute. Internal conflict no business

of present talks. Anouncement should not have anything to do with

internal matters of any country.

21. Wang said Chinese people always strive for peaceful solutions

even in realm of internal matters. But it was Chiang Kai-­shek who

started large scale internal conflict in 1946, as even State Dept White

Paper admitted. Chinese people compelled resort to war to overthrow

Chiang rule and establish PRC.

22. Wang said today remnant elements Chiang clique still haunt

Taiwan, waging disruptive war against mainland China. Nevertheless,

Chinese people still willing, conditions permitting, strive liberation Tai­

wan by peaceful means. This internal matter, not subject present talks.

23. Wang said US Govt had indicated it does not intend speak for

Chiang Kai-­shek, nor can his side accept US to represent Chiang in

talks. He cannot agree to a public announcement which would touch

on a Chinese internal affair.

24. Wang said I had spoken of situations of division in other parts

of the world. As far as China concerned, this metaphor out of place and

cannot justify US encroachment on Taiwan. Any attempt split China

into two Chinas unacceptable to Chinese people.

25. Wang said his draft announcement on basis UN Charter called

for peaceful settlement of disputes without resorting to threat or use

of force. This met spirit of my statement concerning settling disputes

between our two countries peacefully.

26. Wang said, in order realize this desire, appropriate both sides

hold conference of Foreign Ministers to settle question of and eliminate

tension in Taiwan area.

27. Wang concluded if US genuinely seeking peaceful settlement,

there no reason we cannot agree make such announcement. No justifi­

cation for stalling in issuing such announcement.

28. I replied that I did not see how his remarks advanced the sit­

uation very much. Was I to take it as his position that negotiations

between our two countries could be carried on only at the Foreign

Ministers’ level?

29. Wang replied that his side regarded dispute in Taiwan area as

gravest existing dispute between China and US, affecting not only rela­

tions between China and US but also security and peace in Far East.

Therefore it his view that it would be more practical refer such grave

problem to conference of Foreign Ministers of our two countries.

30. Wang said if I considered myself fully authorized and able

assume responsibility for settling question of withdrawal US armed

forces from Taiwan area, he would join me in discussing this question

here.

31. I replied that I understood then that negotiations could be car­

ried on at level other than Foreign Minister.

32. Wang said that if I had power settle question to which he had

referred, he would join me in discussing the problem. He was not try­

ing to evade discussion of the question.

33. I said that next question I wished to raise was one I had raised

before. We have different views with respect nature of dispute Taiwan

area. Did he agree that first and most important task is make sure dif­

ferent views do not lead us to war? We recognized there is practical

situation in area. Overwhelmingly important question of principle was

that practical situation should not lead us to war.

34. I said he had referred to situation as internal matter and had

said “conditions permitting” his side would strive for peaceful settle­

ment. As I had pointed out at last meeting, that is very different from

saying force will not be resorted to in area except defensively.

35. I said obligation to seek peaceful settlement and not to resort to

force did not revolve about the question of internal matter or interna­

tional matter. Question is whether use of force would endanger inter­

national peace and security.

36. I said he had quoted portions of UN Charter. I would like to

quote another portion that has pertinence to the situation. I read para­

graph 1, article 33, chapter VI, of Charter.

37. I said test is not whether question is internal or external, but

whether it affects international peace and security. Same point made

in article 1 of Charter, which refers to “situations which might lead to

breach of peace”.

38. I said my purpose is not to get into legalistic argument over

interpretation of Charter. I simply mean to point out that Charter is one

of places where principle was enunciated that it is contrary accepted

standards of international relations use force in situations likely to

endanger international peace and security.

39. I said I was not asking him accept proposition that problem in

Taiwan area is not internal. To say force will not be resorted to in Tai­

wan area does not prejudice his position in regard to nature of dispute.

I was not suggesting he say anything that would prejudice his position.

I was simply asking whether it is intent of his draft to make clear that

force will not be resorted to except defensively.

40. I said it was of extreme importance that we be absolutely clear

between ourselves on this. It would be most unfortunate and discus­

sions here would be counterproductive if we produced words that

meant one thing to him and another thing to us.

41. I said that I was honestly not clear what his position was.

42. Wang replied that his side “used to maintain” in discussions

between us that US should withdraw its armed forces to express its sin­

cerity. I had repeatedly urged that a statement be issued to effect that all

disputes should be settled peacefully without resorting to force. Draft

was intended to satisfy this request by our side.

43. Wang said any draft must represent common point of view

between our two countries. His draft contained three points suitable

to both of us:

A. First, it contained article from UN Charter on which he was sure

we could have no difference of opinion. Nearly everyone has learned

stipulations of UN Charter by heart.

B. Second, draft provided for peaceful settlement of disputes with­

out resorting to force. He was sure we could agree on this point. Draft

provided that both China and US will not resort to force.

C. Third, draft suggests conference at higher level should be held

to settle question of tension Taiwan area. Even some responsible per­

sonages in US had expressed this desire.

44. Wang said it seemed therefore his draft proposal was reason­

able and able to facilitate our talks. The position of his side was quite

clear, and if I had intent to understand it, I would be able to do so.

45. Wang said his side was in full agreement with provision UN

Charter I had quoted. Articles quoted provide for peaceful settlement

international disputes without resorting to war. That is what his side

is striving for. However in these articles and in other portions of UN

Charter there are no provisions permitting one country to interfere in

internal affairs of another.

46. Wang said that is why he had stated we must not mix up two

distinct problems. Distinction must be made between internal and

international issues. First point we must be clear on is that internal con­

flict is not mixed up with international.

47. Wang said second point is question of interference in internal

affairs of other countries. Fact that US has used armed force against Tai­

wan has brought us together in present talks. We should discuss ques­

tion of interference in Chinese internal affairs on part of US. If American

armed force is withdrawn from Taiwan and US avoids interference in

internal affairs of China, a new page in relations between China and US

would emerge.

48. Wang said if US could meet two points mentioned above,

question how Chinese people will deal with Chiang clique is matter

of China’s internal affairs. Chinese people have consistently expressed

willingness deal with Chiang by peaceful means. That is to say, China

also willing settle internal issues by peaceful means.

49. Wang said in same manner his side willing settle disputes

between US and China. He was sure he had made his position quite clear.

50. Wang said any sovereign state must and should adopt such

position. In past US always stated its desire maintain territorial integ­

rity China. US even made pledge it would not interfere China’s internal

affairs. These two statements in US history are quite just and welcomed

by Chinese people. Grave test facing US is implementing now two sol­

emn pledges made in past.

51. Wang said US has stated history of China full of humilia­

tions, foreign occupation, special privileges on part of foreigners, and

encroachment on territory. Foreign countries encroached on and occu­

pied territory including Taiwan and Manchuria and explained as for­

eign encroachments Chinese sovereignty contrary to UN Charter.

52. Wang said such statement on part of US was in accord with his­

tory of China. However, breaches of Chinese sovereignty and integrity

of Chinese territory have now become matters of Chinese history and

these could only be inflicted on a weak government. Humiliation could

only be inflicted upon weak state such as old China of past. Things

have changed entirely. Today great, strong China will never allow that

history to repeat itself.

53. Wang said his present requirement is a minimum one. What he

sought was to preserve sovereignty and territorial integrity of his coun­

try. Such was his position. He hoped I would understand his position.

54. I replied that it was getting late and that I had two other matters

I wished to take up. The discussion so far had been helpful. I would like

to ask one question, not in an argumentative spirit but to see whether

we were getting closer together. Did the Ambassador agree with me

that whatever our differences of interpretation and views in regard to

Taiwan situation may be, present factual situation is such that resort by

either side to force in area would endanger international peace?

55. Wang replied that he agreed so long as China’s internal affairs

were not involved, so long as disputes between China and US did not

involve China’s internal affairs. In same spirit his Premier had stated

Chinese people and American people were friendly, Chinese people do

not want to fight American people, provided both respect sovereignty

and territorial integrity of other side. His side was willing to reach a

reconciliation with US. He hoped US would also show its reconciliation

by actual deeds.

56. Wang said I had stated that no third parties were involved.

57. I replied that he had not quite grasped my question. My ques­

tion was whether or not the Ambassador agreed that factual situation

Taiwan area was such that initiation of hostilities by either side would

endanger international peace.

58. Wang replied that of course international peace was being

endangered. It was not question of resort to force by both sides. In fact

US already using force in area.

59. Wang said he was sure all his statements today were intended

answer my questions. If I would study his remarks I would get my

answers.

60. I replied that I could not agree that US using force in area but

that I was trying to avoid controversy this point. I had presented views

of my government at preceding meeting and would not take time to

repeat. I would study what he had said and would discuss this subject

further at subsequent meeting.

61. I then presented prepared statement on missing military per­

sonnel as follows:

A. At last meeting when I raised question of missing military

personnel, you used phrase “non-­existent”. I do not know whether

you interpret this to mean missing men are now non-­existent or were

non-­existent.

B. I mentioned Mr. Craig at our last meeting. Evidence indicates

he was alive and in your hands at one time. I want to assure you our

purpose is not to embarrass or make charges but simply to obtain infor­

mation for families of these men. I would like to mention another name

in list I discussed last week. Name is Corporal Russel F. Morris of US

Army. Corporal Morris’ name was listed as prisoner of war in Shanghai

also listed his name.

C. In listing his name along with others, China Monthly Review

states list compiled on basis New China News Agency list of POW’s

who have broadcast statements over Peking Radio or who have asked

Chinese correspondents in Korea to publish their names so that their

families may learn that they are prisoners.

D. In regard to your statement last week, I want to ask whether this

means that responsible correspondents of your side in Korea would

take names of missing Americans and state that they are POW’s in

order to mislead their families? Would your authorities permit such

false information to be circulated by New China News Agency? It is

difficult for me to believe that this is case. If it is not case, this man was

alive as prisoner of war of your side. He was not returned, no report

of his death has ever been received, his body has not been returned.

I am simply asking that your authorities investigate case and tell us

what happened to him. There must be some record of what happened

to Corporal Morris after August 1951. There surely can be no objection

to informing what that record is so that his family can be informed. In

spite of our efforts, we simply have not been able to find out. This is all

I am asking. Just as in case of Corporal Morris, I do not see why this

cannot be done along with other names.

E. This matter is one of deep concern to families of missing men,

to all Americans, and to my government. It is clearly matter at issue

between our two governments.

62. Wang replied that he had made his position clear at last meet­

ing and could not accept discussion this matter. As all cases enumerated

happened in 1951, they happened during Korean War. There is a Military

Armistice Commission which specially deals with prisoners and miss­

ing personnel. American side has some men missing and not accounted

for. On part of Chinese and Korean side in same manner there are miss­

ing men not accounted for. If he were to ask for information concerning

these men, these requests could only be referred to armistic commission

in Korea. These matters within scope of Korean War.

63. Wang said as to Americans in China, he had in spirit concili­

ation given me information on all Americans in China. He believed I

could have no doubt concerning his good will this regard. Facts in past

have borne this out.

64. Wang said he could not accept discussion of matter of miss­

ing personnel in Korean War. Even Secretary of State Dulles stated in

August 18 press conference that list of missing personnel must not

cause hope any these men still alive.

65. I replied that was correct. I had not alleged these men were

alive. I was merely asking that if they have died we be told that.

66. Wang replied he had already informed us of what he knew.

What he did not know he could not tell us. If I agreed with Secretary

Dulles concerning fate these men and that list must not cause hope that

they are alive, he did not see why I raised question non-­existent men.

67. Wang said he sympathized with families these men. They must

blame the criminal war. The suffering and losses of Chinese and Korean

people were even more severe.

68. I replied that his remarks concerning Korean War were entirely

uncalled for but that I did not intend to debate matter.

69. I asked whether his linking of question of our personnel with

question of his side’s personnel meant that his authorities did have

information that they would under certain circumstances be willing to

furnish.

70. Wang replied that he would not have made remarks about

Korean War had this issue not been put forward. He had no intent

discuss question. He had no information to give concerning men

enumerated.

71. I replied that he did not even know names of men. All I was

asking that he take names and ask for information. Immaterial whether

answer supplied here or in MAC. All I asked was that he take names,

ask his authorities to look into matter. If information is that men are not

living we should be told.

72. Wang replied that since this question had been raised in Korea,

it should be put through the same channel. He did not think this was

proper place to discuss. He had no intent engage in debate with me.

73. I asked him whether his government was willing instruct

its representative in MAC to discuss question there. It was precisely

because his side had refused to discuss matter and accept names there

that it had become necessary raise matter here.

74. Wang replied this was not suitable place raise question.

75. I said I would not pursue the matter further this morning; that I

wished to raise another matter. I then presented prepared statement on

subject of trade, as follows:

A. Mr. Ambassador, as I have indicated to you, we are continuing

our study of your draft statement on renunciation of force. I believe our

discussion of this subject this morning has been useful.

B. I full well recognize, and I am sure you do, that the formula­

tion of any declaration on this subject agreeable to both of our gov­

ernments is going to be a matter of delicacy that will require some

thought and time.

C. At our last meeting you suggested that, following any agree­

ment we may be able to reach on a renunciation of force statement, we

should undertake discussion of what you term trade embargo.

D. I am glad that you have thus recognized the inherent relation­

ship between the two subjects and that my response to the questions

which you may raise under your item of trade embargo must greatly

depend upon the degree of agreement which we are able to reach with

respect to renunciation of force.

E. The two subjects are fundamentally related as the measures

which the United States and other like-­minded countries have taken

with respect to trade with your country are in response to consider­

ations of national security and must be considered in that light.

F. However, while the question of renunciation of force is being con­

sidered, I would, in the interest of expediting our discussions, be glad

to hear whatever views you desire to put forward with respect to trade.

G. I do this with regard to your subject even though you have thus

far refused seriously to discuss or even consider with me the question

of missing military personnel which is a subject of deep interest to my

government and people and which clearly is a matter at issue between

us. I also say to you that I would not consider it within the spirit of

these talks to refuse to accept any material which you may desire to

give me with respect to your subject.

H. In discussing the matter of trade at our meeting of September 14

you referred to what you termed “economic blockade and embargo

imposed by U.S.” I am not clear as to what you have in mind in this

regard. I know of no blockade and I know of nothing imposed by the

U.S. on anyone else.

I. I do know of various sovereign measures taken by my govern­

ment with respect to economic intercourse between my country and

your country. I also know of common measures taken by several other

countries in consultation with each other as well as with the United

States concerning the export to your country of strategic materials. I

also know of the resolution of May 18, 1951 by the General Assembly

of the United Nations recommending an embargo on the shipment to

your country of arms, ammunition, implements of war and other stra­

tegic materials.

J. Therefore, when you present the views of your government, I

hope that you will clarify exactly what aspects of this matter you have

in mind.

76. Wang replied that at the last meeting he had stated that after

discussion of question of agreed announcement, we should go on

to question of embargo. He had not said there was any connection

between these questions.

77. Wang said he had never intended create impression that discus­

sion of certain subject is precondition for discussion another. Question

of embargo is precisely one of issues between US and China. It is exactly

one of items which should be discussed. Discussion and solution of

these issues aimed at improving relations between two countries.

78. Wang said he regarded embargo unreasonable by principle.

Such policy runs against peaceful trade relations between nations.

Therefore it is his view that to improve relations policy of embargo must

be abolished. Abolition of embargo policy is in accord with desires and

wishes all people including US people.

79. Wang said he reserved further discussion at next meeting. He

asked whether he could be given a copy of my statement since they had

not taken complete notes.

80. We agreed that a copy would be sent this afternoon.

81. Wang asked whether it would be convenient that the next meet­

ing be advanced to Tuesday, November 8.

82. I explained that I had made plans which it would be somewhat

difficult for me to change so as to be able to meet with him on Novem­

ber 8, but said I would be agreeable to meeting on Friday, November 11.

83. Wang indicated he would prefer to meet on the regular sched­

ule on Thursday, November 10. We confirmed that the usual press

statement would be made. Meeting ended at 12:50.

Dulles

Geneva, November 4, 1955, noon

1061. From Johnson.

1. Suggest that at next meeting I present counterdraft on renun­

ciation force along lines Mytel 1048. Would appreciate Department’s

suggestions on any additional points I might make in this regard.

2. Request Department’s views on transmitting after November 10

meeting copies our original renunciation force statement together

with copies our counterdraft to Nehru through Cooper, to UK through

Embassy Washington, and whether and by what means to Soviets.

3. Wang will presumably make statement on trade to which I will

make no reply at this meeting, except to ask any questions that might

appear useful.

4. Suggest that regardless of action that is taken on recommenda­

tion last para Mytel 1054 for fresh approach to missing military per­

sonnel item in MAC, that I make no mention this item at next meeting.

Consider it much more effective to drop this item for meeting or two

and then return to it rather than invariably bring up each meeting with

result it tends take on aspect routine matter. Believe same consideration

applies to implementation, particularly until O’Neill has time more

fully to test his ability to act.

Gowen

Letter No. 17

Geneva, November 4, 1955

Dear Walter:

I have received your letters of October 29 and November 2.

I first want to say that I greatly regret that it was impossible

to discuss your TEDUL 42, in particular paragraph 2, with the Sec­

retary until just prior to my meeting yesterday morning. The Sec­

retary’s Madrid trip and then the extreme pressure of his other

appointments here made it impossible even to discuss it Wednesday

night, so Herman and I were not able to get to him until 8: yester­

day morning. We talked for about 30 minutes and then I got off my

very short 1044 to you before going to the meeting so as to let you

know as quickly as possible what had happened. I had prepared

for the meeting on the basis of asking Wang questions, and with

the shift of emphasis I had no time to prepare anything else and so

talked entirely extemporaneously. I don’t feel I made any bad slips

and, on the whole, it was probably more effective than sitting and

reading a prepared statement.

Our redraft here of the Agreed Announcement is, as you will

recognize, simply a plagiarized and adapted version of the opening

statement on the subject, which, however, it seems to me, well lent

itself to the purpose. It seems to me that all the added “spinach” gives

us something with much more political sex appeal and much more to

talk about.

In the meeting yesterday I tried to partially lay the ground for

introduction of some such draft and, particularly, to try to make the

point to Wang that they need not sacrifice their position on Taiwan

being a domestic issue by accepting our formula.

In view of the longer gap now between meetings, I plan to send my

next summary report by priority rather than niact, and the full report

by routine. Let me know if this does not work out satisfactorily from

your standpoint.

You are entirely right that I would be very reluctant to lose Ekvall.

We are used to working with each other and he does very well at a very

difficult job, particularly when I start extemporizing and get myself

Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A handwritten note by Robertson next to the last

paragraph about missing military personnel reads: “Walter—Has this been done in any

way?” An attached handwritten note from Robertson to Sebald reads: “I agree we should

advise Hammarskjold of our request for accounting [illegible in the original] personnel.”

wound up, as I often do, in long involved sentences which are by no

means easy to put into Chinese. I also value his judgment, and particu­

larly his assessment of reactions of the other side. I have had to change

every member of my little group here except Ekvall. I would be very

reluctant to have any more changes at this time.

I am having to go up to Prague this week-­end because of a per­

sonnel emergency arising in the staff up there. As I mentioned in my

telegram, I plan, as usual, to come back on Tuesday. I talked it over with

Rod and Herman, as I could, if essential, have come back on Sunday,

but I think that that will give us plenty of time. The Secretary is going

to be away in Vienna and Yugoslavia over the week-­end.

I sent off to you today my thoughts with regard to the next meeting

and will presume that by Tuesday evening we will have your instruc­

tions, which I can, if necessary, Rod assured me, discuss with the Sec­

retary Tuesday evening in time to get something back to you before

Thursday’s meeting.

My travel to Prague has now been complicated by the fact that

they have taken off the early morning plane from Geneva to Zurich,

which means there is no way for me to get there except to go up to

Zurich Friday evening by train and stay overnight and take the plane

to Prague the next morning. However, I can still come back directly,

arriving here at 3: p.m. Tuesday afternoons.

I was very interested in the conversation with Mehta. It does not

shed any light on whether or not they have actually thus far “assisted”

anyone, but I would presume from the conversation that they have not

done so.

Yesterday and today I have quickly and firmly knocked down sev­

eral press rumors—one to the effect that yesterday I agreed with Wang

on a Foreign Ministers’ meeting, and another today to the effect that the

Secretary and Chou have recently exchanged letters.

I will have to cut this short in order to make the pouch, but you can

be sure that we will continue to try to keep things under control.

I assume the Department will do whatever it considers necessary

to keep Hammarskjold informed of our discussion on missing military

personnel.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

342. Letter from Sebald to Johnson

Washington, November 4, 1955

Dear Alex:

I have been wanting to write to you for some considerable time, but

as Walter McConaughy has been doing the corresponding, I thought it

best to keep all the “official informals” in his hands. Furthermore, I feel

sure that, as an old hand on this job, you have some idea of the harass­

ment under which the occupant of my seat usually operates.

However, I do wish to tell you that I feel you are doing a beautiful

job in handling the negotiations with Wang. Having had some experi­

ence with the Soviets in Japan, I know what it means to face up to the

difficult problems such as you have week after week, never knowing

when the end will come or, in fact, just what the negotiations will lead

up to. In any event, I hope you know that you have our complete con­

fidence and full support.

Now down to business. On the question of the Agreed Announce­

ment concerning renunciation of force, I have carefully gone over the

proposed text which you sent along in your 1048 and the following are

my preliminary remarks. We will send the Department’s comments by

telegram.

As a matter of form, I believe that this draft too closely presents

the two “governments” as determining or recognizing, jointly, certain

policies or principles. It seems to me that this results in giving greater

stature to the PRC than is desirable. It also brings the Announcement

close to an agreement.

The draft also seems to place emphasis upon the divergence

between the U.S. and PRC views as the source of tension. It would

seem preferable to shift the emphasis simply to a desire to remove

tensions. It also appears to accept the theory that the problem is inter­

national, thereby affording some leeway to the PRC to claim that the

civil strife between them and the GRC is not comprehended within the

Announcement.

I am also concerned with the apparent wordiness of the draft

which I believe should be as brief and direct as possible. I agree that

it might be preferable to have some bargaining points built into any

draft which we present, but we should bear in mind that it will come

Official–­Informal.

into comparison with Wang’s draft which is ostensibly simple and

direct.

While you have already mentioned the point (in your 1056) that

the UN Charter does comprehend domestic matters if they affect

international peace and security, I think we must be extremely careful

in our draft not to give the PRC the slightest peg on which to hang the

argument that the renunciation of force applies only to international

matters. You have noted, I am sure, that the UN Charter provisions

quoted by Wang are designed to place this problem on an interna­

tional plane. For this reason I would prefer relating the renunciation

of force to the Taiwan area rather than to a renunciation between the

two parties.

Paragraph 3 of your draft is difficult to understand and would seem

to give a good ground for argument that Taiwan is entirely excluded

and hence that force could be used against it with impunity.

In paragraph 4 the phrase “if it constitutes a threat, etc.” raises the

question, who decides? And what about domestic affairs if they should

constitute a threat to peace?

Paragraph 5 seems to limit the declaration to the two parties

and again seems not to preclude the use of force against the GRC.

In paragraph 6 the clause “when this would threaten international

peace” seems to provide an escape clause in the Taiwan situation.

Paragraph 6 also appears to be inconsistent and in conflict with para­

graphs 2 and 5.

Entirely informally and without the slightest pride of authorship,

I am sending along a draft which incorporates my views as to a possible

“Agreed Announcement”. If you think the approach of this draft has

merit, you might wish to discuss it with Herman Phleger and possibly

the Secretary. Alternatively, it may be that some of the language of this

draft could be used to overcome some of the apparent objections men­

tioned above.

This letter is written in a great rush and late in the day, so I hope

you will pardon any shortcomings.

With all best wishes,

Sincerely yours,

William J. Sebald

Enclosure:

Draft Agreed Announcement (3 copies)

Letter No. 24

Washington, November 4, 1955

Dear Alex:

There is enclosed a copy of a letter from General Erskine to Mr.

Robertson concerning the possibility of rendering an accounting to

Wang of Chinese personnel from the Korean War should he demand it.

As you will note, General Erskine says that we are still prepared to ren­

der such an accounting if Wang will respond to our demands. He also

refers to suggestions being prepared in Defense regarding a possible

position for us to take in the Geneva talks. We will study these when

they arrive and pass along to you any that may seem useful.

We have your report on the November 3 meeting, but haven’t

yet had the time to give it and your draft Agreed Announcement the

study that they deserve. As usual, everybody is swamped around here.

I expect that Bill Sebald, Walter McConaughy and I will get together

tomorrow (Saturday) morning and discuss future moves. Walter hopes

to get a letter off to you Monday which you should receive when you

return from Prague.

Best regards,

Ralph N. Clough

Deputy Director for Chinese Affairs

Enclosure:

Letter from General Erskine, November 1, 1955.

Official–­Informal.

1136. For Johnson. Your 1048.

Consider redraft too wordy, opening door to variety of undesir­

able possible interpretations and implications. Also question wisdom

of abandoning original concept of separate, unilateral declarations in

favor joint declaration. Specific comments by paragraph follow:

2) Undesirable because places U.S. in position of publicly acquiesc­

ing in PRC’s right to hold any policy objective, even though we might

consider such objective inimical to survival of free world. It seems to us

we cannot, even implicitly, accept the PRC’s right to hold such policy

objectives as, for example, subversion of free governments.

3) Statement that renunciation of force does not involve interests of

third parties could be construed as leaving Communists free to attack off­

shore islands, which not specifically covered by Mutual Defense Treaty.

4) Provides loophole for Communists to insist this does not apply

to Taiwan, which domestic matter.

5) Contains too strong an implication that U.S. willing enter upon

far-­reaching negotiations if Communists renounce force.

6) and 7) Inclusion phrase “when this would threaten interna­

tional peace” again provides loophole for Communists to argue Taiwan

domestic matter and only threat to international peace arises from U.S.

“use of armed force” against it.

Believe we should strive for simple wording which pins Commu­

nists down clearly and unmistakably not to use force in Taiwan area.

They obviously seeking meaningless wording which would not tie their

hands. We would rather, if necessary, face up to Communist refusal

to agree to clearcut statement, provided latter appeared reasonable to

most of world, than get their agreement to ambiguous document which

they would then proceed to evade.

For reasons set forth paragraph 3 Tedul 42 as well as above con­

siderations believe draft contained Deptel 915 most satisfactory pro­

duced to date. If considered too bare, it might be prefaced by reference

to general principles to which all civilized nations subscribe, without

using exact UN Charter language in Wang’s draft. Would be interested

in Phleger’s comments this telegram.

Repeat to Secretary.

Hoover

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Sebald in draft and by McConaughy.

1140. Eyes Only for Johnson from Robertson.

Reference Deptel 1048, Sebald’s draft of renunciation of force

pouched to you with personal letter from him November 5 had not been

staffed. Sebald now agrees should not be used as basis for negotiation.

Hoover

by Robertson; cleared in S/S.

161. Re Deptel 1136 to Geneva.

Did not consider draft Mytel 1048 departed from concept separate

unilateral declarations but only that preamble lengthened over draft

in Deptel 915 in order give document more “political appeal” better to

meet CHICOM maneuvers with GOI, UK and Soviets as well as give us

better public position if publicity becomes necessary.

It does not seem to me bare more or less legalistic language draft

Deptel 915 is best for this purpose. It is also best answer to inclusion

UN Charter language in CHICOM draft.

Draft contains nothing we have not already said to CHICOMS in

our formal opening statement on renunciation force copy of which was

given Wang.

Specific comments by paragraph:

2. Do not see question “right to hold” policy objective is involved.

Paragraph simply states unquestioned fact two sides do have pol­

icy objectives and that in certain respects these incompatible. Do not

believe anyone could interpret paragraph as US recognition right PRC

hold such policy objectives as subverting free government.

to Geneva for Phleger and Forman as telegram 14.

3. In view publicly stated US attitude toward off-­shore islands and

specific reference to “Taiwan area” in paragraph 7 seems to me diffi­

cult construe statement as whole as leaving CHICOMS free attack those

islands. While it seems to me preferable include some disclaimer re third

parties, could delete this paragraph without weakening statement.

4. It seems to me difficult to enunciate principle that use of force in

purely internal matters is not permissible. Police in all countries contin­

uously use force maintain internal order. Whereas we strongly disagree

with some of policy objectives internal police use force Communist

countries it clearly becomes international matter only when interna­

tional peace, security and justice involved. Test is not whether coun­

try considers matter domestic or international, but rather whether in

fact use of force would endanger international peace. In view existence

GRC and US treaty relationship thereto there can be no question that

use force against GRC constitutes threat to international peace however

PRC regards matter. It will be seen that at last meeting I strongly pur­

sued this point with Wang.

5. Implication is no stronger than in original statement I made to

Wang. Entire context discussion renunciation force has been willing­

ness discuss “other matters” in these talks if PRC renounced force in

satisfactory terms. If this removed there is little left in my negotiating

position. We have made clear our refusal discuss any matters involving

rights and interest GRC.

With different emphasis and of course for opposite reasons Wang

has also disclaimed any intent discuss GRC matters with US.

Entirely concur penultimate paragraph Deptel 1136 to Geneva.

Question is formulating a document that accomplishes both purposes

of tying them down and appearing reasonable to world if negotiations

break on this point. In my opinion draft in Deptel 915 accomplishes

former purpose but not latter.

Johnson

2561.  Your 1877.

Cable priority unclassified to Johnson full text Daily Worker story.

Repeat Department.

Hoover

­Priority. Repeated Priority to Geneva for Johnson as telegram 1142. Drafted by Clough;

cleared in draft by Beale (BNA).

1143. For Johnson.

Daily Worker story referred to our 1142 is Communists’ most fla­

grant violation to date of agreement that substance of talks will not be

revealed without prior agreement or notification. Obvious purpose is to

take initiative this subject away from US. You should promptly deliver

strong written protest to Wang. You may wish mention numerous ear­

lier violations agreement by leaks to NCNA correspondent which we

refrained from protesting in interest progress talks, but this last leak too

glaring to overlook. Matter should be taken up with Wang at Novem­

ber 10 meeting, but protest should be delivered soonest to show Wang

how seriously we regard his breach and forestall if possible further

Communist efforts publicly exploit this subject prior next meeting.

Department neither confirming nor denying Wang has proposed

joint declaration renouncing use of force.

Repeat to Secretary.

Hoover

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and Sebald.

1096. From Johnson. Reference Department telegram 1143.

Immediately following my return from Prague this afternoon I

sent the following letter to Wang:

1. On my return from Prague this afternoon my attention was

called to a newspaper story in the London Daily Worker of Monday,

November 7, by Sam Russell from Geneva.

2. I was most seriously disturbed to note that this story contained

a detailed and accurate report of the substance and even some of the

exact wording of the proposal which you made to me in our meeting

of October 27.

3. This very clear and explicit violation of the understanding that

we have with respect to the privacy of our meetings cannot but cause

my govt to have grave doubts concerning the intent of your govt with

respect to our talks.

4. I would appreciate being promptly informed what action will be

taken to rectify this situation which inevitably prejudices the hope for

progress in our talks.

Gowen

1097. From Johnson.

Following from [text not declassified] correspondent, from source in

CHICOM Embassy in East Germany: Wang Ping-­nan under instruc­

tions continue Geneva talks as long as necessary; CHICOMS willing

continue talks for possibly a year. According to source, at last meeting

Wang informed Johnson that Peiping prepared negotiate with Chiang

Kai-­shek, willing grant Taiwan “autonomous area” status under Chi­

ang for a period of time.

Gowen

1099. From Johnson.

Following is redraft of renunciation of force statement which takes

account of comments Deptel 1136. Subject to Department’s views, it has

concurrence of Phleger and the Secretary. Would hope I would be able

introduce this at Thursday’s meeting.

1. The Ambassador of the United States of America and the Ambas­

sador of the People’s Republic of China during the course of the discus­

sions of practical matters at issue have expressed the determination that

the differences between the two sides shall not lead to armed conflict.

2. They recognize that the use of force to achieve national objec­

tives does not accord with the principles and purposes of the United

Nations Charter or with generally accepted standards of international

conduct.

3. They furthermore regognize that the renunciation of the threat

or use of force is essential to the just settlement of disputes or situations

which might lead to a breach of the peace.

4. Therefore, without prejudice to the pursuit by each side of its

policies by peaceful means they have agreed to announce the following

declarations:

5. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan informed Ambassador U. Alexis

Johnson that:

6. In general, and with particular reference to the Taiwan area, the

People’s Republic of China renounces the use of force, except in indi­

vidual and collective self defense.

7. Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson informed Ambassador Wang

Ping-nan that:

Distribution.

8. In general, and with particular reference to the Taiwan area, the

United States renounces the use of force, except in individual and col­

lective self defense.

Gowen

1101. From Johnson.

Renew recommendations my 1061 except as follows:

1. Pursue question of CHICOM press leak subject to whatever

reply if any I have received to my today’s letter.

2. Make brief statement on implementation.

3. While CHICOM purpose in Daily Worker leak clear and I will

continue vigorously pursue violation by Wang private nature our

talks believe we should ourselves recognize it has some compensating

advantages. By leak CHICOMS have tended create public impression

they have renounced force substantially on our terms. They now face

problem of attempting publicly to explain “fine print” of their condi­

tions and reservations and we should not help them in this.

Gowen

Distribution.

1152. For Johnson.

ChiCom propaganda during week ending November 6 contained

little direct reference ambassadorial talks and comment on Taiwan was

slight as compared previous two weeks. Major attention during week

focussed on Big Four Foreign Ministers’ Conference, Middle Eastern

situation, and the problem of increasing contacts between East and

West.

Ambassadorial talks mentioned only in passing, connection with

question of trade controls. NCNA noted question of the embargo had

been raised at Geneva, and expressed hope that solution to problem

could be reached. Comments on Taiwan confined to internal develop­

ments and avoided international aspects. NCNA broadcast to Taiwan

November 2 reported interview with Chien Hsueh-sen, former Cal

Tech scientist who arrived Peiping October 28.

NCNA commentary on Big Four Ministers Conference adopted

line conference was test of Western powers, and that success of

talks was imperilled by “counter-current” of Western opinion which

favored continuation of Cold War. Peiping strongly supported Soviet

proposal on collective security, and endorsed Soviet proposal both

Germanys be represented at Geneva. Peiping also urged that Min­

isters Conference work out measures to remove obstacles to interna­

tional trade.

Peiping propaganda paid considerable attention problem of

increasing East-West contacts, including trade. People’s Daily Novem­

ber 3 supported Soviet proposal on East-West contacts and attacked

alleged US and Western effort to restrict area of contact. It cited US

“embargo” policy as chief obstacle to increased East-West contact.

Other NCNA comments focussed US ban to travel to Communist

China, accusing State Department of setting up “iron curtain” between

China and US in order prevent Americans from learning truth about

New China.

NCNA commentary on Middle Eastern crisis accused US of stim­

ulating arms race between Israel and Arab states, and infringing on

Egyptian sovereignty. Peiping viewed growing “unity” and “neu­

trality” among Arab states as factors which would deal setback to US

policy.

Drafted by Dawson; cleared in IAD and CA.

Peiping radio continued stress need for normalization of Sino-­

Japanese relations, while at same time denouncing Japanese Govern­

ment for detaining Japanese nationals and “forcibly” sending them to

Taiwan. NCNA continued to criticize Shigemitsu for dragging out Jap­

anese-Soviet talks London, and placed blame on “US manipulation.”

Hoover

1162. For Johnson.

Instructions for 25th meeting.

1. Tax Wang severely with violation secrecy agreement represented

by Daily Worker article.

2. Department considers your revised draft renunciation of force

statement (your 1099) excellent. You should present it this meeting

unless Secretary instructs otherwise.

3. By introducing draft renunciation of force statement first fol­

lowed by Daily Worker leak Communists have taken initiative from us

on this subject. Their violation agreement on private nature talks makes

essential for us to regain initiative and provides opportunity place our

case graphically before world. Subject to Secretary’s concurrence you

should inform Wang that unilateral release by his side of substance last

meeting leaves you no recourse but to set record straight by releasing

explanatory statement together with our draft renunciation of force

declaration (your 1099) immediately following meeting. While publica­

tion our statement would tend to freeze our negotiating position, in our

view there is nothing Wang could seriously object to in paragraphs one

through four, and paragraphs six and eight are so tightly drawn, we

could not accept change in any case. Explanatory statement mentioned

above would be substance of statement Deptel 789 as amended Dep­

tel 805 with minor revisions. Department’s suggested text will follow

Wednesday.

4. Implementation Agreed Announcement. You should remind

Wang that two months have passed since PRC declared it would

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Clough; cleared by Robertson and in S/S.

adopt appropriate measures permit Americans expeditiously return.

Only two of nineteen Americans permitted depart during this lengthy

period. Letter from only one of remaining seventeen so far has been

received by British Charge and Charge has not been permitted see any

of them. US Govt and people will judge dependence to be placed on

PRC promises by its performance.

5. Military Personnel. Concur your omitting subject this meeting.

Department exploring with Defense possibility raising again in MAC,

but this complicated by fact that in past lists presented there included

all missing UN personnel, not just American.

6. Embargo. Listen to what Wang has to say but refrain from sub­

stantive discussion this subject.

Repeat to Secretary.

Hoover

Letter No. 25

Washington, November 8, 1955

Dear Alex:

I enclose a copy of the latest communication from O’Neill dated

November 4.

We have told the British Embassy that we would like O’Neill to

visit Downey as soon as possible unless he feels that it would consti­

tute a precedent and actually interfere with his plans to visit all pris­

oners. We have said that of course O’Neill himself is the best judge of

this and that we would leave the decision to him. Naturally, we want

him to visit all prisoners whether they write him or not if the Chinese

will permit him. We have just heard from the British Embassy that

O’Neill requested an appointment with Chang Han-fu for Monday

­November 7 in order to turn over to him the letters to the 17 pris­

oners and to request permission to visit prisoners. However, he was

told that Chang could not see him on that day. He has requested an

appointment for November 8 and if that should also be turned down,

he proposes to act by letter instead.

Official–­Informal. McConaughy initialed the original “W.”

I hope to get off a longer letter to you by pouch tomorrow, but am

preparing this first so that it will not be delayed in case I am prevented

from doing the other letter.

Sincerely yours,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosure

Communication from the British Embassy

Washington, November 5, 1955

Message from Mr. O’Neill dated November 4

AMERICANS IN CHINA

I am now preparing letters to the 17 prisoners. I propose enclos­

ing text of agreed announcement and to avoid danger impugning

Chinese good faith by saying that I understand that the Chinese have

already communicated the text to the prisoners, but I am attaching

a copy for their convenience. The letters will then draw attention to

my functions under the agreement and say that I am ready to help in

any way I can, and that I hope the prisoners will not hesitate to com­

municate with me as I understand the Chinese authorities agree they

may. The letters will end by saying that the Chinese authorities have

agreed that members of my staff should visit the prisoners and that I

hope to arrange this soon.

the Chinese were not complaining of any restrictions placed on the

Indian Ambassador. I think that, before implementing a concession

which went rather beyond the letter of the agreement (in not insisting

on some initiative by the American prisoners before I could contact

them) [they will require a formal assurance of reciprocity?]. If the Chi­

nese raise this again I shall say that I understand that no restrictions

are imposed on the Indian Ambassador in carrying out his functions

under the agreement. But they may yet require a more specific assur­

ance before they deliver the letter or authorise visits. The Vice Min­

ister for Foreign Affairs on October 26 was particularly insistent that

the arrangements he proposed were subject to reciprocity.

3. My chief reason for suggesting that I should not arrange imme­

diate visit to Downey was that which the State Department give in ask­

ing me to do so: namely that no distinction should be made between

any of the detained Americans. Moreover, if I now ask to visit Downey

only this might give the Chinese the impression that I shall only ask

to visit the prisoners who have succeeded in communicating with me.

I am anxious not to prejudice the wider concession now made by the

Chinese that my staff may visit all the prisoners, whether or not they

write to me first. No other prisoners have so far written. If the State

Department agree I suggest that I should ask the Ministry of Foreign

Affairs at once to arrange visits by members of my staff to Downey and

any other United States prisoners at present in Peking. This would meet

my point.

4. The letters will probably not be ready for delivery till Mon­

day November 7. It would be convenient if the State Department

could authorise by then simultaneous requests for visits as proposed

above.

1108. From Johnson.

Ekvall informed by M.A. Bern his orders as now amended expire

November 26 and cannot under Army regulations be further extended

as TDY. On basis info from Defense arrangements would be made

between Department and Defense which would permit him bring fam­

ily to Geneva, Ekvall had made preliminary arrangements with regard

to home and personal property and any change at this time will cause

him considerable financial loss.

As Department knows I would be most reluctant be required

change interpreters at this time and would not consider it in inter­

est my mission do so. Therefore hope something can promptly be

worked out that will enable me retain Ekvall and also resolve his

reasonable desire concerning his assignment on an indefinite or long

term basis.

Gowen

1110. From Johnson.

In private background discussions with press here we are taking

general line of Secretary’s letter to U Nu transmitted by separate tele­

gram and suggest Department may desire do same.

Gowen

1183. For Johnson.

Following is suggested explanatory statement mentioned last sen­

tence paragraph 3 our 1162:

One of practical matters which United States has introduced for

discussion at Geneva talks is proposal that both United States and Peo­

ples Republic of China renounce use of force to achieve their policies

when they conflict. The two Governments confront each other with

policies which are in certain respects incompatible. This fact need not,

however, mean armed conflict and the most important single thing to

do is first of all to be sure that it will not lead to armed conflict.

Then and only then can other matters causing tension between the

parties in the Taiwan area and Far East be hopefully discussed.

Neither side wants to negotiate under threat of force. Free discus­

sion of differences, and their fair and equitable solution, become impos­

sible under overhanging threat that force may be resorted to when one

party does not agree with other.

United States as member of United Nations has agreed to refrain

in its international relations from threat or use of force. This has been

tribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and Sebald.

its policy for many years and is its guiding principle of conduct in Far

East, as throughout world.

Use of force to achieve national objectives does not accord with

accepted standards of conduct under international law.

Government of League of Nations, Kellogg-Briand Treaties, and

Charter of United Nations reflect universal view of civilized commu­

nity of nations that use of force as instrument of national policy violates

international law, constitutes threat to international peace, and preju­

dices interests of entire world community.

There are in world today many situations which tempt those who

have force to use it to achieve what they believe to be legitimate policy

objectives. Many countries are abnormally divided or contain what some

consider to be abnormal intrusions. Nevertheless, the responsible gov­

ernments of world have in each of these cases renounced use of force to

achieve what they believe to be legitimate and even urgent goals.

Acceptance of this principle does not involve third parties, or jus­

tice or injustice of conflicting claims. It only involves recognizing and

agreeing to abide by accepted standards of international conduct.

In order to accomplish end outlined above, Ambassador Johnson

has today presented to Ambassador Wang Ping-nan following draft

declaration on renunciation of use of force and proposed that it be

accepted.

Hoover

359. Letter from Clough to Forman

Washington, November 9, 1955

Dear Doug:

I would have written sooner after I returned, but I have been con­

fronted with so many not-too-familiar problems since returning to CA

that I have had my hands full. Part of the time, of course, I have devoted

to working from this end on the task you face in dealing with the wily

Wang, but there is just not the same amount of time here for thoughtful

Official–Informal.

meditation that there was in Geneva. Dave Osborn has been on leave

the last two weeks, which has also complicated things somewhat.

You have a direct personal interest in Dave’s leave, since we sug­

gested he take it now with the thought in mind that he might be sent

to replace you around December 1. Final decision on that will have to

be up to Alex, of course, and I want to set down our thinking on this so

that you can discuss it with him.

As you know, Walter and I both feel that officers in CA profit con­

siderably from this rare experience of first-hand contact with the Chinese

Communists, and we would like Dave to have that experience. He has

been informed on the talks from the beginning and we would see that

he is brought closely into the planning from now until he leaves. This

experience at the Departmental end of the wire should be helpful to Alex.

As you know, Dave is a highly competent officer and has had much lon­

ger service in the Department than either you or I. Walter places great

confidence in him and I am sure Alex would find him a worthy replace­

ment for you. His only disadvantage is his limited knowledge of Chi­

nese. Whether that disadvantage would be serious enough to rule him

out would be up to Alex to decide. If he believes it essential to have at

least one of his advisers fully qualified in Chinese, we would send Steve

Comiskey in Dave’s place. Steve is also a very reliable and capable offi­

cer, although he is somewhat younger and less experienced than Dave.

We would like to have Alex’s reaction to this proposal as soon as possible

so we would know which man to bring into the planning for the talks.

Walter will probably mention this also in his next letter.

We had quite a hassle last week with Defense over Bob Ekvall. After

Bern turned us down on the proposal to make him Assistant Military

Attache, Defense was practically ready to recall him and we were con­

sidering sending Al Harding or John Stanley from DRF to replace him.

However, we knew Alex would be very reluctant to change interpreters

and Mr. Robertson finally had a talk with Godell, in which the latter

indicated it would be possible to assign Bob somewhere else in Europe

and detail him to Geneva. This would enable him to bring his family

over and remain in Geneva as long as the talks lasted. Mr. Robertson

sent a letter to General Erskine formally requesting that this be done,

but we have not yet had a reply. Tell Bob not to think he is the forgotten

man, because at least 20 people in Washington have been involved in

some aspect of the discussions concerning him during the past week.

We have a staff meeting coming up and I want to get this into

today’s pouch, so I will stop here. Best regards and keep up the good

work.

Sincerely,

Ralph N. Clough

1115. From Johnson.

This morning I received the following letter from Wang:

I wish to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of November 8.

Our side does not bear any responsibility in connection with the news

report mentioned in your letter. The groundless charges in your letter

are unacceptable at all. However, since reference has been made in your

letter of leakage of the contents of our talks I am inclined to point out

that it is precisely American official quarters and Western news agen­

cies which have on many occasions made disclosures of the contents

of our talks. During the course of our discussions on the first item of

the agenda as well as after agreement on that item was reached the

spokesman of the U.S. Department of State and Western news agencies

had been making side disclosures on certain substance of our discus­

sions on the first agenda item as well as on the United States attitude in

refusing to undertake discussion of other matters under the pretext of

implementation of agreement.

You will certainly recall when on September 14 you violated the

agreement between both sides on the publication of information by

openly making a statement disclosing the points at issue in the talks.

Since we entered into the discussion of agenda item two the disclosing

of the contents of our talks by American official quarters and Western

news agencies has assumed an even more serious nature. Following

your proposal at our meeting of October 8 for both sides to make a

statement on the renunciation of force to achieve national objectives,

the U.S. Secretary of State Mr. Dulles in a speech delivered before the

annual convention of the American Legion asked that China accept the

principle that “military force should not be used aggressively to achieve

national goals”. The United States Government was thus implicitly and

intentionally leaking the substance of our talks through its Secretary of

State. At a press conference on October 18 Mr. Dulles made yet another

disclosure of the substance of our talks. He not only stated the intention

of the United States with regard to the first item of the agenda but also

disclosed that our talks were already discussing the question of renun­

ciation of force. In view of the repeated disclosure of the substance of

our talks by American official quarters and Western news agencies

which has already created an extremely confused impression in public

opinion, the Chinese Government is therefore considering a clarifica­

tion of its position to the public.

Gowen

1116. From Johnson.

Re para 3 Deptel 1162, Secretary has instructed that I not repeat not

make public release of explanatory statement or our draft renunciation

of force declaration.

With reference to Wang’s threat contained in last sentence his letter

to me this morning to make official public statement, I will of course at

this morning’s meeting try to tie this down and unless he clearly reaf­

firms private nature of talks, will reserve our position on also making

public statement. However feeling here is that we should wait until he

actually makes statement before releasing any statement of our own.

Gowen

1122. From Johnson.

1. This morning’s meeting two hours and ten minutes. I opened on

press leaks, referring to unsatisfactory nature his reply my letter, ask­

ing for reaffirmation our agreement on privacy talks, requested clari­

fication statement his letter they considering issuing public statement,

Limited Distribution.

and notified him that if they did so I reserved my right promptly reply

by public statement. There ensued one hour’s discussion on this subject

with charges and counter-charges during which I referred to leaks by

NCNA correspondent as source many press stories. Believe net result

was reaffirmation agreement on privacy talks and do not believe he is

going to issue any statement, but some indication decision is not entirely

his.

2. He then made long prepared statement on their draft renunciation

of force repeating usual arguments but somewhat stronger in tone, par­

ticularly as to their unwillingness ever to recognize “US encroachment in

Taiwan”, status quo, or that Taiwan was not domestic matter. Somewhat

more emphasis upon withdrawal of US forces from Taiwan area.

3. I then made short statement on implementation to effect by

no stretch of imagination or interpretation can their performance be

considered expeditious, and that this situation closely related to other

aspects our talks and my government’s view of reliance which can be

placed on commitments by his government.

4. I then made statement introducing our draft agreed announce­

ment on renunciation of force, giving him copy. Meeting adjourned

after few “preliminary comments” by him along expected lines.

5. He made no statement on trade embargo except for passing

reference in his opening general statement to effect unacceptable that

discussion of trade be conditioned upon issuance renunciation of force

statement.

6. Next meeting Thursday, November 17.

Gowen

1125. From Johnson.

Haguiwara (Japanese Ambassador in Bern) called on me yesterday

evidently under instructions to obtain information concerning progress

in my talks with Wang particularly with respect to trade and to sound

me out on our views on relaxing CHINCOM controls.

to Tokyo as telegram 6.

I spoke to him in general terms of present status with respect

renunciation of force and said no discussion yet of trade. In response

his further questions concerning our attitude on trade if CHICOM give

satisfaction on renunciation of force, pointed out I could not speak for

Department on this subject but set forth personal view of close relation­

ship between strategic trade controls and estimate of intentions other

side in which satisfactory renunciation of force would be only one fac­

tor. Assumption we would not consider relaxation CHINCOM controls

until satisfactory CHICOM renunciation of force appeared be implicit

in his question.

As in past I gave him current information with respect CHICOM

performance re release of Americans. He gave me copy November 5

letter from CHICOM Consul General here to Japanese Consul General

replying latter’s letters August 29 and October 20 on return Japanese

from China which I will transmit by despatch. Purport appears be this

and other matters could be better handled if diplomatic relations estab­

lished and proposes Japanese Government “send delegation to Peking

to begin talks on question promoting normalization relations”.

Gowen

1126. From Johnson.

With reference Taipei’s 426 to Department repeated Geneva 104,

assumption here has been Koo has been kept generally informed prin­

cipal developments my talks with Wang and it should therefore come

as no surprise to GRC that renunciation of force declaration being dis­

cussed. GRC should also be well aware of this from Secretary’s speeches

and other public statements on subject.

Gowen

1132. From Johnson.

Have not yet had opportunity discuss text Deptel 1183 with the

Secretary or Phleger but my thought is that unless in any statement

they make CHICOMS include text their draft announcement we should

avoid releasing our text. Am not sure even if they release their text it

would serve our interests to release our text. Release of texts would so

freeze positions that further negotiation thereon would become very

difficult.

As decision is we make no release unless CHICOMS first do so,

our statement would probably require some tailoring to meet CHICOM

statement. If release made by Wang here, statement in reply should

come from me; but if release by Peiping, believe reply should come

from Washington.

Subject to foregoing concur general lines statement contained 1183

but consider that if text our draft not released, mention should be made

in statement of importance that renunciation specifically apply to Tai­

wan area. Otherwise to casual reader Wang’s proposal would appear

almost completely to meet text statement in Deptel 1183. Suggest addi­

tion of “including specifically the Taiwan area” at end first sentence.

Also better to meet CHICOM FonMin meeting point believe we should

be somewhat more explicit concerning our willingness discuss “other

matters” following renunciation of force declaration. Suggest this be

done by addition of following sentences after end second para state­

ment Deptel 1183: “The United States Ambassador has made clear

his willingness within the agreed scope of these talks to discuss these

other matters at that time. It is the United States view that until both

sides have exhausted a full and honest effort to resolve these problems

through this already established and normal channel, the question of

other channels or other meetings does not arise.”

Gowen

Distribution.

If CHICOMS refuse deliver O’Neill’s letters as presently drafted I

would think there would still be value, at least from standpoint impris­

oned persons’ morale in simply transmitting copy agreed announce­

ment under cover letter from O’Neill.

Gowen

Distribution.

1135. From Johnson.

1. I opened twenty-fifth meeting today with discussion of privacy

of talks. I acknowledged Wang’s letter (Contel 1115) and told him I

could not agee that his side bore no responsibility for London Daily

Worker report. The Daily Worker article contained first report con­

cerning substance of talks in their present stage and constituted full

exposition of Chinese Communist position. It could have originated

only from his side.

2. I said that as result of article, rash of speculation had broken

out in press. I would have been justified in making public position our

side but did not feel this in interests of talks. Have made every effort

discourage further press speculation.

3. I said that in spite of my efforts speculation has continued. I had

hoped he would have found it possible take action that would quiet

this speculation.

4. I said that we must keep in mind distinction between discussion

national policies by governments and either of us making available to

Distribution.

reporters substance of talks. His press, radio, and public officials have

been making statements on aspects of national policy some of which

impinge on substance of talks. I did not raise question in that regard.

I considered that quite different from publishing specifics of talks

between us here.

5. I said my government’s officials also make statements concern­

ing national policies but they carefully refrained from making available

to press substance of discussion in this room. He should note that Sec­

retary Dulles, in October 18 press conference Wang had referred to in

his letter, carefully avoided discussion substance talks.

6. I then read excerpts from Secretary’s October 18 press conference

dealing with talks.

7. I said Secretary had said absolutely nothing but what was known

or made available by Wang’s side. Fact trade embargo and higher level

meeting had been raised was made public by his side September 14.

It was well-known fact even before talks started that US desired dis­

cussion renunciation of force. Secretary merely confirmed these were

subjects of talks and refused enter into substance of meetings.

8. I said I cited this because I wanted him to understand how care­

fully we tried keep agreement concerning privacy of talks. We were dis­

turbed by last sentence Wang’s letter, in which he apparently indicated

intent make farther information available to press. I asked whether this

was in fact intended.

9. Wang replied he had made his position clear in his letter. He

could not accept charges I had made. In fact, it was his side that was

dissatisfied regarding secrecy of talks.

10. Wang said at beginning of talks he had taken stand talks should

be open. I had proposed secrecy, and as concession his side had accepted.

Subsequently understanding reached that prior to public statement either

side, other side should be informed. Thus it would be possible have full

exchange of views to find solution to disputed matters.

11. Wang said his side has always followed this line. Chinese press

has commented only matters on which agreement reached or which

were made public. Has never gone into substance of talks.

12. Wang said members of his group engaged in talks have had no

contacts with press. Nevertheless there had been disclosures to press.

He wished to cite a few cases. Following meeting of October 27, at

which his side put forward draft agreed announcement, press began

to talk about important statement by Chinese side in which Foreign

Ministers conference was envisaged.

13. Wang said that even this morning he had noted story in Novem­

ber 8 New York Times quoting official American sources and reporting

principal ideas his draft and US position. There were many more exam­

ples he could cite.

14. Wang said his side turned down all requests for interviews with

press and even refused pose for pictures. He was dissatisfied with what

appeared in press. This applied even to story in London Daily Worker.

He could not accept responsibility for story many points of which not

satisfactory to him.

15. Wang said even Dulles in press conference I had quoted from

had mentioned that in talks we were engaged in discussions renuncia­

tion of force. He considered this disclosure of what was going on in talks.

16. Wang said there had been distorted press reports concerning

proceedings here and that his side could bear no responsibility for

these. His side was therefore considering clarifying its position.

17. I said that I was glad he had mentioned press reports following

October 27 meeting. I did not question his statements concerning his

relations with press. He may be unaware of situation. I would mention

it only in privacy of this room, but NCNA correspondent who stands

outside this room has for long period of time had remarkably accurate

information what goes on inside. He has not been discreet in discussing

this information with other correspondents. I was not ten minutes back

in my office after October 27 meeting when Western correspondents

indicated NCNA correspondent had said Wang had presented import­

ant statement renewing proposal for higher level meeting.

18. I said I and members of my staff refused discuss report with

press. Nevertheless, places me in difficult position. I was completely

satisfied that this and other reports have often come from same source.

19. I said I had not seen November 8 New York Times report. If

it contained details of his proposal, it was doubtlessly obtained from

Daily Worker article. As for Daily Worker article, it clearly did not orig­

inate with us.

20. I said rather than continue discussion this subject, could we

not agree do our best prevent press speculation. I did not intend make

statement or reply to Daily Worker article. However, if Wang made

statement as intimated in letter I of course reserved my right make

reply.

21. I said I hoped we would not be reduced debating in public.

Progress so far due in large part to fact we able discuss frankly without

public debate.

22. I said I did not recall that Wang had proposed open talks. I

did propose private talks but did not recall any counter-proposal from

Wang. Did Wang reaffirm his agreement to private talks?

23. Wang replied that he could not accept my statement concerning

NCNA correspondent. He often received telephone calls from Western

correspondents who said American delegation had said something and

reporters asked for comments. He had never made any reply to such

inquiries.

24. After October 27 he requested assistance NCNA correspondent

in tracing leak, but reporter responsible for information refused dis­

close source. It was thus groundless to charge origin of leak was on his

side.

25. Wang said concerning November 8 New York Times story he

did not regard it as objective attitude on my part to presuppose ori­

gin of story without having read it. Writer of story attributed it to “US

officials”. It could not be concluded that these officials were staff of

London Daily Worker.

26. I asked him whether he intended issue statement.

27. Wang replied that distorted reports make it necessary consider

this step.

28. I asked whether this constituted notification statement would

be issued.

29. Wang said the matter was under consideration.

30. I asked whether I would be notified prior to any statement.

31. Wang said he could not say at the present moment.

32. I said that I did not intend to issue a statement unless he did, in

which case I reserved my right to make a reply.

33. Wang next presented a prepared statement on renunciation

of force. He said two months had passed since agreement on agenda

item one. Following agreement his side had introduced two subjects:

embargo and higher level meeting. In view of our raising question of

renunciation of force, he had submitted on October 27 a draft agreed

announcement recommending settling disputes between China and

US without threat or use of force in accordance with provisions of UN

Charter. In order to materialize this principle draft proposed convening

conference of Foreign Ministers to settle through negotiation question

of relaxing and eliminating tension in Taiwan area.

34. Wang said after repeated efforts on his part my response so far

had not been satisfactory. At last meeting I had raised question whether

his draft incorporated renunciation of force to achieve national objec­

tives, as I had proposed. Such general term as national objectives con­

fuses internal with international disputes.

35. Wang said in practical terms renunciation of force to achieve

national objectives constituted demand his side renounce sovereignty

and recognize status quo of US interference internal affairs and occupa­

tion China’s territory of Taiwan.

36. Wang said in regard to Taiwan, China’s national objective is to

liberate island. This lies within framework of China’s sovereignty and

internal affairs. China has repeatedly stated that conditions permitting

it will strive liberate Taiwan by peaceful means. Means by which Tai­

wan is liberated, however, is matter China’s internal affairs and US has

no right interfere. This cannot be made subject Sino-American talks.

37. Wang said on other hand US national objective Taiwan area

is to continue encroachment China’s territory of Taiwan and continue

interference Chinese internal affairs. US has already used force and

threat of force attain such aggressive national objective.

38. Wang said I had skipped over this fact and refused discuss such

concrete issue as withdrawal US armed force Taiwan area. At same

time US has demanded through use of general term national objectives

China recognize status quo in Taiwan area, continued US encroach­

ment Chinese territory Taiwan and US interference in Chinese internal

affairs. This can in no way be complied with.

39. Wang said at last meeting I had asked whether intent of his

draft was that force not be used except in self-defense. Taiwan is Chi­

nese territory and US use of force in that area places China in defensive

position. Just as China cannot go to Honolulu to put up defenses in

respect to US, so US has no grounds put up defenses in Taiwan area in

respect to China.

40. Wang said in spite this situation China proposes settle through

higher level negotiation question relaxation and elimination of tension

in Taiwan area. If it is intent that China and US settle disputes in Taiwan

area by peaceful means, this intent finds expression in his draft agreed

announcement. However, if it is intent that China renounce exercise

sovereign right over Taiwan and recognize US encroachment, this sim­

ply will not do.

41. Wang said I had suggested that point was not whether a situa­

tion was internal or external but whether force prejudiced international

peace and security. His side could not accept confusion of domestic and

international issues.

42. Wang said everyone knew Chinese people had liberated main­

land and many coastal islands including Hainan, in process of which

they had not at any time threatened international peace and security.

On contrary, victory had indisputably promoted stability of situation

in Far East and made immense contribution to international peace and

security. On other hand, US had encroached on Taiwan and interfered

with liberation Taiwan and coastal islands, giving rise to situation

which threatened international peace and security.

43. Wang said it was for sake of safeguarding international peace

and security that he had proposed Sino-US meeting on higher level to

settle through negotiation question of relaxing and eliminating tension

in Taiwan area. Yet I had at last meeting objected to linking agreed

announcement to conference of Foreign Ministers.

44. Wang said this is proof US intent is to require his side to

renounce exercise sovereign rights in regard to China’s Taiwan and

to accept status quo of US encroachment on Taiwan and interference

in China’s internal affairs by armed force. He wished categorically to

repeat that his side could not agree to this.

45. Wang said he had stated before that mere statement of princi­

ple force will not be used in relations between China and US without

providing steps to realize that principle would make US inconsistent

in words and deeds, would not contribute settlement tension in Tai­

wan area, and would be likely give rise to misunderstanding that China

admitting to US encroachment in Taiwan and interference in China’s

internal affairs.

46. Wang said he had on many occasions raised question of with­

drawal of US armed force from Taiwan area. However, I had failed to

make any answers this proved entirely necessity of holding conference

of Foreign Ministers.

47. Wang said at last meeting I had said that response to question

of embargo must depend on degree of agreement on renunciation of

force. The policy of embargo was itself unreasonable and hence must be

lifted. That was exactly his intent in the question of embargo and that is

unanimous demand of people of whole world. If US after using force in

encroaching on Taiwan should further demand China recognize status

quo and renounce liberation of Taiwan before US side would consider

lifting embargo, his side could not accept.

48. Wang said his draft agreed announcement represented great

effort seek concretely apply UN Charter to the situation. If our side

were genuinely desirous of peaceful settlement there is no reason why

our side could not agree to his draft agreed announcement.

49. I replied that he had properly pointed out that it is now two

months since agreed announcement on return of civilians was issued.

Only two of those who remained in prison at that time have returned. At

this rate it presumably would be 17 months until all have returned.

50. I said that by no stretch of the imagination or any interpreta­

tion can this be considered “expeditious” or fulfillment of commitment

made by his government in agreed announcement.

51. I said continuation of this situation would inevitably influence

my government’s view of reliance which can be placed on commit­

ments made by his government and thus profoundly influence other

aspects of our talks.

52. I then presented prepared statement on our counter-draft

agreed announcement as follows:

A. I have listened carefully to your statement this morning. My

government has also given careful study to draft agreed announcement

which you gave to me at our meeting of October 27. It has also taken

into consideration our discussions of subject at our last two meetings. I

am taking into consideration your statements this morning.

B. It seems to me that we are in agreement that differences between

our two sides shall not lead to armed conflict. However, as I said at our

last meeting, this is subject too vitally important to our two peoples and

to peace of the world to leave to cloudy language that may mean one

thing to one side and something else to other side. I consider it essential

that we both not only fully understand each other but that any form of

words that we use publicly to announce whatever understanding we

reach be absolutely clear.

C. In studying your draft it does not seem to me this purpose is

fully accomplished. For example, while you cite in your draft some of

sound and fundamental principles of international conduct set forth in

Charter of United Nations, it is quite clear from our discussion that we

have differing views with respect to applicability of these particular

principles to situation in Taiwan area. As I noted at our last meeting,

there are also other United Nations principles which may be consid­

ered also to have applicability to that situation. There are many other

equally appropriate citations in United Nations Charter and other

international documents. However, it does not seem to me profitable to

attempt to cite or include in any public statement upon which we may

agree all of provisions of United Nations Charter or other documents

which may be applicable to situation.

D. I do consider it important that we make perfectly clear in what­

ever we agree publicly to say, that without prejudice to our differing

views or policies with respect to the situation in the Taiwan area, we are

determined it shall not lead to armed conflict.

E. I think it also desirable that whatever we say we make it clear

that neither one of us is renouncing right of individual and collective

self-defense, which is recognized by United Nations Charter.

F. Also, as I said at our last meeting, I do not consider we can con­

dition our enunciation of such fundamental principle upon any partic­

ular form of negotiation between our two countries. I repeat statement

which I made at our meeting of October 8, that such declarations would

make it appropriate to pass on to discussion of other matters with bet­

ter hope of coming to constructive conclusions. I have already indi­

cated my willingness to hear your views with respect to what you term

trade embargo if following our issuance of such declaration there are

other matters properly within the scope of our talks which you desire to

bring up, I will also be prepared to discuss them with you.

G. You and I have agreed that our differences in Taiwan area

should not lead to armed conflict. We are also in agreement that pub­

lic statement should be made in this regard. I have therefore prepared

draft which I believe fully takes into account views of both sides and

clearly expresses this intent.

H. You will note from this draft that, although my original pro­

posal had in mind separate declarations, I have adopted your sugges­

tion of agreed announcement similar in form to that which we made on

September 10.

I. You will also note from this draft that I have taken account of the

principles of the United Nations Charter as well as our differing views

on the situation in Taiwan area. With particular reference to your state­

ments this morning, you will note that this draft is carefully drawn so

as not to require your government in making this statement to renounce

or to prejudice its views in this regard. You will also note that draft spe­

cifically refers to right of individual and collective self-defense and that

it provides for statements by the two governments to be identical. That

is, it is not being suggested your government say anything but what my

government is willing to say.

J. I would hope we could agree on this draft, issuance of which

would mean so much not only for progress of our talks but for world

longing for assurance of peace.

53. After reading draft in English original and having it interpreted

Wang replied that he had some preliminary comments. We all recog­

nized existence contradictions in policies and disputes between our

governments. These disputes must be settled conformity accepted and

recognized standards international conduct. That why entirely neces­

sary as in his draft have specific quotations provisions United Nations

Charter, indicating intent settle disputes accordance quoted provisions.

54. Wang said we were in agreement that public announcement

should be made. However, he could not agree that issuance such

announcement should be a prerequisite for discussion of other matters.

55. Wang said he noted that my draft omitted two paragraphs

United Nations Charter he had quoted. My draft also omitted provision

concerning holding of Foreign Ministers’ meeting. My draft contained

reference to “national objectives”. As he had said this morning, such a

catchall term as “national objectives” could solve nothing.

56. Wang said question arises what objectives are meant by term.

In 1941 after Pearl Harbor United States joined in war against aggres­

sion on basis national objective which was self-defense. Use of force to

achieve such national objective justified.

57. Wang said other national objectives concern domestic affairs of

country. National objective of self-defense is quite just.

58. Wang said he noted that draft refers to United States self-­

defense in connection with Taiwan area. He could not see how United

States has right to put up self-defense in Taiwan area.

59. Wang said that draft mentions desire settle disputes between

two sides by peaceful means. This in conformity with main idea of his

draft announcement.

60. Wang reserved further comment for next meeting.

Same press release.

Gowen

1140. From Johnson.

Presumably at next meeting Wang will have prepared statement

commenting on renunciation force proposal I introduced yesterday. I

will reply as appropriate reiterating arguments already made. Believe

my attitude should be one of willingness consider reasonable amend­

ments in preamble of first four paragraphs but complete firmness on

paragraphs 6 and 8.

While statement on implementation will somewhat depend on

developments in Peiping and views of UK, in general, believe I should

place major emphasis on release and if brought up keep O’Neill’s dif­

ficulties in functioning in secondary position. Believe there is some

advantage to us in present trend of having O’Neill’s functions develop

into UK–PRC controversy.

If Wang makes statement on trade I would avoid substantive dis­

cussion but might ask any questions that would seem useful.

Gowen

1141. From Johnson. ReMytel 1132.

1. I have been reconsidering question of text of any public state­

ment we should issue if PRC makes statement. It now appears to me

text in Deptel 1183 would not be best answer to probable type of state­

ment PRC could be expected.

2. There is given below my thought on general lines of what might

be said here if Wang issues statement, or it could be modified for issuance

in Washington if PRC release was from Peiping. It will be noted this draft

attempts to make our points without becoming involved in specific sub­

stance of meetings or drafts which I feel should if possible be avoided.

A. It is a matter of disappointment and concern that Ambassador

Wang has chosen to issue a public statement at this time. As he and I

agreed when these talks started progress can best be made by not giving

out details of our exchanges until understandings can be announced, as

when we made the agreed announcement of September 10 with regard

to the return of civilians.

B. Some time ago I proposed, in order to make progress in the dis­

cussion of other practical matters arising between the two sides, that

both sides should declare that they renounced the use of force.

C. Ambassador Wang appears to have accepted this principle and

we have since that time been discussing an appropriate form for this

declaration. Such a declaration must make it clear that force is being

renounced as an instrument of national policy in general and also with

particular reference to the Taiwan area. My government believes that

an unqualified declaration in this regard, such as the United States is

willing to make, would be a major step in assuring peace in the Far East

and permit hopeful discussion of other problems.

D. I am pleased to note that Ambassador Wang’s statement appears

publicly to indicate that the People’s Republic of China is in fact willing

to renounce the use of force. I hope that agreement can soon be reached

on an unqualified declaration in this regard.

E. However, the extreme slowness and apparent reluctance with

which Ambassador Wang’s government is now implementing its com­

mitment of September 10 to permit all Americans in China desiring to

return expeditiously to do so is a source of serious concern. Although

Distribution.

more than two months have now passed since the issuance of our agreed

announcement of September 10, 17 Americans still remain in jail.

F. It is my hope that Communist China will no longer delay in

demonstrating its willingness fully to carry out its freely assumed

commitments.

Gowen

370. Letter from Johnson to Sebald

Geneva, November 11, 1955

Dear Bill:

Thank you very much for your thoughtful and generous letter of

November 4. I know that you fully appreciate my problems, but I must

say I could not ask for better support. As I have told McConaughy pre­

viously, and have repeated here to the Secretary and Herman, I feel my

instructions have consistently been excellent and have enabled me to

go to meetings with a feeling of confidence in having sufficient elbow

room to meet any likely situation. However, as I also told Herman, I

would be very happy if someone else were dealing with this renunci­

ation of force item. Prisoners was a subject upon which I could really

get my hands and bulldog, but with renunciation of force I sometimes

feel as if I am punching at clouds or grabbing at eels which slip out just

when I think I have hold. However, I will try to do my best.

It is hard to tell what will happen in the next few weeks. As far as

substance is concerned, there is quickly not going to be much more to talk

about. It is going to simply come down to a refusal by them to renounce

force against Taiwan and our insistence that they do so. I am convinced

they are not going to do so unless they get something they want very

badly. The Foreign Ministers’ meeting is obviously in this category but

whether even this would be sufficient is somewhat doubtful in my mind.

It will then come down to whether they are willing to keep these

talks going for their own sake. This might be the case, and the louder

that Taiwan screams about their continuation, the more it serves to con­

vince Chou that it would be useful to keep them going.

Official–Informal.

Another aspect is that even if they desire to break off the talks, I

believe we have them in a position that makes it difficult for them to

do so. They will realize that we would be able to present it as a refusal

on their part to renounce force, which would carry with it implications

that would be difficult for them to handle.

As you can see from my telegrams I still feel it is a mistake to

bring up implementation at every meeting. On the one hand it tends

to become routine (I have run out of any new ways of saying it), and

on the other hand I think it is counterproductive in that it makes it a

little harder for them to release them. However, I think we should take

advantage of every opportunity to put the heat on them through U Nu,

Nehru and others. I know, however, that I am in a minority of one on

the former point.

I am having serious personnel difficulties in Prague and, hence, I

have been trying recently to get up there as often as possible to lend a

hand, but it is becoming more difficult with the uncertainties of flying

here in the winter and the curtailed schedules.

Tell Walter Robertson that he need not worry that I will ever do

anything rash with ideas that are exchanged in personal letters with

any of you. I would hope that I could continue to correspond on a

purely informal basis, as I have in the past, and pass ideas back and

forth without commitment by anyone.

Tell McConaughy I have, just as I was writing this, received his

letter of November 8 and will not be writing him today.

My best to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. I have just read Hong Kong’s despatch 579 of October 3 on

the release of Buol. I would be interested in knowing from our friends

whether there is any probable basis for the report Buol mentions that

three Americans missing from the 1951 Li Mi operation are imprisoned.

1219. For Johnson.

not have been based on any responsible U.S. official source. We have no

indication as to origin, although internal evidence points strongly to

Daily Worker article as chief inspiration.

Hoover

tion. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in draft by Sebald.

1247. For Johnson.

Guidance for November 17 meeting.

1. Renunciation of force. Concur your agreeing to consider ad ref­

erendum Department reasonable amendments to preamble our draft

declaration, while maintaining completely firm position paragraphs 6

and 8, as proposed your 1140. Reject Wang’s continued accusations US

“armed occupation” Taiwan and reiterate US position outlined Deptel

996. You should not hesitate to state our position as forcefully as Wang

states his, but pointing out that clash of views need not become clash

of arms if both sides accept principle that force will not be used resolve

differences.

2. Implementation. Agree with your view that major emphasis

should be kept upon PRC’s failure carry out express commitment to

release Americans, with O’Neill’s difficulties secondary. Department

will obtain from British latest developments Peiping and send guid­

ance this aspect later.

3. Embargo. Concur your 1140.

tion. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Sebald and McConaughy.

4. Military personnel. Defense has requested UNCMAC to present

lists again. Since reply not yet received from UNCMAC you should

omit subject this meeting.

Pass to Secretary.

Hoover

1186. From Johnson.

Following is text article my talks prepared by Wesley Pederson

USIA for Paul Ford column IPS on Friday if possible. Subject to Depart­

ment’s views I believe release this type article at this time would be

useful and concur in text. If Department concurs request text be trans­

mitted USIA Washington.

Geneva—The United States is pressing vigorously for full imple­

mentation of Communist China’s September tenth pledge to permit

Americans in China “expeditiously” to return home.

Seventeen American civilians are still imprisioned on the China

mainland, despite the promise given in Geneva nine weeks ago to the

U.S. Ambassador to Czechoslovakia, U. Alexis Johnson, by Peiping’s

Ambassador to Poland, Wang Ping-nan.

Johnson and Wang have been holding talks in Geneva since August

first. They met for the twenty-sixth time Thursday. There are two items

on their agenda: the return of civilians, and “other practical matters at

issue between the two sides.”

While waiting for Peiping to release the seventeen Americans, the

Ambassadors are discussing the question of a mutual renunciation of

force, particularly in the Taiwan area. They have not (repeat not) closed

their talks on item one, however, and it is clear that in discussions on all

other matters the United States will take into account Peiping’s imple­

mentation of the September tenth pledge as well as its willingness to

assure the world of its intent not to start a war.

In its broadcasts Peiping is alleging that in spite of its freely made

commitment of September tenth the return of imprisoned Americans

depends upon what the Chinese Communists term “improvement

of relations.” This is an amazingly frank admission that Peiping con­

siders these persons as political hostages to be bargained for political

ends. It also cannot escape notice that Peiping has carefully timed its

releases thus far with political events—the eleven imprisoned flyers

were released the day the Ambassadorial level talks opened, ten civil­

ian prisoners were freed the day the Ambassadors issued their agreed

announcement on the return of civilians, and two more on the day prior

to the opening of the Foreign Ministers’ meeting in Geneva. No other

prisoners have yet been released and 17 still remain.

However, the United States still hopes that the Chinese Commu­

nists will, even if belatedly, fully carry out their commitment to permit

all Americans who desire to do so to return.

The Chinese Communists have publicly announced the two mat­

ters they would like to take up are preparations for a higher level meet­

ing and the question of trade embargo.

Secretary of State Dulles said in a press conference on October

eighteenth that the possibilities of the meeting of the Ambassadors

should be fully explored and exhausted before there is consideration

given to a possible second meeting and that the United States would be

willing to discuss the question of trade embargo at the Ambassadorial

level. However, it has been made clear that the United States is not pre­

pared to make any arrangements which would prejudice the rights of

the Republic of China or other third parties.

The meetings here are conducted in secret because it is the U.S.

belief that there is a better possibility of progress if problems can be

discussed frankly, without the danger of the talks being distorted for

propaganda purposes. Whatever results are achieved, however, will of

course be made public, Johnson has emphasized.

There will, in other words, be no (repeat no) secret agreements.

End.

Gowen

1192. From Johnson.

1. Two hour meeting this morning devoted entirely to draft agreed

announcement on renunciation of force except for statement by me on

implementation to which he did not reply. Discussion centered almost

entirely around our draft.

2. Wang opened meeting with long and uncompromising prepared

statement rejecting our draft as “totally unjustifiable and absolutely

unacceptable” and demanding acceptance his draft. Statement reiter­

ated previous positions on Taiwan, GRC, US occupation, etc. Much

emphasis upon our draft requiring them to acquiesce maintenance of

status quo, US armed interference liberation Taiwan and US encroach­

ment on Chinese territory Taiwan.

3. I replied with long extemporaneous statement rejecting his

implication US not seeking peaceful settlement by referring US pro­

posal these talks, statement on renunciation of force, and willingness

discuss other matters. I restated our position with respect GRC, defense

treaty, etc. Principal point was not now attempt reconcile these differ­

ences but assure will not lead to war. I then went through our draft

paragraph by paragraph, asking him specifically tell me with what they

did not agree.

4. His reply and subsequent give and take was very noticeably

milder than prepared statement but did not add anything substantive.

5. I persisted in attempt obtain more concrete expression specific

objections our draft which he avoided by referring his opening state­

ment which I characterized as generalized and not helpful in arriving

at agreement on text. I pointed out our draft seemed to meet his three

principal requirements: A) no violation sovereignty, territorial integrity,

B) based on UN principles, and C) concrete arrangements for peaceful

settlement already provided for by these talks. In reply he continued

refer back to his prepared statement.

6. Meeting closed on this inconclusive note. Next meeting Wednes­

day, November 23.

Gowen

Limited Distribution.

1197. From Johnson.

Before today’s meeting NCNA correspondent was “expressing

opinion” to Western correspondents that these talks cannot go on much

longer.

Gowen

Distribution.

1272. For Johnson. Your 1186.

AP Tokyo reports Peiping broadcast November 17 announcing

release Mrs. Bradshaw, White and Garvey. No confirmation yet but

presume will be confirmed due course. View this news believe inad­

visable use text article your 1186 Ford column Friday. It would require

extensive revision and would be considerably weakened well as over­

shadowed by news of release three Americans.

Hoover

Drafted by Clough; cleared by Lindbeck, Robertson, and Sebald.

1203. From Johnson.

1. It will be noted Wang’s prepared statement at yesterday’s meet­

ing was very hard and until last sentence I had feeling he was prepar­

ing ground for break. However, should also be noted he has not yet

accepted my invitation at November 3 meeting to give their views on

trade. They have impoliticly [implicity?] accepted our position renunci­

ation force first and most important item although they of course con­

tinue link it with FonMin meeting.

2. While they have dropped immediate demand for withdrawal

US forces from Taiwan they are of course trying to maneuver us into

position of issuing statement which would provide strong basis for

demanding our withdrawal. At same time they have interpreted refer­

ence to “individual and collective self-defense” in juxtaposition to Tai­

wan area in operative para our draft as requiring recognition by them,

on one hand, of US right unilaterally to defend Taiwan, and, on other

hand, validity of US defense treaty with GRC. From this it would fol­

low that they are precluded from even raising question “withdrawal

US forces from Taiwan” as well as abandoning their over-all position

on GRC and Taiwan. Therefore, it is empty to speak of not prejudicing

their policies. Stripped of polemics believe this is genuine position they

that from their standpoint it has considerable point.

3. Do not suggest any amendment our draft at this time but believe

we should be considering how point might be met if it appears desir­

able attempt do so.

4. Also suggest we be considering whether and how our draft

could be amended consistent with our over-all position so that it would

make specific reference to intent both parties settle disputes by peaceful

means. What I have in mind is possibility inclusion some general state­

ment intent both sides peacefully negotiate disputes including possi­

bly specific reference to Taiwan area which would serve as substitute

their para on FonMin meeting without commitment as to any partic­

ular form of negotiation. Believe if something along this line could be

formulated it would substantially strengthen present draft and might

slightly increase its acceptability.

5. However, as Department is aware it is my considered view that

we cannot now anticipate CHICOMS will publicly make such major

shift in position as would be involved in issuance any satisfactory

renunciation of force declaration in Taiwan area without receiving what

they would consider satisfactory assurance substantial value in return.

6. Next meeting will be “my turn” speak first and it will be import­

ant I have carefully prepared and considered statement. Would appre­

ciate Department’s suggestions on additional points I might make or

those made in past which Department believes would be most useful

emphasize.

Gowen

Letter No. 26

Washington, November 18, 1955

Dear Alex:

You are not the forgotten man despite the rather long interval

between letters recently. With our forces rather widely scattered, there

has not been much that I could give you which would add to what you

were getting in the official telegrams. That is still essentially the case.

So this letter will be rather short. I have just checked with both Mr.

Robertson and Bill Sebald. They have no special sidelights on messages

to convey and suggest that I defer any long letter until early next week.

We are meeting with Herman Phleger at noon today. By Monday we

should be able to take his views and the latest thinking of the Secretary

into account.

We have a feeling that we may be getting into a fairly tight cor­

ner on the renunciation of force item although basically our position

is unquestionably sound. It seems to us in FE that we are suffering

from our inability to state our precise position fully and frankly to key

friendly governments; from the need to pull our verbal punches to

some extent at Geneva in order to insure the continuation of the talks;

from the increasingly serious misgivings of the Chinese Government

(see Taipei’s 463 of Nov. 17 transmitting the note of Foreign Minister

Yeh to the Secretary); from the clever way in which the Chinese Com­

munists are attempting to seize the initiative on the renunciation of

force item and masquerade as the real sponsors of the renunciation of

Official–­Informal.

force concept. We are getting an increasing number of queries as to

where we expect to go if the Chinese Communists should unexpect­

edly agree to sign some form of textually acceptable renunciation of

force declaration? Taipei clearly believes that the Communists might

be willing to sign some such form of declaration with no intention of

observing it longer than it served their purposes. Taipei knows that

no such declaration can be self-enforcing and they believe the Chinese

Communists would not hesitate to try to rationalize a violation of any

wording which might be proposed. Taipei is asking with increasing

insistence, “Where would you go after you got an agreed announce­

ment on renunciation of force?” We are drafting a message to Rankin

which spells out to some extent the rationale behind the Geneva

Ambassadorial talks. There may be some tendency on the part of our

people out there to look at the problem almost exclusively in military

terms. More of all this next week.

On the repatriation question, I am enclosing a copy of an Aide

Memoire we are giving the British which answers some of their ques­

tions on the stand we would like for O’Neill to take in regard to letters

and visits to prisoners, the obstruction issue, and the special responsi­

bility resting on the Chinese Communists to establish contact between

O’Neill and the prisoners in view of the inability of the prisoners to take

any initiative without the consent and assistance of Chinese Commu­

nist authorities. We are enclosing a copy of the report of the interview

with Downey on November 15. We are also sending you separately a

copy of the memo of conversation between Indian Ambassador Mehta

and Mr. Robertson which took place yesterday.

We are working on a revision of the draft public statement (your

1141). Presumably there will be no occasion to use this right away but

we hope to have some concrete suggestions for you before the next

meeting. It seems to me that there are various little straws indicating

that the Chinese Communists may be laying the ground work for a

resort to the public forum later. The casual suggestion of Tuesday for

the next meeting is one such straw.

I hope you will find our proposal to substitute Dave Osborn for

Doug Forman acceptable. Doug’s family situation seems to call for his

early return. Dave is outstanding and will bring considerable original­

ity, resourcefulness and fertility of mind as well as a good basic knowl­

edge, both general and particular. His report of current thinking here,

such as Doug brought you in mid-August, will also be valuable to you.

We are working hard on the Ekvall case and hope to have a solution

although it is too early for you to take this for granted. The bureaucratic

hurdles encountered on such a seemingly simple problem are well-nigh

days in transit). Bill Sebald appreciated your letter of Nov. 11 and asked

me to acknowledge it in his behalf.

Regards and good wishes,

Walter P. McConaughy

1281. For Johnson.

Guidance for November 23 meeting.

1. Implementation. Acknowledge release three American prison­

ers, but emphasize 14 remain and we continue to be concerned over

PRC’s failure carry out commitment permit them expeditiously return.

Inform Wang we also concerned over fact British Charge still unable

perform his functions with respect these prisoners. Thirteen of fourteen

still have not written Charge and since PRC has special responsibility

provide facilities for prisoners’ communication, if they have not writ­

ten can only be assumed they prevented from writing. It is obviously

absurd to imagine any person confined in prison would not seek to

take full advantage Charge’s efforts to remove impediments to free­

dom if given opportunity. (We believe this point should be made for

the record.)

Requirement that Charge interview Americans only in accordance

rules for relatives is arbitrary and unreasonable. It is obvious attempt

defeat purpose of Agreed Announcement. No restrictions whatsoever

on freedom of Chinese in US to communicate with Indians nor freedom

of Indians to interview Chinese who appeal to them accordance Agreed

Announcement. US cannot accept contention of PRC Vice Minister that

question of encountering obstruction in leaving country does not arise

in case imprisoned Americans. (Deptel 1248) Imprisonment is self-evi­

dent and incontrovertible form of obstruction to departure. Since more

than two months have passed since PRC pledged Americans could

expeditiously return, it is apparent they encountering obstruction in

leaving.

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Sebald, Phleger in substance, and

McConaughy.

FYI O’Neill being asked make above points in Peiping. Use of pre­

ceding paragraph subject to British concurrence which we hope to have

not later than November 22. END FYI.

2. Renunciation of Force. Continue emphasize, as in paragraphs

in policy should not lead to war and that statement should be made

by both sides renouncing use of force. Department considers argu­

mentation your 1200 admirable and believes you should hold to same

general line.

3. Department puzzled by Wang’s failure to bring up embargo last

meeting. Would like your views as to reason.

4. Important keep meetings at least week apart.

Dulles

1. I have no very firm thoughts on why Wang has not yet further

brought up embargo.

2. However, it is possible they suspect trick of some kind lies

behind our invitation present their views which obviously caught them

by surprise. They may have been confused by our linking of renunci­

ation of force with embargo and have not decided how it can best be

handled. They may also suspect our mention CHICOM [CHINCOM]

and UN resolution was solely to give basis for rejection any discussion

these items as outside scope these talks.

3. Related to foregoing is possibility that having linked renunci­

ation of force to their immediate major objective of FonMin meeting

they do not wish to give us any basis for delay in bringing FonMin

meeting to decision by diversionary discussion on secondary item of

embargo.

Distribution.

4. They may also have been awaiting outcome trade discussion in

Big Four FonMin meeting before making up mind whether press or

how to handle embargo. Lack results Big Four meeting may discourage

them from pressing at least for time being.

Gowen

1289. For Johnson.

Chinese Communist propaganda during past week contained only

one direct reference to Ambassadorial talks, and comment on Taiwan

remained at low ebb. Major attention devoted Big Four talks and other

issues.

Ambassadorial talks. Commentary by “Observer” in People’s Daily,

November 18 charged that US is continuing delay progress of talks.

Cited UP report November 9 quoting US officials in Washington to

effect US would not be party to agreements until all Americans released

from China; contrasted problem of remaining 14 Americans with sit­

uation Chinese nationals in US “long prevented from returning” to

China. Concluded by saying talks at ambassadorial level cannot “be

prolonged indefinitely,” and called on US to stop fabricating “pretexts”

and “honestly sit down and negotiate.”

Taiwan. NCNA November 13 commented briefly on Far Eastern

trip Air Force General Twining, alleging his discussions with Nation­

alist leaders concerned strengthening air defenses in Taiwan Strait.

Special article People’s Daily November 12 commented on “aggressive

maneuvering” US Seventh Fleet in Taiwan area. Broadcasts to Taiwan

featured speech by ex-Nationalist official Li Ming-yang addressed to

government leaders on Taiwan.

Big Four Conference. NCNA commentary on closing of Foreign Min­

isters’ Conference sought to place blame for failure on Western powers.

Accused US of “torpedoing European peace and poisoning interna­

tional atmosphere.” Concluded “great deterrents still exist to relaxation

Drafted by Dawson;  cleared in IAD and CA.

of tensions,” but took position that failure Big Four Conference reach

agreement did not rule out possibility of more fruitful talks in future.

East-West Contacts. Issue of enlarging East-West contacts contin­

ued receive considerable Peiping attention. NCNA November 17 stated

main question is problem of developing normal economic relations, and

cited “growing demand” for abolition trade controls. Alleged “certain

circles” in West were unwilling give up Cold War policies, and viewed

expansion cultural ties as opportunity for pursuing Cold War further.

Korea. People’s Daily November 18 endorsed Nam Il’s October 31

statement demanding North Korean representation UN GA discussions

of Korean Question, and advocated general Far Eastern conference on

Korean issue with “wide representation” for Asian countries. Editorial

also raised issue of Chinese POWs, stating US had never given proper

accounting.

Japan. Katayama mission to Peiping continued receive considerable

attention. Joint Sino-Japanese communique issued November 16, based

on interview between Chou and Katayama November 15, called for

restoration diplomatic relations, and settlement all outstanding issues

through peaceful negotiations. Meanwhile, Peiping continued berate

Japanese Government for deportation Chinese nationals to Taiwan.

Indonesia. Peiping radio November 17 commented favorably on

Sukarno speeches of November 10 and 13, in which he charged connec­

tions between the Darul Islam movement and “foreign imperialism,”

and called for vigilance against danger of “imperialist” efforts to subvert

Indonesian Republic. NCNA pledged Chinese support for Indonesians

in their struggle against imperialism, with specific reference to West Irian.

Dulles

1212. From Johnson.

1. Two hour and fifty minute meeting this morning. No progress

whatever.

Limited Distribution.

2. Towards end of meeting Wang pressed me very hard with

some obvious but unknown purpose in mind to commit myself to

discussion his draft at next meeting while flatly and categorically

rejecting our draft as any basis for further discussion. Although pur­

pose unknown I was quite clear that he had some specific move in

mind if I had given flat negative reply. I of course avoided any com­

mitment, repeatedly replying in response to his demands for flat yes

or no that I had been and would continue striving for agreement on

a text while expressing disappointment lack his concrete responses

to specific questions concerning wording to which they objected in

our draft.

3. I opened meeting with statement on implementation accordance

para one Deptel 1281 to which he made brief reply along usual lines.

4. I followed with long prepared statement on renunciation. Only

somewhat new point I made was that these talks were normal and nat­

ural way discussing and settling differences. I said that if his govern­

ment is as desirous of peaceful settlement disputes as my government,

it will enable him make full and honest efforts negotiate and discuss

differences here before raising question terminating these talks and

substituting another method of negotiation. “When we have succeeded

in resolving questions we are called upon to deal with here, then our

governments will naturally be in better position consider what further

steps might be taken.”

5. Wang replied with long prepared statement repeating for­

mer arguments rejecting our draft, adding nothing new. However he

included statement with respect to trade embargo rejecting “US pro­

posal for lifting trade embargo in exchange for PRC agreement US draft

announcement on renunciation of force.”

6. In my reply and during much give and take I attempted keep

discussion focussed upon concrete discussion our draft but he avoided

all discussion our draft beyond that contained his original prepared

statement and insisted on coming back his draft.

7. Next meeting Thursday, December 1.

8. Departing for Prague this evening, returning Tuesday, Novem­

ber 29.

Gowen

1214. From Johnson.

Although it is hard for me to believe PRC would be willing to

break talks or without breaking talks go to public on their present posi­

tion, Wang’s performance at end today’s meeting nevertheless left me

with feeling that they may well have one or other in mind. Briefly, I am

not confident continuation of talks can be assured beyond next meeting

unless some new element is introduced.

My present thinking with respect next meeting would be to open

with very strong attack on ultimatum aspects his present tactics, brief

but strong attack on his draft and then introduce new draft which

would be essentially same as our present draft but give appearance

of something new. I am also inclined to include implication willing­

ness see respective positions made public but without express threat

to do so.

With respect to his draft my principal point would be that while

giving appearance of renouncing force, what it in fact does is main­

tain threat of hostilities in Taiwan area unless there is Foreign Minister

meeting and such meeting results in settlement satisfactory to them.

Believe it would be useful if new draft could meet points raised in

telegram still valid.

I will transmit views on text new draft in subsequent telegram.

Gowen

ited Distribution.

Geneva, November 23, 1955, midnight

1215. From Johnson.

1. I opened 27th meeting today with prepared statement on imple­

mentation as follows:

A. Since our last meeting my government has received news that

three of Americans held by your government are to be released; in

fact, two of them have already left. Gratifying as this news is, fourteen

Americans still remain in prison in your country.

B. Not only have these fourteen Americans not yet been permit­

ted to exercise their right to return, but British Charge d’Affaires has

not been able to carry out his functions under agreed announcement

with respect to them. Thirteen of remaining fourteen have not yet been

able to communicate with British Charge. Since your government bears

responsibility for providing facilities for prisoners’ communication

with British Charge, my government can only conclude that they are

being prevented from communicating with him. It is obvious that any

person confined to prison would seek to take full advantage of Charge’s

efforts to remove impediments to freedom, if given opportunity.

C. To best of my knowledge the office of British Charge has been

able to visit only one of Americans. My government considers that

requirement that Charge interview Americans only in accordance with

rules for relatives is arbitrary and unreasonable, since Charge is an offi­

cial carrying out his duties and not relative. Requirements for visits

would appear to be attempt to defeat purpose of agreed announce­

ment. There are no restrictions whatsoever on freedom of Chinese

in US to communicate with Indian Embassy or on freedom of Indian

Embassy to interview Chinese who appeal to it in accordance with

agreed announcement.

D. My government cannot accept contention of your Vice Minister

of Foreign Affairs in his interview with UK Charge on November 14

that question of encountering obstructions in leaving country does not

arise in cases of imprisoned Americans. Imprisonment is of itself incon­

trovertible evidence of obstructions to departure. Since more than two

months have passed since your government pledged that Americans

would be expeditiously permitted return, it apparent they are encoun­

tering obstructions in leaving.

Distribution.

E. Tomorrow is my country’s holiday of Thanksgiving; it is tragic

that on this day, two and a half months after we issued our agreed

announcement fourteen Americans covered by that announcement

remain in prison, separated from their families. I can only urge that

your government, in interests of improving relations between our gov­

ernments and furthering prospects for success in these talks, complete

implementation of its commitments without further delay.

2. I continued with prepared statement on renunciatuon of force

as follows:

A. I have since our last meeting carefully reviewed our discussion

thus far with respect renunciation of force. I have particularly reviewed

statements which you have made in this regard including your state­

ment at our last meeting.

B. In doing this I have been seeking to find basis upon which it

would be possible make progress in our search for agreement on text

for public statement. I am encouraged by progress we have thus far

made with respect to principles, but our difficulties now seem revolve

in large part around words with which express those principles. I have

tried, and will continue try, make my best constructive efforts toward

this end and I hope you will also do so. I am satisfied that, if we both do

this, our agreement in principle is wide enough permit us reach agree­

ment on words.

C. Mr. Ambassador, I am sorry have to say that I do not feel that

your statement at our last meeting constituted such constructive effort.

As I said at time, it was confined to generalizations, most of which were

of very controversial character and of little pertinence our immediate

task. I have tried at previous meetings explain why I felt your draft of

October 27 did not best meet situation. I also made effort in my draft

of November 10 meet both points of view. In spite of these efforts you

simply rejected my draft and demanded that I accept your draft. It is

hard for me to reconcile this with genuine desire make progress.

D. In your statement at our last meeting you entirely ignored

statement made in my November 10 draft clearly setting forth that

announcement was without prejudice to pursuit by each side of its poli­

cies by peaceful means. You entirely ignored clear wording of draft and

alleged that it constituted requirement on your government renounce

its views and policies. I want make it absolutely clear that draft consti­

tutes no such requirement with respect to views and peaceful policies

of your government. Draft provides that your government will simply

state it will not initiate use of armed force to implement those policies.

US Government at same time will renew its often repeated statements

in this regard. I cannot see how any reasonable person can possibly

misinterpret this proposal on part of my government and say that it

calls into question desire of my government seek just and peaceful set­

tlements of disputes between us, including those in Taiwan area and

therefore I do not believe arguments which you gave as alleged basis

for rejecting my November 10 draft have a basis in fact.

E. At our last meeting you also again spoke of meeting of our For­

eign Ministers, as if that was only means of peacefully settling disputes.

You appear continue confuse basic difference between fundamental

principle of unconditionally agreeing peacefully settle disputes and

procedural question of what form of negotiation shall be used imple­

ment that principle. My government proposed these talks as normal

and natural way of discussing and settling our differences. We are both

Ambassadors fully authorized speak for our respective governments to

extent that our governments are willing enable us do so. That is why

my government proposed that these talks be at Ambassadorial level.

If your government is as desirous of peaceful settlement of disputes

betwen us as is my government, it will enable you to make full and

honest efforts negotiate and discuss our differences here before raising

question of terminating these talks and substituting another method of

negotiation. When we have succeeded in resolving questions which we

are called upon deal with here, then our governments will naturally be

in better position consider what further steps might be taken.

[F.] At our last meeting you also particularly spoke of inclusion in

my draft of phrase concerning right of individual and collective self-de­

fense. I am very surprised at your apparent rejection of inclusion of

such phrase as I would have thought that you would have considered

it very important. Your interpretation of phrase was very distorted and,

read in context of my draft declaration as whole, I do not consider that

your interpretation is correct. What phrase simply says is, while we

will not initiate hostilities, each of us wish to make clear that, if there is

an attack in Taiwan area or elsewhere, we will defend ourselves indi­

vidually or in concert with others. You have spoken much of princi­

ples of United Nations Charter. This principle of right of self-defense

is certainly age old, natural principle which is again restated in United

Nations Charter, and it is difficult for me see on what basis there can be

objection thereto.

G. We have both agreed that our differences of view and disputes

between us should not lead to war, and that it is intent of both of us that

we will not permit this happen. Thus draft I have proposed simply says

this in as straightforward and simple language as I am able contrive.

H. We both agree that region in which our differing policies and

views confront each other most seriously is in area of Taiwan. This is

also obvious to world. Therefore, in making such general statement it

is important to make clear to world that neither of us has any hidden

reservations or qualifications concerning applicability of that general

principle to area of Taiwan. My draft thus proposes that we specifically

and clearly state this as fact.

I. We also are agreed that in whatever we say neither of us wants

sacrifice or prejudice our position with respect to matters at issue

between ourselves or others, that is, we do not desire to say something

that would prevent us from maintaining our views and pursuing our

policies by means other than use of military force. We want to be free

pursue our policies by peaceful means. My draft also says this in just as

clear and simple terms as I can.

J. We also agreed on principle that peaceful means should be used

for just settlement of disputes between us. It was in accordance with

this principle United States proposed these talks and it was hoped that

reason your government accepted this proposal was that it also agrees

with this principle. United States has done everything possible and

will continue do all it can make these talks succeed. My government’s

purpose in suggesting declaration renouncing use of force as a funda­

mental first principle was intended contribute this objective. And it will

continue be our policy, based on principles of United Nations Charter,

strive for just settlement of disputes by peaceful means.

K. I have taken this time carefully explain and amplify my draft of

November 10, since, from your remarks at our last meeting, it appeared

that your government apparently did not have a full understanding of

it. I hope that these remarks will serve clarify any misunderstanding

that may have existed and enable us make progress in agreeing upon

text.

3. Wang replied first with comments my implementation state­

ment. He said during course of talks 41 American civilians or law-­

offenders had returned to US. Number of Americans who left China

since talks began far exceeded two-thirds of number in China at time

talks started. This fact shows PRC has made greatest effort in solution

problem of returning American civilians.

4. Wang said Americans still remaining being treated accordance

agreed announcement and PRC legal procedures. His side could not

accept remarks alleging obstructions in regard to Americans who com­

mitted offenses. Proof of this in fact I had mentioned that one American

remaining in prison was able communicate with British Charge with­

out factual basis.

5. Wang said he had in past spoken of principle under which

American law offenders will be dealt with. He could not accept con­

tention that imprisonment itself constitutes evidence of obstruction

against return. These people not able return simply because they have

breached Chinese law.

6. Wang said his side desirous improving relations our two coun­

tries through present talks, but such improvement must be without sac­

rifice sovereign rights either party. Cases American law offenders being

dealt with in accordance agreed announcement; at same time handling

must be in accordance Chinese legal procedures.

7. Wang then replied to my renunciation of force statement. He

said his side fully shared desire I had spoken of that these talks succeed

and lead to peaceful settlement disputes between us.

8. Wang said question presently under discussion is renunciation

of force. The basic points in this discussion. First, it is essential we both

have common understanding nature of conflict of policies between

us. Second, we should strive settle question on basis of such common

understanding.

9. Wang said we both agreed desirability making public statement

on renunciation of force. Question now is what is to be said in such

statement. His side has made careful study of US draft of November 10.

At last meeting he had again set forth his views. In my statement this

morning, I had again amplified and explained draft I had proposed.

Consequently it is necessary prior side also renew clarification its point

of view this regard.

10. Wang continued with a prepared statement. He said that he had

put forth October 27 draft agreed announcement after having consid­

ered my renunciation of force proposal and my desire that both sides

make a public statement. His draft embraced points of view acceptable

to both sides. His side was not seeking to impose its views on our side.

11. Wang said his draft quoted articles of UN Charter pertaining to

renunciation of force. I had said that as member of UN, US willing abide

by Charter. If this case, how could it be construed, as I had tried to do at

last meeting, that specific provisions UN Charter were being imposed

upon US or that they were points which were unacceptable to US.

12. Wang said third paragraph his draft stated PRC and US agree

settle disputes by peaceful means without threat or use force. This con­

crete application of UN Chapter in Sino-US relations. He could not see

how US side could possibly raise objections.

13. Wang said obvious difference of principle existed between PRC

draft and first paragraph US draft. Latter simply states differences two

sides shall not lead to armed conflict but makes no provisions what­

ever settle disputes between two countries. Such wording in no way

acceptable under circumstances in which US side has already used

force Taiwan area. Since we both recognized grave differences espe­

cially in Taiwan area, PRC side obliged stipulate concrete provision for

peaceably settling differences.

14. Wang said paragraph 4 PRC draft provided for Foreign Minis­

ters’ conference. If US side sincerely desirous peaceful settlement dis­

putes particularly in Taiwan area, he failed to see how I could object to

that paragraph on any grounds.

15. Wang said PRC draft embraced points of view acceptable both

sides, and was by no means intended impose views one side on other.

16. Wang said paragraph two of US draft, concerning renuncia­

tion of force to achieve national objectives, was not consistent with UN

Charter, which provided force should not be used settle disputes or

prejudice territorial integrity or political independence any state. No

clause in UN Charter permitting interference internal affairs any state;

on contrary, specific provisions barring this. Such terms as “national

objectives” obvious attempt include Chinese internal matters.

17. Wang said Chinese people unshakably determined liberate all

territory of country. By whatever means this accomplished, it cannot be

distorted as violation of principles and purposes Charter. Our wording

that force not be used to achieve national objectives goes beyond scope

of Sino-American talks and is tantamount calling upon PRC side sur­

render exercise sovereign rights over Taiwan, which is what PRC side

absolutely cannot accept.

18. Wang said fourth paragraph US draft purports that peaceful

policies either side will not be prejudiced. However, policy pursued

by US in Taiwan area is encroachment China’s territory and interven­

tion Chinese internal affairs. UN Charter explicitly rules out prejudice

to territorial integrity and political independence of any state by any

means. PRC side would never agree that US side entitled pursue such

policies by whatever means.

19. Wang said paragraph 6 US draft even claims right individual

and collective right of self-defense in Taiwan area. UN Charter con­

tains no clause entitling state encroaching on territory and interfering

internal affairs of another state to individual and collective self-defense

on territory of state aggressed against. US presentation this principle

evidently designed permit US prolonged occupation Taiwan and entire

China through Chiang Kai-shek.

20. Wang said when US encroaches Chinese territory it is alleged

this done for sake of self-defense. When China undertakes action in

exercise of sovereign rights it assailed by US as aggression. He could

not believe that I could be unaware that such a false argument was try­

ing to pass black for white.

21. Wang said US draft failed provide concrete arrangements set­

tle differences two sides. I had stated present talks constituted such

arrangements. However, he had repeatedly asked whether I was will­

ing discuss question withdrawal US armed forces from Taiwan area

and had never received any reply. This bears out fact present talks inca­

pable settling question tense situation Taiwan area. Essential hold con­

ference of Foreign Ministers to discuss and settle that question.

22. Wang said in light foregoing, it was not PRC side but US side

that was attempting impose its views on the other. US draft demands

PRC side surrender sovereign rights regarding Taiwan and recognize

status quo of US encroachment of Taiwan and US interference Chinese

internal affairs.

23. Wang said if his side agreed US draft and recognized status

quo of US encroachment Taiwan and US interference Chinese internal

affairs, then what would remain to be negotiated? Could it be that US

side takes his government to be so naive and so easily led around by

the nose?

24. Wang said I had indicated willingness discuss lifting embargo

in exchange for agreement US draft. This out of the question. Policy

of embargo is of itself unjustifiable. Embargo should be lifted. This is

point he had made repeatedly.

25. Wang said US side had not succeeded in intimidating his side

into submission by threat and use of force against Taiwan. Nor had US

succeeded by these means in forcing PRC side into recognition status

quo of US encroachment China’s territory. US will now fail in trying to

condition embargo on recognition US encroachment on Taiwan.

26. Wang said nearly two months have elapsed since discussion on

renunciation of force initiated, and nearly one month since introduction

PRC draft. He had made clear position his side. Substance US draft is

demand PRC side recognize status quo of encroachment by US on Chi­

na’s territory. This absolutely unacceptable.

27. Wang said his draft embraces points of view acceptable both

sides. If I still considered it essential we issue a statement, then PRC

draft is only reasonable and feasible one. He hoped we would be able

find agreement on basis PRC draft.

28. I replied Wang had misunderstood our position on question of

embargo. In inviting his views, I had pointed out fact that measures he

termed embargo taken by US in light of security interests. Measures US

takes in regard to trade must take into consideration what we consider

to be security interests. If US considers that danger of hostilities is less­

ened or removed, this naturally influences US point of view on trade.

However, I certainly did not mean to imply that US willing trade lifting

embargo for statement on renunciation of force.

29. I said Wang had properly pointed out that it is two months

since renunciation of force discussion initiated. Although I am disap­

pointed we not yet able reach full agreement, I am gratified at progress

I thought we had made. Agreement in principle should be sufficient to

reach agreement on words.

30. I said we did have clash of views on nature of dispute in Taiwan

area, but I had taken position from beginning of talks important first

task is not to reach agreement on nature dispute, but to agree we will

not go to war about it. I had not tried impose our views on him in regard

to dispute or nature of dispute. I had simply tried state in straightfor­

ward terms that clash of views should not cause war between us. I did

not believe that Wang’s draft clearly set forth that intent. I did not want

to repeat my previous statement, which in large part covered points he

had made. I did think most important question we face is whether or

not we each clearly and unambiguously state we do not intend let dif­

ferences between us in Taiwan area lead us into hostilities.

31. I said last paragraph of Wang’s draft stated Foreign Ministers

should discuss and settle question of eliminating tension Taiwan area.

If he felt he could say that without sacrificing his position, I could not

see why he could not also say he was determined differences in Taiwan

area should not lead to war. It was important this be said clearly. In

saying it, I did not see why or in what way it prejudiced his position.

32. I said that I had several times in the past pointed out that fol­

lowing issuance of agreed announcement on renunciation of force, if he

wished to raise other matters within scope of talks, I would be prepared

discuss them.

33. I said I was disturbed we have not gotten further ahead on

agreeing on a text. Regarding my draft, as I understood his position, he

had no objection in principle with respect first paragraph but felt that

it did not go far enough in establishing concrete measures for settling

disputes. Was that correct?

34. I said he had specifically objected to paragraph two of my draft.

I wondered what words he might want changed.

35. I said he had made no mention of paragraph 3 of my draft.

Could I take it therefore that he had no objection to that?

36. I said in regard to my fourth paragraph, could I take it he did

not object but felt it was prejudiced by following paragraphs?

37. I said in regard to last two substantive paragraphs, could I take

it that there should be a specific reference to Taiwan area, such as he

had made in last paragraph his draft, so as to make clear Taiwan was

covered?

38. I said I still was not clear why he objected to individual and col­

lective self-defense. I thought we both would want to include statement

on that. I would appreciate any comments Wang might want to make.

39. Wang replied I had said US had taken embargo measures out

of security considerations. However in actual situation in relations

between China and US, it is precisely China’s security that is threatened.

Thus it can be seen measures of embargo are unreasonable and without

basis. Disputes between us should be settled by peaceful means and

for this end favorable atmosphere should be created. If embargo can be

lifted at present time, it would contribute to such peaceful atmosphere.

40. Wang said we are in agreement on principle of advisability of

making public statement. It should be possible agree on text. However,

any discussion of text must be based on points of view acceptable to

both of us. Draft proposed by his side October 27 has precisely met this

spirit. He believed points enunciated that draft acceptable both sides.

41. Wang said, could it be that US objects to provisions UN Char­

ter? Or that US opposes peaceful settlement international disputes?

Again, could US object to making concrete arrangements for peaceful

settlement existing disputes between our two countries?

42. Wang said as to US draft, he had already expressed his views on

every paragraph. He had explained that he could not accept US draft

as basis for discussion because it involved Chinese internal matters.

Chinese people will not give up determination liberate Taiwan. That is

within scope China’s internal affairs and is unshakable determination

Chinese people. Chinese people convinced they will achieve this end.

43. Wang said PRC side not opposed principle of individual and

collective self-defense. That is inherent right of every state. However,

with respect to Taiwan area side which is on defensive is Chinese side.

In Taiwan area China is entitled to this right exclusively, US can of

course claim right of self-defense but only after it has withdrawn from

Taiwan area. Under present circumstances in which US occupies Tai­

wan China cannot accept what I had termed self-defense by US in this

area. This another reason why US draft unacceptable his side.

44. Wang said he again requested and hoped I would agree adopt

his draft proposal as basis for discussion.

45. I said last paragraph his draft mentioned Taiwan area. I took it

that he did not consider this to prejudice his position concerning nature

of dispute there. I did not understand why if he willing say that, he

not willing say Taiwan area situtaion should not be cause war between

us. I did not see how that would prejudice his position any more than

mention of Taiwan in PRC draft.

46. Wang said I should be reminded there are actually two points

in question that must not be confused. First, in Taiwan area there exists

matter of China’s internal affairs—that is, question of China’s exercise

of sovereign rights in liberty of Taiwan. This falls within scope Chinese

internal affairs.

47. Wang said on other hand there exists in Taiwan area conflict of

policy between China and US. We are agreed position in issues between

two countries should be settled in accordance purposes and principles

UN Charter, we are agreed conflicting policies should not lead to war

between us, in international matter between China and US.

48. Wang said clear distinction should be made between these two

points. It is second point our talks should strive to settle rather than

first. He would appreciate further comments on PRC draft.

49. I replied I was still trying get to heart of matter. If Wang can

express willingness negotiate concerning Taiwan area, why could he

not say that before negotiations threat of force in area be removed?

50. Wang replied that third paragraph his draft is best answer.

51. I said I had nothing further for today’s meeting. I had tried get

into concrete discussion of wording and was sorry there had not been

more progress.

52. Wang replied he believed he had answered all questions. He

also hoped progress would be made. We had already used up a great

deal of time. He would appreciate it if at next meeting I would put forth

concrete opinion on PRC draft. Did I find this agreeable?

53. I replied way to make progress is to get down to specific word­

ing. I set forth in great detail my views concerning Wang’s draft. I had

produced draft that I thought came close to meeting two points of view.

I had not demanded he accept my draft. I had carefully tried determine

points to which there was objection in order bring agreement closer. I

would continue strive for agreement as I hoped he would.

54. Wang said could he take it then that I was willing make further

progress on basis PRC draft?

55. I said I had nothing more to say.

56. Wang said could he take it that at next meeting we would con­

tinue discuss his draft?

57. I said I was willing continue discussion in attempt reach agree­

ment on a draft. Question was not my draft or his draft. Question is to

try to reach agreement. I would approach problem in that spirit and

hoped he would do the same.

58. Wang said was I willing continue strive for agreement on basis

his draft. Question was yes or no.

59. I said question was not yes or no. I had answered question.

60. Wang said he was not clear what I had answered. He hoped we

would be able make concrete progress on this question.

61. I said I certainly hoped so. I would try my best.

62. Wang said he hoped I would put forth concrete views on his

draft.

63. I said I hoped he would put forth concrete views on my draft

as well.

64. Wang said he had made it clear he could not accept my draft. If

he did so, he would be surrendering sovereign rights. Draft not accept­

able his side.

65. I said we should see at next meeting whether we could not

make progress on common text. I was willing continue strive to do

so and hoped he was likewise willing. This fencing “my draft—your

draft” does not get us very far.

66. Wang said he hoped I would give further views on his draft at

next meeting. He would welcome any progress in this direction.

67. I proposed we meet on our regular schedule next Thursday.

Wang agreed.

Gowen

1216. From Johnson.

A. Following is suggestion for counterdraft for introduction next

meeting which I believe somewhat meets points made my 1203 while

still preserving our position.

B. It will be noted second paragraph is taken from article 33 UN

Charter and that paragraph four picks up some language from Wang’s

draft.

C. Have no reason believe PRC would accept this draft, but believe

it meets present situation which seems require new draft and should

provide room for considerable discussion.

“Agreed announcement

“1. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan of the People’s Republic of China

and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson of the United States of America

during the course of their discussions of practical matters at issue

between the two sides make the following declarations:

“2. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan, on behalf of the Government of

the People’s Republic of China, declares that the PRC will refrain from

the threat or use of force except in self-defense; and

“3. In accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter

and generally accepted standards of international conduct, the PRC will

always seek the solution by peaceful means of any dispute to which it is

a party and the continuation of which is likely to endanger the mainte­

nance of international peace and security; and

“4. Recognizing the particular importance of relaxing and elimi­

nating tension in the Taiwan area, the PRC declares that the foregoing

general principles are specifically applicable to that area.

“5. Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf etc.”

D. While foregoing is drafted as PRC section, we would of course

put our section in identical terms first.

Gowen

Letter No. 18

Geneva, November 23, 1955

Dear Walter:

This is just a very brief note as I have said just about everything I

have to say in the telegrams I am sending off today.

Thanks for your letter of November 18. As you can see from my

report of today’s meeting, the corner on renunciation of force is, as you

foresaw, getting tighter and some decisions are going to be required

before my next meeting.

What I am principally writing about is the entire question of what

I suppose might be termed my administrative support. I am very dis­

turbed at the amount of time and energy it is necessary for both of us

to devote to this. If these talks are in fact as important as we believe

Informal. The original is signed “Alex” in an unknown hand. A handwritten note in the

same hand reads: “Amb Johnson just had time to dicate this but not to sign it before

catching his train to Zurich.”

them to be, the Department should surely be able to find some way of

making available the extremely modest funds required so that there is

not this continuous wrangle over whether I am to receive the minimum

support I must have in the administrative field. I have no car or driver

here and use a Consulate Chevrolet only for the purpose of getting to

and from meetings, while Wang parades around in his big Zim with

chauffeur. I have no secretary of my own, a single secretary loaned by

the Consulate serving all three of us. Etc., etc. I am not saying this in

any sense as a complaint but simply to point up what I believe to be the

fact that no operation of comparable importance to the United States

has ever been handled with less cost to the Government. Therefore, it

seems inexplicable to me that there has to be this continuous wrangle

about the few things for which there is unquestioned need.

First on my list is the question of a stenographer mentioned in the

last paragraph of mytel 1201. When the Consulate agreed to loan me

a stenographer, it had no idea that it was going to be for anything like

the period that has already passed. However, they have been extremely

good about it and have cheerfully given me the best they have. However,

the Consulate has now lost several girls and is really up against it, and

I do not feel it is fair to ask them to continue the present arrangement.

When I sent my 1201, I understood that the question of code room

personnel had been resolved following the Foreign Ministers’ meeting

and therefore did not raise that. However, this now turns out to have

been wrong and Deptel 1277 to the Consulate terminates the present

extra clerk December 2, although it states a further period will be con­

sidered if required. The Consulate replied by its 1211 asking that the

clerk be continued for the duration of my talks, but no reply has yet

been received.

I am as sorry to have to bother you with all this as I am annoyed

at continually being bothered with it myself. My suggestion is to see

whether or not a decision cannot be obtained at whatever level is

required to allocate the few thousand dollars that would be required

to be used for purposes such as this. The Department knows me well

enough to know that I will not ask for anything I do not need.

I should not be writing to you in this tone, Walter, as I full well

realize it is certainly least of all any fault of yours, or any other individ­

ual for that matter. I well know it’s “the system” and I only hope that

what I have had to say will help in getting what is needed. It can also

be blamed on bad humor arising from a Geneva cold I’ve been fighting

the last few days.

As I mentioned in my telegram, I’m leaving tonight by train to

Zurich and taking the plane to Prague tomorrow morning in the hope of

having Thanksgiving with the family as well as getting some work done

up there. We have had to send home one of my best officers, leaving only

three officers in the entire Embassy including the Consular Officer and

Charge, so they are in a bad way and I want to do what I can to help.

I hope that before the next meeting there will be opportunity fully to

go over the situation with Herman and the Secretary and will await my

instructions with much interest. If it seems advisable, I could come back

here on Sunday, but I will take some material with me to Prague so as to

be able to respond from there on anything that might appear desirable.

I was very disturbed to hear from Herman that you have not been

feeling well. Do take care of yourself—there is a point beyond which it

does not pay to try to work.

My best to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

1326. For Johnson.

Chinese Communist propaganda during past week devoted some­

what more attention to subject of Taiwan and ambassadorial talks than

in previous weeks. General attitude toward US continued hostile, with

repetition of familiar themes that US obstructing progress of talks,

quote intensifying unquote military efforts in Taiwan area, and seeking

to revive Cold War.

Major Chinese Communist pronouncement of week on Taiwan

issue and talks was statement appearing in East German youth daily,

JUNGE WELT, November 24, based on interview given by Ch’en Yi

November 7 to German youth group in Peiping. Ch’en reiterated usual

CCP line on Taiwan issue, noting two possible solutions, voluntary

withdrawal of US forces from area, or failing that, CCP quote libera­

tion unquote of Taiwan by quote force of arms unquote. Peiping gov­

ernment, said Ch’en favored peaceful solution but quote many people

unquote on mainland growing quote impatient unquote over Taiwan

question. Ch’en saw no immediate need for resort to force, but China

must be prepared. Hence, quote active preparations unquote being

Drafted by Dawson; cleared in IAD and CA.

carried out along coast, including construction of airfields, railroads,

and ships. Lengthy negotiations at Geneva had produced no concrete

results except release of Americans, but advantage of informing world

opinion as to quote truth about Taiwan unquote.

Article in TA KUNG PAO November 24 alleged that US is protract­

ing ambassadorial talks in order to quote perpetuate domination unquote

over Taiwan. US quote intensification of war preparations unquote in

Taiwan area said to violate international principles against use of force.

Article noted visits of topranking US military leaders to Taiwan since

October, cited reports US increasing supply of Sabrejets, and quoted

Gen. Twining to effect that US Far East air force and Nat. air force being

welded into force quote capable of advance unquote. NCNA commented

briefly on visit of Admiral Stump to Taiwan. Other comment largely of

Psychological Warfare nature, concerning food shortages on offshore

islands, and quote factionalism unquote among Nationalist leaders.

Peiping comment on ambassadorial talks November 19 and

November 24 reiterated previous charge that US obstructing progress

of talks and detaining Chinese nationals desiring return to mainland.

People’s Daily November 19 alleged that lists Chinese nationals pre­

sented by US at Geneva were incomplete and charged that less than one

fifth of Chinese who had requested return to China had been permitted

to leave. Demanded that US take immediate steps to facilitate return,

and stated that question of quote lawbreaking unquote Americans still

held in China and that of quote guiltless unquote Chinese nationals in

US entirely different matters. TA KUNG PAO November 24 urged that

US quote get down to serious negotiation and reach necessary agree­

ment on practical matters at issue unquote.

ChiCom commentary on Ministers Conference continued to echo

Soviet line. Relaxation of tensions will continue, despite US efforts

revive Cold War, but struggle for peace will be long and hard. Peiping

hailed Bulganin trip as quote important milestone in strengthening

peaceful cooperation between USSR and Asian countries unquote.

NCNA denounced Bagdad pact as quote concrete step by the US

to aggravate tension in the Middle East unquote and hailed refusal

of Egypt and Arab states to join as quote serious blow to US policy

unquote.

Peiping during week continued to give considerable attention to

question of trade restrictions, alleging that US embargo and quote trade

monopolies unquote had seriously impaired expansion of trade among

Asian countries. ChiCom overtures to Japan for normalization of trade

relations continued. At same time, Peiping continued to berate Japa­

nese government for its treatment of Chinese nationals seeking return

to mainland.

Dulles

1329. For Johnson.

Guidance for December 1 meeting.

1. Implementation. If consonant with situation at time of meet­

ing, impress on Wang there has been no progress this respect since last

meeting. No additional Americans released, no more letters received

by British Charge from imprisoned Americans. US Government takes

serious view of PRC’s unjustifiable delay in implementing its clear

commitment under Agreed Announcement. Cite Bradshaw case as evi­

dence personal hardship individuals suffering through PRC’s delay.

2. Renunciation of Force. While Wang’s hard line at last meeting

may presage break in talks or resort to publicity, we believe it may also

be deliberate pressure tactic to determine whether we will give any on

our draft. PRC would seem not to be in strong position either break off

talks or go to public at this moment. Believe we should hold firm on our

draft for at least one more meeting. Wang’s only criticism our draft has

been on ground that it would preclude PRC use of force in Taiwan area,

which would be true of any draft we presented.

You should follow tactics suggested your 1214 (omitting introduc­

tion revised draft), with strong attack on ultimatum aspects his posi­

tion. Without acceding to his insistence that you negotiate on basis his

draft, it might be useful probe vigorously to see whether he has any

negotiating latitude with respect to it. Press hard on basic defect his

draft which is failure apply renunciation force principle to Taiwan area.

Argumentation you used last meeting was excellent and you should

continue along this general line.

You may wish to point out that Wang has endeavored separate issue

part he claims is a domestic issue which concerns only the Communists

and the Nationalists and in which he retains complete freedom to use

force in that area. The second part he defines as an international ques­

tion involving issues between the Communists and United States. As

to this the Communists are willing to renounce the use of force. By this

formulation, the Communists seek to deprive the United States of its

right to use force in collective self defense, an inherent right recognized

by the Charter, while preserving to the Communists entire freedom to

bution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Sebald and in draft by Robertson, Dulles, and

Phleger.

use force to take Taiwan any time they wish. This Communist tactic

appears designed to handcuff the United States by pious expressions

of the renunciation of force to settle disputes while reserving to itself

complete freedom to use force to take Taiwan whenever it wishes. This

entirely defeats object of seeking declaration on renunciation of force

in the Taiwan area which was designed not as a verbal exercise but to

remove in fact threat of armed conflict there and thus permit progress

in discussion on other practical issues.

Re your 1216, Department considering advisability introduction

revised draft at later meeting if deemed essential to forestall break. In

any event any changed formulation should not affect our basic position

that both sides must renounce force in Taiwan area, and do this before

there can be fruitful discussions other issues.

Dulles

1330. For Johnson.

UNC called meeting of MAC November 26 at which US repre­

sentative referred to Wang statement Geneva that MAC was proper

channel for accounting for missing US military personnel and said

US concurred this view. He presented revised list 2720 UN personnel

including 450 US servicemen and offered individual accounting for

98,739 personnel of Communist side whenever Communists presented

accounting for UN personnel. Communist side accepted lists but stated

(1) individuals held outside Korea do not come under authority MAC

and therefore irrelevant to discuss in MAC; (2) MAC has no connec­

tion with POW’s disposed of by PRC. Also noted UNC offer to account

for Communist side personnel and stated it unnecessary comment on

UNC list at this time.

In view above MAC action you need not raise this subject again

with Wang until further instructed. However, Communist statements

Drafted by Clough; cleared in substance by Norred (NA) and by McConaughy.

1 and 2 above provide opening resume negotiation with Wang if Com­

munists give no satisfaction in MAC within reasonable time.

Dulles

390. Circular Airgram 41991

CA–4199

Washington, November 30, 1955

SUBJECT

Background Information on United States-Chinese Communist Ambassadorial

Talks at Geneva

TO

All American Diplomatic Posts

The following background information on the United States-­

Chinese Communist Ambassadorial talks at Geneva should be used

as appropriate on a confidential basis in conversations with key offi­

cials of the government to which you are accredited and diplomatic

colleagues. The Department particularly desires to scotch speculation

that the talks presage recognition of the Chinese Communist regime by

the United States.

The original agreement was that the talks would deal first with

the return of civilians to their respective countries, then go on to “other

practical matters at issue”. On September 10 the two Ambassadors

issued an Agreed Announcement in which the Chinese Communists

declared that Americans in the Peoples Republic of China who desired

to return to the United States were entitled to do so and pledged itself

to adopt “further appropriate measures” so that they could “expedi­

tiously exercise their right to return”. The Agreed Announcement also

provided that Americans in the Peoples Republic of China who believed

they were encountering obstruction in departure might request repre­

sentations by the British Charge d’affaires on their behalf. The United

States made a parallel declaration with respect to the right of Chinese

in the United States to return to the Peoples Republic of China if they

desired which provided for Chinese to appeal to the Indian Embassy if

they believed their departure was being obstructed.

Clough; cleared by McConaughy, Sebald, Phleger, and Dulles.

Of the nineteen Americans still held in prison in Communist

China following the issuance of the Agreed Announcement, only five

have been released to date. The United States is continuing to press at

Geneva and through the British Charge d’affaires at Peiping for early

release of the remainder. The failure of the Chinese Communists to ful­

fill their commitment to allow Americans to return “expeditiously” is

causing the United States Government serious concern.

The United States places no restrictions on the departure of Chi­

nese from the United States. The Department knows of no Chinese who

claims his departure is being obstructed and the Indian Embassy has so

far made no representations concerning any such case.

Under the second item of the agenda, the Chinese Communists

asked for the removal of the United States economic embargo and

agreement to talks at the Foreign Minister level. The United States

asked for a Chinese Communist declaration renouncing force, and an

accounting for 450 military personnel missing from the Korean War,

and concerning whose fate we have evidence that the Chinese Commu­

nists might have knowledge.

Discussion has centered around the renunciation of force item. The

United States has proposed that both parties make similar declarations

renouncing the use of force generally, and with particular reference

to the Taiwan area. The purpose is to remove the threat of war in the

Taiwan area. The Chinese Communists have indicated a willingness

to make a general renunciation of the use of force, but so far have ada­

mantly resisted our efforts to get them to apply this to the Taiwan area.

They insist that the Taiwan question is domestic and refuse to consider

any curtailment of their freedom to use military force if necessary to

impose their control over Taiwan. They have demanded the with­

drawal of United States forces from the Taiwan area. The United States

is continuing its effort to bring them to modify this attitude.

With reference to the proposal for a conference at a higher level,

the United States view is that the ambassadorial level is the appropriate

one. No proposal for higher level talks could even be considered until

the Chinese Communists have permitted all United States citizens to

leave, have renounced force in the Taiwan area, and all other practical

matters at issue have been disposed of.

The questions of economic embargo and missing military person­

nel have received little discussion up to the present.

The United States has assured the Government of the Repub­

lic of China that it will not discuss at Geneva anything involving the

rights, claims and essential interests of the Government of the Repub­

lic of China. There has been no discussion of recognition or admission

of Communist China to the United Nations, as rumored in the press.

Discussion has been strictly limited to subjects mentioned in the pre­

ceding paragraphs.

A similar instruction is being sent to the following consular posts:

Algiers, Auckland, Bombay, Calcutta, Chiengmai, Dacca, Dhahran,

Frankfort on the Main, Geneva for Johnson, Genoa, Hamburg, Hong

Kong, Istanbul, Jerusalem, Kobe, Kuala Lumpur, Lahore, Madras,

Medan, Melbourne, Milan, Montreal, Munich, Naples, Nagoya, Naha,

Palermo, Penang, Sao Paulo, Singapore, Stuttgart, Surabaya, Sydney,

Toronto, Tunis, Vancouver, Yokohama, Zagreb

Dulles

391. Circular Airgram 42001

CA–4200

Washington, November 30, 1955

SUBJECT

Background Information on United States-Chinese Communist Ambassadorial

Talks at Geneva

TO

Algiers, Auckland, Bombay, Calcutta, Chiengmai, Dacca, Dhahran, Frankfort on

the Main, Geneva for Johnson, Genoa, Hamburg, Hong Kong, Istanbul, Jerusa­

lem, Kobe, Kuala Lumpur, Lahore, Madras, Medan, Melbourne, Milan, Montreal,

Munich, Naples, Nagoya, Naha, Palermo, Sao Paulo, Singapore, Stuttgart, Surabaya,

Sydney, Toronto, Tunis, Vancouver, Yokohama, Zagreb, Penang

The following background information on the United States-­

Chinese Communist Ambassadorial talks at Geneva should be used as

appropriate on a confidential basis in conversations with key officials

and colleagues. The Department particularly desires to scotch spec­

ulation that the talks presage recognition of the Chinese Communist

regime by the United States.

The original agreement was that the talks would deal first with the

return of civilians to their respective countries, then go on to “other prac­

tical matters at issue”. On September 10 the two Ambassadors issued

an Agreed Announcement in which the Chinese Communists declared

that Americans in the Peoples Republic of China who desired to return

Clough; cleared by McConaughy, Sebald, Phleger, and Dulles.

to the United States were entitled to do so and pledged itself to adopt

“further appropriate measures” so that they could “expeditiously exer­

cise their right to return”. The Agreed Announcement also provided that

Americans in the Peoples Republic of China who believed they were

encountering obstruction in departure might request representations by

the British Charge d’affaires on their behalf. The United States made a

parallel declaration with respect to the right of Chinese in the United

States to return to the Peoples Republic of China if they desired which

provided for Chinese to appeal to the Indian Embassy if they believed

their departure was being obstructed.

Of the nineteen Americans still held in prison in Communist

China following the issuance of the Agreed Announcement, only five

have been released to date. The United States is continuing to press at

Geneva and through the British Charge d’affaires at Peiping for early

release of the remainder. The failure of the Chinese Communists to ful­

fill their commitment to allow Americans to return “expeditiously” is

causing the United States Government serious concern.

The United States places no restrictions on the departure of Chi­

nese from the United States. The Department knows of no Chinese who

claims his departure is being obstructed and the Indian Embassy has so

far made no representations concerning any such case.

Under the second item of the agenda, the Chinese Communists

asked for the removal of the United States economic embargo and

agreement to talks at the Foreign Minister level. The United States

asked for a Chinese Communist declaration renouncing force, and an

accounting for 450 military personnel missing from the Korean War,

and concerning whose fate we have evidence that the Chinese Commu­

nists might have knowledge.

Discussion has centered around the renunciation of force item.

The United States has proposed that both parties make similar dec­

larations renouncing the use of force generally, and with particular

reference to the Taiwan area. The purpose is to remove the threat of

war in the Taiwan area. The Chinese Communists have indicated a

willingness to make a general renunciation of the use of force, but

so far have adamantly resisted our efforts to get them to apply this

to the Taiwan area. They insist that the Taiwan question is domestic

and refuse to consider any curtailment of their freedom to use mili­

tary force if necessary to impose their control over Taiwan. They have

demanded the withdrawal of United States forces from the Taiwan

area. The United States is continuing its effort to bring them to modify

this attitude.

With reference to the proposal for a conference at a higher level,

the United States view is that the ambassadorial level is the appropriate

one. No proposal for higher level talks could even be considered until

the Chinese Communists have permitted all United States citizens to

leave, have renounced force in the Taiwan area, and all other practical

matters at issue have been disposed of.

The questions of economic embargo and missing military person­

nel have received little discussion up to the present.

The United States has assured the Government of the Repub­

lic of China that it will not discuss at Geneva anything involving the

rights, claims and essential interests of the Government of the Republic

of China. There has been no discussion of recognition or admission of

Communist China to the United Nations, as rumored in the press. Dis­

cussion has been strictly limited to subjects mentioned in the preceding

paragraphs.

A similar instruction is being sent to all diplomatic posts.

Dulles

392. Memorandum from Robertson to Dulles

Washington, November 30, 1955

SUBJECT

Draft Declarations on Renunciation of Force

There are attached three draft declarations on renunciation of

force. The first (Tab A) is the Chinese Communist draft introduced at

Geneva on October 27; the second (Tab B) is the United States draft

introduced November 8; the third (Tab C) is a revision of the United

States draft which Ambassador Johnson has proposed introducing on

December 1.

I consider the draft we submitted on November 8 to be tightly

drawn and difficult to improve on. I also believe that the Chinese Com­

munists are in a weak position from which to break off the talks and

that they are unlikely to do so at this time when matters related to their

entry into the United Nations have reached such a critical stage. There­

fore, it is proposed to instruct Ambassador Johnson not to introduce a

revised draft on December 1. However, it may become desirable at a

Clough.

future meeting to introduce a revised draft in order to keep the talks

going. Ambassador Johnson’s draft is consequently being submitted

for your comments.

Tab A

Chinese Draft

Geneva, October 27, 1955

PRC DRAFT DECLARATION ON RENUNCIATION OF FORCE

(Introduced October 27)

1. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan on behalf of the Government of the

People’s Republic of China and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson on behalf

of the Government of the United States of America jointly declare that,

United Nations, “All members shall settle their international disputes

by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and secu­

rity, and justice, are not endangered”; and

United Nations, “All members shall refrain in their international rela­

tions from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or

political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent

with the purposes of the United Nations”;

4. The People’s Republic of China and the United States of America

are agreed that they should settle disputes between their two countries

by peaceful means without resorting to the threat or use of force.

5. In order to realize their common desire, the People’s Republic of

China and the United States of America decide to hold a conference of

Foreign Ministers to settle through negotiations the question of relax­

ing and eliminating the tension in Taiwan area.

Tab B

U.S. Draft

Geneva, November 8, 1955

US DRAFT DECLARATION ON RENUNCIATION OF FORCE

(Introduced November 8)

1. The Ambassador of the United States of America and the

Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China during the course of the

discussions of practical matters at issue have expressed the determina­

tion that the differences between the two sides shall not lead to armed

conflict.

2. They recognize that the use of force to achieve national objec­

tives does not accord with the principles and purposes of the United

Nations Charter or with generally accepted standards of international

conduct.

3. They furthermore recognize that the renunciation of the threat

or use of force is essential to the just settlement of disputes or situations

which might lead to a breach of the peace.

4. Therefore, without prejudice to the pursuit by each side of its

policies by peaceful means they have agreed to announce the following

declarations:

5. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan informed Ambassador U. Alexis

Johnson that:

6. In general, and with particular reference to the Taiwan area, the

People’s Republic of China renounces the use of force, except in indi­

vidual and collective self defense.

7. Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson informed Ambassador Wang

Ping-nan that:

8. In general, and with particular reference to the Taiwan area, the

United States renounces the use of force, except in individual and col­

lective self defense.

Tab C

Johnson’s Proposed Draft

Geneva, undated

AMBASSADOR JOHNSON’S REVISED DRAFT

(Proposed for Introduction Dec. 1)

1. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan of the People’s Republic of China

and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson of the United States of America

during the course of their discussions of practical matters at issue

between the two sides make the following declarations:

2. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan, on behalf of the Government of the

People’s Republic of China, declares that the PRC will refrain from the

threat or use of force except in self-defense; and

3. In accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter

and generally accepted standards of international conduct, the PRC will

always seek the solution by peaceful means of any dispute to which it is

a party and the continuation of which is likely to endanger the mainte­

nance of international peace and security; and

4. Recognizing the particular importance of relaxing and eliminat­

ing tension in the Taiwan area, the PRC declares that the foregoing gen­

eral principles are specifically applicable to that area.

5. Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf, etc.

1235. From Johnson.

1. At one hour forty-five minute meeting this morning Wang

opened with prepared statement which was very mild and conciliatory

in tone, in very marked contrast to tone prepared statements past few

meetings, and closed with presentation new draft agreed announce­

ment which reads as follows:

A) Ambassador Wang Ping-nan, on behalf of the Government of

the People’s Republic of China, and Ambassador Alexis Johnson on

behalf of the Government of the United States of America, agree to

announce:

B) The People’s Republic of China and the United States of Amer­

ica are determined that they should settle disputes between their two

countries through peaceful negotiations without resorting to the threat

or use of force;

C) The two Ambassadors should continue their talks to seek prac­

tical and feasible means for the realization of this common desire.

2. In reply I welcomed his statement and characterized it as

advance in our negotiations. I then spent about an hour probing on

applicability statement to Taiwan area. Best answer I obtained from

him was that although Taiwan internal matter beyond scope present

talks, willing settle that question by peaceful means. He omitted usual

qualification “condtions permitting”. During give and take he spoke of

“step by step” resolution US–PRC disputes and said if during course

our talks here I wanted discuss ways and means relaxing tensions Tai­

wan area or other questions, he willing discuss. There was no renewal

Limited Distribution.

demand for withdrawal US forces but reply my question as to whether

subsequent negotiations would be conducted under continued threat

his side would resort to force Taiwan area if desires not met he replied

with somewhat pro forma statement that PRC is one which feels itself

threatened in area.

E. I made detailed statement on Bradshaw along lines Deptel 1297

and brief statement on implementation along lines para one Deptel 1329.

4. In reply Wang dicussed at length Indian implementation in US

and our failure assist them communicate with Chinese in US while

we were asking UK Charge take initiative communicate Americans in

China. I of course pointed out contrast Americans imprisoned in China

with freedom any announcement, for Indians taking initiative.

5. Next meeting Thursday, December 8.

6. Departing for Prague Friday evening, returning Tuesday.

Gowen

Note: No paragraph D.

1240. From Johnson.

1. Twenty-eighth meeting today opened by Wang Ping-nan with

prepared statement on renunciation of force. Wang said it now two

months since discussion this subject began. Draft statement put for­

ward by CPR side October 27 and by US side November 10. He has

carefully studied drafts and statements made by both sides.

2. Wang said if both sides agreed in principle, it should be possi­

ble agree on text announcement. Chinese side always stood for peace­

ful settlement international disputes without resort to threat or use of

force, in conformity UN Charter.

I had repeatedly indicated US as member UN also willing abide

by UN Charter. At last meeting I had indicated US agreed to princi­

ple finding just settlement international disputes by peaceful means.

On this principle there should be agreement both sides. Whether draft

Limited Distribution.

announcement incorporated pertinent provisions UN Charter is tech­

nical question and must not constitute obstacle in way of agreement.

3. Wang said in view of agreement this fundamental principle,

there should be no difficulty making agreed announcement to effect

PRC and USA will settle disputes between them without resort to

threat or use of force. Both recognize existence international disputes

and agree practical, feasible way should be sought arrive at peaceful

settlement. In order realize this CPR side has proposed conference For­

eign Ministers. However, I and other responsible members US Govern­

ment had indicated that present talks should be fully utilized. In order

that talks may progress step by step he considered principles agreeable

both sides should be confirmed by agreed announcement and talks

continued in order find practicable and feasible way peacefully settle

disputes between our two countries.

4. Wang said in line with above he was presenting new draft

agreed announcement, pledging not to use force in international rela­

tions (Mytel 1235).

5. Wang said for presenting draft CPR side was not abandoning

proposal convene Foreign Ministers’ conference in order relax and elim­

inate tension Taiwan area. However he would amplify his stand in talks

following issuance announcement. Draft announcement embraced all

points on which both sides agree and contained nothing disagreeable

to either side. He believed we should be able reach agreement on this

new draft.

6. I replied I welcomed Wang’s statement and felt it represented

considerable advance our discussions. I would give draft the detailed

and careful consideration I knew it deserved.

7. I said I had one question. Major point of difference between us

so far has been whether or not there should be specific mention Taiwan

area. I wanted make clear our suggestions in regard specific mention

Taiwan area not motivated desire embarrass or trick Wang’s Govern­

ment into abandoning its well known position in regard Taiwan area.

Desire for specific mention Taiwan area motivated by desire make clear

whatever is said on renunciation of force applies also to Taiwan area.

8. I said on basis original draft and Wang’s remarks in course of

meetings, there has been doubt in my mind in this regard. I originally

raised this question when October 27 draft presented. I asked at that time

whether fourth paragraph applicable disputes between us in Taiwan

area. I recalled Wang’s answer had been yes. However, in subsequently

amplifying his position, it seemed to me his government was reserv­

ing right to consider situation Taiwan area as domestic matter beyond

scope of international matters between our two countries. I understood

his position in this regard and did not desire engage in controversy this

point. I simply desired know what effect draft announcement would

have our dispute in Taiwan area. As I understood his remarks, effect

is that his government reserved right at any time interpret situation as

domestic matter in which it entitled take offensive military action.

9. I said stated in another way his proposal appeared to me to

have been that although we would seem to have agreed renounce force

between us, his government would maintain threat at any time of its

choosing to initiate hostilities that area. We consider it important that

whatever is said on renunciation of force, it be made clear that even

though there may be differences in interpretation of situation in Taiwan

area, announcement also apply that area.

10. I said this was somewhat long introduction my question, but

I wanted make clear our line of thinking. Questions whether or not

Wang willing consider mention in some specific way of Taiwan area

in order make clear we both consider announcement applies Taiwan

area. Said I might add I perfectly willing this be done in manner not to

prejudice his government’s position and pursuit by peaceful means of

its policies.

11. Wang said we had already spent long period of time discuss­

ing this question. Purpose discussions was overcome obstacles in way

of settlement between us. Proposal for both of us make announce­

ment originated with myself. Now we have before us two drafts for

announcement. Each of us has points which he cannot accept in draft

of other one.

12. Wang said however at last meeting I had indicated we agreed

on principle making announcement and also agreed on need for

peaceful settlement disputes but differed on text of agreement. At last

meeting I had also repeatedly indicated that so long as we agreed in

principle, there should be no difficulty in agreeing on text. So long as

we both serious and sincere in search of agreement, there should be no

difficulty.

13. Wang said his side had now made new effort in that spirit. I

would note that new proposal did not contain anything to which we

not able agree between us at present time. He considered that issues

between PRC and US must necessarily be solved step by step. His

idea was first to agree on points in common between us. So long as we

employed peaceful means for settling disputes, he saw no reason for

not reaching agreement.

14. Wang said in regard to mention of Taiwan area, he wished to

renew his statements made in past meetings. We must not confuse

international with domestic issues. Internal conflict naturally not

within scope of present talks. In explaining fourth paragraph October

27 draft and also in presenting present draft, he had made clear dis­

putes between two countries include dispute between us in Taiwan

area. It was precisely desire of PRC side that disputes between us in

Taiwan area be settled peacefully.

15. Wang said he wished point out that proposal made this morn­

ing was very important and put forward only after serious and careful

consideration. He was glad to hear my preliminary views and com­

ments this draft. He hoped our side would give careful consideration

to this latest offer. He hoped we would be able reach agreement on this

draft. Adoption this draft would demonstrate that although we spent

great deal of time in discussion, we able make progress and find text

agreeable both of us.

16. I said I was still trying to get at heart of matter. I too hoped we

can show progress to world. Important thing is we make sure it is genu­

ine progress. Our problem is not give appearance of progress by agree­

ing to form of words that means one thing to one side and another to

other. Problems we face are too fundamental importance for that. I felt

we would be doing disservice to both our people and cause of peace

if we attempted agree on basis words which had different meanings.

That is why I may be appearing so persistent. Purpose is not debate but

to try to arrive at understanding. I agreed that problems should be dis­

cussed step-by-step. We both agreed the area in which policies confront

each other most seriously is Taiwan area.

17. I said what I was trying to get at was this. In making statement

such as he had proposed, US would be renewing what I had termed

renunciation of force in international relations; Wang’s government

would give appearance of doing same thing. However, in light of his

remarks and fully expressed policy his government, would not his gov­

ernment in fact be saying it considered question of Taiwan area domes­

tic matter and hence reserved right initiate use of force any time it did?

18. I said perhaps I had not made myself clear. I would state my

point in another way. While his side was willing make declaration of

renunciation of force with US, did it still insist on right interpret situ­

ation Taiwan area to permit it to apply force at any time its desires not

met? That is, would US have renounced force whereas Wang’s gov­

ernment would not have done so because of its reservations in regard

to nature of dispute in Taiwan area? Would any further negotiation

between us be subject to continuing threat of initiation of force by his

government that area?

19. I said I hoped I was not right in this. What I had expressed

frankly was my understanding of position Wang’s government. I

wished he would tell me frankly if I was wrong.

20. Wang said he thought it important to note we were dealing with

matters between China and US. If he were to raise matters or policies

within scope internal affairs US or if he were to cause apprehensions

concerning US policy of internal affairs, he would be guilty of going

beyond scope present talks. This would complicate problem between

us and would amount to creating difficulties in talks.

21. Wang said draft he had presented can in no way be described

as an “apparent” form. He agreed anything we declared should have

practical bearing. Difference of policies our two countries in Taiwan

area has led to extremely tense situation over which people of world

most concerned. Demonstrating our desire settle disputes by peaceful

means without resort to use of force meets with desire people of world.

This action in interests both sides.

22. I said I would put my question very bluntly, if this or simi­

lar statement were issued tomorrow, would his government have said

anything that would prevent it on next day from saying that it consid­

ered situation Taiwan area domestic matter and was therefore initiating

hostilities there?

23. Wang said my question went precisely beyond scope of talks.

As he had repeatedly stated, question of Taiwan is an internal matter of

China, which his side also willing settle by peaceful means. To follow

line I had taken, if we were to issue announcement tomorrow, then our

discussions have created same result. That, is, two countries henceforth

willing settle any dispute by peaceful means. That would certainly be

welcomed by all. It would demonstrate to world that China and US

have made contribution to relaxing tension Taiwan area.

24. Wang said following issuance of announcement, we would

continue discussion to find settlement disputes, such as question

embargoes and higher level conference between two countries. Then if

I wanted discuss further ways and means relax tension Taiwan area, his

side prepared join me and continue discussion in this direction. I said

would this mean discussions would not be held under threat that one

side would reserve right initiate hostilities if its desires not fully met?

26. Wang said it has always been stand his side that negotiations

should be carried on in peaceful atmosphere. If one were to mention

threats, it is his side that felt itself being threatened.

27. I said I had nothing further on this subject. I would study draft

and reply more fully at next meeting. Before passing to another matter,

did he have anything further?

28. Wang said we had talked a great deal on this subject and new

effort his side was being made on basis of what I had said at last meet­

ing. He believed draft is within interest of both of us, and hoped we

would progress smoothly on this subject.

29. I said I agreed, and felt our discussion this morning had been

most useful. I hoped he would meanwhile consider question I had

raised this morning. Amplification of his answers would be most

helpful.

30. I said I wished bring up humanitarian matter in regard to

implementation agreed announcement on release civilians that hoped

he would present to his government. On November 17, his government

had announced Mrs. Bradshaw being released from custody and free

to depart. Mrs. Lau who had been caring for her asked that Mrs. Brad­

shaw be permitted depart with her. Permission not granted in time.

31. I said we understood from Mrs. Lau that Mrs. Bradshaw’s

health was very bad. She is extremely weak and we understand she

has to be fed artificially at times. She is unable move or travel without

assist­ance. Mental state also unstable apparently attempted commit

suicide several times. I was sure Wang agreed with me it would be most

unfortunate if she did not promptly and safely arrive in US.

32. I said it seemed to me best answer to problem would be for

Mrs. Bradshaw’s, husband, Dr. Bradshaw, who is physician to be

promptly released so he could travel with her and take her out. Would

be in interest of both of us. I hoped he would present suggestion to his

government.

33. I said I also noted that no further Americans had returned since

November 17 and that British Charge had not seen additional Ameri­

cans or received further communications beyond one he received some

time ago.

34. Wang said he had noted my statement. Regarding question of

British Charge being unable communicate with imprisoned people as

believed by me, he had already expressed his position. His side has all

along been lenient in treatment imprisoned Americans in accordance

agreed announcement, so that they should be able effect their return

smoothly. Of course Americans who have committed offenses must

necessarily undergo and complete legal procedure in China. Their cases

must be examined and dealt with in accordance Chinese legal proce­

dures. Before these are completed, question of return was not possible.

35. Wang said there was even less point in alleging delay or

obstruction. If any American who has committed offenses has any

communication to British Charge to make, PRC all along has helped

them do so. If it were so, I asked that British Charge should have ability

of communicating with Americans in question on own initiative, then

Indian Embassy should enjoy same right in US of communicating with

Chinese residents on its own initiative. PRC has learned from Indian

Embassy that US not assisting Indian Embassy communicate with Chi­

nese. Moreover, US has failed provide lists of Chinese in US. Indian

Embassy thus has encountered difficulty in communicating with Chi­

nese residents in US on initiative of Indian Embassy. PRC side not sat­

isfied with failure US Government assist Indian Embassy communicate

with Chinese residents in accordance agreed announcement.

36. I said I was sure UK Charge had not raised question commu­

nicating with Americans in China in general. Question involved only

imprisoned Americans. Wang’s government certainly had special

responsibility in regard imprisoned Americans. Difficult to understand

why of fourteen Americans remaining in prison only one had commu­

nicated with UK Charge.

37. I said as far as Indian Embassy functions in US concerned, I

had previously given assurances every assistance being given carry

out functions under agreed announcement, and no restrictions being

imposed in this regard. Agreed announcement concerned people who

desire return. Any Chinese in US who desires return and desires com­

municate Indian Embassy entirely free do so. I said I hoped he would

transmit suggestion regarding Bradshaw to his government. There is

no one to care for her. Her husband certainly best equipped do so.

38. Wang said he also hoped improvement would be made regard­

ing Indian Embassy functions.

39. I said I knew of no complaint from Indian Embassy.

40. Wang said Indian Embassy had raised question of communicat­

ing with Chinese residents and US had stated it could not do so.

41. I asked what there was in agreed announcement concerning

initiation of communications by Indian Embassy with Chinese resi­

dents. Announcement concerned only Chinese who wish to return.

42. Wang said governments concerned had duty grant facilities

to third state. It was only because I had raised question that he had

referred to matter. He had only stated that two third states should enjoy

same rights.

43. Meeting closed with confirmation next meeting Thursday

December 8. Same press statement.

Gowen

1241. From Johnson.

1. Believe yesterday’s developments reflect major tactical shift in

Peiping which will require corresponding decisions on our part. What­

ever their motives their draft almost completely meets position I have

been taking.

2. Their acceptance renunciation force concept, and agreement to

apparently indefinite extension these talks probably stems in part from

Peiping estimate repercussions these developments on Taiwan as well

as on our allies. Postponement demand for FonMin conference proba­

bly influenced by our firm rejection this proposal at present stage, by

failure obtain support of Molotov (as well as Macmillan and Nehru)

and realization their public position of pistol-to-head demand on this

issue was not good. Believe Secretary’s communications to U Nu, sub­

stance of which undoubtedly passed on, also played important part.

3. At any rate PRC has now presented draft which very closely

follows line of argument I have been taking in meetings. They therefore

have grounds for anticipating its acceptance with little modification.

If not accepted they are in very strong negotiating as well as public

position and will probably not hesitate quickly to go to public if they

consider it desirable bring pressure on us.

4. One question is whether in context negotiations thus far there

would be commitment by U.S. to discuss in some form “relaxation and

elimination of tension in Taiwan area”. Refusal in any way to admit to

discussion these talks would be difficult to defend publicly and would

support their demand for FonMin meeting. Acceptance will increase

strains our relations with GRC but possibly to lesser extent than Fon­

Min meeting. Possibly we can find some subject we can introduce or

some unilateral action we can take that would give us at least tempo­

rary initiative in this general field.

5. Another question is what other subjects could be introduced

or discussed in effort keep talks going so as postpone coming to grips

with thorny Taiwan area questions. Trade is now only remaining ques­

tion and particularly if I must continue indicate complete firmness

on U.S. embargo this offers little scope for meetings. While lowering

CHINCOM levels fairly promptly following issuance any declaration

Distribution.

renunciation force would be useful move, it cannot provide much in

way of subject for discussion in meetings.

6. In light of above I will need as well as much background guid­

ance as it is now possible to give me on what we desire concerning

future course of talks.

7. With respect Wang’s draft believe situation precludes my intro­

duction new counter draft or return my first draft. On other hand I

should have clear idea whether we willing accept his draft with or

without such amendments we might suggest. I need not necessarily

give final approval at next meeting but will desire avoid taking any

positions from which I might later be required to retreat.

8. With respect his draft it seems to me principal question is

whether I should press for specific mention of Taiwan. It seems to me

from standpoint our relations with GRC and degree to which we are

committed to discussion Taiwan area questions with PRC there is much

to be said for omission any specific reference to Taiwan in declaration.

This also related to whether we are to regard any such declaration as

primarily legal or political statement. While statement as presently

drafted may contain legal loopholes with respect Taiwan area, regarded

as political statement it seeems to me it would be extremely difficult for

Peiping issue this statement and then turn around and attempt justify

attack in Taiwan area on grounds unexpressed fine print. In eyes of

world both friendly and enemy, major dispute between U.S. and PRC

is in Taiwan area.

9. With respect second para Wang’s draft, important note re accu­

rate and literal translation of Chinese original would be “PRC and

U.S. are determined that they should settle disputes between their two

countries through peaceful negotiations and also will not resort to any

(and all) threat (intimidation) of military force”. (Chinese text operative

portion this para and last para being transmitted by separate tel.) This

of course much stronger and preferable from our standpoint to English

translation given me by Wang, there not being any conditional relation­

ship between negotiations and renunciation of force.

10. Therefore believe that, subject to whatever views Department

may have with respect to specific reference to Taiwan, I can and should

at next meeting probe on substitution of “and also” for “without” in

English text. Wang will probably not commit himself but question will

inevitably arise as to whether we prepared accept if they agree our

English version.

Gowen

1243. From Johnson.

Re para 9 Mytel 1241 there follows Chinese text in Matthews num­

bers of substantive portion second para beginning with “are deter­

mined” and all last para Wang’s draft:

Gowen

Limited Distribution.

1244. From Johnson.

Haguiwara (Japanese Ambassador) as well as Leroy (Belgian) have

under instructions called on me in last few days to inquire our attitude

on reduction CHINCOM controls.

Haguiwara particularly talked about indirect West European sales

CHINCOM items to CHICOMS through SovBloc countries while prac­

tically Japan excluded from such trade. Specifically mentioned galva­

nized sheets.

Leroy said Belgian trade delegation headed by member Parliament

recently returned from trip to Communist China and is strongly press­

ing government for relaxation CHINCOM level.

to Paris for Topol as telegram 279 and to Brussels unnumbered.

I took strong line with both along lines merchant letters to De Mar­

gerie and Kirkpatrick, personally emphasizing high value I placed on

trade weapon and importance my renunciation force negotiations to

other countries. However said my talks here only one aspect our atti­

tude on CHINCOM level and further discussion subject should be in

Washington or Paris.

Gowen

1339. For Johnson.

In view pertinent Peiping broadcasts transmitted Geneva in full by

FBIS, Department believes it unnecessary continue weekly telegrams

summarizing ChiCom propaganda. Therefore unless you request con­

tinuation no further weekly summary will be issued.

Dulles

by Jacobson; cleared in IAD and CA.

1354. For Johnson. Reference Deptel 1352.

Following is Wang’s December 1 draft on renunciation of force as

amended by Department.

BEGIN TEXT.

ority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Sebald, Phleger in draft, and

McConaughy.

A. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan, on behalf of the Government of

the People’s Republic of China, and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson

on behalf of the Government of the United States of America, agree to

announce:

B. The People’s Republic of China and the United States of Amer­

ica are determined that they should settle disputes between them

through peaceful negotiations without resort to the threat or use of

force; and they renounce the use of force in general, and with partic­

ular reference to the Taiwan area, except in individual and collective

self defense.

C. The two Ambassadors should continue their talks to seek prac­

tical and feasible means for the realization of this common desire. END

TEXT

Department has decided not to object to form of joint announce­

ment at this time rather than insist on separate, unilateral announce­

ment so that if Communists should break off talks they could not utilize

dispute over form of announcement to obscure real issue.

Dulles

1260. From Johnson.

2. While we do not know what was in Bradshaw’s two previous

letters fact remains letter from him was transmitted containing infor­

mation two previous letters refused transmission, and asking for visit

“in order he and Mrs. Bradshaw might be released earliest possible

moment”. While failure transmit two previous letters grounds for pro­

test, it seems to me difficult to make this basis for presentation outlined

paragraph 3 Deptel 1352 particularly as a letter from Bradshaw has

now been received.

3. I strongly question desirability of placing so much emphasis

upon secondary “welfare” aspect of September 10 announcement.

Believe we would be on much stronger grounds to base presentation

Distribution.

paragraph 3 Deptel 1352 on failure release Americans “expeditiously”

under September 10 announcement.

4. Huan’s reply to O’Neill’s request for release Bradshaw (para­

graph 8 Deptel 1348) would seem indicate Wang had probably trans­

mitted my similar appeal at December 1 meeting and as things now

stand we have some ground to hope for early release Bradshaw.

5. With respect Bradshaw and tomorrow’s meeting I would

be in an awkward position if Bradshaw were to be released about

simultaneously with meeting. While it is unlikely I must also be pre­

pared for possibility Wang would exceptionally inform me of release

at meeting. If Bradshaw not released by tomorrow’s meeting I do

not see how in light all circumstances our tactic will persuade Chi­

nese Communists expedite his release and believe may in fact be

counterproductive.

6. Therefore I urgently request authority at tomorrow’s meeting to:

A. Make protest on failure deliver Bradshaw’s first two letters and

reiterate hope for his early release.

B. Make statement along lines paragraph 3 Deptel 1352 but for

most part based on failure “expeditiously” release Americans under

September 10 announcement as set forth last sentence paragraph 3

rather than on Bradshaw’s letters as implied second sentence para­

graph 3.

C. With respect renunciation force, ask him for more complete

replies questions I asked last meeting (at close last meeting it was indi­

cated to him I expected such replies), and make some general com­

ments as would appear appropriate on his draft, picking up pertinent

materal from Deptel 1353 and in general paving way for introduction

at subsequent meeting of our amendments his draft.

Gowen

1355. For Johnson. Your 1260.

1. Department did not intend that you place primary emphasis on

“welfare” aspect Agreed Announcement. You should continue as in past

placing primary emphasis on Communist failure release ­Americans

expeditiously using Bradshaw case as glaring example not only failure

release, but refusal to transmit letters, pointing out this forces conclusion

that remainder imprisoned Americans are receiving same treatment as

Bradshaw.

2. Secretary believes time has come to demonstrate stiffer attitude

on failure Communists live up to commitments. Three months passed

since Agreed Announcement and only five of nineteen released. Wang

has come to regard our weekly protests this subject as routine. Best

way of convincing him we take this seriously is concentrate exclusively

this subject for one meeting, basing your protest on fact you have been

instructed by your Government do so.

3. Bradshaw release before or simultaneous with meeting does not

change situation. This would not prove that Communists are carrying

out declaration but only that in this case had done so because facts

were fortuitously revealed. Bradshaw case is merely example of course

of conduct by Communists which is continuing as to remainder still

imprisoned. You can point out that Washington felt so strongly on this

subject that your instructions were to deal exclusively with it for this

meeting and that future progress on renunciation force is of necessity

dependent on showing good faith in implementing Agreed Announce­

ment already made.

4. While above tactics may not immediately assist Bradshaw,

our conclusion is that from overall standpoint, bearing in mind that

ninety days have now elapsed, time has come to take stronger line than

heretofore.

5. It is important to show relationship between Communist perform­

ance under first Agreed Announcement and question participation by

US in second one. This point should receive strong emphasis in your

presentation.

Dulles

tion. Drafted by McConaughy, Clough, Sebald, and Phleger; cleared in draft by Robertson.

1263. From Johnson.

1. One hour fifty minute meeting this morning devoted entirely

to implementation except for prepared statement by Wang amplifying

his replies my questions last meeting on his renunciation of force draft.

2. I opened with long prepared statement fully bringing out all

points contained Deptels 1352 and 1355.

3. After “regretting” I had nothing to say today on his draft Wang

made prepared statement amplifying his answers my questions at

last meeting particularly regarding applicability draft Taiwan area.

He was more specific than previously in saying Taiwan area is heart

US–PRC dispute and as such is international matter going beyond

domestic matter of PRC’s dealings with Chiang clique. New draft is

integral whole. PRC still considers removal and reduction tensions in

Taiwan area proper subject Foreign Ministers’ meeting but willing dis­

cuss these talks if US desires. However refusal discuss and settle this

problem would be tantamount to demanding PRC recognize status quo

which it will never do. Somewhat more stress than last few meetings on

withdrawal US forces as only way remove present threat to PRC.

4. Wang then made already prepared statement on implementation

which he tied to my previous statement. Largely reiterated former posi­

tions on not discussing matter here but through third parties, vague

complaints of US violation agreement during which he mentioned

alleged new immigration regulations requiring Chinese students obtain

entry permits to Taiwan before given date, with regard which they are

asking India make presentation. Would not answer many questions

from me with respect to implementation until I answer:

A) Whether US prepared provide India with complete list names

and addresses all Chinese in US.

B) Assist India in finding out status of Chinese in US.

C) Rescind all measures violating “spirit” of the agreed announce­

ment.

There was then long give and take during which I stressed not

single known case any Chinese obstructed from a departure from

US contrasted with situation 14 Americans remaining in prison. Also

contrasted freedom Chinese US communicate not only with Indian

Limited Distribution.

Embassy but with persons in PRC with known facts in Bradshaw letters

and failure receive communications from other 12 Americans.

6. Next meeting Thursday, December 15.

Gowen

1269. From Johnson.

1. I opened 29th meeting today with prepared statement on imple­

mentation as follows:

A. I have been greatly encouraged in progress I feel we have been

making in our discussions. It has seemed to me that we have been

successful in gradually enlarging area of agreement in our search for

basis upon which announcement would be issued which would assure

world of our determination that our clash of views and policies, includ­

ing those in Taiwan area, would not lead to war.

B. In this connection I have often spoken of vital necessity in dis­

cussing this fundamental subject, of making certain that there is not

only full and complete understanding between us of exact meaning

and implications of any form of words upon which we may agree, but

also confidence that agreements reached will be fully carried out. In this

regard I have most earnestly and frankly spoken of my government’s

dissatisfaction with way in which your government is carrying out obli­

gations it assumed under our agreed announcement of ­September 10.

That was first agreement reached between us and, in spite of very

explicit words of that statement, it now appears there was either not

an understanding of its terms, or its terms are being violated. My gov­

ernment considers latter is case. This does not create atmosphere con­

ducive to discussion and agreement on second public announcement.

My government and world public had every reason to expect that clear

words of our statement of September 10 would be fully and effectively

carried out. Words of first substantive paragraph of your portion of that

statement are as clear as words can be: “PRC recognizes that Americans

Distribution.

in PRC who desire to return to U.S. are entitled to do so, and declares

that it has adopted and will further adopt appropriate measures so that

they can expeditiously exercise their right to return.” That statement

which was freely made by your government contains no conditions,

exceptions, or qualifications such as are now being used to justify your

government’s continued detention of American citizens imprisoned

in your country. At time we were discussing this subject in detail you

asked such terms as “quickly”, “very quickly”, etc., and I pointed out to

you that word “expeditiously”, which you suggested for English text,

meant just that, and my government and people would so understand

it. However, almost three months have now passed since the issuance

of that announcement and 14 Americans still remain in prison.

C. It is not realistic to expect progress in reaching another agree­

ment unless there is clear evidence that there is good faith in proceed­

ing to carry out agreements already reached. I have been instructed

to make absolutely clear that my government does not feel that there

has been good faith with regard to expeditious return of Americans

detained in your country, as well as in carrying out other aspects of

agreed announcement.

D. Not only are Americans not being expeditiously released, but

those detained are not able freely to communicate with U.K. Charge

as is also clearly provided in agreed announcement. Of 14 Americans

still detained UK Charge has received communications from only two.

Yet your government has not, and I am sure that it will not, allege that

reason these imprisoned Americans have not communicated with UK

Charge is that they do not desire to return. You told me at our last meet­

ing that if these Americans desired to communicate with UK Charge,

they were being assisted in doing so. I believe that you must not have

had all facts at time you made that statement.

E. For example, on December 2, UK Charge finally received letter

from Dr. Bradshaw which had been written on November 19 and post­

marked November 28. In this letter Dr. Bradshaw stated that prison

authorities had refused to forward to UK Charge two previous letters

he had written, one on October 26 and another on November 10. It is

understood that transmission of these previous letters was refused on

grounds that such letters must be limited to request for interview with

UK Charge. There is certainly nothing in our agreed announcement of

September 10 that contains any such limitation, and on December 5

representative of UK Charge properly protested to your authorities

suppression of Dr. Bradshaw’s earlier letters. Representative of UK

Charge additionally pointed out that your authorities had never in any

way indicated this. That communications to him originated by Ameri­

cans had to be limited to mere request for interview.

F. Your authorities did not attempt deny fact that Dr. Bradshaw’s

freedom of communication with Charge had been restricted but

refused to accept protest on grounds that it went beyond the duties

of UK Charge under agreed announcement. I thus assume that your

authorities consider that this is only proper place for discussion of such

matter. I do not agree that it cannot also be discussed by UK Charge in

Peking, but am entirely willing discuss matter here.

G. This is clear evidence that your government has, in violation of

terms of the September 10 agreed announcement, obstructed free com­

munication of Americans with UK Charge. My government expects

that any similar obstructions to free communication of other remaining

Americans with UK Charge and other obstacles to full performance of

his duties will be promptly removed.

However, I was encouraged to note statement by your authori­

ties to UK Charge on December 6 that consideration was being given

to request for early release of Dr. Bradshaw so that he could accom­

pany his wife, and wish again to express hope that this matter can be

promptly handled.

I. I will have further comments to make on your proposed draft at

a subsequent meeting. I have nothing further to say today.

2. Wang replied that it was in interests of progress our discussions

that his side presented new draft last meeting. Was regrettable I had

not been able this meeting put forward concrete views U.S. side on that

draft. Certainly hoped, as I had stated, would be able put forward latest

views on draft at later meeting.

3. Turning to prepared statement Wang continued that in view of

fact I had raised number questions regarding his draft at last meeting, he

was willing make few amplifications on that draft. As I had specifically

raised at last meeting question whether draft covered Taiwan area, he

willing again amplify statement in explicit manner. It is specified in new

draft that China and U.S. should settle disputes between them peacefully

without resort to threat of use of force.

4. Wang said as heart of Sino-American dispute is precisely cen­

tered on Taiwan so it goes without saying that new draft covers this

question. That I had said describing Taiwan as area where interests and

policies China and U.S. clash seriously shows that tension Taiwan area

is international matter and not simply domestic matter how to deal

with ­Chiang clique.

5. Wang said in 1946 Chiang Kai-shek launched large-scale civil

war and Chinese people forced to resort to war to overthrow Chiang

and establish PRC. Notwithstanding fact some people been adopting

hostile attitude towards victory Chinese people, nobody could deny

fact liberation of mainland and large number coastal islands by PRC

has never created international conflict or danger war. Quite to con­

trary has greatly benefited stability Far East and has contributed to

world peace and security.

6. Wang said in line with consistent stand, PRC willing strive for

peaceful settlement disputes when circumstances permit. This includes

such domestic matters as Chiang clique. However, this being matter of

Chinese domestic affairs must not be made subject these talks.

7. Wang said present situation in Taiwan area is that U.S. side has

initiated use of force and is threatening use force in interfering with

liberation Taiwan and coastal islands. Is this situation which creates

danger to peace? I had chosen skip over this fact, however it cannot be

evaded.

8. Wang said each day U.S. armed forces remain in Taiwan area is

a day of threat to PRC. According to UN Charter, PRC entitled demand

U.S. side remove its forces from Taiwan area in order preserve its terri­

torial integrity. In interest of relaxing tensions, China proposed as it did

at Bandung conference that China and U.S. enter into negotiations to

ease and eliminate tension Taiwan area.

9. Wang said party which now using force and threat force is none

other than U.S. side. However China is not afraid of American force and

threats. China not afraid of proposing enter into negotiations precisely

because it determined not to yield to American force and threats.

I had indicated that U.S. unwilling enter into negotiations under threat

Chinese might use force at any time. Fact is contrary. It is Chinese side

being threatened and U.S. side which already initiated use force.

10. Wang said nonetheless, China still desires settle disputes

including dispute in Taiwan area through peaceful negotiations. Such

negotiations aimed at removing force and threat of force which U.S.

already applying against China. PRC side has consistently advocated

negotiations, however I must not think PRC side thereby recognizing

status quo of U.S. seizure Taiwan and interference PRC internal affairs,

which is last thing PRC side will ever do.

11. Wang said new draft envisages two steps. Expresses determi­

nation to settle disputes through peaceful means without threat or use

force. U.S. side has also indicated it would subscribe this principle. PRC

side has taken account of view of U.S. side and draft adds Ambassadors

should continue these talks to seek practical means for realization this

desire.

12. Wang said PRC side considers that relaxation tension in

­Taiwan area is too serious to be lightly disposed of in Ambassadorial

talks. Settlement these questions should be left to conference Foreign

Ministers China and U.S. In presenting latest draft PRC side preserved

its proposal for conference between Foreign Ministers China and U.S.

for purpose eliminating tension Taiwan area. However, if U.S. side

desires discuss and settle this question in these talks PRC side will not

object to making such attempt.

13. Wang said he must stress that new draft is integral whole.

Question tension in Taiwan area must be discussed and settled. Refusal

discuss would be tantamount to requiring that PRC recognize status

quo in Taiwan area and surrender its sovereign rights, which is what

PRC side absolutely cannot do.

14. Wang said new draft has already incorporated common ground

in our views. If U.S. really sincere in expressing desire for settlement

Sino-American disputes, U.S. side should adopt new draft and then

continue discussions between us in order seek settlements.

15. Wang hoped these remarks he had made might help me fully

consider questions before us.

16. Wang said I had again this morning raised question implemen­

tation agreed announcement. He could not accept allegation PRC side

has violated announcement. Since I had repeatedly raised implemen­

tation question at every meeting he would like make few comments.

17. Reading from second prepared statement Wang said PRC side

considers that since we reached agreement on first item our agenda

these talks and since each side has entrusted implementation agree­

ment to third state, questions regarding implementation should be

referred to respective third states. There is no ground for repeatedly

raising questions these meetings. Entanglement first and second items

preventing further progress in discussions.

18. Wang said moreover facts have borne out that PRC side has

been faithfully implementing agreement. Party failing implement is

PRC side has provided U.S. side with complete list Americans in

PRC. This was done as early as last year and again at opening present

talks. U.S. side because it has been provided with these lists can corre­

spond with Americans in China.

19. He said U.S. side also maintains liaison station Hong Kong and

can make use this station in checking list.

20. Wang said thus far U.S. side has not provided PRC with com­

plete list Chinese in U.S. PRC side can only learn status remaining

­Chinese in U.S. from few Chinese who return from U.S. PRC side has

every reason request Indian Embassy find out situation. However U.S.

Government has made known it cannot assist Indian Embassy this

regard.

21. Wang said I had stated there is no restriction on Indian Embassy

perfoming functions assist Chinese return but this does not correspond

with the facts.

22. He said moreover, even in case those Chinese who I had

admitted being prevented from departing, so far many of them still

unable effect return. Not only has India no means offer assistance

on its own to these people, but according to recent information U.S.

Immigration and Naturalization Service has of late made regulation

requiring all ­Chinese students get entry permit Taiwan before given

date. This intimidation Chinese students designed forestall return.

This gross violation agreement.

23. Wang said it is intention PRC side make representations U.S.

Government through Indian Embassy. However still felt such questions

should not be brought up here so as hinder progress in present talks.

24. Wang said if U.S. side nevertheless insists raising these ques­

tions PRC side bound raise following questions:

A) Is U.S. side prepared provide complete list names and addresses

Chinese in U.S.?

B) Will U.S. side aid Indians determine status Chinese in U.S.?

C) Is U.S. side prepared rescind measures violating spirit of

agreement?

Before these questions are satisfactorily answered PRC side could

not answer question U.S. side might raise.

25. Wang said he considered if both sides sincere in desiring prog­

ress should concentrate on second item and adopt reasonable proposal

of PRC side under this item.

26. I replied that when present talks began, first question on

agenda was return of civilians. I had hoped that September 10 agreed

announcement would resolve that question. So far as U.S. concerned,

question resolved even before September 10 because U.S. had rescinded

all measures preventing return of Chinese in U.S. I had informed Wang

of that at outset of talks. Nevertheless to show good faith U.S. had

entered into arrangement that India could assist any Chinese in U.S.

who felt prevented from returning.

27. I said many vague and general statements had been made here

and by Wang’s government concerning supposed measures by U.S.

Government preventing return of Chinese. It is well known in U.S. and

well known to Indian Embassy that there is nothing to prevent any

Chinese in U.S. from communicating with Indian Embassy if he feels

obstructed in departure.

28. I said under agreed announcement, U.S. agreed accept any rep­

resentations by Indian Embassy on behalf of Chinese who felt there was

obstruction to departure from U.S. It is important to look at facts. From

outset of talks to present moment, not one single specific case called to

attention U.S. Government in which departure prevented.

29. I said insofar as Americans in Wang’s country concerned, in

spite of terms of agreed announcement and arrrangements made for

UK carry out functions, 14 Americans still detained.

30. I said insofar as lists are concerned, Wang would recall that at

first meeting I gave him list all Americans we had grounds for believing

were prevented from leaving. That list compiled with great effort by

my government.

31. I said insofar as efforts his government or Indian Embassy

determine status Chinese in U.S., Wang would recall announcement

referred only to those who desired return. I would repeat my statement

that any Chinese in U.S. who feels obstructed from returning is free

communicate any way he desires with Indian Embassy. This in addi­

tion freedom communicate with Wang’s country.

32. I said after agreed announcement was issued, I had carefully

outlined measures taken assure every person covered fully informed of

its terms. In addition 70,000 copies agreed announcement were being

posted in post offices throughout U.S. Thus not slightest possibility any

Chinese in U.S. not fully informed his rights under announcement. Any

Chinese has full freedom exercise those rights. In spite of all this, no sin­

gle case called to attention U.S. Government of obstruction to departure

for Wang’s country or any country of his choice.

33. I said this contrasts sharply with situation Americans in Wang’s

country. Wang had spoken of not entangling item one and item two of

agenda. I had no desire entangle these subjects, but to my regret desire

Wang’s government fully and promptly carry out agreement has inev­

itably entangled subjects.

34. I said it was difficult consider another announcement or public

statement except in light of how previous statement carried out. Before

agreeing on further statements there must be full confidence between

us that any agreement will be carried out. For this purpose I made

statement this morning. If we were to make progress there must be this

understanding and confidence between us. My government is anxious

there be progress and in interest of progress has instructed me make

clear our feeling concerning implementation our first agreement.

35. Wang replied he agreed progress in regard further statement

will depend on manner in which previous agreement carried out. He

wanted point out, however, that proposal for second statement origi­

nated with U.S. side. He felt there was no ground for making imple­

mentation previous agreement prerequisite for further statement. We

had reached agreement item one concerning return civilians and so far

as his side concerned agreement all along faithfully carried out. Since

beginning talks, 41 Americans left China, including American civil­

ians and number of Americans released as result of lenient measures

adopted his side. This figure exceeded two thirds of Americans in

China at time of announcement.

36. Wang said insofar as Americans in general category concerned,

they will be able depart promptly upon application. They will not

encounter difficulties or obstruction. This in conformity agreement

reached September 10. In light of this, what grounds are there to allege

his side not faithfully carrying out agreement?

37. Wang said as for Americans who have committed crimes he

recalled he had clearly and repeatedly explained stand his side in

course of discussions item one. He had never stated Americans who

had committed crimes would be able return upon issuance agreed

announcement. Question their return must be handled accordance

­Chinese legal procedures. Every sovereign state entitled this right.

Would I imagine case of Chinese in U.S. who had committed murder.

Would he be permitted return promptly? It was therefore groundless

accuse his side of detaining Americans.

38. Wang said I had stated Chinese in U.S. free depart from U.S.

According recent information U.S. Immigration Service is requiring

Chinese students U.S. obtain entry permits Taiwan before given date.

Is this not attempted persecution Chinese students? Can it be said this

measure is in conformity September 10 agreement? Party which has

failed carry out and has violated agreements is U.S. His side intended

make representations with U.S. through Indian Embassy. However,

he had no desire bring up this question at present talks, lest it hinder

progress of talks.

39. I said I wanted ask only one question. Did Wang know of single

case, or had he been informed of single case, or had Indian Embassy

called attention to single case of Chinese in U.S. whose departure pre­

vented by U.S. Government?

40. Wang replied U.S. had not provided lists Chinese in U.S. Conse­

quently it was difficult ascertain this. Even in cases of Chinese on list I had

given him many not yet able return. Only small number have returned.

Without mentioning further cases, requirement of U.S. Immigration

­Service for students obtain entry permits Taiwan constitutes obstruction

on part of U.S. Government.

41. I said I did not know what this alleged requirement of Immigra­

tion Service was. Even if it were fact, I did not see how it would prevent

Chinese who wanted to leave from doing so.

42. Wang said by what right was U.S. entitled change status these

people. He considered U.S. Government had no right adopt such coer­

cive measures. Measure constituted persecution of Chinese and is

designed prevent return to China.

43. I said I failed to see this. Question appeared to relate to students

desiring remain in U.S.

44. Wang said he considered U.S. action illegal in principle. Chinese

residents in U.S. should be free decide to go anywhere and should not be

subject unreasonable coercion.

45. I said I would repeat that any Chinese who feels subject to

coercion is free communicate Indian Embassy.

46. Wang said that is what he was going to do. His government

was requesting Indian Embassy make representations.

47. I said I had said any individual in U.S. who felt prevented from

returning was free to communicate. Indian Embassy was free investi­

gate facts any such case. We had agreed accept the representations from

Indian Embassy any such case. I did not know of single case where

there have been such representations.

48. Wang said September 10 announcement specified both govern­

ments would take further measures facilitate return civilians. However

measures of U.S. Immigration Service cannot be construed constitute

measures envisaged agreed announcement. If dissatisfaction with imple­

mentation agreed announcement was to be revised [raised], it was

­Chinese side that feels entitled raise such dissatisfaction.

49. I said agreed announcement certainly did say just that. Discus­

sion had centered on Americans in prison. It was our understanding

his government would take further measures permit their return. His

government presumably had in mind before it made announcement

what measures it would take that regard. What I had pointed out was

that those measures not so far taken regard 14 of Americans who were

subject our discussion. I had pointed out in addition that there is evi­

dence freedom 14 Americans communicate with UK Charge under

agreement announcement has been obstructed. That certainly is not

carrying out of agreed announcement.

50. Wang replied he had nothing further.

51. Next meeting Thursday December 15. Same release to press.

Gowen

1270. From Johnson.

1. Wang’s “three questions” at last meeting and his allegation con­

cerning INS requirement for Taiwan entry permits give me excellent

basis for following up on implementation at next meeting.

2. Would appreciate information on probable factual basis if any

of allegation concerning INS requirement and suggestions concerning

any further reply I might make this regard.

3. With regard three questions I would promise reply:

A) No provision in agreed announcement for furnishing list ­Chinese

in US and has no relation to obligations under agreed announcement

which relates only to those who desire return. Would refer discussion this

subject when agreed announcement being negotiated. Test of perform­

ance under agreed announcement is whether in fact any obstruction to

those who desire to return, freedom communicate with representative

third state, freedom representative third state investigate facts any such

case, and willingness receive and promptly act on representations from

representative third state concerning specific cases. Facts in CHICOM

and US performance speak for themselves.

B) There is nothing in agreed announcement concerning investi­

gation of “status” all Chinese in US. Sole question this regard between

US and PRC under agreed agenda as well as agreed announcement is

freedom Chinese in US who desire do so return PRC.

C) At opening these talks US had already completed all necessary

measures remove all obstructions to departure Chinese who desire

return PRC. This continues in effect. There is in addition arrangement

for Indian Embassy functions. Chinese who do not desire return PRC

are in no way matter between US and PRC. If one were to speak of

measures violating “spirit” of agreed announcement PRC should

in addition to releasing imprisoned Americans repeal exit permit

requirement so that Americans in PRC and Chinese in US would be

on same basis.

4. In addition foregoing, subject to views UK I could raise Miner

case (Mytel 1202).

Distribution.

5. It will be Wang’s “turn” speak first next time and foregoing

somewhat subject to what he may say on implementation in his open­

ing statement.

6. Believe at next meeting I should also make counterproposal on

renunciation force concerning which am submitting my views by fol­

lowing tel.

7. Have arranged with UN address letters Wang and myself stating

fact services curtailed in UN Palais during week between ­Christmas

and New Years and asking whether we expect meet that week and will

therefore require special arrangements for servicing meeting room.

I will at next meeting use letter as basis attempt obtain Wang’s agree­

ment to omitting meeting during that week.

Gowen

1271. From Johnson.

1. As substitute for para B amended renunciation force draft con­

tained Deptel 1354 I submit following for consideration: “The PRC

and USA are determined that they will settle disputes between them

through peaceful negotiations, and that, without prejudice to the inher­

ent right of individual and collective self-defense, they will not resort to

the threat or use of force in the Taiwan area or elsewhere.”

2. In general this seems to me somewhat preferable to draft sug­

gested in Deptel 1354 while still incorporating all its elements. I think

that it also somewhat meets point made para 2 Mytel 1203 while still

fully preserving our position.

and eliminates what I felt was undesirable conditional relationship

between two clauses by substituting “and” for “without”.

4. While it does not incorporate word “renounce” it is uncondi­

tional in stating force will not be used in Taiwan area or elsewhere. It

seems to me it is therefore a full “renunciation” of force but by avoiding

use of word “renounce” in statement in which we are joined avoids

Limited Distribution.

undesirable and incorrect implication that we are “renouncing” some­

thing we have heretofore used while in fact accomplishing this purpose

with respect CHICOMS.

5. It seems to me this draft also avoiding somewhat confusing jux­

taposition in Department’s draft of very similar phrases of “without

resort to the threat or use of force” and “they renounce the use of force”.

6. While I have no reason believe Wang will accept foregoing draft

I feel I can advocate and defend it in negotiations much more effec­

tively than draft suggested Deptel 1354.

Gowen

1272. From Johnson.

1. Particularly in light Wang’s clear acknowledgement at last

meeting international character our dispute in Taiwan area I still

believe that as political document Wang’s December 1 draft would

have approximately same effect as any more closely drawn docu­

ment in deterring CHICOM attack against Taiwan or offshore islands.

However, believe I can and should thoroughly test Wang’s position

during next few meetings by presentation and discussion draft con­

tained Mytel 1271.

2. With respect Deptel 1353 as defensive reaction in compliance

treaty with GRC mentioned second sentence para 1 would presumably

follow initiation use force by CHICOMS against GRC, do not perceive

how CHICOMS could use to justify such initiation use force. In short do

not perceive how Wang’s draft in any way ties our hands defensively.

3. Seems to me important point is that so long as any declara­

tion carries express or implied commitment seek peaceful settlement

CHICOMS might claim US failure seek such settlement vitiated decla­

ration and untied their hands. Wang’s statement at yesterday’s meeting

carried this implication clearer than at any previous meeting. This is

one reason I believe it desirable substitute “and” for “without” in sec­

ond para draft as again suggested preceding tel.

Distribution.

4. Another important point is that so long as any declaration incor­

porates word “threat” CHICOMS are going attempt establish position

that by renouncing “threat” we are obliged remove “threat” presence

our forces on Taiwan. Of course they will also continue maintain simi­

lar position with respect “force”. That is, by stationing forces on ­Taiwan

U.S. has used “force” against PRC territory. However, seems me this

can be much more readily handled than point in para 3 above.

that there is necessarily clear choice between declaration some kind

and “continued participation in negotiations along present lines”.

[garble—­Granted] CHICOMS appear desire continue present negoti­

ations for at least time being, do not see how we can assume they will

indefinitely maintain this desire if they do not feel they are obtaining

any substantial return. One practical difficulty is that present trend

these talks is to reach point in near future at which there will be noth­

ing left to negotiate about.

6. Of course similar question also arises as soon as any declaration

7. I thoroughly understand general principles set forth para 3

­Deptel 1353 and will state as appropriate. However problem arises with

respect practical application. If for example, does Department consider

that any discussion presence our forces in Taiwan area is admissible

within scope those general principles or that it would be useful subject?

Of course I would not enter into any commitments discuss additional

subjects without specific Department approval but background guid­

ance in this general field would be very helpful.

lic position particularly abroad and whether there would be general

acceptance rationale especially next to last sentence.

Gowen

1372. For David Osborn.

Examine carefully entire record of talks and telegraph Department

earliest whether Chinese Communists ever told explicitly US would

not negotiate subjects involving rights and interests GRC without their

presence.

Dulles

Drafted by Clough.

Geneva, December 12, 1955, noon

1276. From Johnson. Department’s 1372.

No record Chinese Communists ever told this in talks. They been

told repeatedly acceptance U.S. renunciation force proposal not to

involve third parties. For example my October 8 statement introducing

Gowen

Distribution.

1376. For Johnson.

Urtel 1262. Failure receive significant flow FBIS due paucity per­

tinent items. Requirements under review however to ensure coverage

your interest.

Dulles

Drafted by Smigel (IAD); cleared by Strother (FBIS) and in substance by Stanley (DRF).

1377. For Johnson.

Guidance for December 15 meeting.

1. In view failure Communists to take any further action implement

Agreed Announcement since last meeting, you should again limit your

presentation to this subject, emphasizing that progress made on renun­

ciation force declaration is encouraging, but further progress being

hamstrung by Communist failure carry out earlier commitment. US

Government and people do not understand why Communists should

require more than three months to take “further appropriate measures”

permit Americans “expeditiously” return. Your presentation last meet­

ing was excellent and can serve as basis further representations.

2. Department concurs in your proposed replies Wang’s three ques­

tions (Your 1270). Will consult with British on Miner case and advise.

because of Christmas and New Year’s holidays which fall on Sundays

with following Mondays also holidays.

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and in draft by Dulles, Phleger,

and Sebald.

4. FYI Decision use above tactics based upon following consid­

erations: a) as time passes and Communists evasion of commitments

under Agreed Announcement becomes more flagrant, we should

increase pressure on this issue in order obtain release US citizens and

avoid giving impression weakness; b) we consider Communists prob­

ably will not break on this issue for their position on it is weak. They

have neither made good on their first commitment nor have they been

willing agree specifically renounce force in Taiwan area. Furthermore,

UN situation developing so they would probably hesitate rock boat by

breaking now; c) renunciation force issue has been dramatized suffi­

ciently through these talks so as to make resort to force more difficult

for them than it was. END FYI

5. Agree with your suggestion for text amendment Wang’s draft

transmitted your 1271. You should not submit it at next meeting unless

you believe this absolutely necessary to prevent break.

Dulles

With reference Communist charge US requiring Chinese obtain

Taiwan entry permits by given date, facts as follows:

Generally accepted international practice is that temporary visitors

to a country must have document admitting them to some other coun­

try, their own or third, on expiration their permitted stay. Passports

ordinarily suffice, but number of Chinese temporarily in US hold old

GRC passports which not now valid entry Taiwan unless accompanied

by Taiwan entry permit granted solely by Taipei authorities. When such

Chinese applies extension his stay, Immigration and Naturalization

Service must see proof he admissible to another country after expira­

tion proposed extension. Chinese intending go eventually Taiwan may

satisfy requirement by obtaining Taiwan permit or visa other country.

For those Chinese intending go PRC, US will not, except in emergency,

Drafted by Nagoski and Clough; cleared in substance by Suddath (INS).

grant extensions particularly in view Communist claim we obstructing

their departure.

Thus, Communist charge that entry permit procedure not in con­

formity with Agreed Announcement is groundless. It required only for

those who desire to prolong stay in US, not those who desire depart.

Dulles

412. Memorandum from Robertson to Dulles

Washington, December 12, 1955

SUBJECT

Guidance for Geneva Talks with Chinese Communists

1. It is proposed to instruct Johnson at the next meeting to limit his

presentation again to insistence on Chinese ­Communist implementa­

tion of the Agreed Announcement and to request a recess in the talks

telegram to Johnson. (Tab A)

2. Johnson has suggested a revision of Wang’s renunciation of

force draft so that it will make specific reference to the Taiwan area

and allow for individual and collective self defense. (Tab B) This draft

appears acceptable to us, but it contains the commitment first intro­

duced by Wang, that both sides will settle disputes between them by

peaceful negotiation. If agreement should be reached on this draft, the

­Communists would immediately seek to push us into negotiations on

the Taiwan issue, particularly the presence of our forces in the Taiwan

area. Refusal by us to negotiate at all would give them plausible ground

to claim they had been tricked.

Recommendation:

(1) That we avoid final agreement on an announcement on renun­

ciation of force until the Communists have released the fourteen

­Americans they hold or we are confident they will be released; (2) that

if agreement is reached on an announcement and the Communists then

propose discussing withdrawal of U.S. forces that we take the position

Clough.

that we cannot make agreements on this, but that the disposition of our

forces would naturally depend on the military situation there and when

the threat of use of force is removed, we would take this into consider­

ation in our deployment of forces. If the Communists press further for

discussion of the status of Taiwan and related matters we must insist

on the position that these affect the interests of the Government of the

Republic of China and we cannot discuss them without the presence

of this Government. (Attached as Tab C is a compilation of statements

made publicly and to the GRC to this effect.)

Attachments:

1. Draft telegram to Ambassador Johnson (Tab A).

2. Revision of renunciation of force draft (Tab B).

3. Compilation of statements (Tab C).

It is my understanding proposed recess to begin after meeting

December 22.

Gowen

Distribution.

1393. For Johnson. Your 1283.

Department’s intention is that proposed recess begin after

December 15 meeting. Re Our 1366 Colm may leave immediately

after next meeting assuming recess agreed to.

Hoover

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and in substance by Yager.

1286. From Johnson.

1. Four hour meeting this morning devoted entirely to implemen­

tation.

2. Wang stated PRC is going to issue statement, presumably

from Peiping, on implementation in rebuttal of alleged official U.S.

­Government as well as press statements charging PRC violation agreed

announcement. Specific reference made to Secretary’s December 6

press statement. In spite my pointing out deliberate effort made in

­Secretary’s statements reduce and allay rising public concern in U.S.

over failure PRC implement agreed announcement and our contin­

ued efforts keep PRC failures from propaganda forum, it was evident

Wang was under instructions and had no discretion on whether state­

ment would be issued. As additional effort discourage statement, I tied

request for recess until January 12 to this serious and disappointing

action on their part which would reduce hope progress our talks. This

obviously gave Wang considerable pause but he remained firm on issu­

ance of statement while rejecting any linking request for recess to such

grounds. However willing consider recess based on holiday period.

Limited Distribution. Repeated to Paris for the Secretary only as telegram 286.

I did not press question of linkage and finally made straight proposal

for recess until January 12. Wang agreed consider and inform me later.

I urged decision before tomorrow evening. In meanwhile we agreed

inform press simply next meeting would be held December 22.

Gowen

1288. From Johnson.

1. We do not know what contents will be of CHICOM statement

referred to by Wang today and how much impact it may have. Fact is of

course Peiping propaganda has by interviews with returning students

etc. been maintaining steady line of vague charges U.S. non-compliance

with announcement, and dependent on content and context, new state­

ment may not attract much notice. I avoided getting into their previous

propaganda line with Wang today in order not get led down side road

of statements made by returning Americans and to accentuate serious­

ness with which we viewed present action. I of course made it clear

that, while we regretted their step, we did not shrink from propaganda

battle if that was their purpose and that we would probably issue state­

ment in reply although I did not commit ourselves to doing so.

2. If CHICOMS actually issue statement from Peiping and reply is

considered desirable, believe it should be issued by Department.

3. Believe Wang’s statements last few meetings give clue to prob­

able content of statement, and amount of attention it attracts will be

dependent on whether and to what degree it reiterates charges U.S.

deliberately “stalling and entangling”. I did not receive impression

statement would contain text their last draft proposal on renunciation

of force and therefore made no effort to introduce our amendments for

which the negotiating situation in the meeting was in any event by that

time entirely unsuitable.

4. Statement will at least probably reiterate vague charges of

“fears” Chinese students “apply” to return, contrast our refusal give

list Chinese in U.S. including those who may be in jail to Indians with

ited Distribution. Repeated to Paris for the Secretary only as telegram 288.

list Americans given us by CHICOMS, proportionately small number

of Chinese in U.S. who have “returned” compared with proportion

Americans who have returned from China, INS “intimidation” Chinese

to apply for Taiwan entry permits, etc.

5. I have no suggestions concerning public reply except to reiterate

as appropriate positions that have been taken in meetings while avoid­

ing specific reference to contents of meetings. With respect numbers

who have returned, suggest use one line in opening statement today,

52 previously detained given permission depart and in 14 weeks since

September 10 only 5. Thus results of agreed announcement largely neg­

ative with respect Americans and certainly not “expeditious” either in

absolute numbers or proportion.

6. In considering any statement we make in reply, I desire reiterate

my conviction that whatever points we may be able score in propa­

ganda battle this subject will not be reflected, at least at any time soon,

in increased releases of imprisoned Americans. To accomplish this

objective our efforts should be directed to maximum extent consistent

with our public position to restoring former basis of negotiation.

7. Going Prague Friday evening returning Tuesday if there is meet­

ing December 22.

Gowen

1289. From Johnson.

1. I opened 30th meeting today with prepared statement on imple­

mentation as follows:

A. At our last meeting, I think we were in agreement in expressing

our common desire avoid what you have termed entangling question

of return of civilians to their respective countries with other questions

before us. I have pointed out that only sure way of avoiding such

entanglement was promptly and faithfully carry out terms of agreed

announcement September 10. I have all along maintained that two of us

Limited Distribution.

here should be prepared discuss and do everything possible eliminate

any differences of opinion with respect to this first agreement between

us and thereby establish sound basis which would give us best hope of

making further progress in dealing with other vitally important mat­

ters confronting us.

B. You will recall that following issuance of our announcement of

September 10 I pointed out favorable atmosphere which its prompt

and full implementation could create for progress in discussion of sec­

ond part our agenda. I pointed out advantage of promptly putting into

effect appropriate measures for implementation of our announcement,

which would dispose of problem we were called upon to deal with

under agenda item one, before attempting resolve complicated and dif­

ficult problems under second item our agenda.

C. Although I did not feel that your government had in fact ini­

tiated all appropriate measures called for under announcement, on

strength of your assurances in this regard I undertook discussion

with you of questions under item two. I had hopes that entanglement

of our two agenda items in our talks could thus be avoided. I am

deeply disappointed and disturbed that my hopes have not thus far

been realized. In fact in some ways results appear to have been neg­

ative when compared with situation prior to issuance of our agreed

announcement.

D. When we arrived here to begin our discussions on August 1,

there were to our knowledge 52 Americans whose departure from your

country was being prevented in one way or another and whose names

I gave to you. On August 1 you informed me that of that number 11

were being permitted return to U.S. On September 6 you informed me

of 12 additional persons of that group who would be permitted depart.

On September 10 you informed me of another 10 who would be per­

mitted to return. Thus, in approximately 6 weeks between August 1

In approximately 14 weeks since September 10, of that group only

5 additional persons have been given permission depart. Thus, how­

ever results are regarded, that is by absolute numbers or by proportion,

results in this regard since September 10 have been extremely dis­

appointing and out of keeping with my government’s understanding

and expectation of what was reasonably to be expected under agreed

announcement.

E. At our last meeting I also spoke of restrictions imposed by your

authorities on freedom of Americans communicate with UK Charge, as

provided for in agreed announcement, and other restrictions on ability

of UK Charge carry out his functions.

F. I have also spoken several times in particular of cases of Dr. and

Mrs. Bradshaw. You have often spoken of lenient and humanitarian

consideration by your authorities of cases of imprisoned Americans.

There is certainly no better case in which there is opportunity now

demonstrate this than case of these two persons.

G. UK Charge who visited Mrs. Bradshaw on December 10 fully

confirms our previous understanding that this unfortunate woman is

now mentallly and physically in entirely helpless condition. She is eat­

ing practically nothing and could well pass away at any time unless

prompt steps are taken. She is physically and mentally entirely inca­

pable of making arrangements for her departure and travelling from

country. Apparently one of her few touches with reality is knowledge

that her husband remains in prison and desire be reunited with him

in departing from country. Apart from agreed announcement these

humanitarian considerations alone should dictate prompt release of

Dr. Bradshaw.

H. It is our understanding that even full sentence of Dr. Bradshaw

expires in March. He is understandably extremely concerned over con­

dition of his wife and desires immediately return with her. I should

think that policy of lenience, particularly in light of agreed announce­

ment, should make possible shortening of his five-year sentence by

mere matter of ten weeks.

I. It is understandable that known facts with regard to Dr. and

Mrs. Bradshaw greatly increase concern of my government for fate of

imprisoned Americans with regard to whom we have no information

and accentuates need for their expeditious release so that they can exer­

cise right of return recognized in agreed announcement.

J. At our last meeting you raised several questions with respect

to carrying out by my government of obligations it assumed under

agreed announcement. I am entirely prepared and willing fully

answer those questions, even though they do not appear relate to fac­

tual information concerning any specific case nor to terms of agreed

announcement.

K. Your first question related to whether my government was

prepared provide Indian Embassy with complete list of names and

addresses of all Chinese in U.S.

L. You will recall that we very fully discussed this question at time

we were discussing text of our agreed announcement, and I am sur­

prised that you again raise matter. Next, I desire point out again that

statement made by our two governments on July 25 with respect to

holding of these talks, as well as our agreed first agenda item, relates

solely to persons who desire return. I also want point out that agreed

announcement of September 10 very specifically refers only to persons

who desire return

M. At very outset of our talks I gave you list of Americans in your

country who my government had reason believe desired return. I have

not discussed or raised question of other Americans who may be in

your country.

N. There is nothing in agreed announcement which in any way

places any obligation on my government supply, either to Indian

Embassy or to your government, list of all Chinese in U.S. Even if it

would be possible to compile such list it could have no relation to abil­

ity of Chinese in U.S. return to your country. Tests of performance of

obligations assumed under agreed announcement are very simple.

O. First test is whether there is in fact any obstruction to return

of individuals who decide do so, and whether individuals are there­

fore able expeditiously exercise their right to return. As I have contin­

ually pointed out since beginning of these talks, my government has

removed all measures which would obstruct any Chinese in U.S. who

desires return from doing so.

P. The second test is whether any individual who believes that,

contrary to this declared policy, he is encountering obstruction in

departure, can freely communicate with representative of third coun­

try. I have repeatedly and unconditionally stated that any Chinese in

U.S. is entirely free communicate with Indian Embassy in this regard.

Indian Embassy is in position fully confirm this to your government.

Q. Next test is whether representative of third country is able

investigate facts in any such case. Again I have fully and uncondition­

ally assured you that Indian Embassy is able do this. And, again, Indian

Embassy is in position confirm this to your government.

R. Next test is willingness of government concerned receive and

promptly act upon representations from representative of third coun­

try concerning any specific case. I have repeatedly assured you here

and Indian Embassy has been assured of willingness of my government

to act in this manner. However, as I have pointed out, I do not have

knowledge of single case in which Indian Embassy has felt it necessary

make representations, nor do I know of any complaint of any kind from

Indian Embassy regarding willingness of my government fully assist

and cooperate with it in carrying out its functions.

S. Without spending further time on this, I believe that facts with

regard to manner and extent to which our respective governments have

met these tests of performance under agreed announcement speak for

themselves.

T. Your second question related to assistance to Indian Embassy in

determining what you termed status of all Chinese in U.S. This is very

vague term and I am not sure exactly what you may mean by it. There is

certainly nothing in our agreed announcement with regard to investiga­

tion of status of all Chinese in U.S. Sole question between our two govern­

ments with regard to Chinese in U.S. under terms of July 25 statement by

our governments, agreed agenda, as well as our agreed announcement,

is that of freedom of Chinese in U.S., who desire do so, return to your

country. I, therefore, assume that by investigation of status you mean

whether individuals do desire return to your country. This is, of course,

something that can be determined only by each individual for himself,

and any so-called “investigation of status” has no relation thereto. Our

agreed announcement and steps taken by my government implement

it fully and comprehensively deal with all aspects of this question. As

I have many times pointed out, any Chinese in United States who desires

return to your country is under no compulsion or requirement obtain

permission from anyone or inform anyone. Neither is he prevented from

informing or communicating with anyone. For example, if he feels that

there is any obstruction to his departure, he is entirely free communicate

with Indian Embassy. He does not have to submit such communication

through anyone else, nor does anyone have right in any way interfere

with his freedom of such communication. There is thus complete and

firm guarantee that any Chinese in the U.S., who in fact desires to return

to your country, is able do so, and no general investigation of status of

Chinese in United States is required.

U. Your third question related to rescinding by U.S. of any meas­

ures which you term would violate spirit of agreed announcement.

I am not aware of any such measures, and it is rather your government

which should rescind and correct measures which not only violate

spirit but letter of our agreed announcement. There continues to be no

obstruction to departure of any Chinese from U.S. for your country. As

I have many times pointed out, there is not even any requirement for

Chinese departing from U.S. obtain exit permit. Requirement of exit

permit in itself entails delay and obstruction no matter how promptly

it may be acted upon. Requirement of obtaining exit permit also pre-­

supposes ability of the agency to which application is made to deny

permit. Therefore if one were to speak of rescinding of measures violat­

ing spirit of agreed announcement, reference would have to be made

to exit permit requirements of your government. Only repeal of such

requirement with respect to Americans in your country would place

our two countries in position of equality and reciprocity in this regard.

V. At our last meeting you referred to supposed requirement that

Chinese in U.S. obtain entry permits into Taiwan. I have investigated

this matter and preliminary statement, which I made to you at our

last meeting, I find to be entirely correct. This relates only to general

requirements under our immigration laws that aliens, admitted to the

U.S. temporarily, desiring to extend their stay must present valid evi­

dence that upon expiration of their temporary stay, they will be able

to proceed to another country. Thus matter relates entirely to Chinese

desiring remain in U.S., rather than Chinese desiring return to your

country, and in no way interferes with or hinders ability of Chinese in

U.S. return to your country. Thus matter has no relation either to letter

or spirit of our agreed announcement.

W. I have spoken thus frankly with regard to this matter as I hope

you continue share my feeling that it is important that in privacy of this

room two of us not attempt dissimulate and conceal differences but

openly discuss them with view of finding solutions.

X. I have spoken in some detail concerning our agreed announce­

ment on September 10 in hope that our differences with regard to this

matter could once and for all be resolved and that, fully understand­

ing our point of view, your government would take the necessary

steps remove this impediment to understanding between us and to

progress in our discussions of other matters. I feel that encouraging

progress we have been able make toward finding acceptable form of

words to express our determination that our differences should not

lead to war makes it doubly urgent that this other matter be quickly

resolved. It is in this spirit I have made this statement this morning

and it is in this spirit I hope it will be most carefully considered by you

and your government.

End prepared statement.

2. Wang replied he had already made known position PRC side

on questions relating to first item on agenda which I had raised at last

meeting.

3. Turning to prepared statement Wang continued during meeting

this morning I had again raised questions in this respect. Though he

had already made his reply on same questions I had raised nevertheless

he willing once again express position his side.

4. Wang said at last meeting and again this morning I had raised

question on first item and without grounds accused PRC side violating

agreed announcement. At same time U.S. side kept stalling discussion

of second item. PRC side considered this attitude could in no way be

reconciled with the statements and the gestures I had made regarding

my desire see progress in talks.

5. Wang said our first item concerned return civilians. It was none

other than U.S. side which violating terms agreement. In first place as

he had previously pointed out PRC side had provided us complete

list of Americans in China at outset our talks whereas U.S. side failed

do same by providing complete list all Chinese in U.S. so that Indian

Embassy in U.S. had no means of fully carrying out functions specified

in agreed announcement.

6. Wang said he could not agree to my statement that this question

bears no relation to discussion of return civilians.

7. Wang said his side has every reason to request Indian Embassy

look into status Chinese in U.S. and investigate facts concerning

obstructions their departure, as well as offer assistance in effecting

return. Yet U.S. has made known it cannot give any assistance to Indian

Embassy that regard.

8. Wang said U.S. side claims Indian Embassy can only communi­

cate with Chinese nationals after individuals have put in request.

9. Wang said though PRC side does not agree this interpretation,

in circumstances since U.S. side adopting such interpretation PRC side

can only treat British Charge on parallel footing.

10. Wang said and now U.S. side expresses dissatisfaction with sit­

uation which has been created solely by U.S. side. This is nothing but

making a nonsensical fuss.

11. Wang said it only PRC side which entitled raise protest. If U.S.

side wishes alter this situation it must first provide complete list names

addresses Chinese in U.S.

12. Wang said in second place American prisoners held in Chinese

prisons are those who have breached law. During period they are serv­

ing sentences they not entitled to request return. To speak of obstruc­

tion to departure is even more out of question.

13. Wang said however as PRC side has stated Chinese Government

reviewing these cases accordance Chinese legal procedures as well as

taking behavior individual into account and will then decide measures

to be taken towards them.

14. Wang said it is matter of fact that China has in accordance its

own statement already taken concrete steps and is carrying on review­

ing work.

15. Wang said China has even made available to the prisoners full

text agreed announcement and has lent hand to British Charge in dis­

tributing notices these people concerning agreed announcement.

16. Wang said in the event of individuals making request British

Charge is also assisted to communicate with and interview them.

17. Wang said I could not deny that letters from these people asking

British Charge for assistance have all been permitted to be forwarded.

18. Wang said during term of their sentences American prisoners’

outgoing communications of course must be handled according to reg­

ulations laid down by competent Chinese authorities.

19. Wang said however other side this matter is that U.S. side never

informed PRC side as to exactly how many Chinese imprisoned in U.S.

nor has Indian Embassy been given list, so it has no means of making

check. Indian Embassy also finds no way extending assistance to such

persons. Such situation is unequitable.

20. Wang said now that U.S. side has raised question of Americans

who have breached laws PRC side demands U.S. should first submit

list of Chinese imprisoned in United States.

21. Wang said in third place U.S. side has also kept raising question

of rate at which PRC side has been releasing law breaking Americans.

As he had specifically stated, this would not advance implementation

of agreed announcement. Americans who had broken law must be

handled in accordance Chinese legal procedures and this could by no

means be hastened by setting deadline. Such is a matter Chinese sov­

ereign rights.

22. Wang said I had also time and again made reference to respect­

ing Chinese legal procedures and avoiding actions prejudicing Chinese

sovereign rights.

23. Wang said thus U.S. side has no justification whatever to raise

demand for effecting release by a deadline or otherwise making such a

demand under different cloak.

24. Wang said PRC side has been releasing Americans who have

breached a law. From beginning these talks on August 1 already

26 among 40 Americans who had breached laws have been released.

This is fact which I cannot but recognize. Already two-thirds of Ameri­

cans have been released.

25. Wang said however no corresponding measures being taken

with respect Chinese being held in prison in U.S.

26. Wang said in fourth place insofar as ordinary Americans in

PRC concerned they have never encountered any difficulty in depart­

ing. Since beginning these talks China been extending assistance to

expedite handling their pending affairs in order they may effect their

return at early date.

27. Wang said 16 who applied to return were all permitted return.

3  of 16 have not yet departed from China. That is due their having

unsettled affairs. However, China giving them all assistance.

28. Wang said the remaining American nationals who may later

desire depart will also be able make their departure and can also count

on being given similar assistance.

29. Wang said insofar as Chinese in U.S. concerned, even in case

of 103 Chinese whom U.S. side admitted had long wanted depart but

whose departure been prevented, 38 of them not yet returned up to

present.

30. Wang said U.S. side stated that they were permitted to depart.

However U.S. side never submitted their addresses nor accounted

for failure to effect their return. Moreover U.S. side has refused assist

Indian Embassy look into their status.

31. Wang said in fifth place PRC side particularly wants lodge pro­

test in connection with measure of Immigration Naturalization Service

which requires Chinese students remaining in U.S. to obtain entry per­

mits for Taiwan.

32. Wang said I had said at last meeting that even if this was case it

was not violation agreement. I had again this morning made reference

to my previous statement. However that statement is sheer sophistry.

33. Wang said this requirement of Immigration Naturalization

­Service has nothing in common with arrangements generally required

of foreign nationals before they effect their departure.

34. Wang said it entirely understandable that Chinese students

may not be able make their return for time being whether because they

not yet completed studies or because they might be delayed by other

personal affairs.

35. Wang said by requiring these Chinese students proceed Taiwan

U.S. obviously subjecting them further threat so that in future they will

not dare demand return mainland of China.

36. Wang said as far back as last April State Department had

admitted that “some Chinese students may refrain from applying to

­Immigration Naturalization Service for permission return to mainland

for fear of being refused”. And now U.S. not only failed take measure

eliminate apprehension created during long period in which they been

subject obstruction and threat but has further adopted threats against

them. This is entirely in violation letter and spirit agreed announce­

ment. PRC side demands that U.S. side promptly remove such regula­

tions which violate agreed announcement.

37. Wang said it is U.S. side which has violated agreement reached

on first item. Yet U.S. side has been making accusations against PRC

side without any grounds. U.S. Secretary of State and other spokesmen

have reversed the merits of this case by accusing PRC side of alleged

failure implement. In view of this Chinese Government has decided

make statement on this question.

38. Wang said he must point out from series of statement made by

US on first item of agenda it appears U.S. side has regarded agreement

as purely unilateral requirement PRC side assume obligations while US

side not bound. U.S. side not only failed provide PRC side and ­Indians

with facilities but laid down regulations in violation of the agreement.

He urged U.S. side implement agreement and still considered we

should proceed item two discussion.

39. Wang said in course discussion of second item it is U.S. side

which suggested renunciation force in international relations. It was

also U.S. side which demanded that two sides make statement this

respect. PRC side has not only put forward reasonable draft but again

submitted new draft drawn on basis points that have been agreed or

may be agreed.

40. Wang said at previous meeting I had stated as result of effort

PRC side there had been considerable progress in talks. At last meeting

had indicated it would be unrealistic enter into another agreement

before previous agreement fully implemented.

41. Wang said it would appear that it is chance of agreement that

has made U.S. side hastily revert to same self-contradictory position

which U.S. side had taken couple of months ago when U.S. side insisted

on final implementation agreed announcement before entering into

discussion of second item.

42. Wang said this situation could not but pose once more ques­

tion of whether U.S. side has sincere desire for progress when it insists

on the condition of final implementation before there will be another

agreement. Did I mean that there could be an agreement only after

all Chinese in U.S. desiring to return had done so? If that were what

I meant it would not be a matter of few months but a matter of years for

the return of Chinese in U.S. who number tens of thousands.

43. Wang said U.S. side must see that if it attempts by this method

to drag out or break up the talks it will get nothing good out of it.

44. Wang said he wished to point out that if U.S. side was sincere

there is no justification for entangling talks with question of item one.

Agreement should be reached on new draft of PRC side. Then talks

could proceed to negotiation on problems at issue between both sides.

45. I replied that either Wang had misunderstood me, in which

case I was sorry I had not made myself clear, or he had chosen distort

what I had said concerning relationship of agreed announcement of

September 10 and possible future agreements. Wang had quoted me as

saying it would be unrealistic to enter into another agreement before

first was fully implemented. I did not recall having said that and felt

sure I hadn’t. What I had said, was that I felt it would be unrealistic

enter into another agreement unless full confidence was established

that first was being carried out. I had many times referred to impor­

tance of confidence and full understanding between us, without which

it would be unrealistic enter into other agreements. I had understood at

last meeting he agreed with that.

46. I said I had for these reasons discussed agreed announcement

in such detail. Far from desiring to retard progress I was hoping by this

to expedite progress. In that spirit I had frankly discussed matter. If

I did not desire make progress, I certainly would not take time and effort

discuss this first matter as seriously as I had. I would be doing disserv­

ice to both of us if I attempted conceal or gloss over my government’s

feeling concerning operation of first announcement.

47. I said we should be completely frank. At time Wang and I had

discussed agreed announcement, it was clear between us that largest

group of Americans in his country under discussion was those in

prison. I had made it clear at that time I had no intent interfere with

method his government chose handle problem.

48. I said at time we issued agreed announcement, only Americans

remaining Wang’s country concerning whom U.S. had no assurances in

regard to departure were those in prison. Our long discussion of draft

agreed announcement had revolved almost entirely about this group.

I had at first suggested problem be resolved by permitting their return

prior to any statement. When Wang not willing, I had suggested release

be simultaneous with issuance agreed announcement. When Wang did

not accept that proposal, I suggested at least private understanding

concerning length of time that would be needed. Wang unable accept

that position. However, Wang had told me many times, time required

would be very short. I would not review entire discussion that led up

to suggestion by Wang and acceptance by US of word “expeditiously”.

49. I said it was certainly clear in using that word concerning release

of Americans in PRC we were talking about Americans in prison. It

was also clear that phrase “further appropriate measures” pertained to

measures within PRC sovereignty that would be taken to bring about

release these Americans.

50. I said sometime before we issued announcement, Wang had indi­

cated review of number of cases had been completed. On ­September 10,

he informed me of these 10 names whose review completed. I did not

know how long review of 10 had taken, but presumably review started

after August 1. As I had pointed out this morning, this made total of

33 persons assured release in six week period between August 1 and

August 1. In fourteen weeks since that time, only 5 additional released.

As I had said, it appeared issuance agreed announcement has in fact

slowed up resolution this problem.

51. I said I had not raised question of complete implementation of

September 10 announcement. I thought it could and should have been

completely implemented before this, insofar as this group of Americans

is concerned. If it could have been, this certainly would have had ben­

eficial effects. Nevertheless, what I have been raising is only question

whether statement has any real substance or meaning insofar as this

group is concerned.

52. I said on basis of facts it is certainly understandable that my

government has doubts concerning how much meaning statement

really has. Apparently PRC had reservations with respect to meaning

and substance of statement. Those reservations not apparent to my

government when it agreed to enter into statement. What I was asking

in all earnestness was that some action be taken by PRC which would

remove doubts on part my government.

53. I said turning again to questions he had raised, I honestly did

not see how they bore any relationship to question of implementa­

tion. As I had pointed out there are simple tests of manner in which

announcement is being implemented. I would not take the time to

repeat. However, basic test is whether or not there is obstruction to any

Chinese departing U.S. for PRC or any other country. In spite of all

discussion revolving about this question, there is still to be produced

as single case of any kind of official obstruction by U.S. since my assur­

ances to Wang this regard on August 2.

54. I said on one hand he had raised question of 38 Chinese who

had not returned, out of group of 103. On other hand he had made

statement acknowledging some Chinese in U.S. may not desire return

for time being. In regard to 103, he apparently still not clear what that

group consisted of. I had never said that all of group desired return and

prevented from doing so. I did not want to go again over issuance of

restraining orders. I wanted to make clear, however, that issuance those

orders not necessarily related to whether person desired return. Orders

issued, as I had pointed out, in absence of exit permit system to prevent

departure of persons we did not desire go PRC at that time. Some per­

sons that group may not at any time have in fact desired return. Others

may have subsequently changed their mind. I had no way of knowing.

55. I said facts in individual cases not important. Important thing

is whether persons now know that they free to go if they so desire and

that if they feel obstructed they free communicate with Indian Embassy.

Each person individually informed restraining order his case lifted.

Each person aware of his right to get on boat and leave if he desired

do so. Each person perfectly aware of ability and right to communicate

with Indian Embassy if he feels obstructed. That applies to all Chinese

in U.S.

56. I said Wang had again spoken of alleged fear of some Chinese

in U.S. to apply for departure lest they be refused. I had stated over and

over again that no Chinese desiring depart U.S. need apply to anyone

for permission to do so. No exit permits of any kind required to depar­

ture. As I had pointed out this morning, if our nationals were to be

placed on equal basis, PRC would have to repeal its exit permit require­

ments. However, I had not and did not intend to make such demand,

since I did not want get bogged down in discussion of subject.

57. I said Wang had referred to cases Chinese in prison in U.S. I did

not know of any such case. Certainly if there were a Chinese in prison

who desired return, he free communicate with Indian Embassy and

Indian Embassy free investigate his case.

58. I said Wang had also again raised question of INS requirement

concerning entry permits to Taiwan. I would repeat again that there is

no general requirement Chinese in U.S. obtain entry permits to Taiwan.

What there is, is normal and regular requirement of any country that

person entering country temporarily must show that at end of stay he

able go somewhere else. This not applicable to Chinese alone but to all

aliens entering country. This normal requirement by consular officers

issuing visas and has been done as long as I can remember. When per­

son in country under temporary status desires extend period of stay, he

must show this still holds good.

59. I said this arose regularly in regard to Chinese admitted tem­

porarily as it does in regard any other nationality. Requirement can be

satisfied in number of ways. Does not change fact when alien desires

depart he free to do so and go any place of his choice. This need not be

place he indicated at time of application. We do not control destination

of aliens. They free depart any time for any destination of their choice.

60. I said Wang had spoken of his government making statement

on September 10 announcement. It was not clear whether he referring

to his statement here this morning or to public statement. I hoped it

would not be latter. I was willing see facts made public, as I was sure

facts would speak for themselves, but I did not see how it would help

progress talks to engage in public propaganda. Such course would cer­

tainly entangle discussions.

61. I said I was sure he had noted that in spite of great public con­

cern in U.S. over subject, statements by Secretary of State restrained

in tone and confined to expression expectation announcement will

be fully implemented. Secretary thus attempting discourage public

debate. I thought he had been quite successful in this effort.

62. I said I had talked privately and frankly with Wang about sub­

ject. I had carefully and honestly answered all questions he had raised,

and frankly given views of my government. I failed to see how bringing

all this into public propaganda debate could contribute to progress.

63. Wang replied that he was very disappointed and wished express

regret that discussion last meeting and again today had gone beyond

item two of agenda. PRC side has no intent or desire go back to dis­

putes and discussion that took place before issuance of September 10

agreement. It was because I had engaged discussion item one, PRC side

forced do same.

64. Wang said his side always rejected any accusations by myself

or by U.S. officials alleging his side violating agreement on return civil­

ians. It has been position PRC side all along that either we would not

reach agreement or, if agreement reached, it would be faithfully carried

out so far as PRC side concerned. PRC has not altered this position. It

can be seen PRC side is exactly performing agreement. From figures

I had produced this morning, cannot be denied majority of Americans

including those who committed offenses have departed.

65. Wang said we had had long argument over handling of group

of Americans who breached law in China. PRC side did not enter into

agreement that this group would be released by given date. This very

clear. As he had indicated before, two factors will count concerning

handling these Americans. One factor is behavior of individual and

nature of case. Other is manner in which relations between our two

countries improve. He might ask whether there has been any signifi­

cant improvement in relations between two countries since issuance of

­September 10 announcement.

66. Wang said as to question whether there are Chinese held in

US prisons, I had answered I did not know of such cases. This did not

mean that there is no such case. I had said even if there were such cases,

Chinese held in U.S. prisons would be free communicate with Indian

Embassy and request latter make investigation in such cases. This was

answer I had provided. He wanted to point out that investigation into

facts such cases and ability these persons effect return are two sepa­

rate matters. He wished assure me Chinese Government handling cases

Americans who breach law in China in exactly this manner.

vented from returning and have not yet effected return, I had suggested

these persons may have changed their mind. He considered there was

no ground for such conclusion. It incredible that individuals who had

dared demand return under circumstances of being subjected to threats

would not wish to return after issuance agreed announcement.

68. Wang said in regard to INS requirement Chinese students

obtain entry permit Taiwan within given time limit, my explanation

was not convincing. He might cite case of American nationals in China

to explain his point. As I was aware, Mrs. Huizer was holding Dutch

passport and as rule would be considered Dutch national. However,

I had requested she be returned as American national. It was good will

on PRC side that case was handled as that of American national. In

explaining my point I had stated every alien national should be allowed

proceed destination of his choice. How would I explain matter con­

cerning Chinese nationals in U.S.? Why did U.S. side not take steps so

Chinese would obtain entry permits to China instead of insisting they

obtain entry permits Taiwan. By contrasting manner in which PRC side

handled case of Mrs. Huzer and manner in which U.S. side handled

requirement Chinese students obtain entry permits Taiwan, clear pic­

ture emerges of unfriendly attitude U.S. side. This also open violation

September 10 agreement.

69. Wang said I had spoken of necessity ensuring understand­

ing and confidence both sides in solution problems before us. On this

he was in full agreement. He regarded present talks as concrete step

toward promotion understanding and confidence our two sides. After

forty days discussion, we able agree on September 10 agreement, the

first between us. This represented further increase confidence and

understanding between our two sides.

70. Wang said if since September 10 side issues had not been

raised in discussion, he was sure we would have been able on basis

September 10 agreement make steady progress in settlement other

matters at issue in sincere spirit. However, stalling by U.S. side

in discussion item 2 and entangling over question of first item of

agenda, even with accusation PRC has violated agreement, will not

help obtain better understanding

71. Wang said during course discussion PRC side has firmly fol­

lowed understanding between both sides to discuss matters in frank

and open spirit without engaging in progpaganda. However repeated

distortions appearing in press originated by U.S. official quarters alleg­

ing PRC side violating agreement have compelled PRC Government

make its position clear.

72. I asked whether Wang’s government had already or was going

to issue statement.

73. Wang replied he had not said his government had already

made statement.

74. I asked whether it was going to do so.

75. Wang said that was correct.

76. I said that he must realize that my government would have to

consider making statement in reply.

77. Wang said to his knowledge U.S. Government had already

made public statements on numerous occasions.

78. I asked what statements he was referring to.

79. Wang said without enumerating all instances, he could cite

­Secretary Dulles’ press conference of December 6.

80. I said I did not wish to argue the point. Secretary was asked

question in press conference and carefully refrained from making this

public issue. As I had pointed out, American people expected impris­

oned Americans would be permitted expeditiously return. By any

standard they not returning expeditiously. Inevitably Secretary of State

is being asked questions this regard. His answers entirely directed at

reducing public controversy this point. He has consistently taken stand

he hoped and expected agreement would be carried out. I did not see

how exception could be taken to such statements, which in fact directed

at attempting improve atmosphere surrounding talks and allaying

public speculation in U.S. If PRC Government now determined bring

matter into public propaganda field, difficult for me but to conclude

that PRC does not share our desires for progress in talks. This cannot

but adversely influence whole atmosphere that has been created.

81. I said Wang had spoken of September 10 announcement as

furthering understanding and confidence between us. That had been

exactly my hope. However, it is not words of announcement and

appearance of agreement that further understanding, but carrying out

of announcement. It was only because of my tremendous interest in

furthering progress that I had discussed matters the way I had. I regret­

ted that matter was going to enter propaganda field, which could not

but inhibit discussion of subject here.

82. I said I regretted that Wang had again spoken of state of our

relations as factor in determining release of Americans. I had previ­

ously given my views on this and the inevitable interpretation that

must be placed upon it. Improvement of relations is two way street. I

had tried since beginning of talks point out as clearly as I could relation­

ship between improvement of relations and views of American people

concerning continued imprisonment of Americans. This not subject to

arbitrary control of U.S. Government or anyone in U.S. Government.

But is basic fact that must be taken into consideration in discussing our

relations. I would not be honest and would not be doing service to our

relations if I did not point this out frankly.

83. I said there were only two other small items. I had previously

tried to make clear that group of 103 Chinese he had referred to were

not persons who had demanded return, but were people who may or

may not have desired to return against whom restraining orders were

issued.

84. I said I failed to see any relationship between Mrs. Huizer and

my explanation of immigration laws concerning temporary visitors.

I was sure he did not mean to imply that if she had been Dutch subject

she would not have been permitted leave.

85. I said concerning requirement of immigration law regarding

temporary visitors, his country and every other country must have sim­

ilar regulations. PRC certainly did not admit foreigners on temporary

visits unless they able go somewhere else at end of visit. Various coun­

tries may administer such measures in various ways. As I had pointed

out, U.S. requirement can be satisfied in various ways. Certainly it did

not interfere with ability Chinese in U.S. proceed PRC if they decided

to do so. Therefore, requirement had no relation to implementation

agreed announcement.

86. Wang said he still did not agree to my explanation of INS

requirement for Chinese in U.S. obtain entry permits Taiwan. Chinese

students in U.S. all came from mainland of China. What right did U.S.

Government have compel these students proceed to Taiwan? He had

referred to case of Mrs. Huizer because PRC had regarded her as Dutch

subject. I had regarded her as American national. Citation of Mrs.

Huizer was designed show how Chinese Government has been han­

dling problems in friendly spirit. Whereas U.S. side handling problems

of Chinese in U.S. in unfriendly spirit.

87. Wang said I had said if Mrs. Huizer was Dutch, would PRC

have prevented her departure. He could only conclude that it is a delib­

erate distortion for U.S. side to state matter in this manner.

88. Wang said as to need for establishing friendly atmosphere

around talks, this was always objective of PRC side. But in order estab­

lish friendly atmosphere both sides must make common effort. It would

be illusion for one side to insist on making charges while it wants other

side keep silent. Statement PRC side is going to make has been com­

pelled by U.S. propaganda.

89. I asked whether Wang could give me copy of statement.

90. Wang replied he did not now have a copy.

91. I said I wished again to deny emphatically that any Chinese in

U.S. are being required to proceed to Taiwan.

92. Wang said this denial would have practical effect only after INS

repealed its requirement on Chinese students.

93. I said there was no INS requirement that any Chinese student

go to Taiwan.

94. Wang said requirement compelling students make such appli­

cation is nothing but forcing them to proceed to Taiwan.

95. I said students could satisfy requirement in any number of

ways. Wang must be aware that all Chinese who entered U.S. in recent

years entered under Government of Republic of China passports. If

those passports have expired, it is perfectly natural for these people

to obtain renewal of their passports. However, whether they fulfill

requirement that way or not, nothing compels them go to Taiwan.

96. Wang said as he had pointed out he could not regard this meas­

ure as justifiable.

97. I said I had nothing further on this subject. However, I was

seriously disturbed over PRC side placing our talks on this subject

into propaganda field. In view of action his government and in view

of approaching holiday season for both of us, I wondered whether

it would be preferable have few weeks interval before next meeting.

Action of his government is inevitably going to entangle two items our

agenda and our discussion. Perhaps if we were not to meet for a short

period it might reduce public speculation and get us back to situation

where we could make progress. I was throwing this suggestion out as

sincere effort try reduce impact action his government and in hope it

will enable us make further progress. Would appreciate his views.

98. Wang said what period of time did I have in mind in proposing

a short recess.

100. Wang said there are two aspects to question. According to

what I had said, I desired recess and I was trying justify this recess by

alleged effect of action his government was going to take. If this was

case, he could not agree to recess because it would not reconcile with

spirit of making efforts find common ground between us. However, if

recess proposal was motivated merely by consideration of holidays, he

would consider suggestion and reply later.

101. I said I did not feel move his government will be helpful find­

ing common ground between us. It was one of reasons leading me to

suggest recess. However I did not desire to press point.

102. Wang said as I had stated, he would not agree to recess on

first grounds, relating to action his government. If I insisted on recess

on those grounds his side compelled make further statement to clarify

its position. However, if second reason were in mind, if motive were

purely the approaching holidays, then he would consider matter and

give reply later.

103. I said my specific suggestion was for recess until January 12.

If he preferred some other period I would consider it. I was not trying

to be arbitrary.

104. Wang said he would reply after consideration. I asked when

that would be and whether before December 22. He replied he couldn’t

say but would make it as soon as possible. In reply to my query as to

what we would say to press he suggested we inform press next meet­

ing would be December 22, the usual date. In case of change we would

announce it later to press.

105. I pointed out I was leaving for Prague Friday and would

appreciate if possible an answer before I left. He said he would try but

could not promise.

Gowen

1294. From Johnson.

1. Text of press statement PRC Foreign Affairs Ministry was made

available to correspondents here by Chinese Consulate General. Wang

refused correspondents request for interview, and officer handing out

­Priority. Repeated to Paris for the Secretary only as telegram 291.

statement refused answer any questions on grounds had just been

received from Peiping had no time yet to read. Assume full text avail­

able from FBIS. Statement of more than thousand words covered only

following points:

A) U.S. failure supply list Chinese in U.S. to Indian Embassy.

B) While since August first 26 out of 40 American law breakers

have been released, U.S. has refused inform PRC how many Chinese

imprisoned in U.S. or list of their names.

C) No time limit can be set for release remaining Americans whose

cases being reviewed individually and therefore “no justification for

Americans to ask, or ask in disguised form for setting time limit to

release American criminals” who are being released expeditiously.

D) Departure “ordinary” Americans not obstructed and in fact

assisted where required while of 103 Chinese who U.S. admitted long

prevented from departing 38 still not returned.

E) INS regulation requiring Chinese in U.S. obtain entry permit for

Taiwan is threat against Chinese students unable for time being return

which is violation letter and spirit September 10 agreement.

2. Statement closes with “The charge of the American side that

China has not fully complied with the agreement is completely unten­

able. The Chinese Government firmly asks that the American side put

a stop to all its acts in violation of the agreement and fully comply with

the agreement between both sides”.

3. I am informing press for attribution my spokesman that PRC

ascertain in statement that it has fully complied with agreed announce­

ment of September 10 and allegation that U.S. has not are completely

contrary to fact. Any further comment would have to come from

­Washington. For background I have pointed out to correspondents

here lack of relation charges against U.S. to obligations under agreed

announcement and apparent attempt to obscure CHICOM failure

comply with September 10 announcement in cases 14 imprisoned

Americans. Have also expressed for attribution spokesman puzzle­

ment at reference demand for time limit release Americans pointing

out know of no public statements this regard.

Gowen

1295. From Johnson. Re Mytel 1289.

Paragraph 21 second sentence to end should read: “As he had

specifically stated in advance reaching agreement on return civil­

ians, Americans who had broken law must be handled in accordance

­Chinese legal procedures and this could by no means be hastened by

setting deadline. Such is matter Chinese sovereign rights.”

Gowen

1296. From Johnson.

1. In event meeting is held December 22 I find some difficulty in

formulating any views on best course of action. However, following are

some factors I believe should be considered in formulating tactics for

next meeting and future strategy. Unless there is some new and unex­

pected development from CHICOM side before meeting such as release

some prisoners it seems to me it would be difficult in present position

to undertake any intensive discussion renunciation force. At same time

further extended discussion implementation can only rake over already

thoroughly plowed ground. (Incidentally situation with respect who

speaks first also not clear. At this last meeting it was Wang’s “turn” but

he deferred to my request open meeting.)

2. Though both of us have preserved some freedom of maneuver

and have left some leeway for enlarging area of maneuver, we are very

close to deadlock. Position I have set forth is substantially that refusing

further discussion under agenda item two until at least some further

CHICOM steps on implementation. CHICOM position is virtually that

ited Distribution.

of no further releases prisoners until “relations improved” by at least

resumption discussion under agenda item two.

3. It therefore seems to me one question we face is whether on one

hand we attempt enlarge area of maneuver or respond any attempt by

Wang do so, or on other hand whether we desire push them further into

corner even at risk full deadlock. Full repetition my line last meeting

with emphasis on their failure implement will push them further into

corner. On other hand it may be possible maintain and enlarge area of

maneuver by putting emphasis my regret on damage atmosphere talks

their public statement and impediment to confidence created by their

hidden reservations on September 10 announcement.

4. I am inclined think that if meeting held December 22 Wang may

attempt force my hand on discussion renunciation force draft in effort

better establish basis for public position of charging us with “stalling”.

In response I could follow either foregoing lines but believe latter line

would be more productive.

Gowen

Letter No. 19

Geneva, December 16, 1955

Dear Walter:

I have neglected writing you the past few weeks, on the one hand,

because I felt that I have covered matters very thoroughly in my tele­

grams, and, on the other, since the necessity of my returning to Prague

each week because of the negotiations I have going on up there has left

me little time after getting out my telegrams.

I know that in some of my messages I posed some really hard

and possibly unanswerable questions at this time, but I, nevertheless,

wanted you all to know what was worrying me and that I did appreci­

ate answers to the extent that they could be made.

As I have indicated in my telegrams, I have had serious doubts

about the efficacy of the course I have been asked to pursue the past

two meetings, but I have, nevertheless, tried to do my best in carrying

out the instructions I have received. Very frankly, while we have been

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

able to establish what will undoubtedly appear as a good position “on

the record”, I think that it has, if anything, set back the release of fur­

ther Americans, and I am at the moment not at all clear as to where we

go from here. Yesterday’s session was a very trying one, and towards

the end of the meeting I tried to balance myself on the knife’s edge in

testing their reaction to the continuation of these talks. It was quite clear

to me that they certainly did not want a break, at least at this time, but,

as I have said in a telegram last week, I do not think that we can safely

assume that this is going to continue indefinitely.

I hope that the Department appreciates that in practice it would be

extremely difficult for me to carry out an instruction, such as that for

the last meeting, to introduce our amendments on their renunciation

of force draft if necessary to prevent a break. It would probably only

be absolutely clear that a break was coming if Wang were to make an

ultimatum type statement of some kind to the effect that there would be

no point in continuing the meetings unless I negotiated on their renun­

ciation of force statement. This would, of course, be in effect an ultima­

tum, and if I were at that point suddenly to respond to his ultimatum,

I would entirely destroy my future negotiating position.

I greatly appreciated the telegram authorizing Helenka’s employ­

ment and she is going to go to work right away. I had thought of this

possibility but had not yet got around to talking with her when your

telegram arrived.

Give my regards to all and an especially Merry Christmas to you

and Dorothy from Pat and myself.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Letter No. 27

Washington, December 16, 1955

Dear Alex:

I am sure you must have been concerned at the last two meetings

as to whether the tactics being adopted might not lead to an early break

Official–­Informal.

in the talks. This problem has been given very serious consideration

here. The consensus is that on the one hand the time has come when we

must adopt a more forceful position with respect to Chinese ­Communist

failure to implement the Agreed Announcement and on the other the

Communists are not in a favorable position to break off the talks. These

are the considerations which led to the decision to undertake tactics

possibly involving greater risk of a break. The matter was discussed

with the Secretary himself and he agreed that the time had come to

take a stiffer attitude. I know that you have felt in the past that your

basic instructions to keep the talks going frequently prevented you

from taking as strong a line as you would have liked. The feeling here

now is that we have in the talks accomplished a good deal up to this

point toward our objective of making it more difficult for the Chinese

­Communists to resort to force and that we can now take greater risks

than heretofore.

How useful to you are the FLDNP and ALDLP figures sent each

week? I notice that you have not used them recently in the meetings,

and that in any case, the Chinese do not pay much attention to them.

Their compilation requires a considerable investment in time by I&NS

and CA. Unless you feel otherwise we plan to discontinue this work.

With regard to the details in the cases of missing US military per­

sonnel, we have tracked down some of the Chinese newspapers in

which there are probably references to some of the 450 men on your

list. It will require a lot at work to go through the papers and find the

names. Therefore, we do not plan to undertake it until such time as it

appears you may be called upon to take up this matter again in Geneva.

I am enclosing a copy of a speech made by Nehru September 6

which you may wish to refer to next time you discuss renunciation of

force with Wang. You will note on page I–2 that Nehru has explicitly

renounced force with regard to Goa.

We have received a request for the original Chinese version of

Wang’s letter of September 16. If any of your staff has the time we

should appreciate your sending us copies both of this letter and of the

Chinese draft Agreed Announcement on the renunciation of the use of

force in Chinese.

Mr. Hoover and Mr. Robertson believe that we have been sitting on

the story of the mistreated Americans about long enough. The time may

have come for us to release some accounts of the outrageous treatment

experienced by these people. We are now working on an account of the

experiences of a number of people. It is still an open question how we

will use this material. The main objective would be to show foreign coun­

tries which may have some influence in Peiping what we are confronting.

No final decision to use this material immediately has been made. The

compilation of the material is on a contingency basis, but the tendency is

to think that we should use it fairly soon unless there is an early favor­

able development in regard to the 14. The most impressive account we

have is the ghastly story of Bersohn, which he has written in full. Being

an intelligent and articulate person, his story is effective, all the more so

because it is written in an objective, matter of fact way without emotion,

sermonizing or generalization. I am enclosing a copy of a memorandum

from John Henderson to Mr. Robertson embodying his ideas of how an

information campaign should be conducted. If you have any thoughts on

this, I would suggest that you get them in immediately.

I am engrossed now in drafting a Departmental statement in reply

to the Chinese Communist press release of last night. It is a rush effort

since we must issue it this afternoon.

I am planning to take a little leave next week if we get the recess.

Otherwise, I expect to continue on the job.

The long lapse in my letters is explained by the fact that there just

has not been any background or long-term guidance I could give you

which was not embodied in the official telegrams. I hope that it will be

different from now on.

I trust your administrative problems that you mentioned in your

letter No. 18 are pretty well solved with the employment of Helena

Osborn as your secretary and the assignment of Ekvall to Paris.

It was good to hear your voice on the telephone last night. Con­

gratulations on your continued good handling of your trying assign­

ment, and holiday greetings and good wishes to both you and Pat.

Sincerely yours,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Three British notes.

2. Nehru speech.

3. Memorandum from Mr. Henderson.

Geneva, December 19, 1955, noon

1300. From Osborn.

Following just received from Wang:

“Since our side proposed the new draft for an agreed announce­

ment at our December 1 meeting and although you have repeatedly

referred to it as an encouraging progress in the talks, however, your side

has, for three consecutive meetings, not expressed its attitude towards

our new draft so that we have not been able to carry on discussions on

the basis of this new draft in order to reach agreement. Our side con­

siders that our new draft is entirely capable of leading to an agreement

between the two sides and as such there should be no (repeat no) fur­

ther delay. Our next meeting should be held on December 22, without

alteration, as was agreed between us and publicly announced.”

Gowen

Limited Distribution. Repeated Niact to Prague for the Ambassador only as telegram 17.

Will depart Prague tomorrow morning so as meet with Wang

December 22.

Believe that at meeting I should strongly reject effort in Wang’s

message use withholding agreement on recess force lines discussion.

Nevertheless if radio report I have just heard both Bradshaws released

confirmed believe basing presentation on this I could usefully under­

take some discussion renunciation force draft at December 22 meeting,

in addition to presentation on implementation suggested my ­December

introduction our amendments which while certainly not palatable other

side might be useful in encouraging further releases and would place me

in more advantageous position to propose recess until January 12.

In any event at December 22 meeting I would propose recess until

January 12 and insist strongly on minimum of recess until January 5.

However, would appreciate Department’s instructions on how far it

desires me to go in insisting on recess. That is, does it desire I go to extent

of simply telling him I am not prepared meet regardless his desires. This

would of course result in hereafter tending make timing of meetings sub­

stantive issue which both of us have thus far avoided.

Johnson

1410. For Johnson.

Guidance for December 22 meeting.

1. You should point out undesirability public exchanges like last

week’s as they impede real progress in talks. Remind Wang you urged

Communists not make statement, but since they insisted US compelled

reply. Suggest place for discussions is in meeting not in public and

express hope this will be followed in future.

2. Express satisfaction at Bradshaw release, adding hope this por­

tends early release thirteen remaining Americans. Inform Wang US

position on implementation Agreed Announcement has been stated

in Department’s press release December 16 and no further statement

required at this time. Add betterment in relations can only be expected

as prisoners are released.

3. Propose recess until January 12 on basis Christmas and New

Year holidays. If Wang resists point out he said at last meeting he will­

ing consider on this basis and remind him of importance these holidays

in US. Issue should not be pressed to point of refusing meet regardless

his insistence although you could go so far as to state that in absence

Limited Distribution. Drafted by Clough and Phleger; cleared in draft by Dulles and

McConaughy.

any major development you will be in Prague and unavailable to meet

on December 29.

4. Department considers that odds against Communists breaking

off talks at this time in light developments at UN which they proba­

bly would think make it unwise from their viewpoint to break. There­

fore, we can press further on implementation without serious risk and

with hope of some results. Release of Dr. Bradshaw would seem bear

this out. Bradshaw release justifies temporary relaxation pressure on

implementation, but it is desirable avoid discussion other topics at next

meeting, particularly in view hard tone Wang’s note refusing recess

proposal. However if you believe introduction revised US draft essen­

tial to forestall break you authorized to do so.

5. You may inform Wang in any case that on January 12 you will

have comments to make on his draft and will have some changes to

propose.

6. If Wang should accuse US of misrepresentation in stating you

had protested “cruel and inhuman treatment” of Americans, you

should tell him we referring to Bradshaw case.

Dulles

1308. From Johnson.

1. One and one-half hour meeting this morning.

2. Wang insisted on opening making strongest charges to date of

US stalling, “insincerity” and renewing line of last meeting on imple­

mentation. Made special reference to cruel and inhuman treatment

portion Dept release. Statement constituted strong invitation to me to

rehash implementation discussion last few meetings.

3. In light subsequent developments at meeting, believe Wang was

attempting lay basis for immediate issuance by them of public statement

on agenda item two discussions and US failure respond their Decem­

ber 1 draft on renunciation of force. However, believe this was forestalled

Limited Distribution.

by my subsequent statement along lines Deptel 1410, particularly para 5

which, however, I stated in somewhat less categorical fashion.

4. In reply he reiterated points his opening statement and in noting

my statement re discussion his draft proposed January 12 meeting said:

“I should say that that would be the last opportunity for us to reach an

agreement on basis our new draft. We can permit no further delay. Oth­

erwise we will be compelled to make public the proceedings of our dis­

cussions on the second item of our agenda and leave it to public opinion

for judgment. We cannot afford to endure definite delay in this respect.”

5. Although foregoing statement carries some implication of break-

off, I interpret it only to be threat to go to public. Believe, however, intro­

duction our amendments next meeting would probably forestall this.

6. I challenged ultimatum aspect this statement characterizing as

threat. In reply he did not withdraw statement but denied it was threat.

He proposed and during subsequent give and take strongly insisted

on next meeting January 6. I indicated I could not give any assurances

would be in position discuss his December 1 draft before January 12.

He finally accepted my suggestion. We announced next meeting for

January 12 and if in meanwhile any developments either considered to

make meeting desirable would get in touch with other. Agreed press

announcement would state simply that in view of Christmas and New

Year holidays next meeting January 12. Word recess was not used.

Departing for Prague this evening.

Gowen

1311. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 31st meeting today with prepared statement: It

three months since September 14, when our side put forward question

of embargo and question of making preparations for Sino-American

negotiations on higher level, as second item for agenda.

2. Wang said if both sides share sincere desire for peaceful set­

tlement Sino-American disputes there should not be any difficulty in

Distribution.

speedily reaching agreement on these subjects. However, US side on

October 8 proposed both sides first make announcement renouncing

use force. Our side submitted on Oct. 27 draft stating that in accordance

provisions UN Charter we agree settle disputes by peaceful means

without resort threat or use force.

3. Wang said, in order realize this common desire, his draft stated

two countries decided hold Foreign Ministers conference to settle ques­

tion relaxing and eliminating tension in Taiwan area.

4. Wang said this draft should certainly have been acceptable to

both sides. Nevertheless, US side rejected it and was not ready to accept

concrete step provided in this draft which foresaw imminent holding

Foreign Ministers meeting.

5. Wang said, again in order expedite progress, PRC side has

made another effort. On December 1 put forward new draft on agreed

announcement. It provided that PRC and US are determined that they

should settle disputes through peaceful negotiations without resort threat

or use force, and added that two Ambassadors should continue talks to

seek practical and feasible means for realizing this common desire.

6. Wang said his new draft had taken views US side into account

and incorporated all points which already agreed on or might be agree­

able. I had admitted I recognized this as encouraging progress. Hence

it evident both sides should speedily reach agreement based on his new

draft.

7. Wang said, however, for last three meetings US side has thus far

failed make known any concrete views on this draft. As result we have

not been able carry on discussions and reach agreement on his new draft.

8. Wang said, in last few meetings not only not been discussion his

draft but also have been no preparations for Foreign Ministers meeting

nor any progress in making bilateral statement which was first pressed

for by US. US side must shoulder full responsibility for such unsatis­

factory situation.

9. Wang said since talks entered into second phase of agenda, US

side has been dragging out talks. At first meeting following conclusion

agreement on civilians item, US side announced that before implemen­

tation of first announcement complete it would be premature to enter

into discussion other matters. It precisely that unreasonable attitude

which has deferred progress in talks.

10. Wang said subsequently when US unable avoid getting along

into item two, it again continually kept thrusting implementation of

first agreed announcement into discussions, in deliberate attempt to

entangle talks and obstruct progress.

11. Wang said lately US side went step further by making groundless

charges that PRC side has not fully implemented agreed announcement,

while at same time refusing implement. That is deliberate attempt

defeat any concrete outcome talks. At our last meeting he had already

brought out that PRC side has all along been faithfully implementing,

and it was none other than US side which not only not implementing,

but had acted in deliberate violation agreed announcement.

12. Wang said thus far US side not yet furnished PRC with names

and information on all Chinese in US, while of those Chinese who US

admitted had desired return but had long been prevented from return­

ing [garble] there still many who not been permitted return.

13. Wang said US has never given PRC side any accounting of

Chinese imprisoned in US nor adopted any appropriate measures in

regard them.

14. Wang said I had stated that Indian Embassy had made no repre­

sentations concerning the disability of any Chinese to depart, however,

actual fact is that US side has completely refused offer any assistance

to Indian Embassy permitting it take initiative to learn about Chinese

in US and take measures help them. Result is that Indian Embassy not

been in position to fully carry out its functions.

15. Wang said moreover US side is posing further threats to ­Chinese

students in US by requiring them obtain entry permits Taiwan as con­

dition their temporary stay in US, so that in future they will not dare

ask return mainland. Such is outright contradiction to undertakings of

US side by which it announced “US recognizes that Chinese in US who

desire return PRC are entitled do so, and declares that it has adopted

and will further adopt appropriate measures so they can expeditiously

exercise their right to return.”

16. Wang said this action by US side has grave consequences. He

asked that US side give consideration point he had raised, make satis­

factory answer to it.

17. Wang said December 16 statement by State Dept. while

attempting deny this gross violation agreed announcement even made

allegation about Americans in China being subject cruel and inhuman

treatment. He could only express indignation at such charges. Such

charges do not have shred of factual basis since Americans who been

imprisoned in China have repudiated these charges. If one to talk

about cruel and inhuman treatment, it none other than American side

which guilty of this, by preventing for long period return of Chinese

to homeland and their reunion with their families.

18. Wang said it none but US which guilty cruel inhuman treat­

ment for, after persecuting threatening Chinese in US it has now come

out in outright breach of agreed announcement by adopting measures

against them. There many cases of Chinese whose mental state put out

of order as result protracted threats and persecution against them by

US Government. There are such cases among Chinese who returned to

China recently.

19. Wang said it is distortion of agreement to allege that there is no

distinction between ordinary Americans in China and those who have

committed offenses in China.

20. Wang said he would like frankly point out it is not possible for

PRC side or for anyone who sincerely concerned with Sino-American

talks to tolerate charges which reverse merits of matter and drag out

talks. Wang said PRC side asks that talks should without further delay

get down to discussion of making announcement on basis their new

draft so as to reach agreement thereon.

21. I then presented prepared statement as follows:

A. Before taking up any other matters this morning, I desire express

my satisfaction at release of Dr. Bradshaw and news that both he and

Mrs. Bradshaw have now arrived Hong Kong. I would hope that this

action your government portends early release fourteen Americans still

remaining in prison your country, thus removing not only this source

dispute and controversy between us here but also removing continuing

impediment to improvement relations between our two countries.

B. I regret note that in spite of fact that at our last meeting I most

earnestly urged your government not issue public statement concern­

ing substance our discussions here regarding our agreed announce­

ment September 10, your government, nevertheless, issued such

statement. As I pointed out at our last meeting, it is difficult for me

understand how your government can consider that such statements

contribute to real progress in our talks here. Such public debate can

only exacerbate our differences and in no way can contribute to their

solution. I have in past, and hope in future fully and openly discuss

our differences here with intent do my best resolve them or arrive at

greatest possible degree common understanding. I still hold view that

place for these discussions is in our meetings here rather than by our

two governments exchanging public statements. Action of your gov­

ernment making such statement of course compelled my government

make reply. Position my government with respect to carrying out of

agreed announcement of September 10 set forth in that reply which

was issued by Department of State December 16.

C. I then said as far as cruel and inhuman treatment concerned,

facts in case Mrs. Bradshaw speak for themselves. In December 1950 this

woman along with her husband applied for exit permits. These refused

and in February 1951 she and her husband arrested. At time she entered

prison, she in normal health. Three and half years later she released com­

pletely broken in body and mind. In spite this, more than another [omis­

sion in the original] passed before authority given her leave.

D. I said Wang statement this morning again raised question con­

cerning agreed announcement he had raised at previous meetings.

These questions bear no relationship to carrying out of September 10

agreement. Unlike questions I had raised which bear directly on agreed

announcement, his questions are extraneous thereto. I had thoroughly

covered this ground in last few meetings. In spite of Wang’s apparent

desire lead us down side road in discussing these extraneous issues,

I have no desire go over ground already covered. Particularly in last

few meetings I had carefully and in detail gone into these questions.

Statement appeared entirely ignore what I said previously. I had no

intention pursue this subject this morning.

E. I said that as for other aspects Wang’s statement, I had tried

point out relationship between carrying out agreed announcement and

confidence that must be established in regard to our other subjects.

I had said many times that my discussion this subject not motivated by

desire delay talks but by desire expedite them.

F. I said in regard to question of embargo I had still not received

answers to questions I asked many weeks ago.

G. I said in view of imminent Christmas and New Year holidays

and common practice with respect international meeting during that

period, I suggest that we hold our next meeting January 12. I would

hope at that meeting it will be possible to renew our progress toward

reaching agreement on joint statement with respect renunciation force.

I would expect at that meeting to be in position make further comments

in regard to your December 1 draft, as well as to make definite propos­

als concerning amendments thereto that we would consider desirable.

22. Wang replied that on Monday he had sent letter stating at

today’s meeting we should give emphasis discussion on agreed

announcement on renunciation of force. He regretted that in my state­

ment this morning I had again failed put forward concrete opinions

concerning new draft of December 1 of PRC side. He could not consider

this satisfactory.

23. Wang said this fact shed light on attitude of US, which aimed

at dragging out talks. Purpose of present talks is try resolve conflicts of

policy between two countries. Existing conflicts of policy as well as ten­

sion Taiwan area are posing serious threat international peace. That is

why world public focussing attention on developments Sino-­American

talks.

24. Wang said he had to point out that after forty days of discus­

sion of item one, we finally reached successful agreement that item. But

100 days have passed since entering into discussion of more important

questions, yet we still find ourselves no closer to progress. Cause for

lack progress this respect entirely due to delaying attitude on part of

US concerning item 2.

25. Wang said he believed this state of affairs will surely disappoint

world public opinion and also American opinion. What American peo­

ple want is friendly relations between Chinese and American people

advantageous both people.

26. Wang said proposal for renunciation of force statement origi­

nated with US side. New draft put forward by PRC side December 1

fully meets points of view and requirements both sides. It seemed to

him issuance of such announcement would be first step for relaxing

tension between our two countries. He is surprised to find we have

been delayed such a protracted time over this question. Although his

side has plenty of patience, such waiting would naturally have a limit.

27. Wang said he noted my statement that I would be able present

concrete views at next meeting on this question. He also noted that

I had expressed hope that it would be possible for us make progress at

that meeting.

28. Wang said “I should say that that would be the last opportunity

for us to reach an agreement on basis our new draft. We can permit no

further delay. Otherwise we will be compelled to make public the pro­

ceedings of our discussions on the second item of our agenda and leave

it to public opinion for judgment. We cannot afford to endure indefinite

delay in this respect.”

[29.] Wang said I had expressed hope that discussion between us

would not be made public but would be confined to conference room.

Since beginning of series of talks, PRC side has maintained that spirit.

However, two points must be taken into consideration. First, neither

side should be allowed to make public statements outside of meetings.

Second, unreserved and frank exchange of opinion at meetings should

be directed toward resolving questions and making progress rather

than dragging on indefinitely.

30. Wang said as far as last public statement his side concerned, he

had pointed out at last meeting it was necessitated by fact US official

quarters, including Secretary of State Dulles, openly made charges alleg­

ing PRC side not implementing agreed announcement. These charges

and accusations had no factual basis, hence his side compelled set forth

truth of matter to public in formal statement. From this truth world pub­

lic can see which side is carrying out agreement and which is purposely

violating it. All this has been set forth clearly in last public statement PRC

side and again in his statement this morning. He had already set forth

explicitly views his side in this regard and had nothing further to add.

31. Wang said in regard to my proposal to hold next meeting

­January 12, he wondered if I would be agreeable to make it January 6.

32. I replied I was disturbed at his use of such phrases as “last

chance” and “last opportunity” concerning our talks here. I could only

interpret his remarks as a threat and was certain that negotiations were

not helped by threats of that kind. I hoped he did not mean it the way

it sounded. I was perfectly willing for public to judge on basis of facts

concerning our discussions. However I did not see how exchange of

public statements would help progress.

33. I said I was also surprised he would purport to speak for

­American people. I believed I was in position to do that. However,

I did agree that American people desired improve relations between

our two countries. I had tried to point out during meetings effect on our

relations and talks of Americans still imprisoned his country.

34. I said I thought part of difficulty of present situation is lack

of complete understanding concerning meaning of first agreement

reached between us. At time that agreement reached, I had tried my

very best obtain common understanding of words in agreement, par­

ticularly word “expeditiously.” However, Wang not willing reach such

understanding with me. This points up and emphasises need of full

understanding in any other agreements we may reach. In that spirit

I have been trying to discuss matters with Wang.

35. I said that as I had stated this morning, I proposed next meeting

be January 12. At that meeting I would expect to be in position to make

further comments concerning Wang’s December 1 draft and make sug­

gestions concerning amendments we would consider desirable. My

government was continuing its study of draft and of entire matter. I did

not expect to be in position to give our views until January 12 because

of interposition of Christmas and New Years holidays.

36. I said magnitude and delicacy of question is such I did not see

what could be gained by forcing pace of discussion. Wang himself had

said question under discussion is most serious. World and our own

peoples are more interested in solidity of agreement than in speed. We

should certainly not attempt sacrifice solidity and satisfactoriness of

agreements to speed. I felt it would be more satisfactory of Wang would

agree to January 12 for our next meeting.

37. Wang replied we were now seeking ways and means for set­

tlement of conflicts between our two countries. If both sides sincere,

100 days would certainly have been enough to get something out of

discussions. It cannot be claimed we did not have enough time. I would

be able to see how patient PRC side has been.

38. Wang said I had referred to terms such as threats. He could not

accept such terms. PRC side has no intent of threats against US. In fact

PRC side feels all along it is being threatened. Also it would not agree to let

discussions be dragged out when sufficient time exists to achieve results.

39. Wang said as I had stated, he did not have least intent speak on

behalf of American people. He was only expressing view that interests

of people of whole world were identical and American people of course

are included. That is to say, friendly relations between China and US

conform to interests of Chinese people and also of American people.

40. Wang said I had said American people still concerned over 13

Americans imprisoned in China. But he must point out also that ­Chinese

people in same way are not only concerned over tens of thousands of

Chinese residents in US but also over eight million Chinese people in

Taiwan. This is something which must be taken into consideration in dis­

cussing problems between us.

41. Wang said he noted my explanation of proposal to meet

­January 12. He wondered whether it would be agreeable to set next meet­

ing tentatively for January 6 and then to consider whether it would be

desirable to extend recess. After consideration, if there should be an alter­

ation in tentative schedule, he would inform us in written form.

42. I replied that I could not give assurances that I would be able

discuss December 1 draft until January 12.

43. Wang said it appeared two weeks recess is still not sufficient

time for me.

44. I said I could not give assurances I would be able discuss

­December 1 draft before January 12. If Wang thought it would be use­

ful to meet before that date, I would certainly consider it. I suggested

we announce next meeting for January 12. If prior to that time, develop­

ments made it desirable to meet, either side could get in touch with other.

45. Wang agreed to this proposal.

46. I suggested and Wang agreed we announce to the press that

next meeting will be January 12 in view of Christmas and New Year’s

holidays.

Gowen

Letter No. 20

Geneva, December 22, 1955

Dear Walter:

Thanks very much for your letter of December 16. I have just come

back from and finished dictating the summary of our meeting today

Informal. Drafted by Johnson who signed the original “Alex.”

and as you will see, things got fairly tight and sticky. However, the

most excellent instructions contained in the Dept.’s 1410 I think exactly

fitted the siutation and enabled me to finish up with no serious losses.

(Incidentally, the Dept.’s. 1410 was a model of drafting fully covering

the situation and I was completely clear in all the points contained.) It

will be noted that at today’s meeting I deliberately avoided attempting

to pick up and answer all his points and being drawn into discussion

of other topics. It left me with a somewhat unsatisfactory feeling at the

meeting to do this but I feel that overall it worked out well.

As I said in my summary telegram, I do not believe that his threat

at today’s meeting was to break the talks but rather to go to the public.

However, I am not absolutely positive on this and thought it well for

you to immediately have his exact words. I naturally did not want to

show too much worry or concern by attempting to get him to clarify at

today’s meeting. Fortunately I had made my statement on discussion

of his December 1 draft prior to his making this statement. Otherwise

I feel that it would have been impossible for me to make my state­

ment. I have difficulty in interpreting the reason he made his statement

after my statement except in the light of an assumption that they were

prepared to go to the public today if I had said nothing on their draft

and that my statement left him in a somewhat half-way position which

he felt that his instructions required him to make the statement. They

were all somewhat nervous at the beginning of today’s meeting and

at the close of his opening prepared statement and I had a feeling that

they were building up to something.

However, we now have a respite until January 12 and I know that

good use will be made of the time back there to think through our

future course. As you can appreciate it would be most helpful for me to

have all the background guidance possible.

I think it likely that their present estimate of the situation is that

our only interest is in obtaining the release of all of the Americans and

that if and when this is accomplished we will be quick to cut off any

further negotiations. I feel that our future moves should take account

of this probable estimate on their part.

Thanks for the quote from Nehru which I am sure I will be able to

put to good use.

Dave is now making and will send you a copy of the original

­Chinese text of Wang’s letter of September 16 and all of his December

1 draft Agreed Announcement. I sent you all of the substantive portion

of his draft by telegraph.

With respect to the proposed information campaign my princi­

pal thought is that the decision as to whether or not such a campaign

should be carried on officially by the U.S. Government must be care­

fully related to our overall objectives with regard to these talks and

our relations with Communist China. I think we have to carefully dis­

tinguish between a campaign bearing the official imprimatur of the

Government and articles and stories appearing in private publications.

An official campaign will probably be interpreted by our own people as

well as other countries, and the Chinese Communists, as a prelude to a

break in these talks. If such is the intent, a campaign of this nature would

of course be well suited to the purpose. With regard to Henderson’s

memo to Mr. Robertson, I think it would be completely idle to believe

that such a campaign would result in expediting the release of impris­

oned Americans. It would certainly counter any impression that we

are, as the memo phrases it, softening our attitude towards ­Communist

China, and correspondingly reduce whatever capital I believe we have

gained by our strong position in proposing these talks and our renun­

ciation of force position. As far as U.S. public opinion is concerned, my

own feeling is that it is fully willing without any stimulation to follow

and support whatever policies the administration believes best. It is

only necessary for the administration clearly to enunciate its policies.

I want to make clear that the foregoing applies to an identified offi­

cial program, and does not imply that I think that we should sit on

naturally generated news stories and articles. If Bersohn, for example,

has a good story and some magazine desires to publish it, I certainly

would not discourage it. In fact I am inclined to think that it would be

useful all around. However, I believe entirely different considerations

are involved in an official program and that before starting such a pro­

gram we should be absolutely clear as to our purposes and whether the

means will accomplish the purpose.

If the situation in Prague permits, I want to take Pat and Jenifer

down to Garmisch for a few days at the New Year and will let you

know by telegram from Prague whether I am doing so. Someone will

at all times be on watch here in Geneva and will be able to get in touch

with me in a matter of hours at the most. It will also be possible for me

to get from Garmisch down here by car in six or seven hours. I hope

that you will, as in the past, send me at Prague anything you think I

should see or have a chance to think about before the next meeting.

I hope that you are able to have a real vacation as you have cer­

tainly earned it.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

1320. From Gowen.

US-­Chinese talks.

Representative Chinese Communist ConGen Geneva called today

and handed me letter from Wang saying I might open it in absence

­Johnson as matter “very urgent.” English text which accompanied

­Chinese text reads “Geneva December 28. Ambassador Johnson: Liu

Yung-­ming was Chinese student of bridge construction engineering

­Missouri ­University. He arrived in USA in 1947 and passed M.A. in 1949.

In May 1949 he applied for return to China but he was not only prevented

from leaving USA but also was regarded (sic) in mental disorder and sent

to state hospital no. 4, Farmington, Missouri. From hospital he wrote his

wife saying ‘no freedom at all. No freedom for writing letters, separated

from outside, nobody comes see me. Eagerly hope get out of this hell and

return to arms my mother country as early as possible’. Since latter part

of 1950 his family has never heard anything from him. His wife has once

and again written and inquired of the hospital. Hospital merely replied

occasionally that he would leave hospital as soon as he recovered. Since

1951 even replies from hospital were cut off. Recently I received letter

from his family in which above situation mentioned. You are requested

to make investigation into this serious matter and give me satisfactory

answer. Signed Wang Ping-­nan.”

Understand Johnson will return Geneva on or about January 10.

Gowen

194. For Ambassador.

(Code Room: Please repeat Geneva’s 1320, December 28; control

13398)

Dulles

by Nagoski; cleared by Johnson (EE).

1338. From Osborn.

Following is English text letter addressed Johnson delivered by

representative CHICOM Consulate General to Consul General Gowen

English nor Chinese text bears Wang’s autograph. Signature is typed.

Dated Geneva January 5.

BEGIN QUOTE

I have asked you, in letter of December 28, to investigate serious

matter regarding Chinese student  [name not declassified] who is pre­

vented from returning to China, and give me satisfactory reply. I still

wait your reply.

I have received 7 more letters from families of Chinese students in

USA. It is mentioned in these letters that 7 Chinese students are pre­

vented from returning to China as follows:

[text not declassified]

END QUOTE.

Gowen

Repeated to Prague Priority for the Ambassador as telegram 21.

1465. For Johnson.

Guidance for January 12 meeting.

1. We believe at next meeting you should review at length course

of discussions on renunciation of force issue. Such review will serve to

summarize our position for record and refute Wang’s accusations past

several meetings that US has been stalling.

2. In opening, you should state that you are dealing with this subject

now, only because at last meeting you agreed to comment on Communist

counterproposal. Otherwise because of Communist public statements

since last meeting, you would have devoted this meeting solely to present­

ing protest to Communist misrepresentation of Agreed ­Announcement

and its failure to implement it. This you will deal with later.

3. You should emphasize that US first introduced subject of renun­

ciation of force, and repeat your introductory statement October 8.

Point out that Communists waited three weeks, then on October 27

introduced draft which not only fell far short of meeting US proposal,

but introduced extraneous elements. Point out that on November 10,

two weeks later, US presented draft which incorporated all points

made when you introduced subject and also legitimate portions of

Communist draft and should have been acceptable. Read draft. How­

ever, this not accepted by Communists, who after another three-­week

interval, on December 1 presented counterdraft which represented

some improvement over their first proposal, but failed to meet essential

requirements including that announcement apply to Taiwan area and

provide for legitimate self-­defense.

4. You should avoid linking your presentation directly to Wang’s

accusations that US stalling. You should not be on the defensive, but

rather take the offensive, taxing Communists with undeniable fact that

for three months they have refused to agree to reasonable proposal

made by US and intended to prevent hostilities in Taiwan area.

5. Conclude your presentation with statement that US willing to

make further effort to reach agreement on this issue and to this end

introduces revision of Communist counterproposal repeat counter­

proposal of December 1. Then present draft Deptel 1466. This identi­

cal with that previously approved for your use, except word “means”

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and Phleger; cleared by McConaughy and in draft by

Dulles and Sebald.

substituted for word “negotiations” in paragraph D in order broaden

meaning and give more flexibility. This phrasing in line with language

in Communist December 1 draft paragraph C.

6. You should then proceed to statement on implementation, stress­

ing that you protest in strongest terms Communists attempt to claim

that Agreed Announcement does not apply to imprisoned Americans,

pointing out that their names were actually before parties and were

being discussed when unequivocal statement regarding their expe­

ditious repatriation was drafted and made public. These imprisoned

Americans were ones about whom we had for previous weeks been

actually making representations. Also protest failure of Communists to

live up to their announcement and point out that this cannot but have

serious effect on success of discussions. Obvious that progress depends

upon good faith performance of agreements already reached.

7. FYI Deptel 1455 contains substance O’Neill’s report on receipt of

communications from five imprisoned Americans since last meeting.

8. Material for use in replying Communist charges Liu Yung-ming

case and others telegraphed separately.

9. Do not agree on earlier date for next meeting than January 19.

Dulles

1466. For Johnson. Deptel 1465.

Following is U.S. revision of Chinese Communist counterproposal

of December 1 to be introduced January 12 meeting:

BEGIN QUOTE

Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson on behalf of the Government of

the United States of America, and Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan, on

behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of China, agree to

announce:

Distribution. Drafted by Phleger and Clough; cleared in draft by Dulles and Sebald and by

McConaughy.

The United States of America and the People’s Republic of China

are determined that they will settle disputes between them through

peaceful means and that, without prejudice to the inherent right of indi­

vidual and collective self-­defense, they will not resort to the threat or

use of force in the Taiwan area or elsewhere.

The two Ambassadors should continue their talks to seek practical

and feasible means for the realization of this common desire.

END QUOTE

Dulles

1467. For Johnson. Your 1320.

You may inform Wang at next meeting that immediately upon

receipt text his letter Department undertook investigation situation

Liu Yung-­ming. Hospital stated that although Liu not repeat not com­

pletely recovered, he now able to travel. US immigration authorities

obtained transit visa for Hong Kong and have arranged his return. He

sailed for Hong Kong on President Wilson January 8.

American Red Cross has also been investigating case in response

to request from Madame Li Te-­chuan and is in communication with her

concerning case.

Indian Embassy, in response to Peiping request, took up Liu case

with Department. On being informed of action taken to effect Liu’s

repatriation, Embassy expressed satisfaction and stated no action their

part appeared necessary.

Dulles

Limited Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared in draft by Dulles, Sebald, and Phleger

and by McConaughy.

1468. For Johnson. Your 1338.

You should inform Wang at next meeting that none repeat none

of persons mentioned his letter is being prevented from leaving U.S.

As you have repeatedly told him, there are no obstructions to ­Chinese

leaving U.S. Furthermore, any Chinese who wants to go to China

mainland and feels he is being obstructed is free to communicate with

Indian Embassy. So far, Indian Embassy has not brought to attention of

Department any such case.

Dulles

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and in draft by Dulles,

Phleger, and Sebald.

Letter No. 28

Washington, January 9, 1956

Dear Alex:

During the recess period we received a number of communications

from the British concerning O’Neill’s activities in Peiping. I am enclos­

ing copies of those which I think you have not yet seen. Unfortunately

they are not numbered in any way so there may be one or two missing.

However, I believe you have received all important documents.

We are in the process of numbering all documents received from

the British concerning O’Neill’s work and we hope to maintain this file

on a more systematic basis henceforth.

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Deputy Director for Chinese Affairs

Official–­Informal.

Enclosures:

British Embassy.

1351. From Johnson. Re Deptel 1467.

Would appreciate prior tomorrow’s meeting text any statement by

INS re Liu and substance American Red Cross reply to Madame Li.

Would also appreciate any info that would assist me in answering

probable question as to why nothing happened re Liu’s case between

attempted deportation 11951 when he presumably able travel and date

Wang’s letter.

Gowen

1353. From Johnson.

Would appreciate prior to tomorrow’s meeting text any public

reply that may have been made by then to Peiping Allegation of US

on reply if Wang should raise subject.

Gowen

1475. For Johnson. Your 1353.

No public reply made to Peiping allegation.

If Wang should raise subject you should reply this is irresponsible

charge similar to others made in past and you do not intend to engage

in discussion of it.

Dulles

Limited Distribution. Drafted by Clough.

1476. For Johnson. Your 1351.

1. INS has issued no repeat no statement regarding Liu case.

2. American Red Cross telegraphed Madame Li January 6 that Liu

scheduled depart San Francisco by boat January 8; that US ­Immigration

handling arrangements in accordance with deportation proceedings

instituted earlier; that Red Cross representative in Hong Kong would

meet Liu and escort to border; and inquired whether Chinese ­Communist

Red Cross would meet at border.

3. Red Cross representative saw Liu in San Francisco and provided

him with toilet articles and cash for trip. Red Cross representatives in

Honolulu, Yokohama and Manila also instructed lend any necessary

assistance.

Liu’s father who asked that hospital continue to care for Liu. Hospital

Limited Distribution. Drafted by Clough.

has no record of correspondence from Liu’s wife. Department’s first

information concerning her existence and interest in Liu’s return con­

tained in Wang’s letter.

Dulles

1362. From Johnson.

1. I opened 32nd meeting today with prepared statement as follows:

A. You will recall that at our last meeting I said I would hope to be

in position at this meeting to make further comments with regard to

your counterproposal of December 1 for declaration by our two gov­

ernments concerning renunciation of force.

B. However, I regret to note that your government has during

interval since our last meeting undertaken most violent and unfounded

propaganda campaign instead of taking any constructive action with

regard to our agreement September 10 which would genuinely con­

tribute to understanding between us. These unfounded propaganda

attacks against my government appear to indicate an intention on part

of your government to misuse agreement of September 10 to foster mis­

understanding rather than to contribute to understanding between us.

In view of this, I would think it well to devote this meeting solely to

purpose of clarifying this situation and pointing out facts with regard

to which side has thus far really failed to carry out September 10 agree­

ment. Nevertheless, in light statements which I made at our last meet­

ing, I will first discuss this morning your December 1 counterproposal

with regard to renunciation of force.

C. I think it well to recall it was my government which initiated sug­

gestion for clear understanding between us and public announcement

on basic and fundamental question of whether our differences would be

permitted to lead to war. You will recall I introduced this question first

at September 28 meeting and again at meeting of ­October 5. Then more

than three months ago at meeting of October 8 I made very carefully

drawn statement fully setting forth position of my government in this

Limited Distribution.

regard. I think it well to recall exactly what I said at that time. (I then

repeated my introductory statement October 8 on renunciation of force

and continued with prepared statement as follows:)

D. That statement took full account of issues between us and posi­

tions of your government with regard thereto. I was hopeful we would

be able promptly to reach full understanding on substance thereof

which would permit us to draft and issue suggested declarations. It

was only three weeks later on October 27 you introduced draft which

not only fell far short of specific proposal I had made October 8 but

also introduced extraneous elements. I discussed this matter in detail

with you at subsequent meetings and only two weeks later at meet­

ing November 10 introduced draft which incorporated essential points

which I had hoped in light of our discussions we were agreed upon.

(I then went over my November 10 draft point by point.)

If there were genuine substantive agreement on part of your gov­

ernment with views of my government concerning vital importance of

not permitting differences between us, including those in Taiwan area,

to lead to war, I cannot understand why my draft Nov. 10 should not

have been acceptable. However, your side not only refused to agree

to this draft but took extreme position of rejecting it even as basis for

discussion.

E. After another three week interval, on Dec. 1, you presented your

counterdraft. As I indicated at the time, I felt this counterdraft repre­

sented some improvement over first proposal of your side. However,

as I also pointed out at the time, your counterproposal failed to make it

clear that announcement applied to Taiwan area as well as elsewhere.

In light of statements you had made here, as well as public position

of your government, it thus appeared your counterdraft might carry

concealed reservation with respect to Taiwan area under which your

government could, it it later so chose to do, initiate hostilities in Taiwan

area on grounds situation there was purely domestic matter. Your draft

also failed to provide for legitimate self-­defense.

F. However, in further effort to reach agreement on this funda­

mental subject, (see attached) agreement we are willing to accept your

counterproposal December 1 as basis for discussion. Subject to slight

amendment to bring English text of second paragraph more fully into

conformity with our understanding of Chinese text and an addition to

cover question of self-­defense, as well as question of whether declara­

tion is considered to be applicable to Taiwan area, we are also prepared

to accept all of language as well as form your December 1 counterdraft.

In order make our suggestions clear I have prepared draft incorpo­

rating our amendments and additions to second paragraph. You will

note that first and third paragraphs are identical with your December

1 counterdraft.

G. In making these suggested amendments I have taken full account

of our discussion and believe I have entirely met your objections to my

November 10 draft. (I then handed draft Deptel 1466 to Wang.)

H. As soon as you have had opportunity to study it, I will be glad to

explain any points that may not be clear or discuss with you in greater

detail changes we have suggested.

I. I desire subsequently to discuss with you today questions raised

in your letters December 28 and January 5, as well as other matters

related to September 10 announcement.

Gowen

1363. From Johnson.

1. Three hour twenty-­five minute meeting this morning.

2. I opened with long statement on renunciation of force closely

following outline Deptel 1465. After relatively cursory study my draft

Wang rejected it, renewed charges US occupation Taiwan, and particu­

larly centered attacks my amendments as renewed effort by US obtain

PRC recognition validity US collective defense arrangements Taiwan

area. He ended with prepared statement renewing charges US stall­

ing and proposing this and subsequent meetings be “open”. (Later in

response questions he indicated that by “open” he meant release of

communique giving full substance following each meeting).

There followed long give and take during which I stressed appar­

ent significance failure their side during three months since my Oct. 8

proposal to agree to specific inclusion Taiwan in any statement, as well

as pressed him on willingness include in statement recognition as gen­

eral principle right individual and collective defense. There was long

give and take toward end of which apparently recognizing weakness

their public position on inclusion specific mention Taiwan, he stated

would consider our amended draft if reference individual collective

Limited Distribution.

self-­defense removed. I expressed willingness consider any alterna­

tive formulation for inclusion this principle and emphasized weakness

their position in refusing include it in public statement while admitting

to validity during our discussion. However, was unable to shake him

on this.

I then made statement on implementation accordance para 6 Deptel

1465, brief statement on Liu, and statement accordance Deptel 1468.

At close of meeting after I repeated my refusal to agree to open

meetings he said “would leave this question open for time being” and

referred to his statement at last meeting on issuance unilateral public

statement on discussion agenda item 2, indicating that would probably

make such a statement. In reply my questions as to where, when and

text, he said “this matter has not been decided so far”. I, of course, indi­

cated that if they issued statement we would feel free make reply.

Suggest that if they do issue statement, text my opening statement

at today’s meeting would be good reply and am telegraphing full text

separately “Niact”.

Next meeting Jan. 19.

Gowen

1364. From Johnson.

1. Wang responded my prepared statement (Mytel 1362) at open­

ing 32d meeting January 12 by saying he had listened my statement

this morning in which I had reviewed course discussion on item two.

He had listened very carefully but could not hear anything new or con­

structive in statement.

2. Wang said this applies in particular to my remarks which dis­

cussed his draft of December 1. He recalled that when he introduced

December 1 draft, I had expressed welcome and had said it represented

Limited Distribution.

considerable advance in discussions. We have had prolonged discus­

sion this matter of issuing announcement on this question.

3. Wang said he had glanced over amended draft I had presented

this morning and while leaving aside details of wording and language,

he noted that question of principle still remains. He noted I was again

claiming alleged right of so-­called individual and collective self-­defense

in Taiwan area.

4. Wang said US is today occupying island of Taiwan which ­Chinese

territory. Under these circumstances US has absolutely no right speak of

any self-­defense in Taiwan area.

5. Wang said in my statement this morning I had made reference

to fact US is member of UN and also made reference to number inter­

national treaties and pacts, but all this could not defend position of US

in occupying territory of other countries. If US could claim right to self-­

defense in Taiwan area, Wang could say there is no more justice in world.

6. Wang said his side has long expressed itself unmistakeably on

this matter, that it would never accept this position. Therefore he said

that amendments presented by me at todays meeting unreasonable and

unacceptable to his side. Such amendments as had been put forward

this morning would not help in any way in settlement of matter before

us. Nor would they help bring closer views of two sides.

7. Wang said I might recall that during discussion of second item

it was US which initiated proposal of making announcement on renun­

ciation force. PRC side has repeatedly met views of US side and put

forward new draft of December 1. Thus it could be said PRC side has

moved several steps forward on this matter.

8. Wang said in this draft of PRC side it clearly stated that on basis

of UN Charter, both sides should settle disputes between them by

peaceful means without resorting to threat or use force. This not only

conforms with desire of people of our two countries but also conforms

with the desires of peaceloving peoples of world.

9. Wang said however for three meetings in succession US side has

failed make any comments on his draft and fact that after long recess

US side should suggest such terms and wording as had long been cate­

gorically rejected by PRC side could not but cause doubt as to whether

US side has sincere desire arrive at agreement.

10. Wang said at same time he wanted point out that recently

American military aircraft have been making encroachment on their

territorial air and American “top brass” have gone to Taiwan to step

up military preparations. All this conclusively proves that US bent on

increasing tension in Taiwan area.

11. Wang said further, according press reports, US Air Force Secretary

Quarles has gone so far as to indicate that outlying islands around Taiwan

are American bases in Far East. Thus it apparent that it intention of US

side to require PRC side to recognize status quo of American occupation

Taiwan as well as coastal islands controlled by Chiang ­Kai-­shek clique.

This position of US side can never be tolerated by PRC side.

12. Wang said all these events cannot but alarm PRC side and cre­

ate doubts among Chinese as to whether US side is genuinely sincere in

stated desire settle disputes between two countries.

13. Wang said, in view of fact that US is creating tension and in

view of attitude of US side in deliberately stalling talks, all of which not

in conformity with purpose and aims these talks, therefore PRC side

demands that these meetings be public so that issues may be judged by

world opinion. Also PRC side is obliged give account to Chinese people

of proceedings these talks. That was PRC side’s opinion on question we

had just discussed.

14. I said in reply that first I didn’t believe they’d had sufficient

time fully consider my suggested changes and that I hoped they would

do so. I thought probably first question between us, often discussed

here, is question of whether we considered statement applied to ­Taiwan

area. My suggestion from beginning on October 8 was that we make

this specifically clear.

15. I said my understanding of their position had always been

that they would consider such statement as applicable to Taiwan area.

However, they had objected to form in which it was previously made

on grounds this would prejudice their position on Taiwan area.

16. I said that I had stated in as many ways as I possibly could that

our intention was not to get them to say anything that would prejudice

pursuit of their policies by peaceful means, that this was made clear in

our October eight statement and our November 10 draft, but that they

had objected to form in which it was set forth in that draft.

17. I said we were both agreed that most serious problem facing

our two sides was precisely in Taiwan area, and that question therefore

appeared to me to be not whether any agreement applied to Taiwan

area but whether it clearly stated this.

18. I said that they had talked previously, and at great length this

morning, of sincerity. I said my government had over and over pro­

posed and I again proposed this morning that both sides sincerity be

demonstrated by specifically relating our agreement to Taiwan area.

This would assure world which as he had rightly said had longed for

peace, that neither side had any concealed reservations in this regard.

19. I said I had over and over pointed out problem wasn’t one of

form of words which either side variously interprets, but lay in reach­

ing genuine agreement which could be put into words. To do other­

wise certainly could not contribute to peace. I was reluctant to place

interpretation that might well be placed on their adamant refusal to

permit any mention of Taiwan area.

20. I then said in regard to second point—mention of individual

and collective self-­defense—I would have considered they would have

regarded it as important as we did. It was my understanding their gov­

ernment did not deny right of individual and collective self-­defense to

itself or to any other country. My understanding had been that their

side objected to form of our November 10 draft because they felt it prej­

udiced their position on Taiwan area. Again, in honest effort to meet

their point on this, in this draft we had tried to introduce this idea in

form that would not do so.

21. I suggested that we go over exactly what that second para said.

What it said was we were determined to settle our disputes by peace­

ful means and that certainly neither of us objected to that. Then it said

we would not resort to force in Taiwan area or elsewhere. This was

certainly clear and specific and I could not see why there could be any

objection to that language. It then said that in stating this principle both

sides wished to make it clear it was without prejudice to right of indi­

vidual and collective self-­defense. This was stated as general principle

and I could not see what possible objection there could be to its inclu­

sion in draft.

22. I said this second para as presently drafted would go as far as

words could to show there was understanding between us. That if there

was objection as to wording that revealed understanding between us

was not as clear as I had thought.

23. I said they again this morning had discussed our dispute in

Taiwan area and certainly our first task was to make certain this dis­

pute did not lead to hostilities. If threat of force was clearly removed

from that dispute, there was hope questions between us could, in that

atmosphere, be discussed and resolved. I said draft I had proposed this

morning should accomplish this purpose and I had hoped they would

give it further study in light of my remarks.

24. I said I was not exactly clear about what they meant by their

proposal to make our meetings open. I understood that in normal inter­

national usage, “open” meant public would attend our meetings. Or

was their proposal that at close of each meeting press would be given

full account of meeting by each of us.

25. I said in either event it was difficult for me to see how this could

contribute to progress of our discussions. It seemed to me in either of

these events, it would tend to make our meetings platforms from which

each would speak to his public, rather than place for our negotiating

and reaching understanding.

26. I said I was certainly willing that our respective positions be

laid before public. I was certainly willing that public be informed of

their categorical and sweeping rejection of any mention of Taiwan

area in any statement of agreement growing out of our discussions.

I was sure public would have difficulty in understanding that in three

months which had passed since we had made our proposal, their gov­

ernment was still unwilling to make it clear it did not have concealed

reservations on Taiwan area in any statement on renunciation of force.

27. I said that however, I didn’t see how all of this would contrib­

ute to our making further progress in our discussion and if this was

attitude of their government, I wondered whether it really desired that

we make progress. As I as well as my government was interested in

making progress, I was unable to agree that we abrogate our agreement

that nature of these meetings be private, and I was unable to agree

either that meetings be open to public or press be informed substance

each meeting.

28. I said I still felt interests and relations between two of us and

cause of peace could best be served by keeping our discussions on

frank open level that was possible under present arrangement and

by informing general public of our agreements when we had reached

them, rather than by informing the world of our disagreements as they

came up here.

29. Wang said that other side had just asserted that Chinese side had

not had sufficient time to study draft presented by US side. As to ideas

US side has brought up, Chinese side had always been willing to give full

consideration to those which were constructive, but he had to say that

draft presented today did not contain anything new or constructive. All

those amendments US side had presented that morning had been subject

to long and tedious discussions, and during course of these Chinese side

had on many occasions expressed its firm opposition.

30. Wang said he was sure US Ambassador was fully acquainted

with course of discussions, in which it could be seen clearly how far

Chinese side had moved and how the US side still stuck to its origi­

nal position without making any progress. Views presented by US side

had repeatedly been rejected by Chinese side, yet they have again been

advanced, and Chinese side could not give consideration to them.

31. Wang said that in particular, he noted that US side had again

advanced point concerning individual and collective self-­defense. Nat­

urally, it was a matter of principle that every state was entitled to right

of self-­defense and Chinese were prepared to recognize this. However,

question was as to where it was to be applied, because there can be no

objection if US exercises this right on its own territory.

32. Wang said that if, on other hand, it were on territory of another

country, then certainly it could lay no claims to self-­defense. When Japan

in 1937 began its aggression against China, she also claimed this action

was in self-­defense. However, no people in world then recognized that

as such and none could be persuaded that Japan’s action was taken in

self defense. Therefore, there should be a clear definition and under­

standing as to this word self-­defense and this word must not be arbi­

trarily abused.

33. Wang said that as to question US side had raised regarding

whether peaceful solution of disputes between our two countries

applied to Taiwan area, as he had repeatedly declared this did concern

Taiwan area. The peaceful solution of disputes between two countries

also applied to Taiwan area.

34. Wang said as to openness of meetings: it was not meant that

public would be admitted to this conference room. But he meant the

content of our discussion be released to press. Hence, as US side clearly

recalled, at outset of talks he had followed US suggestion that these

talks should be held private and this arrangement have no set time

limit. The Chinese side throughout has observed these two rules in

hope that it would permit full exchange of views, frankly, and would

settle issues between us, and finally reach agreements.

35. Wang said Chinese side felt these rules had been useful to our

discussion in initial stages. And facts showed that after forty days dis­

cussion we did reach our first agreement on the return of civilians. That

also showed there was common desire between two sides to arrive at

agreement and Chinese had expressed their welcome to such a spirit.

Thus it showed that provided both sides shared a common desire to

solve their common issues, these issues would be capable of resolu­

tion. For example, last September between Soviet Union and German

­Federal Republic. As we knew, relations were rather tense; however,

after one week’s discussion they did arrive at an agreement simply

because of their common desire to reach an agreement, and hence there

were favorable results.

36. Wang said that since last September 14 we had begun to discuss

item two. It was now four months. This was not a short time. If there

did exist common desire between two sides to settle issues between

them, he should say that the two would have been able to reach many

agreements instead of only one agreement. However, after four months

both still found themselves deadlocked in the same place, and found

themselves incapable of agreeing on simple announcement after all this

time.

37. Wang said questions between us not only concern peoples of

our two countries but also concern people of whole world. They, how­

ever, are not informed about our talks and of what has taken place.

Now people ask why after such long time discussion, you people

have obtained no result. As to Chinese side, they have always wanted

an agreement to be reached between two so that Chinese Government

could make account to its people as to what had happened. We have

wasted lots of time. Chinese side considers there has been deliberate

stalling in talks. This is why Chinese side suggested we make meet­

ings open: so that people will realize what issues between us are. That

is what Chinese side considers responsible attitude toward people.

38. I said he had said that if we shared common desire to reach

agreement we should be able to do so. I most thoroughly agreed. That

is what I had been trying to find out.

39. I said clear back on October eight I had said that US was willing

to make declaration that we were determined our differences should not

lead to war. I made it clear that US was desirous and willing, in order that

there be no misunderstanding between us or in world, that this would

specifically apply to area in which our most serious dispute existed, that

is area of Taiwan. I made it clear this did not involve in any way and

it was not intention US in these talks involve rights and interests third

parties. Nor was there any intention to prejudice peaceful pursuit of our

several national policies. Yet after three months their government still

unwilling publicly to make such statement. It was difficult to understand

why, if Chinese considered that such statement applied to Taiwan area,

as he had stated, why he would be unwilling to do so.

40. I said I did not agree that we had not made progress—I believed

we had made some. I believed discussions had been useful. Insofar as

responsibility for failure thus far to agree on text of announcement on

renunciation of force—it is very clear.

41. Wang said US side had remarked that our exchange views had

been useful, but he did not see how it had been useful. If it were really

useful, it should have been demonstrated in progress toward solution

of issues between us.

42. Wang said as to wording of text, if phrase concerning right to

individual and collective self-­defense could be removed, then Chinese

side could give consideration to mention of Taiwan area. However, if

we fail reach agreement on text of declaration, responsibility squarely

on US side.

43. I asked if he objected to principle of individual and collective

self-­defense.

44. Wang said that principle was all right but could not apply to

Taiwan area. US attempting to exercise this right in Taiwan area would

be abuse.

45. I asked if he intended to tell United States in what countries it

could have arrangements for individual and collective self-­defense. As

I understood it, their country had individual and collective self-­defense

arrangements with other countries but I had never raised question here.

46. Wang said they had such arrangements but they had them on

their own territory and they had never gone thousands of miles across

sea to US. Suppose Chinese had military strength to occupy San ­Francisco

and then clamored about self-­defense. Could US consent to this?

47. I asked whether I could understand that they had no objection

to principle but felt its mention in this context prejudiced their position

in dispute between us in Taiwan area.

48. Wang said it was not thus. Chinese agree that every country

has this right of self defense, but question is not that this prejudices

their position but that US has no right to claim self-­defense in Taiwan

area. And in exactly same manner China has no right to set foot on San

Francisco and claim self-­defense.

49. I said that I did not believe he had gotten point of my question.

Question of validity of our defense arrangements in Taiwan area was

matter of dispute between us. Chinese Govt had one view, my govern­

ment had another. I did not propose to discuss or try to resolve this

problem with him. That was element in differences of views we had

respecting Taiwan area. As I had told him, I had no intention demand­

ing any statement from them that would prejudice their view in that

regard. What I was saying was it was desirable we both make it clear

we weren’t thereby renouncing our respective rights of self-­defense.

I had tried to accomplish both purposes in this draft. If Chinese have

suggestions as to another method of reaching this, I was willing listen.

50. Wang said in whatever way I might put this matter, present US

occupation Taiwan was flagrant violation of international law. No mat­

ter how US was trying to defend itself, history would pass final judge­

ment. US had asked whether Chinese side had any other views on draft

announcement. He said his side had made its greatest effort and could

not go further. As Wang had said, if US would accept their proposal to

remove individual and collective self-­defense from text, then Chinese

would give consideration to draft. Otherwise, they could only consider

that US was deliberately obstructing issuance of such announcement.

51. I said how he could call inclusion of statement of what I thought

was universally recognized principle of individual and collective self

defense obstruction, I could not understand. I had thought they would

have considered it of equal importance. As I had made clear, I would

be glad to consider any other formula they would like to propose.

I wanted to be clear: was it that under no circumstances whatever and

under no conditions that they would consider inclusion of any such

phrases in any statement we might make?

52. Wang said that dispute between us in Taiwan area was what

was under discussion and in this respect they could not acknowledge

US right to individual and collective self-­deefense. It was matter of

principle. This was not acceptable. Question was not that there should

be any further suggestions from Chinese side but from the US side. And

new suggestions should come from US side.

53. I said that I entirely disagreed and that unless we both here

were willing together to work things out, I did not see how it was pos­

sible to reach agreement. Negotiation was not a matter of unilateral

concessions, it was a matter of attempts to reach common agreements.

I had, with these few minor changes, accepted form and words of

their draft. This contrasted strongly with their refusal to accept my

­November 10 draft even as basis of discussion. As I saw it, principal

question between us was whether there should be any mention of indi­

vidual and collective self defense in any agreement. I had tried to do so

in manner agreeable to them. I had expressed willingness to consider

any other formula that they considered would better fit their position.

It was hard for me to see how I could go further.

54. Wang said his points had also been made clear. He could go no

further than that.

55. I said that it did not seem that any further discussion today was

useful. I had nothing further on this if he had not.

56. Wang said he had made his position very clear on this matter.

57. I then said if agreeable to Wang I would turn to other subject.

I read prepared statement on implementation as fols:

In previous meetings, I have frequently stated my belief that two

of us here ought to be prepared to bring up and discuss frankly any

questions which may arise as to implementation agreed announcement

September 10. I held this opinion because of my conviction that by so

doing we could best iron out differences of opinion, and contribute to

speedy and faithful implementation our agreement. This, I felt, would

aid progress talks with respect other items as well.

A. It was, of course, not my intention that two of us should

attempt to go beyond provisions agreed announcement, nor to reopen

issues which were discussed and settled before issuance September 10

announcement. I have, for example, avoided bringing up for discussion

here cases of Americans in your country where there was no evidence

desire return. I have carefully confined my remarks to those cases cov­

ered by agreed announcement, that is, Americans who clearly desire

return and who have not yet been permitted to do so in accordance

with terms September 10 announcement, and to those cases where UK

repeat UK Charge has encountered difficulty or obstruction in carrying

out his clearly defined functions.

B. Recently I have noted your official organs again appear publicly

and otherwise to be attempting through an involved process of reason­

ing to create false impression Americans remaining in prison your coun­

try are not covered by agreed announcement. We have here discussed

this subject at great length and I had hoped had arrived at understand­

ing in this regard. I simply want again to repeat my government most

emphatically cannot agree with statements of your government in this

regard. Our September 10 agreed announcement draws no distinction

whatever between those Americans in prison and those denied exit per­

mits for one reason or another. We both well know that at time we issued

September 10 announcement only Americans in your country of whom

we had knowledge desiring return and being prevented from doing so

were those in prison. It was in this context our statement drafted, agreed

upon and released. Unless unequivocal words of that statement and our

discussions leading up to it are entirely without meaning with respect to

this group Americans, they most definitely are covered by September 10

agreed announcement, and my government absolutely rejects any efforts

now to allege this is not case.

C. I again must most seriously call to your attention fact that by

no stretch of imagination or interpretation of plain meaning of words

can it be considered Americans imprisoned your country are being

permitted exercise their right expeditious return US in accordance

terms that announcement. I have repeatedly pointed out failure fully

implement this agreement during increasing passage of time cannot

but have increasingly serious effect on success our discussions of

other subjects here.

D. I now refer to questions raised your letters December 28 and

January 5 concerning implementation by my government of agreed

announcement.

E. Immediately upon receipt your December 28 letter my authori­

ties looked into situation of Liu Yung-­ming. Liu has been hospitalized

at public expense since 1949 with serious case chronic schizophrenia.

Although he was not yet completely recovered, it was determined he

was able to travel and arrangements were made by my authorities for

him depart January 8 for Hong Kong by steamer President Wilson.

F. With respect to persons mentioned your letter January 5, I can

assure you none of them are being prevented from leaving US. In addi­

tion, I again assure you there are no obstructions to Chinese leaving US.

Furthermore, any Chinese who feels he is being obstructed in proceed­

ing your country is entirely free communicate with Indian Embassy.

Thus far Indian Embassy has not brought to attention of my govern­

ment any such case.

58. Wang replied in extemporaneous statement that he glad learn

Liu Yung-­ming on way home. However he must note that from this

case it could be seen US has not been carrying out agreed announce­

ment very well.

59. Wang said next as to question of American nationals residing

in China and Americans in prison for offenses in China, PRC side

expressed its position definitely and clearly in course our discussions.

Any ordinary American resident in China free leave country any time

upon application. Even in cases Americans who have violated law in

China, he noted that two-­thirds of total have already been permitted

leave.

60. Wang said if we view this matter in light of terms of American

offenders in China he might well cite case of Father Rigney who had

been sentenced to ten years. However, he only served five years and

was granted release. Rigney was released five years in advance expira­

tion of term. Was this not case of expeditious return? Wang would say

it was very expeditious indeed.

61. Wang said however, PRC nationals residing in US find selves

in very different situation. US Government has thus far not furnished

PRC side with name list of all Chinese nationals in US nor has it

given assistance Indian Embassy to carry out its functions. Nor has

US Government given any account of Chinese imprisoned in US. Yet

US Government been coercing Chinese students in US to secure entry

permits Taiwan.

62. Wang said recently many exposures been made in cases of

­Chinese students in US who being obstructed from returning China.

Chinese could not feel satisfied with this state affairs. All this violation

of agreed announcement. They demanded that US faithfully implement

provisions agreed announcement and withdraw any requirements that

run counter to agreement.

63. In reply I said I not clear what Wang’s allegation was. Agreed

announcement says no obstruction will be offered to departure civil­

ians. I had told Wang in detail of steps we had taken implement that.

Agreed announcement says anyone who desires return but feels he

encountering obstruction will be free communicate Indian Embassy. I

had assured Wang that any Chinese in US free do so. I knew of no alle­

gation or evidence that anyone been prevented from communicating

with Indian Embassy.

64. I said I not clear therefore as to whether his statement referred

to freedom communicate with Indian Embassy. Indian Embassy

entirely free investigate any such case. I knew of no case in which

Indian Embassy has stated it being obstructed in carrying out this func­

tion. Agreed announcement says that US will accept representations

from Indian Embassy when it feels there has been any obstruction con­

trary to agreed announcement. As I had already stated this morning,

thus far US had not received any communication from Indian Embassy

with respect any such case. If we did, Wang could be sure it would be

promptly acted upon.

65. Wang said as far as Chinese in US concerned they had learned

that some of them have not been informed of agreed announcement,

others find their freedom communicate obstructed. This state affairs

must be improved by US. Compulsion of Chinese students in US to

secure entry permits Taiwan was matter of mental torture towards

these Chinese students.

66. Wang said he had list of three persons in US and he was request­

ing me make investigation about them. (He then handed me list, tele­

graphed separately, containing names Tan Yu-­min, Teng ­Hsien-­jung,

Yuan Jui-­hsiang). In this list they had detailed information known to

PRC side including place residence, profession, as well as time since

they last heard of.

67. I said, of course I had no way of forcing Chinese in US to write

to people in China. They free do so if they wanted to. However, in

speaking of obstruction, I wanted be clear, was allegation that Chinese

in US not free communicate with Indian Embassy?

68. Wang said his statement included cases in which freedom of

communication with Indian Embassy been obstructed.

69. I asked whether that applied these three on list.

70. Wang said that was different matter. These three were missing,

no information from them. Their families have lost contact with them.

71. I said, to get back to my question, is the allegation that people

being prevented from communicating with Indian Embassy?

72. Wang said there had been cases in which freedom of communi­

cation been obstructed.

73. I asked if Wang could give me any details on these cases.

74. Wang said they would give me such details whenever he found

it necessary.

75. I said it is all very simple. If Chinese want to return, they free

do so. I knew of no such case in which any person has been in any way

prevented from communicating with Indian Embassy.

76. I said then our next meeting would be next Thursday.

77. Wang said he had suggested that as from today our meetings

be made open and he had given his reasons. He didn’t know how I felt

on this.

78. I said I had told him I did not agree.

79. Wang said if I unable agree, then should we leave question

open for time being. However I would recall that at last meeting during

discussion second item of agenda, he had told me his side going to

make public statement on that matter which was discussed between us.

80. I asked him if he was going to do that.

81. Wang said they were going to make public statement.

82. I said that was entirely matter their choice, but US would have

to consider making reply.

83. Wang said that was matter of our freedom.

84. I asked if I could get copy of text.

85. Wang said when text been received he would send it to me.

86. I asked when and where would be released. Here or Peiping?

87. Wang said this matter not been decided so far.

88. We then agreed next meeting would be Thursday January 19.

Gowen

1365. From Johnson.

Fol list handed me by Wang January 12 meeting (para 66 Mytel

1364):

[text not declassified]

Gowen

Distribution.

Geneva, January 13, 1956, noon

1366. From Johnson.

Comments on yesterday’s meeting.

Believe Wang was under firm instructions make proposal on

open meetings as well as, in event we did not substantially accept

their December 1 draft, to implement December 22 threat on unilateral

statement.

Limited Distribution.

Believe our strong review history negotiations on renunciation

force, and form in which we introduced our amendments their draft,

well anticipated their tactic and created some confusion and doubt as

to strength their public position even on agenda item two. Until very

close of meeting was hopeful I had succeeded in dissuading them from

persisting in threat to open meetings or going to public.

However, believe substantial gain accomplished in their tentative

acceptance inclusion specific mention Taiwan in a statement which

regardless of its exact wording would as political document commit

CHICOMS in public mind to renunciation of use force in attempting

upset status quo.

Negotiating position with respect next meeting was left some­

what confused, this portion January 12 meeting closing on note Wang’s

adamant refusal consider any mention individual and collective self-­

defense and I not giving any indication willingness consider any for­

mula which did not include this principle.

Possible implication Wang’s position could be willingness carry

his position at close Jan 12 meeting to point of threatening actual or vir­

tual break at next meeting unless we yield on self-­defense clause. It pos­

sible this could be done as negotiating tactic, with intention yielding

at meeting after next, or that by next meeting CHICOMS will perceive

weakness their position on this and shift ground. However, I should

also be prepared for contingency threat would be genuine.

Therefore, would appreciate my instructions for next meeting

covering whether if necessary it is desired maintain my present posi­

tion on inclusion self-­defense clause up to point of actual or virtual

break. Only by doing so could I completely test strength position he

may adopt this regard. At same time would not want to be placed in

position of appearing yield on this point in response threat of break

by Wang.

With respect implementation Wang showed no enthusiasm

for discussion (it was almost 1 p.m. when this introduced) and his

replies were perfunctory and along familiar lines. With respect first

sentence para 6 Deptel 1465 believe it important, particularly in any

public ­output, to note their position and particularly Wang’s posi­

tion with me since our early exchanges on subject is more subtle than

just asserting that agreed announcement does not apply to impris­

oned Americans. Position is that there is “distinction” between those

“who have committed crimes” and those who have not. With regard

to those “who have committed crimes” PRC is taking “further meas­

ures” accordance agreed announcement and “expeditious” must be

read in relation to “seriousness their crimes” etc. This also brought

out in Jan 6 Peiping Foreign Office spokesman statement and again in

my exchange with Wang Jan 12.

Seems to me our best negotiating and public position is to reiterate

simple and publicly understandable charge of failure release “expedi­

tiously” accordance clear Sept 10 commitment rather than give currency

any doubt imprisoned Americans covered by agreed announcement.

As sidelight Wang introduced two new assistants yesterday,

Lai Ya-­li and Wang Pao-­liu replacing Lin and Li. (Am transmitting

separate tel asking for available bio). On Tuesday met Wang together

with Wang Pao-­liu in Prague airport they apparently having come

from Warsaw. Prague we traveled by same plane to Zurich. Wang

used all of his very limited English in taking initiative congenially

greet me, introduce Wang Pao-­liu and some innocuous conversation

while we were waiting board plane.

Gowen

1369. From Johnson.

4946, 4080) respectively, replaced Li and Lin on CHICOM Ambassadorial

­delegation yesterday. Request biographic information.

Gowen

1496. For Johnson.

Guidance for January 19 meeting.

1. Point out that at last meeting in attempt to meet all legitimate

Communist points, you had introduced amendment to their counter

proposal of December 1. This amendment did not change essential

features of Communist proposal, but for purpose of preventing future

misunderstanding of scope and meaning, had introduced two clarify­

ing insertions a) making clear it applied to Taiwan area, and b) that it

was not intended to deny inherent right of two sides to individual and

collective self-­defense.

2. Refer to Wang’s statement last meeting that Communists would

be willing consider inclusion specific mention Taiwan area in renunci­

ation of force declaration. This represents step forward and leaves only

self-­defense issue standing in way of agreement.

3. Insist on necessity to include provision for individual and col­

lective self-­defense for protection of rights of both sides. This cannot

possibly be objectionable to either side since it is right long recognized

by international law. It is expressly provided for in Article 51 of UN

­Charter. Having raised point, if US were now to agree to remove this

provision from declaration on renunciation of force, it could be con­

strued as a waiver by both sides of this inherent right and US cannot

agree to this. You should point out that this is not designed in any way

to commit Communists to renounce pursuit of their policies by peaceful

means with respect to Taiwan, as was stated in your ­November 10 draft.

4. FYI. You should hold firm on this point. Department consid­

ers Communists unlikely break over this, for they would find their

position difficult to defend publicly. However, even if Communists

should break on this, Department considers it impossible to yield to

­Communist demand since this could be claimed by Communists to

be relinquishment US right to enter collective defense arrangements

in Taiwan area, and indeed its right to defend its ships and forces,

and to participate in defense of offshore islands, if it decides to do so

should they be attacked by Communists. END FYI

ited  Distribution. Drafted by Phleger and Clough; cleared in draft by Dulles and by

McConaughy and Sebald.

5. You should repeat arguments used last meeting, again reviewing

course of negotiations and emphasizing US initiative on renunciation of

force issue, and its having met every legitimate Communist proposal.

6. Make strong statement on implementation, concentrating on

Communist failure fulfill Agreed Announcement expeditiously. Expose

absurdity of Communist allegations that US obstructing departure

­Chinese by citing Baltimore Sun article on Liu An-­hua. Avoid implying

that US has obligation or intention to investigate individuals named

by Wang in absence any evidence that individuals in question being

obstructed from going to Communist China. Wang’s inability produce

such evidence proves hollowness his charges. Weakness of Wang’s posi­

tion provides you opportunity take offensive as you did last meeting.

7. If Wang should renew demand that substance of discussions be

made public, you should state that progress to date made possible by

private character of discussions and detailing them to public would

only hinder success. US has nothing to hide but has no desire transform

talks from serious discussion into propaganda contest.

8. FYI British learned on good authority in Peiping that Wang was

there December 31.

Dulles

A–173

Washington, January 16, 1956

For Johnson.

Your 1369. No data on Wang Pao-­liu.

Lai Ya-­li has been Deputy Director of General Office of CHICOM

Fonmin since October 1949, office headed by Wang Ping-­nan until 1955.

Lai apparently social scientist, reportedly once was secretary to General

Feng Yu-hsiang. CHICOMS publicly identify Lai as member ­Kuomintang

Revolutionary Committee, but intelligence reports he Communist. In

February 1949, reportedly arrived in Peiping as member delegation

“democratic personages” from Manchuria. Same year, ­participated in

first All-­China Youth Conference, elected to National Committee All-­

China Federation Democratic Youth. Apparently relinquished connection

by Nagoski.

youth organizations before 1953. In 1949, joined preparatory committee

­Sino-­Soviet Friendship Association, became Executive Committee mem­

ber and Deputy Secretary General Association. Relieved of these assign­

ments by late 1954.

As Fonmin official, accompanied Chou to Moscow January 1950 for

Sino-­Soviet negotiations. Only other known trip outside China: In 1952

headed Sino-­Soviet Friendship Association delegation to Mongolian-­

Soviet cultural conference in Ulan Bator.

Was delegate from Kuomintang Revolutionary Committee to

­Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference and has been one

of directors Chinese People’s Institute of Foreign Affairs.

Dulles

Letter No. 29

Washington, January 16, 1956

Dear Alex:

We are trying to be more forehanded in getting out the guidance

for your meetings. We are now having our preliminary session on

­Saturday preceding the Thursday meeting. This enables us to get out

the first draft of the telegram by Monday morning. If all goes well we

can get the Secretary’s approval on Monday and dispatch the telegram

before the close of business on that day. I believe you will agree that

the extra day’s margin is a good thing. We met with the Secretary last

Monday, the 9th for about 45 minutes. He personally approved your

instructions after making slight changes. I believe you will be inter­

ested in knowing that he continues to follow the talks closely notwith­

standing the ever-­mounting pressures on him. He gave no indication at

the last meeting that he felt any change of tack on our part was needed.

So there is no reason to expect any new departure in your guidance in

the absence of agreement on the renunciation of force item and satisfac­

tory implementation of the agreed announcement, or some other major

move by the Chinese Communists.

I am enclosing a copy of the Shepley article on the Secretary from

the January 16 issue of Life Magazine. In view of the flurry this article

Informal.

has caused here we are taking no chances of your not having it. It is

possible that it will either be mentioned by Wang or will influence the

Chinese Communist tactics in some way. In any event it would be well

for you to know what it says. Judge Phleger remarked on Saturday

undoubtedly the article would receive close study in Peiping. He felt

that it would probably have an influence on Peiping moves although it

could not be predicted what the influence would be. It might well have

something of a restraining and sobering effect, although the possibility

of a different reaction could not be ruled out.

Mr. Robertson, Judge Phleger, Bill Sebald and I all agree that

we cannot agree to any deletion of the provision for individual and

collective self defense from a renunciation of force declaration. Your

instructions as now drafted reflect this position. It seems clear to us that

Wang’s strategy is to tie our hands in the Taiwan area by getting us to

renounce the right of self defense there. Then, by Chinese Communist

reasoning, there would be no occasion for them to exercise any right of

self defense in an “international” dispute and they could deal with the

Chinese Nationalists as a domestic insurrectionary element the same as

they would with an insurrection in Fukien Province.

My reaction to Wang’s request that the talks be opened up, is that

it indicates something of a turning point. I take it as a major decision

probably growing out of Wang’s reported consultation in Peiping.

While it may have been something of a bluff, they had to be prepared

for the possibility that we would call the bluff. It could mean that

despite our not calling them they are prepared to make a unilateral

move, although it may be significant that today, four days after Wang

made the threat, there is still no public statement out of Peiping.

At the least, Wang’s move would seem to indicate that the Chinese

­Communists no longer have any real hope of getting what they want

out of these talks. They undoubtedly expect to get a relaxation of the

trade controls but figure that it will fall in their laps without their

having to negotiate for it at Geneva. I dislike our being put in a posi­

tion of seeming to want secret negotiations and seeming to fear pub­

licity as to what is going on in the talks. It is the supposed secrecy

that has led to the misunderstanding of the talks which has hurt us,

especially in the Far East. Our public position at a later stage could

be harmed by an insistence now on preserving the private nature of

the talks. However I concede that no further progress would be possi­

ble if we abandon the private nature of the talks. The opposing posi­

tions would be instantly frozen. However, it is a question whether

any further progress will be made anyhow. The clincher argument for

trying to continue the private character of the talks is that the chance

of protracting the talks for a while longer is certainly better if neither

side goes to the public.

I was sorry to be away on the day of your meeting. I was up at the

Naval War College making a speech on “U.S. Security Arrangements in

the Far East”.

I hope Wang will not bring up anything on alleged Chinese prison­

ers in American penitentiaries. We are continuing to make preliminary

investigation against that contingency.

Regards to all four of you, commendations from all of us here, and

continued good luck to you,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Article from Life Magazine

2. Article from Baltimore Sun

1387. From Johnson.

1. Appreciate and entirely concur guidance Deptel 1496 re renun­

ciation force.

2. Believe CHICOM failure thus far make public statement in spite

Wang’s statement last meeting indicates they appreciate weakness their

public position and greatly strengthens my hand.

3. In view their failure make public statement, believe I should

be prepared for unlikely but possible contingency Wang may attempt

force my hand at next meeting by eventually agreeing to our amended

draft and pressing for prompt issuance. I would, of course, utilize

every possibility of delaying any decision to at least next following

meeting including necessity referring to Dept any changes whatever

in text. However, if he should fully accept my text would appreci­

ate Department’s instructions regarding issuance statement. Would

suggest that same pattern be followed as with September 10 agreed

announcement, that is, would agree with Wang on release time by

Limited Distribution.

both us here, text to be made available press by Department shortly

thereafter, together with such further comment as Department con­

sidered desirable.

4. For following reasons question suggested reply on Liu An-­hua:

(A) I have in past consistently deprecated Wang’s attempts use US or

other press sources as reliable foundation for discussion in our talks. If

I cite press source as official answer his inquiry re Liu An-­hua I open

door for him throw back at me my previous statements this regard and

confront me with press stories that may in whole or part be favorable

CHICOM position. (B) If I reply concerning Liu An-­hua even by refer­

ence news story difficult avoid implication acceptance obligation reply

other cases. Failure do so might then carry implication facts other cases

not favorable to us.

5. Wang has thus far carefully avoided specifically charging any

individuals named are being denied rights under agreed announce­

ment and is cleverly couching request more on whereabouts and wel­

fare grounds. As by-­product to major objective of offsetting weakness

their public position arising from failure release imprisoned Americans

they hope thereby also lay “humanitarian” basis for justifying enlarge­

ment Indian Embassy functions into this field. Another by-­product

would be utilize our failure reply in meetings to expand precedent of

Red Cross channel established Liu Yung-­ming’s case.

6. This exercise also partially fishing expedition in hope find­

ing case some Chinese who is imprisoned with which belabor us for

another Liu Yung-­ming case.

7. Believe position we adopt should be consistent with position

we have thus far taken with respect O’Neill taking initiative in visiting

imprisoned Americans as well as whereabouts and welfare inquiries

concerning Americans we may in future desire to make either directly

here or through UK repeat UK.

8. Therefore, with respect this aspect for next meeting suggest I

avoid direct reply concerning any individuals named by Wang keeping

discussion as at last meeting strictly to US performance under agreed

announcement and CHICOM failure produce any specific evidence of

failure fully implement announcement. Believe I can make more effec­

tive presentation exposing hollowness Wang’s charges and cynical

nature CHICOM attempt throw up smokescreen without specifically

mentioning Liu An-­hua case. Would, of course, continue avoid any

implication US has obligation investigate individual cases in absence

such evidence.

9. In meanwhile suggest VOA make full world-­wide use excellent

material on Liu An-­hua contained Baltimore Sun article as refutation

Peiping broadcasts.

Gowen

1507. For Johnson.

According Dutch Embassy, Dutch Mission Peiping learned from

diplomatic colleague who had spoken to Wang Ping-­nan that latter was

in Peiping January 1. Wang reportedly remarked to informant Chinese

Communists were concerned at lack progress in Geneva talks.

Dutch Mission reports general view among diplomatic corps

Peiping is that Communists do not desire break off talks but are seeking

means exert greater pressure on U.S.

Dulles

tribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Lancaster (WE).

1512. For Johnson. Your 1387.

1. If Wang should accept our amended draft without change and

press for immediate announcement, you should inform him question of

ority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Sebald, Phleger in draft, and

McConaughy.

timing announcement must be referred Washington and propose spe­

cial meeting mutually satisfactory date during week beginning January

23 to make final arrangements for release day following such meeting.

Department would agree to release first in Geneva and by Department

shortly thereafter.

2. You given full discretion as to whether to refer to newspaper

article Liu An-­hua. FYI VOA broadcasting Liu An-­hua case world­

wide and seeking similar stories on other individuals mentioned by

Wang.

Dulles

1388. From Johnson.

Wang met Krishna Menon at airport yesterday evening and they

conferred in airport for one hour during stopover Menon’s plane. In

response correspondent’s questions following meeting, Menon said

they had discussed subjects of these talks, United Nations and China.

Wang refused make any statement.

Gowen

Repeated to New Delhi as telegram 28.

1398. From Johnson.

1. Three hour ten minute meeting this morning.

2. Wang opened meeting with long prepared statement reiterat­

ing position of objection to individual and collective security clause on

grounds it would require them recognize “U.S. occupation Taiwan”,

referred my previous statements declaration did not involve third par­

ties but said attempt incorporate individual and collective self-­defense

clause in Taiwan area automatically involves “Chiang clique”. Then

referring my statements these talks must be free from threat of force,

launched into long and strong attack on alleged statements by Secretary

which constituted “clamor for atomic war against China”, “Chinese

cannot be intimidated”, “blackmail doomed to failure”, “condemned

by peace-­loving people” etc., “this cannot benefit our talks”, “cannot

but raise question whether U.S. had genuine sincerity peacefully settle

questions between China and U.S.”

I replied with long extemporaneous statement first picking up

his statements concerning Secretary which I characterized as “entirely

uncalled for and gross libel”. Record of U.S. had more than demon­

strated lack aggressive intent toward other countries including China,

cited unparalleled U.S. restraint in Korea in face provocation Chinese

attack which gave every moral and legal justification for defending

U.N. forces attack Chinese bases. Consistent U.S. record of fostering

and protecting freedom and independence other peoples. Purely defen­

sive nature all U.S. collective defense arrangements with other coun­

tries. President and Secretary have repeatedly expressed overwhelming

sentiment American people never to initiate attack. There is nothing

Secretary has ever said in any way that could possibly be interpreted in

terms employed by Wang. During subsequent give and take this sub­

ject in response my direct question Wang cited “Life” article as basis for

his statements. If had been said by “Knowland or McCarthy” would

have been ignored but could not be ignored when made by Secretary. I

said I had read article and find no statement by Secretary therein which

could remotely support Wang’s allegations. Said he should not confuse

official and authorized statements with expressions of opinion made on

own responsibility by writer magazine article. During course discus­

sion he stated “hard to understand why U.S. on one hand invites PRC

Limit Distribution.

make declaration renouncing force while on other hand Secretary State

reveals that on three occasions U.S. was “on verge unleashing atomic

war against China”. I replied that I knew of no such revelation by

Secretary but did know of statements of determination by U.S. to resist

by war if necessary aggression unleashed by others.

Long discussion individual and collective self-­defense for most

part reiterated former positions. We each took increasingly adamant

lines, I following line Department telegram 1496. I stated and reiterated

“U.S. cannot and will not under any circumstances agree” in negotiat­

ing this declaration to PRC demand that U.S. renounce its legitimate

right to individual and collective self-­defense. Wang avoided meeting

me directly on general principle, gave no reply to my interpretation

of negotiations and yesterday’s public statement as denouncing U.S.

renounce individual and collective self-­defense but carefully lim­

ited presentation his adamant position to PRC recognition U.S. claim

applicability this principle Taiwan area. Adamancy this position best

reflected by Wang’s statement “if U.S. insists on including clause indi­

vidual and collective self-­defense in Taiwan area, I do not see how we

can reach any agreement.”

While he did not challenge neither did he confirm my reference

to his statement last meeting concerning willingness consider specific

mention Taiwan in declaration.

He then initiated discussion implementation with relatively mild

statement giving me additional list of four names. Discussion for most

part followed general lines last meeting.

At close of meeting I made statement referring their public state­

ment expressing disappointment, concern over effects on talks and

made somewhat double barreled query whether this indicated they did

not desire to continue these talks upon basis which I had suggested at

beginning of talks and which I had tried very hard to maintain. In reply

Wang stressed their statement only “one time operation” reasons for

which he had given in two prior meetings. Reaffirmed desire continue

talks without suggesting modification present procedures on publicity.

He said “it my hope and desire that talks will reach positive, construc­

tive, honest outcome.”

He took initiative suggesting next meeting, asking as special

accommodation be held Wednesday January 25. When I asked whether

this for just one meeting he replied hope next following meeting could

be held Friday February 3. But in response my suggestion February 2

instead of February 3 next following meeting we agreed leave question

open until next meeting. (For Department’s information “Porgy and

Bess” company arriving Prague February 4 and I planning hold large

reception for them February 4 or 5.)

Gowen

1402. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 33d meeting today with visibly hastily drawn pre­

pared statement saying that at our last meeting he already made some

remarks on my proposed amendments to draft announcement. This

morning he going make further comments.

2. Wang said at last meeting I stated that China and US confront

each other with policies that in conflict but it need not lead to hostili­

ties. If so, solution to disputes should be brought about through nego­

tiation and that exactly specified in their draft. If however it intention

US side in making announcement to maintain status quo of occupation

Taiwan then as he had long ago pointed out his side would absolutely

not agree.

3. He said I had repeatedly stated China not required to renounce

policies she has laid down. However, policy of China is exactly to

liberate Taiwan. My draft requires them to recognize right of US to

individual collective self defense in Taiwan area. That aims to require

his side recognize US-Chiang treaty as well as recognize US occupa­

tion Taiwan.

4. Wang said furthermore my draft attempted confuse exclusively

internal issue of China with international disputes between China US.

This would require his side give up legal sovereign right over Taiwan.

As he had long pointed out this what his side absolutely will not do.

5. Wang said I had stated use of force does not accord with accepted

standards of international conduct. However it exactly US which using

force and threat against China in Taiwan area.

6. Wang said, in spite this his side still maintains that disputes

between China US be settled through negotiations. As to question in

which manner China will settle internal issues, as he had pointed out

long ago, that exclusively matter Chinese internal affairs and permits

no foreign country’s interference.

7. Wang said again I had stated that issuance agreed announce­

ment does not involve any third parties. However in draft put forward

by me I raised question of so-­called individual collective self defense in

Taiwan area. That exactly an attempt to bring Chiang clique into matter.

Limited Distribution.

8. Wang said thus it evident that amended draft put forward by me

Jan 12 and my original draft Nov 10 contain practically no difference

and therefore it not acceptable.

9. Wang said my side on one hand suggested inside conference

room that announcement on renunciation force be issued. However

on other hand over an extended period US side not willing arrive at

agreement this question. This cannot but raise question as to sincerity

of professed desire settle issues between China US.

10. Wang said furthermore he would like point out in our previous

meetings I stated that talks between us must not be held under threat of

force. Yet US Secretary State Mr. Dulles had been clamoring recently for

atomic war against China. Was this not outright threat?

11. Wang said if Mr. Dulles thinks Chinese people can be intimi­

dated by threats and that Chinese people can be forced give up their

sovereign rights this entirely wishful thinking.

12. Wang said it is well to recall that Korean armistice, restoration

peace in Indochina as well as withdrawal from Tachen Islands, all these

events have sufficiently demonstrated fact that forces of world people

for peace and justice cannot be stopped, whereas policy of position of

strength and atomic blackmail doomed failure.

13. Wang said recent warlike utterances of Secretary not only pro­

voked greatest indignation on part Chinese people but also condemned

by people of other countries including peace loving people in US. Could

these utterances be reconciled with purposes present talks? Could these

utterances be reconciled with further desire for progress?

14. Wang said all these events cannot but raise question as to

whether U.S. has genuine sincerity to settle peacefully issues and dis­

putes between China and U.S.

15. I replied extemporaneously saying Wang had again this morn­

ing spoken of sincerity. He had made remarks concerning Secretary of

State which entirely uncalled for. I believed that record of U.S. in world

affairs as well as record in these talks speaks for itself.

16. I said U.S. has demonstrated not just in words but in actions its

devotion to cause of peace. It has also demonstrated not just in words

but in actions its devotion to supporting freedom and independence of

all peoples.

17. I said U.S. has demonstrated not only by words but by actions

its complete lack any aggressive intent whatsoever not only towards

other countries but also towards Wang’s country.

18. I said Wang had mentioned Korea. I was sure there is not in

history of world any greater example of self-­restraint and lack aggres­

sive intention towards other people than that demonstrated by U.S. in

Korean hostilities. Actions of forces under control of Wang’s government

crossing into Korea and attacking U.S. and other forces there operating

under authority U.N. gave every moral and legal justification for those

U.N. forces defend themselves by attacking bases in his country from

which Chinese forces were supported.

19. I said U.N. forces restrained themselves from taking that action

because of great desire, in spite actions Wang’s government, not to

spread war. For month upon weary month Chinese representatives

refused agree any reasonable armistice that would stop hostilities.

Eventually during period that Mr. Dulles was Secretary State, armistice

was finally concluded.

20. I said every agreement or collective defense arrangement U.S.

has entered into around world including Far Fast very specifically

and clearly limited to self defense, self defense not only of selves but

collective self-­defense with other like-­minded countries which fear

aggression.

21. I said President of U.S. and Secretary State have time and again

expressed overwhelming sentiment of American people in stating

U.S. will never attack anyone. To state that Secretary is “clamoring for

atomic war” is gross libel which I most strongly resented.

22. I said I well aware of public statements of Secretary. There was

nothing Secretary had ever said in any way that could possibly be inter­

preted in that fashion. To do so was grossest type misrepresentation.

23. I said as far as devotion to peace and desire avoid war is con­

cerned and with respect these talks I was satisfied facts are equally

clear. As I had reviewed with him at last meeting and as he had again

recognized in his statement this morning, it was U.S. which proposed

we make it clear we were determined settle disputes through peaceful

means and not resort war.

24. I said there is vast difference between proposing negotiate with

overhanging threat of attack in background and proposal definitively

to remove threat of war and then seek peaceful means resolving our

disputes.

25. I said Wang had consistently in these talks and his government

had in its public statement issued yesterday ignored plain statement

I made in my original proposal October 8. I had made it clear in that

statement, had made it clear in all statements I ever made in these meet­

ings, had made it clear in draft November 10, that it was not suggested

that Wang’s government renounce in any way peaceful pursuit policy

objectives which it believed it legitimately entitled achieve. Those not

just idle words. I had attempted already carry out that intent. It was

stated very specifically in November 10 draft, but in order meet Wang’s

objections to that draft, I tried another formula in amendments which I

suggested to his draft of December 1.

26. I said at our last meeting I had offered consider any alternative

formulation he might have in mind. I certainly didn’t see how it possi­

ble for me be any more reasonable this regard.

27. I said there are two things that I had considered essential. One

is that we make it clear that there no concealed reservations with regard

Taiwan area. I had welcomed his statement last meeting that he will­

ing consider inclusion of words that would make it clear Taiwan area

included in scope any declaration we made. This seemed to me be very

encouraging step towards final agreement.

28. I said that seemed to me leave only one obstacle. That obstacle

did not seem be matter of substance but rather matter of finding words

express substance. I had reference to matter of individual collective self

defense.

29. I said we had both in these meetings expressed concurrence

with this as principle. I had clearly expressed to Wang my intent that in

stating principle, it should not prejudice his position with re nature our

dispute in Taiwan area. I honestly felt I had accomplished that purpose

in suggested amendments I proposed at last meeting. However I had

said if he felt differently I was willing consider other suggestions he

might have that regard.

30. I said having agreed on substance it certainly seemed to me

not unreasonable and not beyond ingenuity of two of us to find words

express that substance.

31. I said it had never occurred to me that this principle so long

recognized in international law, embodied in U.N. Charter and gen­

erally accepted throughout world could be objectionable anyone. It

never occurred me that any country which genuinely concerned with

own sovereignty and willing respect that of other countries would be

opposed to it.

32. I said it hard to see how any country would desire go on public

record as admitting its policies were inconsistent with legitimate exer­

cise by other countries of right self defense.

33. I said I repeated that in stating this it never had been and still

was not my intention demand that his government abandon any of its

claims or its views or its right to peaceful pursuit its policies, no matter

how strongly I might disagree with some of those policies.

34. I said however as our negotiations upon this subject had devel­

oped, and particularly in light of public statement made by Wang’s

government yesterday, it appeared that intent of his government was

to demand that in negotiating this statement my government renounce

its legitimate right of individual collective self defense. I wanted make

it perfectly plain that my government cannot and will not under any

circumstances agree to do this.

35. At this point, 11 a.m., Wang consulted at some length with his

interpreter. Also messenger brought in three-­page Chinese letter which

Wang glanced at briefly before proceeding.

36. Wang said this morning he had specifically pointed out negoti­

ations between us should be aimed at bringing about peaceful solution

of dispute between us in Taiwan area and relaxation tension in Far East.

Therefore, he held negotiations should not be held under overhang­

ing threat of force. As he had pointed out this morning, statement by

Secretary contained flagrant threats against his side, and it seemed to

him that such threatening utterances on part of Secretary of State of US

would not rpt not bring people of US any good. Nor would these state­

ments raise prestige of American people.

37. Wang said I had spoken much about US peaceful intentions in

world. However, if US genuinely willing, not by words but by action, to

demonstrate its peaceful intent, it was capable making great contribu­

tion to world peace. Today, people of world capable making own judge­

ments, which made not on basis words but actions demonstrated. From

development of events in field of disarmament, from establishment of

military bases around world, from open intervention in internal affairs

Korea, and armed intervention in Taiwan, people of world able judge

by whom peace being breached, and that all these events run against

international law and justice.

38. Wang said, in mentioning these past events he had no interest

go into debate with me, for I well knew we could hold long debates

without coming to any useful conclusion. He wished only make specific

mention events in Korea and Taiwan. He convinced history would pass

judgement as to which side had engaged in intervention in domestic

affairs of others, as well as which engaged in armed aggression. People

of world will make own judgements.

39. Wang said that I had referred to drafting of announcement

renouncing use force and setting forth principle of peaceful settlement

of disputes. He was sure I well aware their efforts this direction, that

is, that they were striving in this direction to bring about agreement.

On question of an agreed announcement on renunciation of force, their

side had repeatedly made concessions. If both sides followed principles

international law and both shared same desire for peace, hard for him

see why latest draft Chinese side unacceptable.

40. Wang said this morning I had again stated US had no intent

demand Chinese side renounce its legitimate rights, or abandon its

views, or renounce pursuit its policies. However, in next instant I had

again raised question of US right of self defense in Taiwan area and had

stated US would not renounce its claims to individual and collective

self-­defense in Taiwan area. This latest statement practically refutes all

my other statements and renders them meaningless.

41. Wang said it was their view that both sides must make equal

efforts come to agreement. Chinese side has made such efforts but US

has not. Therefore, difference between two of us not one of specific for­

mulation or of choice of words, but one of substance. If US insisted on

including phrase concerning individual and collective self defense in

draft agreed announcement, he did not see how we could reach any

agreement. This outcome was not Chinese desire or hope.

42. I responded that, first, Wang insisting on belaboring supposed

question of statements by Secretary of State. I would like specifically

ask what statement or statements?

43. Wang said this was statement now known everywhere and he

referring to statement appeared Life magazine.

44. I said I wondered whether or not Wang along with many

others might not be confusing official and authorized statements of

Secretary of State with opinions and views issued on own responsibil­

ity by writer of magazine articles. I might add that I had read article in

entirety and could find no statement therein by Secretary of State that

could remotely support statements Wang made here this morning.

45. Wang said talks between two of us should be aimed at settling

peacefully dispute between our two countries instead of at creating ten­

sions. Peaceful settlement of dispute between two countries would not

only bring about relaxation tensions in world but would contribute to

cause of peace in world. Hard for them understand why US on one

hand invited them discuss making joint announcement on renuncia­

tion force, while on other hand US SecState revealed that on three occa­

sions US had been on verge of unleashing atomic war against China.

Suppose these disclosures had been made by someone else—Senator

Knowland or Mr. McCarthy—Chinese could omit ref to them in these

talks. However, they noted these statements being made by personal­

ity in charge and guidance of US foreign policy, and those statements

certainly caused alarm part of Chinese. They could not help raising

question as to whether US foreign policy, under guidance Mr. Dulles,

advocated negotiations between two sides or advocated use of atomic

bombs against China. He only wanted make it plain and clear Chinese

people were not to be frightened by this sort of talk.

46. Wang said, in particular they thought that at time while

­Sino-­American talks were in progress, these utterances would serve no

useful purpose. And he wanted to point out also that he who plays with

fire is one who gets burnt in the end.

47. I said I had seen no statement by Secretary in Life article or

elsewhere, or ever under any circumstances anywhere, speaking of

unleashing an atomic war on China or on any other country. I had how­

ever seen statements referring to determination of US to resist, by war

if necessary, aggression unleashed by others.

48. Wang said he had made clear his views on this situation and

had nothing further to add.

49. I said, turning to his remarks concerning our draft, he had

apparently slightly misunderstood or misinterpreted statement I had

made this morning. What I was speaking of concerning embodiment in

any declaration or statement on individual and collective self defense,

was that it be clearly embodied as a principle. What I had said was that

in light of history these negotiations and particularly public statement

issued by Chinese Govt yesterday, they were in effect demanding that

US renounce this principle. I had said this was what we would not do.

In this, they were asking us to do something that we had not asked

them to do.

50. Wang said he had made their position crystal clear in previous

meetings as well as today on question of draft announcement. As he

had said, he would welcome any constructive proposal or amendment

which I willing present.

51. I said I had also made my position clear. Amendments which

I had suggested to their Dec 1 draft, in spite of their importance, did

not change draft’s essential nature. I had incorporated them in form

such that it was difficult for me to see why they should not have been

entirely acceptable. I had offered consider any alternative formulations

that would accomplish same purpose. I was disappointed that this

morning he persisted in rejecting what I had offered without making

any constructive suggestions of his own. I did not see how I could go

any further.

52. Wang said I could see that they had already made repeated

efforts on question of draft announcement. I would recall that in their

original proposal they proposed to include certain specific stipulations

of UN Charter as well as para concerning holding conference For­

eign Ministers. However, in view our reluctance accept that draft and

in spite fact stipulations UN Charter could be in no way objected to,

subsequently in interest formulating draft meeting views both sides,

Chinese side put forward Dec 1 draft, in which paras concerning UN

Charter and convening Foreign Minister conference were withdrawn.

53. Wang said, however withdrawal of two paras did not mean

paras themselves were objectionable or that they not proper for inclu­

sion in draft. Withdrawal two paras from original draft did not mean

they were not qualified for inclusion, but represented effort their part

formulate an acceptable form and effort their part to work for making

such an announcement and not for its hindrance. Therefore, hard for

him see why I not willing accept concrete proposal he put forth last

meeting: to withdraw phrase concerning individual and collective self

defense from amendment to draft I had put forward at last meeting.

54. I said it should be clear to him and his government that, from

manner in which this question of individual and collective self defense

had been handled by him in these meetings as well as in public state­

ment made by govt., any failure to mention this in any draft we might

issue would inevitably be represented as renunciation on part of US of

its legitimate rights of self defense. It should be equally clear that this

was demand which it entirely impossible for US accept.

55. Wang said wanted make clear position his government this

regard. That was, they would not accept any draft which included

phrase dealing with so called right to individual and collective self

defense in Taiwan area. If they did accept such phrase, would be tan­

tamount recognition on their part of occupation of Taiwan by US. This

why this (rpt this) phrase absolutely unacceptable to them.

56. I said I had nothing further on this. Did he have anything else?

57. Wang said, with reference to seven Chinese mentioned his pre­

vious letter to me, as well as list of three handed me last meeting, won­

dered if I had any information? He had further list of four Chinese in

US who want return and who either been prevented or who have not

been heard from for long time by families. Would like to hand me list

(names in fol tel) and requested my govt investigate. Should note that

in list had entered full details concerning them. He only wanted say

that Chinese not satisfied with situation encountered these persons and

fact they not able return.

58. I asked what was his allegation concerning these persons? Was

it that they wanted return but were being prevented?

59. Wang said families of some have not heard from them for long

period, others desire return but unable do so.

60. I asked if allegation was they obstructed?

61. Wang said yes.

62. I said if they felt they encountering obstruction they could

freely contact Indian Embassy. Is allegation that they being prevented

communicate Indian Embassy?

63. Wang said there were various circumstances. Some these peo­

ple not informed concerning agreed announcement and therefore not

informed of specific measures in agreed announcement and had no

knowledge about communication with Indian Embassy.

64. I said it not credible to me that any Chinese in US who decided

return had not heard of agreed announcement. I had outlined to him

at time issuance of agreed announcement exceptional measures taken

to bring it to attention of every Chinese in US. Since that time, as I had

mentioned previous meeting, 70,000 copies full text posted in each

of 36,000 post offices in US. Inevitable that it would be brought their

attention some manner. Also like mention, if he had not noticed, press

release by Dept. of Dec 18 (I later corrected date to 17th) which stated:

“If anyone knows of any Chinese who wishes to leave or who claims

he is being prevented, he should communicate at once with the Dept of

State or the Indian Embassy in Washington, which the US has agreed

may render assistance”. If there were in fact any obstruction departure

any these people, reasonable that at least one case would have been

brought attention Indian Embassy. He often here and statement his

government yesterday continually referred to applying permission

depart. I had over and over again explained him, and it was confirm­

able by Indian Embassy and any one else, that Chinese wishing depart

need not apply to anyone.

65. I said if we were going bog discussions down here with case

every Chinese in US who for one reason or another does not exercise

his right to write person his country, did not seem to me we could get

anywhere.

66. I said it should be most reassuring him that thus far Indian

Embassy has brought no case to attention Dept concerning obstruction

to departure of Chinese. I would be very happy and people my country

would be much gratified if that were situation regarding US citizens in

China.

67. I said I perfectly aware number Americans in his country with

no desire return US. This entirely matter decision and right of individu­

als. I had not made any issue these cases. My government nor I here had

not stated these pressured, terrorized, or in any other way prevented

leaving, although this might be case. However, I making no such charge.

I had tried keep discussions within terms agreed announcement of Sept

10. If I had evidence any these people being prevented in their desire

depart, I would take it up here. However, my govt and I myself have

no desire create hypothetical issues for sake propaganda or make exag­

gerated charges for public consumption. I carefully trying avoid place

this type obstacle in way improvement relations and progress peaceful

settlement our disputes.

68. I said my govt continues increasingly concerned fate thirteen

Americans in prison who indisputably fall within category specifically

covered agreed announcement. This not propaganda issue with us in any

sense. It question validity and usefulness of any agreements between us.

These thirteen certainly desire return. They clearly being prevented from

doing so. Their freedom communicate UK Charge definitely been placed

under limitations. They should be promptly expeditiously allowed exer­

cise right return.

69. Wang said after announcement our agreement although US

claimed it made wide publication concerning agreement, there still

many people who not informed about agreement. Furthermore, in view

fact that US had failed submit list of Chinese in US, Indian Embassy

had no means inform these people.

70. Wang said in addition many Chinese students in US have writ­

ten home their families complaining of many difficulties and obstacles

they encountering.

71. Wang said most conspicuous case is that of Liu Yung-­ming.

Liu innocent person who never committed any offenses against US yet

he had been confined in mental hospital long time. Even after agreed

announcement Sept 10 US Govt failed take any measures regarding

him. It only after Wang had written letter to me that Liu allowed return.

72. Wang said as he stated at last meeting although he welcomed

measures taken effect Liu’s return, he entirely dissatisfied with treat­

ment Liu subjected to for such long time.

73. Wang said furthermore I had failed give them precise informa­

tion concerning any Chinese in US prisons. They had seen no measures

taken by US Govt to remove requirement for Chinese in US secure

entry permits for Taiwan. All these things indicated hindrances in way

of return of Chinese in US.

74. Wang said he hoped I would make investigation into situation

these people whose names he gave me in his letters as well as lists he

gave me at last meeting and at today’s meeting. He hoped measures

would be taken assisting them return.

75. Wang said he would like point out names these people were not

included in list I gave them of Chinese who desire return. He wished

express his dissatisfaction over this fact.

76. I replied that with regard Liu, I simply wanted point out no

action ever taken by US Govt prevent his departure. Liu was and still

is sick man. He hospitalized many years at public expense in US. Only

member of family who apparently ever took trouble correspond with

hospital was Liu’s father.

77. I said if Wang would refer to full record correspondence

between father and hospital he would note that father asked that Liu’s

treatment be continued.

78. I said soon as word received that Liu’s wife did not desire have

treatment continued but wanted him return, and that he was willing

return, although Liu not fully recovered arrangements made for him

depart. There certainly no legitimate grounds for complaint regarding

his treatment. In fact it would seem to me quite opposite.

79. Wang said superintendent of hospital in which Liu kept wrote

letter which fully proved that Liu could have left hospital long ago. Liu

also wanted return. His family always wanted him return. However,

he not able do so for long time. Question of Liu and his situation quite

clear.

80. I said neither Wang nor myself were psychiatrists, but there cer­

tainly difference between ability to travel, which apparently was Liu’s

condition in 1950, and being cured of illness. Certainly neither hospital

or any other official agency in US would have any interest in treatment

of person mentally ill other than pure humanitarian.

81. Wang said he thought doctor in this hospital was one who

capable making just statement regarding condition Liu.

82. I said I would think so too and doctor says Liu still not cured.

83. Wang said but they had letter written by superintendent hospi­

tal stating Liu was fit to leave hospital long ago.

84. I said, that is, fit to travel.

85. Wang said yes.

86. I said I only wanted to say before leaving that I was very disap­

pointed to note that in spite discussion last meeting Wang’s govt saw

fit issue statement with regard talks. It difficult for me see how this

could help us make progress. As I said at last meeting, I did not see how

public airing our differences helped towards solution problems. It only

aggravates them.

87. I said I wondered if this indicated whether his government

still intrested in continuing these talks upon basis which I suggested at

beginning and which I had tried very hard maintain.

88. I said exceedingly heavy responsibility rests upon two of us

here. I had tried for my part to discharge talks we face here with deep

sense that responsibility. I willing continue do so. I hoped Wang shared

my feeling this regard.

89. Wang said he could not accept charges I had leveled against

their action in making public statement. He had at previous two meet­

ings explained his position and reason tthat led for this one time to

making public statement on their part.

90. Wang said I asked whether they interested in continuing these

talks in previous manner. He wanted point out that in past his side had

consistently been adhering to form of talks. However, form in which

talks being carried on should be aimed at facilitating development of

our talks.

91. Wang said he agreed with me that we had exceedingly heavy

responsibility in talks. Public opinion in world had given our talks

great attention as well as great hope. Public desires to see improvement

in relations between our two countries as well as relaxing tension in Far

East in world. However, public does not want see our talks remaining

in old position without making progress forward.

92. Wang said they have always advocated means of negotiation to

find way to settle statutes [disputes] peacefully. PRC side will fully and

certainly discharge task which we shoulder. It his desire and hope that

our talks make positive, constructive and honest-­to-­goodness progress.

January instead of usual Thursday.

94. I asked whether this just for this one meeting.

95. Wang said they would possibly want to delay the next follow­

ing meeting one day to Feb 3, Friday, instead of Feb 2.

96. I indicated I agreed to 25 Jan meeting but indicated I might

have some difficulty agreeing to latter change.

97. Wang suggested we leave that question open until next meeting.

Gowen

1403. From Johnson.

Comment on today’s meeting:

With respect renunciation force, position concerning self defense

clause froze very tight at today’s meeting with only slight opening left

by Wang. Their yesterday’s public statement of course also tends rigid­

ify their position at least for time being.

Wang’s persistent relation of PRC objection on self-­defense clause

to its linkage with Taiwan area suggests that way to agreement might

be by rephrasing and or repostioning clause. Question is who takes ini­

tiative in suggesting change.

I do not see any immediate possibility breaking this deadlock and

would propose at next meeting only to carefully review and reiterate

our position.

Although not explicitly confirmed at today’s meeting, I feel that

they have accepted inclusion specific mention Taiwan, as well as

“means” in place of “negotiations”. Much of Wang’s comments on self-­

defense clause were based on implicit assumption Taiwan was included

in paragraph.

Distribution.

I purposely refrained from my usual tactic of initiating implemen­

tation discussion and he was quick to take initiative. In contrast to acri­

monious discussion of “Life” article and renunciation force, his manner

and language in introducing implementation and particularly when

presenting additional list of names was very mild and polite.

I also went some length in testing their desire continue meetings

and it is clear they desire to do so for immediate future. However,

would be rash to hazard any guess how long this may continue if no

new element is introduced.

In considering future course I am continuing consider effects on

remaining 13 Americans. I have no doubt if it were possible reach

agreement on renunciation force statement, particularly if initiative

came from US, additional releases would take place. In absence some

such development or additional indirect pressure that could be applied

difficult to forsee CHICOMS fully carrying out this commitment in

near future. In this connection from conversations with correspondents

and private individuals here am impressed with success of CHICOM

smoke screen on situation of Chinese in US. Most seem impressed by

CHICOM citation specific names and feel must be some fire where so

much smoke. Also are confused by Liu Yung-­ming case. Have found

most effective rebuttal is citation fact not single representation yet

received from Indians. We need get our story across better this regard,

and repeat on all possible occasions.

Message unsigned

1405. From Johnson.

Fol is list handed me by Wang at board [33rd?] meeting:

[text not declassified]

Gowen

1524. For Johnson.

Following statement being released by Department 11 a.m.

­January 21:

QUOTE

The Chinese Communists issued a misleading statement on

­January 18 regarding the Geneva discussions which have been tak­

ing place between United States Ambassador Johnson and Chinese

­Communist Ambassador Wang. It is thus necessary that the record be

set straight.

These conferences were started last August to discuss the repatria­

tion of civilians and other “practical matters at issue”.

AGREEMENT TO REPATRIATION OF CIVILIANS

On September 10, 1955 the representatives of both sides, by agree­

ment, issued statements that civilians were entitled to return to their

own countries (Annex A).

The Communist declaration stated:

“The Peoples Republic of China recognizes that Americans in the

Peoples Republic of China who desire to return to the United States are

entitled to do so, and declares that it has adopted and will further adopt

appropriate measures so that they can expeditiously exercise their right

to return.”

As of today, four months after this declaration was made, only

six out of the nineteen for whom representations were being made

on ­September 10 have been released. Thirteen Americans are still in

­Communist prisons.

As for the United States, any Chinese is free to leave the United

States for any destination of his choosing, and not a single one has been

refused exit. The Indian Embassy which was designated to assist any

Chinese who wished to leave, has not brought to the attention of this

Government any case of a Chinese who claims he is being prevented

from leaving, nor has it stated that it is impeded in any way in car­

rying out its functions under the terms of the September 10 Agreed

Announcement.

ity. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and White (ND).

DISCUSSION OF RENUNCIATION OF FORCE

After this Agreed Announcement was made, the two sides pro­

ceeded to discuss “other practical matters at issue between them”.

The Communists suggested the topics of the termination of the

trade embargo against Communist China and the holding of a meeting

by the Foreign Ministers of both sides.

Ambassador Johnson at the October 8, 1955 meeting, pointed out

that progress in further discussions could not be expected in the face

of continuing Communist threats to take Taiwan by military force, and

suggested that both sides agree to announce that they renounced the

use of force generally and particularly in the Taiwan Area and agree

to settle their differences by peaceful means. The United States repre­

sentative made clear that this renunciation of the use of force was not

designed to commit the Communists to renounce pursuit of their poli­

cies by peaceful means with respect to Taiwan. These proposals were in

the terms shown as Annex B.

Three weeks after the United States proposal to renounce the use

of force, the Communists on October 27 proposed a draft, a copy of

which is shown on Annex C. In this proposal, the Communists point­

edly omitted any reference to the Taiwan Area, or to the recognition

of the right of self-­defense, and inserted a provision for an immediate

meeting of Foreign Ministers.

This proposal was unacceptable because it would have made it pos­

sible for the Communists to claim that the proposal did not apply to the

­Taiwan Area, which is the very place against which the Communist threats

are directed, and to claim further that the United States had renounced the

right to use force in self-­defense. Ambassador Johnson further pointed

out that consideration of higher level meetings was neither appropriate

nor acceptable under existing circumstances.

On November 10, 1955, Ambassador Johnson, in an attempt to

reach an acceptable form of declaration, submitted a new draft decla­

ration (Annex D). This made clear that the renunciation of the use of

force was without prejudice to the peaceful pursuit of its policies by

either side; that it had general application, but applied particularly to

the Taiwan Area; and that it did not deprive either side of the right of

self-­defense.

The United States proposal was rejected by the Communists,

who, on December 1, 1955, made a counter-­proposal (Annex E).

This represented an advance over their previous proposal in that it

dropped the provision for talks on the Foreign Minister level in favor

of the continuance of Ambassadorial talks, but still pointedly omitted

any reference to the Taiwan area and to recognition of the right of

self-­defense.

In a further effort to reach agreement, Ambassador Johnson, at

the January 12 meeting, suggested two simple amendments to the

­Communist counter-­proposal. These were the insertion of the words

“without prejudice to the inherent right of individual and collective

self-­defense” and of the words “in the Taiwan Area or elsewhere”.

This United States revision of the Chinese counter-­proposal is shown

in Annex F.

THE COMMUNIST PUBLIC STATEMENT

This was the status of the discussions when the Communists

released their public statement of January 18.

The Communist statement apparently rejects the United States

proposal. It states “Taiwan is Chinese territory: there can be no question

of defense, as far as the United States is concerned. . . . Yet the United

States has demanded the right of defense of the Taiwan Area. Is this not

precisely a demand that China accept continued occupation of Taiwan

and that the tension in the Taiwan Area be maintained forever.” And

further, it states: “The American side continues to demand that our side

accept that the United States has ‘the inherent right of individual and

collective self-­defense’ in China’s Taiwan Area. This is what our side

absolutely cannot accept.”

THE UNITED STATES POSITION

Two points must be made clear. First, the United States is not occu­

pying Taiwan, and Taiwan has never been a part of Communist China.

The claims of Communist China and the contentions of the United

States with respect to this area are well known and constitute a major

dispute between them. It is specifically with respect to this dispute that

the United States has proposed the principle of renunciation of force

and the settlement of differences by peaceful means. This is the princi­

ple which the Communists say they have accepted.

In this connection the United States has made completely clear that

in renouncing the use of force neither side is relinquishing its objectives

and policies, but only the use of force to attain them.

Secondly, the United States has rights and responsibilities in the

­Taiwan Area; also it has a Mutual Defense Treaty. Accordingly, it is pres­

ent in the Taiwan Area. The Communist refusal to state that the renun­

ciation of force is without prejudice to the right of self-­defense against

armed attack can only be interpreted as an attempt to induce the United

States to agree that if attacked it will forego the right to defend its lawful

presence in this area.

The right of individual and collective self-­defense against armed

attack is inherent; it is recognized in International Law: it is specifi­

cally affirmed in the Charter of the United Nations. No country can

be expected to forego this right. Indeed the Communists should be as

anxious to preserve this right as is the United States.

CONCLUSION

The present exchange makes clear that:

1. Four months after the Communists announced that they would

adopt measures to permit Americans in China to return to the United

States, 13 Americans are still held in Communist prisons.

2. The United States proposed that the parties renounce the use of

force without prejudice to the right of individual and collective self-­

defense against armed attack, in order that the discussions might take

place free from the threat of war.

3. The United States made clear that this renunciation would not

prejudice either side in the pursuit of its objectives and policies by

peaceful means.

4. The Communists, while stating that they accept the principle of

the renunciation of force, have deprived such acceptance of its value by

refusing to agree that it is without prejudice to the right of individual

and collective self-­defense against armed attack and that it is applicable

to the Taiwan Area.

In short, the Communists so far seem willing to renounce force

only if they are first conceded the goals for which they would use force.

The United States for its part, intends to persist in the way of peace.

We seek the now overdue fulfillment by the Chinese ­Communists of

their undertaking that the Americans now in China should be allowed

expeditiously to return. We seek this not only for humanitarian reasons

but because respect for international undertakings lies at the foundation

of a stable international order. We shall also seek with perseverance a

meaningful renunciation of force, particularly in the Taiwan Area.

END QUOTE

Dulles

Letter No. 21

Geneva, January 20, 1956

Dear Walter:

Thank you very much for your letter of January 16 and especially

for your forethought in sending me a copy of the Shepley article. As you

will see the subject came up in a very major way at yesterday’s meeting

and I was able to handle it against the background of full knowledge of

the contents of the article.

I do not think there can be any question but that the article stung

Peiping and that at the minimum they felt they had to react as least ver­

bally. I have tried to kill much speculation among the correspondents

here that the article called forth the Chicom statement on the talks, let­

ting it be known that Weng had informed me at last meeting before

the furor concerning the Shepley article had started, that they were

going to issue the statement. Whether or not the Shepley article in fact

had any effect on their final decision, it gave them a convenient peg on

which to hang their release.

I had to handle my reply to Wang entirely off the cuff but believe

I made the major points. I had not anticipated quite this kind of pres­

entation from him and thought it would more likely be a passing

­reference such as his reference to Quarles’ statement the preceding

meeting which I could, if I chose, ignore. However, his presentation

with regard to the Shepley article was such I felt it incumbent to reply

at some length.

I have tried fully and frankly to cover my views with regard to the

situation in my telegrams and have little to add.

You can be sure that I more than share your concern over the pos­

sibility, and I think even probability, that eventually some Chinese in

jail that desires to return will turn up. I am a little concerned over being

too specific in my statements each of the persons mentioned in his lists

is free to return, just on the chance one of them might turn out to be

imprisoned, deceased, or some other such thing.

I agreed with him yesterday on changing the date of meeting after

I had verified that it was not an attempt to step-­up the frequency of the

meetings. Knowing your schedule on getting my instructions to me, as

well as the likelihood that little new would be needed for the next meet­

ing, it should not present any problem to you back there. By agreeing

to it of course enabled me somewhat to balance off his agreeing to my

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

Christmas recess and puts me back in the position of being able to ask

for any change that we might desire in the future.

As a sidelight, as promised, Wang promptly furnished me copies

of their January 18 statement and his interpreter just called Ekvall and

asked that I furnish them copies of any statement that the Department

may issue, which I agreed to do.

I stayed here last week-­end in order to be on hand if and when

they issued their public statement and I am staying here this week-­

end because of the meeting on Wednesday. However, I hope to leave

Wednesday night so that I can get back to Prague on Thursday as things

are piling up back there.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

1410. From Johnson. Department’s telegram 1524.

Statement is excellent and from my standpoint strikes exactly

right note. Yesterday Wang asked for copy of any statement made by

Department and I am sending copies to him as soon as press reports

Department release has been made. Will also make copies available to

correspondents here in response inquiries.

Gowen

1530. For Johnson.

Chinese Communist Vice Minister made following reply to letter

sent by O’Neill make representations on behalf McCarthy:

QUOTE

American criminal McCarthy offended against Chinese law and has

been sentenced by competent Chinese Authorities. During period of his

sentence McCarthy has no right demand repatriation and accordingly

question of his encountering obstruction in departure does not arise.

According to statement agreed to during Sino-­American ­Ambassadorial

talks, American criminals in China are basically different from law abiding

Americans in China. American criminals in China cannot exercise their

right of repatriation until Chinese Government has adopted meas­ures. As

to what sort of measures China adopts in accordance with its own legal

procedure, and when it adopts these measures in respect of these persons,

this is a matter of [group undeciphered. China’s] sovereignty and will be

decided by China herself.

UNQUOTE

You should register emphatic protest this gross misrepresentation

and violation of agreed announcement in your presentation under

paragraph 3 guidance telegram.

Dulles

Limited Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Phleger in substance and Sebald.

Brackets are in the original.

1531. For Johnson.

In response to request from Miner UK Charge made representa­

tions his behalf and received reply dated January 18 stating Shanghai

authorities have been taking active measures to help Miner settle his

affairs and some progress made. However, Miner had intentionally

delayed liquidation some his firms. Reply added authorities continu­

ing help him but he himself responsible for his inability leave China

quickly and his statement that he was being obstructed was not true.

Local representative Starr Interests says Miner reported recently

he had completely transferred one firm to Chinese Communists and

about to complete second. He appeared optimistic as result progress

being made. Consequently, Department not requesting further British

representations this time.

Dulles

Limited Distribution. Drafted by Clough.

1533. For Johnson.

Guidance for January 25 meeting.

1. Concur your proposal only to review and reiterate U.S. posi­

tion on renunciation of force. Department’s press release January 21

­(Deptel 1524) affords guide line for your presentation.

2. You should not take any initiative to rephrase or reposition

self-­defense clause so as to set it apart from reference to Taiwan area

but you can make clear that its location is not designed to estop the

­Limited Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared by Dulles, Phleger,

and Sebald.

Chinese Communists from pursuit of their policies by peaceful means

with respect to Taiwan.

3. Renew demand that Communists make good on their under­

taking to release Americans expeditiously. Reiterate no Chinese being

prevented from leaving U.S., no case of Chinese claiming he being

obstructed has been brought to Department’s attention by Indian

Embassy, no response received to Department’s public statement

December 16 asking anyone who knew of Chinese being obstructed

to communicate at once with Department or Indian Embassy. ­Chinese

in U.S. completely free to write to relatives on mainland China if

they wish. No U.S. responsibility for fact that some fail to write. FYI

­Department investigating case of Yuan Jui-­hsiang (Your 1365), alleged

by Wang to have been taken into custody by U.S. Immigration Service.

Will take some time since Immigration does not maintain central files

individual cases and must query each immigration district office. May

be impossible trace if name given by Wang differs radically from spell­

ing used by individual himself. END FYI.

4. Contrast U.S. performance with Communist refusal so far fulfill

their commitment and emphasize Communist non-­fulfillment would

cast doubt on dependability of their pledged word.

5. Point out that responsibility for dragging out of talks lies with

Communists, who not only fail to carry out their pledge of September

10 but also refuse to accept reasonable U.S. proposal for renunciation of

force by both sides which would remove threat of war in Taiwan area

and permit constructive discussion other practical matters at issue.

Dulles

1416. From Johnson.

Wang sent me 3: p.m. today copies long Foreign Ministry state­

ment January 24 replying Dept’s Jan 21 statement. Presume Dept

receiving via FBIS.

Priority.

Statement contains little new apart from slight hardening and

amplification of line:

“Situation in which one side faithfully executes agreement while

other side unscrupulously violates it is not permitted continue for

long”.

“China has consistently stood for respecting right of each coun­

try to individual and collective self-­defense . . . However, on Chinese

territory of Taiwan, can be no question of self-­defense so far as US

concerned.”

“Ambassadorial talks have proved incapable of settling such

major substantive question as relaxation and elimination tension in

­Taiwan area. Chinese side holds that Sino-­American conference of For­

eign Ministers must be held, as this is practical and feasible means for

settling this question”.

Statement ends: “Should US persist in such unreasonable demand

and drag out talks without any settlement, US must bear responsibility

for all consequences”.

I making no comment here.

Gowen

1419. From Johnson.

Three hour twenty minute meeting this morning.

I opened with prepared statement on renunciation force. Stressed

proposed declaration was essential preliminary other discussions, fact

it did not require acceptance by either side of views of other. Pointed

out his attempt force US into renouncing self-­defense right was distor­

tion original proposal and was “effort obtain US capitulation to PRC

demands with respect our controversy Taiwan area”. Cannot expect

this to succeed.

Wang replied with strong attack on US record Korea, bitter repeti­

tion charge of US “occupation” Taiwan and assertion US building base

Limit Distribution.

there for mainland invasion. Said Foreign Ministers conference must

be held to settle question relaxation tension, realize principle non-­use

force. Demanded withdrawal US forces from Taiwan.

I reiterated facts on restraint of US and UN action Korea, refuted

his charge of US “occupation” Taiwan by statement purely defensive

and limited character our collective defense arrangements with GRC,

which UN member and recognized by majority of world governments.

Again assured Wang we not asking they accept our views, contrast­

ing this with his attempt force US capitulate to views PRC regarding

­Taiwan controversy. I made this statement as pointed as possible and

reiterated it in give and take in order test whether Wang would deny

they attempting demand US capitulation. He refused all openings to

deny it, reaffirmed that “liberation” Taiwan is exercise of Chinese peo­

ples’ inherent right self-­defense, finally stated flatly “it not sufficient

merely to state that either side may not accept views of other. Some

views must be opposed”.

On implementation I took initiative with my most forceful refu­

tation to date their attempt claim distinction between “ordinary” and

“law-­breaking” Americans, referring to PRC Vice Minister’s letter to

O’Neill (Deptel 1530). Wang reaffirmed their position supporting dis­

tinction, reiterated standard charges, demanded revocation alleged

­Taiwan entry permit requirement and other pressures on Chinese in

US, demanded “accounting” persons on his previous lists. Handed me

new list 4 unheard from Chinese in US.

In give and take I stressed lack representations from Indians to

which Wang had no rebuttal.

At close, Wang suggested instead of postponing next meeting to

February 3 it be moved to January 28. I declined, saying had made

arrangements for February 3 meeting accordance his proposal last

meeting, but said I willing meet on February 2 as per regular schedule.

Wang shifted back to February 3 date to which I agreed.

Leaving for Prague Thursday. Returning Tuesday.

Gowen

1422. From Johnson.

1. I opened 34th meeting today with prepared statement as fols:

A. I have given considerable thought since our last meeting to

nature and origin of difficulty which confronts us in present stage our

talks. I do not mean to minimize significance of issues involved in our

area of disagreement, but I am encouraged to believe if we are sincerely

determined to seek with perseverance meaningful renunciation force,

which will also unmistakably be applicable to Taiwan area, we can find

way out this difficulty.

B. I believe to some extent our difficulty lies in fact that we may

have gotten away from underlying principles and purposes of pro­

posed declaration. In my Oct. 8 statement to you, proposed declaration

was clearly identified as preliminary step towards peaceful settlement

our disputes. It was to be—and I quote—“an essential foundation and

preliminary to success of discussions under item two”. This I regard

fundamental principle. As I plainly said there should be no question of

attempting to settle or prejudge, in this declaration, issues in dispute

between us.

C. I can honestly say I have carefully endeavored to be guided

by this principle. My draft Nov. 10, I believe, was completely consis­

tent with my statement Oct. 8, in that it was not suggested either of us

should renounce any policy objectives which we considered we were

legitimately entitled to achieve, but only that we renounce use of force

to implement these policies. I have since on many occasions given you

similar assurances.

D. Another fundamental requirement of proposed declaration was

necessity it be clearly applicable Taiwan area. If declaration was to be

useful preliminary to free discussion of our differences and their fair

and equitable solution, it obviously had to apply Taiwan area, precisely

area in which our differences are most acute, and where danger of

hostilities is greatest. I believe my drafts and statements in these meet­

ings have all recognized this requirement that our declaration be fully

responsive to situation in which confrontation of policies of our two

countries is most immediate.

Limited Distribution.

3. Despite fundamental and even obvious character these two

requirements, you for long time persisted in your objection to their

retention in our declaration. You have also claimed my amendments

Jan. 12 to your draft Dec. 1 required your govt. renounce its policies or

abandon its well-­known position with respect Taiwan area. I have given

you repeated assurances that was not my intention. I again assure you

it would not be in keeping with what I regard as fundamental char­

acter and high purposes of declaration for me to attempt to trick you

into form of words that could be represented as renunciation by your

government of its claims and peaceful pursuit its policies with respect

­Taiwan area. First, I have too much respect for your intelligence and

that of your Prime Minister to think such an effort would be successful.

Secondly, it would not be intelligent on my part even if I were suc­

cessful in doing so. We would be entering into agreement that would

mean one thing to one party, and something else to other party. While

we would thereby be able momentarily to present to world surface

appearance of agreement, in fact we would simply be creating further

cause controversy and [garble] between our two countries. This would

serve interests of no one honestly interested in reducing causes of our

controversies.

F. I renew my plea you approach this matter in the same spirit. You

certainly cannot reasonably expect my government can in any manner

be forced in such declaration either explicity or implicitly to renounce

its view with respect Taiwan area or its legitimate rights. You certainly

cannot expect US to say if American vessel on lawful mission is fired

upon it foregoes right to defend itself. You certainly cannot expect US

in effect to say it renounces right of individual or collective self-­defense

against armed attack—probably oldest, most fundamental and gener­

ally recognized right in law of nations.

G. Apparent attempt your govt. accomplish this purpose distorts

simple and straightforward objective my Oct. 8 proposal. It can only be

interpreted as effort on part your govt. attain in our negotiation of this

declaration capitulation by US to demarche your govt with respect our

controversy in Taiwan area. Your govt. cannot seriously expect it will

be successful in this.

H. Effort to persist in this as well as continued failure your govt.

fully to carry out agreement Sept. 10 with respect Americans impris­

oned your country can only continue to delay time when it will be

possible for us to enter into constructive discussion other practical

matters at issue between us. For my part, I continue to hope it will be

possible for us to enter into such discussions without further unnec­

essary delay.

2. Wang replied from notes taken during my statement that he had

listened to my statement this morning, but failed note any new con­

structive remarks in it. He very much regretted that arguments which

he had repeatedly refuted in course of talks had again been raised.

3. Wang said on his part it had always been their stand that talks

should make positive steady progress. He didn’t see how points raised

by me, which unacceptable their side, could lead talks forward. He

did not see any difference between points advanced this morning and

those presented at last meeting. He had already given his comments on

points raised last meeting. He would like make further comments now.

4. Turning to prepared statement, Wang said at last meeting I had

lauded allegedly good record of US in world affairs and stated that in

Korea US demonstrated restraint and lack aggressive intention. He had

already indicated their views on this at that time. He would again point

out that version given me grossly at variance with facts.

5. Wang said US performance in Korea and on Chinese territory as

witnessed by Chinese people in past and at present time points entirely

different record. US started war of aggression against Korea in June

1950 and ordered its armed forces to push towards Yalu and Tumen

Rivers. Security of Chinese nation was greatly threatened and Chinese

people could not stand idly by. Chinese people could not but rise in

self-­defense.

6. Wang said US at same time as its aggression against Korea also

used threat and force against China in Taiwan area. Since intrusion US

Seventh Fleet into Taiwan Strait, Chinese province of Taiwan fallen

prey to direct aggression of US.

7. Wang said US has established naval and air force bases on

­Taiwan and stepped up equipping of Chiang Kai-­shek clique, turning

Taiwan into base of contemplated invasion of mainland. Such is matter

of fact well known to all. Is there slightest grain in this performance

which could be presented as restraint and lack aggressive intent?

8. Wang said Taiwan Chinese territory. Even US had assumed sol­

emn pledge this effect. It matter of fact that Taiwan and Penghu turned

over to then Chinese Govt. on Oct 25, 1945. This fact also acknowledged

by US in White Paper published by State Dept. It indisputable matter

of fact that new China has succeeded to China’s entire territory and

sovereignty.

9. Wang said as US has used force and threat against China in

Taiwan area China has every justification to repel such aggression in

exercise right of self-­defense in its own territory. Nevertheless, China

still willing seek for settlement this dispute between China and US by

peaceful negotiations without resorting force.

10. Wang said it would not be difficult for me see that it PRC

side which genuinely demonstrated self restraint and control. They

always stood for peaceful settlement of dispute in Taiwan area between

China and US by means of negotiation. In course our talks PRC side

has repeatedly made major efforts and presented reasonable drafts for

announcement renouncing use force by both sides.

11. Wang said their reason for holding of FonMin conference, which

they still hold, exactly demonstrates their stand in this regard. How­

ever, confronted with circumstances in which US already using force

against Chinese territory Taiwan, proposition of non-­employment of

force cannot be used to induce China to accept US occupation Taiwan.

12. Wang said, in order realize principle of non-­use force in rela­

tions between China US, conference between ForMins two countries

must be held to settle question of eliminating and relaxing tension

between two countries.

13. Wang said we now spent four months on discussion second

item agenda. If US genuinely willing renounce force and accept peace­

ful settlement dispute it should withdraw forces from Taiwan area.

Unfortunately they had not yet seen any actions on part US to with­

draw forces and stop posing threats in Taiwan area, nor had they heard

any remarks from me ponting towards that end.

14. Wang said, as if to add to this, Mr. Dulles who leading figure

of US foreign policy recently declared that America had thrice gone

to brink of launching atomic war, recently stepping up military activ­

ities in Taiwan area which aimed at creating tension. In recent months

American military aircraft made repeated intrusions into China’s terri­

torial air.

15. Wang said US refuses touch on question of withdrawing its

forces and ending threat, yet persists in demanding China accept its

right self-­defense on Chinese territory Taiwan. Was this not resort to

perversion of facts and turning argument upside down?

16. Wang said to respect right of state to individual collective self-­

defense in conformity with UN Charter one thing; to whitewash one­

self with false claim to self-­defense is quite another. Was this not clear

enough? Could there be found any stipulation in UN Charter which

could possibly be interpreted as granting aggressor state right of self-­

defense on territory of state which is victim of aggression?

17. Wang said I had stated that question of self-­defense is not sub­

stantive issue. This sheer sophistry. If US atttempts carry out so-­called

right individual collective self-­defense on China’s territory Taiwan, this

is what Chinese people would determinedly oppose. If Chinese peo­

ple were to accept such action of seizure as legal, what more remains

between China and US which necessitates negotiations?

18. Turning again to pencilled notes, Wang continued that in state­

ment I had made this morning I had remarked that talks have now

encountered difficulty. I had acknowledged necessity for us to find way

out of this. However, it might be asked wherein lies root of this present

difficulty and how we should try to get out of it.

19. Wang said solution to present difficulty should be directed

towards effective relaxation of tension in Taiwan area rather than in

reverse direction. However, he did not see anything which leads this

direction in my remarks this morning.

20. Wang said he could not refrain from pointing out that crux of

issues between us is one of substance and principle.

21. Wang said we had agreed to make declaration in conformity

UN Charter of fact we agreed disputes between two countries in

­Taiwan area should be settled peacefully. That is preliminary step. Next

step would be for two of us seek practical and feasible ways to realize

above objectives. That precisely point of view their side.

22. Wang said US on other hand proposes make declaration in

which so-­called right self defense of US in Taiwan area to be recog­

nized. Instead of ending its occupation Taiwan, US by such declaration

contemplates legalizing its occupation. That is controversy of principle

with which we confronted.

23. Wang said Chinese people will never accept any terms in dec­

laration which recognize so-­called right of self-­defense of US in Taiwan

area. If US refuses give up so-­called right self-­defense in Taiwan area,

can only create doubts as to whether US sincerely desirous of peaceful

settlement of disputes between two countries.

24. I said I had just few preliminary comments make on statement

he had just made. I had no desire enter into debate on matters past his­

tory, which cannot contribute to progress in our discussions here.

25. I said I found it impossible, however, pass by his statement that

US started war of aggression in Korea in June 1950 and that security of

China was threatened by US. I simply wanted point out fact that, with

exception of those associated with that aggression against ROK, virtu­

ally every member UN agreed on who true aggressor was.

26. I said his statement regarding use force and threat to his coun­

try in Taiwan area at time Korean hostilities so entirely ignored action

taken that time just to prevent spread of hostilities to that area.

27. I said his statement regarding US as attempting turn Taiwan

into base for aggression against his country also entirely ignored facts.

Purely defensive character and strictly limited arrangements of collec­

tive self-­defense in Taiwan area by US has been published too and is

well known by entire world.

28. I said tension Taiwan area had been caused not by any action

taken by US. Tension been caused by long repeated, often reiterated,

and still continued threats his country initiate hostilities that area.

29. I said it was US had proposed it be made clear that there is

determination not initiate hostilities in area but seek solution to dis­

putes existing between us in area by peaceful means. Not condition­

ally by peaceful means—that is not to say that if solution not found

entirely satisfactory to one side or other that force will be resorted to,

but unconditionally that solution be found by peaceful means.

30. I said he also persisted this morning in speaking of US occupa­

tion Taiwan. US is not occupying Taiwan. Presence US forces in Taiwan

area in accord with collective defense arrangements with a government

that is member UN and is recognized by great majority world govern­

ments. No amount words can twist this fact into supporting statement

that US is in occupation Taiwan.

31. I said, however I recognized these were matters on which we

have different views. I have not asked him accept my views in regard

these matters. What I had asked was that we unconditionally and

without reservations make it entirely clear we will not permit these

differences lead us to war. Once this done, we could in that atmo­

sphere discuss our differences and other outstanding practical matters

between us with better hope coming to mutually agreeable and mutu­

ally satisfactory solutions.

32. I said I had made it very clear in proposing and discussing this

declaration that it not my intent they sacrifice their views or renounce

their policies. I regretted their not being willing adopt same attitude.

33. I said I regretted this morning that he had made it very explicit

that his govt’s purpose in these negotiations for declaration was to

require US give up its right collective self defense. This entirely distorts

proposal I had made.

34. I said what he seemed be saying was in making this declaration

US Govt should entirely capitulate to views his govt with respect dis­

pute Taiwan area. I had made no such demand on his govt and in nego­

tiating this declaration did not believe it proper do so. That, it seemed

me, got us completely away from proposition that we first make clear

we not going to war and discuss our problems in that atmosphere and

moved us to proposition that we discuss our differences under threat

our side might resort to hostilities. That exactly situation I had been

trying get ourselves out of.

35. I said I regretted that his govt gone so far in distorting this very

simple straightforward and fundamental propsal.

36. Wang said he found hard accept views presented by me in

my statement. Certainly not his intent initiate debate past history. Was

because I raised some historical events at last meeting that compelled

him make their views clear.

37. Wang said I had again asserted that no intent part US threaten

security China when Korean hostilities started. However, Chinese peo­

ple could never forget historical lesson given in path taken by ­Japanese

imperialists when seized Korea in order attack China in long run. I had

alluded to UN resolution on question of who was aggressor but he

might point out that resolution adopted under entire manipulation of

US and therefore completely illegal.

38. Wang said, again on question of spread of Korean war which

had been prevented: he might point out that was due to strength

­Chinese and Korean people that expansion Korean war prevented.

39. Wang said, then turning my denial US has occupied Taiwan

and turned it into base for attack against China, he might pont out US

has made no gestures withdraw Taiwan area but is steadily reinforcing

strength that area. Could only raise question whether US is not trying

strengthen forces in order launch attack against China.

40. Wang said my claim tension Taiwan area not caused by US but

rather by China was glaring distortion facts. It matter fact that libera­

tion by Chinese people entire mainland China had never posed threat

against anybody else. If there no presence American forces this area

there would be no tension this area.

41. Wang said, as to proposal for relaxation tension between China

and US in Taiwan area, proposal first advanced by Chinese Premier at

Bandung conference in which he proposed China and US enter negoti­

ations resolve disputes between them by peaceful means.

42. Wang said in order eliminate conflicts in Taiwan area and ten­

sions that area, necessary take practical actions rather than merely ren­

der lip service.

43. Wang said I had proposed that disputes in Taiwan area be set­

tled unconditionally, yet in draft presented by US, US claims right of

self-­defense in Taiwan area. This is exactly a condition imposed by US.

44. Wang said it was this condition that prevented our talks from

making progress. Chinese people will never accept my denial that

US has ever occupied Taiwan, nor my statement regarding relations

between my government and Chiang Kai-­shek. It well known fact

entire world that corrupt regime Chiang Kai-­shek long been veil worn

by Chinese people. Without support of US, this Chiang Kai-shek clique

can never exist for single day. Action US in supporting Chiang clique

and occupying Taiwan is outright violation sovereignty China and

interference with China’s internal affairs.

45. Wang said if US continues persist claiming right to self defense

in Taiwan area then all my remarks concerning not requiring Chinese

renounce pursuit policies or views toward dispute are no more than

empty words.

46. Wang said I had given example that if American vessel fired

upon it would respond in self-­defense. He might ask what sort vessel

meant. If merchant vessel carrying on peaceful mission would be one

thing. If military vessel intruding into terriorial waters China, it could

not claim any self-­defense. That action would be outright provocation

and act aggression against Chinese people and Chinese people would

not hesitate respond that aggression.

47. Wang said turning now to question of declaration on renun­

ciation force. If US refuses withdraw its untenable claim to right self-­

defense in Taiwan area, it then proves US not willing make any progress

on this question.

48. Wang said if US should in any way assume Chinese would

accept my proposal, that, he might say, would be an illusion which

could only be realized when sun rises in west.

49. I said, in other words his proposition was that, instead of being

renunciation of force and agreement settle differences peaceful means,

that instead would be renunciation of US of its views, rights, and inter­

ests in Taiwan area.

50. Wang said if they were to make declaration renouncing use

force and at same time declaration recognized American right self-­

defense in Taiwan area, what meaning would there be to such a decla­

ration? Probably I was proposing making of statement in which their

side would accept continuing armed occupation Taiwan by US.

51. I said I had told him over and over again that it not my intent,

and I did not think amendments I had suggested, in any way prejudice

their views and policies on area. I still believed I had accomplished that

purpose and I had said if they do not agree, willing listen any sugges­

tions they cared make on this query.

52. I said, however in statements he had made here previously in

public statements by his government, and again very explicitly this

morning, he had stated his purpose in negotiating this declaration was

to have US renounce its views and its rights in area. That was something

different. He could not expect US do that, either explicitly or implicitly.

53. Wang said, I had said I did not demand China give up its views

or position. However, position of China is exactly to liberate Taiwan. This

liberation of Taiwan is inherent right of self-­defense of Chinese people.

54. Wang said this reasonable position of China was accepted

throughout world. He had repeatedly pointed out that US has absolutely

no right self-­defense Taiwan area. For US to insist on its views or rights

in Taiwan area was to interfere in domestic affairs of another country

and to seize territory of another country in violation international law.

This view of rights of US cannot be accepted by Chinese people. These

are unequal rights or views.

55. I said I not asking him accept my views. What I asking was that

he take same attitude regarding my position. However, he not doing so.

What he was doing, and he had again explicitly stated it this morning,

was demand that my govt accept his govt’s views and renounce right

of self-­defense.

56. I said I believed I had fairly accurately stated my understand­

ing of situation. If I had not stated it correctly, willing to hear in what

way I was wrong.

57. Wang said, first, it would be well for me to recognize that pur­

pose present talks was to try settle issues Taiwan area. Present fact was

US had occupied Chinese terriory of Taiwan and violated sovereignty

of China. Fell upon us two to correct this unreasonable situation. In

order to resolve this issue, it not sufficient merely to state that either

side need not accept views of other. Some views must be opposed.

58. Wang said today it US which violates Chinese terriory; it not

China which violates American terriory. If US would withdraw armed

forces from Taiwan area and stop its threats in Taiwan area, no further

issues would exist in this area between us.

59. I said I had nothing more on this this morning but had another

matter I would like to take up. Made full prepared statement on

implementation:

A. I had occasion on Jan 12 to call your attention to efforts your govt

create false impression that in some way Americans imprisoned your

country, only Americans we were discussing at time of our announce­

ment Sept. 10 last year, were not entitled expeditiously return in accord­

ance with commitment your govt made in that announcement. I had

continued to hope this did not represent considered views your govt.

B. However, I particularly regret to note since our last meeting your

government has in communication with UK Charge again attempted to

justify this entirely indefensible position. In reply to communication

with regard Father McCarthy your government has made such extreme

assertions as Father McCarthy has no right even ask for repatriation

during period his imprisonment and question of his encountering

obstruction in departing does not arise during his imprisonment. Your

government has even stated that under our agreed announcement of

Sept 10 it was agreed cases of imprisoned Americans are basically dif­

ferent from those not imprisoned.

C. It is hard for me to believe your govt seriously thinks such

contentions can be supported, and I am surprised that it continues its

attempt to do so.

D. In first place you know, I know and world knows that was

precisely these imprisoned Americans we were discussing at time our

agreed announcement issued. We were not discussing theories, imagi­

nary or hypothetical Americans, we were discussing specific Americans

in prison your country. What did your government say with respect

those Americans? It first said it recognizes Americans in your country

desiring return are entitled do so. It did not say only some selected

Americans, it did not say only Americans who have managed to stay

out of your prisons, it did not say only Americans released from prison,

it did not say Americans in prison basically different from those not in

prison, it said Americans desiring return, Americans we were talking

about at the time, were entitled to do so. Words cannot be more plain.

E. What did your government next say with respect these

­Americans? It first said it has adopted and then that it will further

adopt appropriate measures.

F. It did not say these further measures will be adopted with regard

to Americans already in process of returning, it did not say these meas­

ures would be adopted with regard to those who did not desire return,

it did not say these measures would be adopted with regard to any

theoretical group Americans, it said these measures would be adopted

with regard to Americans desiring return, precisely this group impris­

oned Americans we were discussing Sept 10.

G. What was next thing said with respect these Americans? Your

government said these measures would be adopted so these Ameri­

cans could expeditiously exercise their right return. It did not say mea­

sures would be adopted so they could return when they had completed

whatever sentences your authorities chose to inflict upon them, it did

not say measures would be adopted so they could return when your

authorities decided release them from prison, it said measures would

be adopted so they could return expeditiously—not expeditiously from

some future date, not expeditiously after they had been released from

prison, not expeditiously after lifetime in prison, but expeditiously as

of Sept 10, 1955 more than four long months ago.

H. That was statement freely made and freely entered into by your

government. Your government could have had no misunderstanding

of what statement meant.

I. What is record—thirteen these Americans still in prison.

­Thirteen Americans falsely given impression that all this has no rela­

tion to them. Not only have these Americans not been given their

rights under agreed announcement, but your authorities seem to be

attempting further to put off day when commitment with regard to

them will be carried out.

J. Just with regard to case Reverend McCarthy—after over two

years in prison without even trial, and six weeks after this commitment

on part of your govt. what happens? Are obstructions to his departure

removed so that he can expeditiously return? On contrary, apparent

new obstructions are set up and he is finally tried and sentenced four

years imprisonment.

K. I fail to see what your govt hopes or expects to gain by this con­

tinued delay and evasion in carrying out its freely entered into commit­

ment, and why it adopts course of action which if continued cannot but

continue to cast increasing doubt on dependability of its pledged word.

L. It cannot hope conceal these facts or obscure issue by repeti­

tion vague and unfounded charges of hypothetical nature against my

government.

M. Simple fact is my govt is not preventing any Chinese from leav­

ing US for your country or any other destination of his choice. Third

power who you designated to confirm this assurance has not called to

attention my govt single case to contrary. There has not to our knowl­

edge been single response to public statement made by Dept of State to

which I referred at our last meeting inviting even anyone who knew of

any Chinese being obstructed in departing to communicate either with

Dept or Indian Embassy.

N. No amount propaganda nor reiteration vague charges can

obscure contrast between my government’s record and that of yours

in this regard.

60. Wang said, in first place he wanted say he entirely could not

accept false and unfounded charges against his govt on its carrying

out agreed announcement Sept 10. Statement made by me was another

attempt at distorting agreed announcement Sept 10.

61. Wang said he sure I would recall that, in discussions on first item

agenda, clear distinction was made between those ordinary ­Americans

in China and those who had committed crimes.

62. Wang said that as to ordinary American residents in China, pas­

sages of announcement of Sept 10 quoted by me were entirely correct.

His govt has explicitly assumed commitment toward these ordinary

American citizens. Along this line their side been consistently carrying

out agreement concerning American residents in China.

63. Wang said that once any American civilian in China applied

for departure, his govt never in any instance offered any obstruction

to him. Even in cases those American civilians who had not yet settled

personal affairs in China, policy his govt was assist them to enable them

quickly depart. In this respect, no charges against his govt justified.

64. Wang said, as to those Americans who had committed offenses

against laws China, they were precisely carrying out agreed announce­

ment as well as principles indicated in our discussions over their han­

dling of them. We had for very long time discussed question of those

Americans who have committed offenses. Neither in conversations in

course of discussions, nor in text agreement have they stated all those

Americans who have committed offenses should be released at given

time. It simply said his govt would review each these cases, and would

handle their cases with leniency, taking into consideration nature cases

as well as their behaviour. As matter fact, their lenient policy towards

these Americans has been demonstrated.

65. Wang said among 40 Americans who had committed offenses

against Chinese laws at beginning of discussions, 27 been released.

Could this action his govt be misrepresented as not lenient? Some of

the Americans had been sentenced 10 years imprisonment yet after

only five years imprisonment had been released. Was not this example

lenient treatment by his govt?

66. Wang said it true 13 Americans still remain prison for their

offenses. However, cases these people could in no way be used to

charge Chinese Govt not carrying out agreed announcement. It was

these 13 Americans themselves who were to blame for their not abiding

by law in China and committing offenses against Chinese law.

67. Wang said I had stated that any Chinese in US was free to leave

and that Indian Embassy had so far not raised any cases of obstruc­

tion departure Chinese. All this at variance with facts. If anyone to be

accused of failure carry out agreed announcement, it was US which

should be accused.

68. Wang said it precisely because my side continued exert pressure

on Chinese in US in violation of agreement that many Chinese dared

not attempt return or even communicate with Indian Embassy. More­

over, it because my refusal submit list all Chinese in US and furnish info

about Chinese in US prisons that makes it difficult for Indian Embassy

carry out its duties. Even after conclusion agreement agenda item one,

my govt saw fit to adopt measures further threatening Chinese in US by

requiring them secure entry permits Taiwan, thereby depriving them

their freedom apply for return in future.

69. Wang said, although his side had repeatedly protested our

gross violations agreement, so far had seen no actions by my govt to

revoke these measures and improve situation. Might he ask whether

US willing implement terms agreement after all.

70. Wang said he would appreciate receiving specific reply from

me concerning withdrawal by US Govt of requirement for Taiwan entry

permits.

71. Wang said he would also ask me to look into situation of 14

Chinese who were missing in US or whose departures prevented, as

given in previous three separate lists. I had not yet given an account

of them. Again I had stated in last meeting that I could see no point in

their side raising question of Chinese who for one or other reason do

not desire return for time being. He considers such attempt at gener­

alization as entirely unjustifiable. For all these have desire return but

prevented doing so by US Govt my side has obligation give account on

each of these. These represent only fraction those Chinese prevented

from returning but does show plight of broad masses of Chinese in US.

72. Wang said this morning he had further list of four Chinese in

US (names in fol tel) and requested me make investigation and give

accounting on these as well as others. Full details had been given in list

he handed me.

73. I said, first, in discussing Americans in China, he had spoken

of lenient treatment, we had different views as to what was lenient and

what was not, and I would not go into that.

74. I said he had also said his govt had not agreed that impris­

oned Americans would be freed at any particular time. I did not think

I needed take time review our discussion on this, but both of us well

aware of significance of word “expeditiously” in this agreement. We

had accepted word in good faith.

75. I said what I had said, and was repeating, was that these

­Americans were not being released expeditiously. No amount of expla­

nation or rationalization could change that fact.

76. I said I had previously gone into question of what he called

­Taiwan entry permits at great length. If his govt going to disregard

those explanations, I saw little purpose in repeating them.

77. I said, I had said in past and was again saying that I always

willing discuss with him and immediately take up case where there

appears evidence my govt might not be fully carrying out terms agreed

announcement. I continued to be willing do this.

78. I said, however at same time I could not take or accept respon­

sibility for those among tens thousands Chinese in US who do not write

letters. As far as communication by Chinese in US with Indian Embassy

concerned, anyone knowing anything about US and its postal system

would know it perfectly absurd say that any Chinese afraid drop letter

addressed Indian Embassy in mail box.

79. Wang said he had already stated their position towards

­Americans in China and their policy in handling of their cases. He had

stated that his govt would continue faithfully to carry out terms agreed

announcement.

80. Wang said he also asked US Govt do same in faithfully carrying

out agreed announcement and refraining from any actions in violation

of it.

81. Wang said situation of Americans in China was quite clear to

everybody. And this situation was that their side has assisted these

Americans in China. But they still not able get list Chinese in America

from our side. They not even been furnished by US Govt with list indi­

cating number Chinese who are in prisons.

82. Wang said I had just stated it hard understand why nobody

among the great number of Chinese nationals in US had written Indian

Embassy. This situation quite understandable to them. Situation is result

of series of harassments and pressures taken by US Govt toward these

people in past. Many people been detained prison, punished with fines,

intercepted on way home by US Govt. All this has left deep impression

minds Chinese in US. Particularly, after conclusion agreement return

civilians, US Govt went so far as to require Chinese civilians residing

US to procure entry permits Taiwan. This serious pressure on Chinese

residents in US.

83. Wang said I had repeatedly advanced claims concerning 13

American prisoners China. These, as I knew, had committed offenses

against Chinese laws. And cases known everybody.

84. Wang said the eighteen Chinese whose names given me previ­

ous meetings and this morning represent only fraction Chinese in US

who have long wanted return but unable do so. These cases of eighteen

show plight Chinese in US find themselves in.

85. Wang said, they ask US expeditiously make an account and

give specific reply these cases of Chinese whose names he has given me.

86. Wang said and they ask US Govt should cease threats and

pressures against Chinese students. US should adopt measures accord­

ing with agreed announcement so as to enable these Chinese return

expeditiously.

87. I said I did not say no Chinese in US had communicated with

Indian Embassy. I did not know whether he familiar with press release

of Indian Embassy Dec 20 which said that it been receiving enquiries

and applications from Chinese in US. That press release said that some

these had raised technical matters which Embassy was taking up with

Indian Govt, and some had financial questions.

88. I said I did not know what these technical issues were. My

only point was that Indian Embassy clearly was in touch with many

­Chinese in US. At least thus far, not in single case has Embassy of India,

in spite fact in touch many Chinese in US, called attention my govt to

any respect in which it violated agreed announcement or where Indian

Embassy feels US obstructing departure of any these Chinese.

89. Wang said, as he had said if US Govt would not revoke those

unreasonable measures against Chinese, the pressures against their

free choice would always be present. They continued ask that US adopt

measures in accordance with agreed announcement. He specifically

had raised number cases with me, and he awaits my answer to these

representations.

90. I said I had nothing more.

91. Wang said he also had nothing more.

92. I asked if he still wished meet next Friday.

93. Wang said perhaps we could advance next meeting—say

Saturday 28th.

94. I said in view his suggestion last time I had arranged my sched­

ule to fit and was agreeable his proposal of next Friday or as regularly

scheduled on Thursday.

95. Wang switched to agree to next Friday, Feb. 3.

Gowen

1425. From Johnson.

Following list handed me by Wang 34th meeting January 25:

[text not declassified]

Gowen

1426. From Johnson.

Comments on yesterday’s meeting:

Extreme position adopted by CHICOM with respect self-­defense

clause which they full well recognize would never be accepted by

US, together with their public statements, may represent new policy

decision make no further efforts arrive at agreement with US on renun­

ciation force declaration. Their tactic now appears be thereby utilize

demonstrated inability these talks make progress to support public

campaign and political pressures for FonMin meeting and in general

try establish posture of their repeated efforts negotiate “reduction ten­

sions in Taiwan area” being rebuffed or frustated by US. They may feel

that if they are successful in this it would tend free their hands military

action against offshore islands. To support this they may desire these

talks be continued pro forma for time being or at least not be willing

accept onus for breaking them off. In this regard Wang made no threats

at yesterday’s meeting to break off talks or otherwise and from this

standpoint his statements were somewhat milder than Jan. 24 Peiping

statement.

2. As far as next meeting is concerned it will be Wang’s “turn”

to open. It seems to me he has four possible courses of action which I

list in order my estimate probability: (A) maintain focus on impasse

perhaps putting more stress on threat aspect; (B) propose that as we

have now spent more than four months on our item renunciation

force without agreement we drop it and move to their item of FonMin

meetings and trade embargo; (C) make new proposal on renuncia­

tion force declaration and (D) make move to break off talks. Believe I

should be prepared handle any of foregoing possibilities.

3. If he follows first course or depending on nature his proposal

even third course, believe in addition points I have already made, I

might point out contradiction between accepting applicability renunci­

ation force to Taiwan and demand US renounce self-­defense right there.

If PRC sincere in renouncing force Taiwan area question US exercising

right self-­defense there does not arise.

4. If he proposes break off of talks I would propose reiterate my

willingness and desire continue efforts reach agreement and make clear

they would have to bear entire onus.

5. While I could reiterate our position on renunciation force and

FonMin meeting if he adopts second course, he may adopt attitude of

flat refusal further discuss renunciation force declaration.

Gowen

1429. From Osborn.

Wang’s interpreter called to request postponement next meeting

to Saturday February 4. Emphasized request purely for administrative

reasons. He requested press be told merely it been agreed hold next

meeting February 4 instead February 3, without saying at whose ini­

tiative. On instruction Ambassador Johnson, I agreed both requests.

Gowen

­Priority. Repeated to Prague as telegram 24.

470. Circular Telegram 5001

500. Joint State–USIA.

Department and Agency request telegraphic report reaction to

Chinese Communist foreign office statement January 18 concerning

Ambassadorial talks at Geneva, Department’s reply January 21 and

rebuttal by Chinese Communist foreign office January 24. Report

should cover same points listed circular 426 December 23.

Dulles

by Henderson; cleared in USIA, NEA/P, EUR/P, and by Clough. Sent to Bangkok, Bern,

Bombay, Brussels, Bonn, Calcutta, Colombo, Djakarta, Hong Kong, London, Madras,

Manila, New Delhi, Paris, Rangoon, Rome, Saigon, Singapore, Stockholm, Taipei, and

Tokyo.

1559. For Johnson.

Guidance for February 4 meeting.

1. Concur in your estimate (Your 1426) that most likely Communist

tactic next meeting is renewed attack on US position regarding renun­

ciation of force. You should respond along lines your presentation last

meeting.

2. Reiterate demand for expeditious release Americans. Note

that flagrancy Chinese Communist breach of Agreed Announcement

cumulative with each added week of non-­performance. Again reject

in vigorous terms Communist attempt exclude imprisoned ­Americans

from application Agreed Announcement. Point out that imprisoned

­Americans were very persons about whom we were making repre­

sentations when Agreed Announcement was drafted and issued. Also

point out that instead of fulfilling commitment to take appropriate

meas­ures expedite Americans return, in at least two cases some six

weeks after issuance Agreed Announcement, Americans who had been

held in prison several years were tried for first time and sentenced to

long prison terms. This is callous violation their pledge. Longer they

unjustifiably continue hold Americans, more apparent it becomes to

people of world that they using human beings as political hostages.

Such action is repugnant to all civilized nations. FYI During coming

meetings you should continue build strong case against Communists

aimed particularly at their failure to honor commitments and demon­

strated use individuals as political pawns. END FYI

3. Inform Wang US is investigating case of Yuan Jui-­hsiang, alleged

to have been taken into custody by US Immigration Service, but does

not intend to investigate other names previously submitted by Wang

in absence specific showing claiming that US Government obstruct­

ing departure these persons. Refuse to accept any more names unless

Wang makes such showing. Failure of Chinese in this country to write

letters to Communist China is no evidence either that they wish to go

to Communist China or that they have encountered obstruction.

Distribution. Drafted by Phleger, Clough, and McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and in

draft by Dulles.

4. Your argumentation at last meeting was excellent throughout

and theme can be repeated next meeting with suitable variations.

5. FYI We do not wish talks broken off and under no circum­

stances should break come from us. Break, if inevitable, should come

from other side. If Communist press for discussion of trade embargo

or higher level meetings you should maintain position that fruitless to

discuss other issues until both sides renounce use of force.

6. FYI. It would be possible by rearranging draft announcement of

renunciation of force to eliminate any basis for claim that juxtaposition

of reservation of self-­defense and mention of Taiwan would represent

Communist concession that Taiwan not part of China, and we could

also insert statement that neither party gives up right to achieve objec­

tives by peaceful means. However, because of categorical Communist

statements which make clear their plan to contend that US renunci­

ation of force would in effect give up US rights in Taiwan area and

in implementation of Defense Treaty with GRC, we do not ourselves

suggest any change in formulation of announcement, as it would be

misinterpreted.

Dulles

Appreciate reasons against appearing accept even by implication

obligation investigate names submitted by Wang in absence any show­

ing of current desire return and current obstruction departure. Will

continue make clear not accepting any such obligation.

However, believe refusal accept further lists would be inconsis­

tent with acceptance previous lists and my stand regarding his refusal

accept list 450 military personnel which we may again desire raise.

Also as matter has thus far been handled by him in meetings

it is only after receiving and reading lists that I can determine exact

allegation concerning persons named and it would be awkward then

attempt return list or tear off some names from list and retain others.

Believe I can effectively make point in paragraph 3 reference telegram

without refusing accept lists.

Gowen

1568. For Johnson. Our 1567.

Both British Embassy and American Red Cross have received

telegrams from Hong Kong confirming Liu stated he did not wish

to proceed Communist China. He is being cared for by Hong Kong

authorities who are investigating whether Liu has any relatives in col­

ony. ­American Red Cross has requested British Red Cross undertake

any humanitarian assistance required by Liu and British Red Cross has

agreed. American Red Cross telegraphing Chinese Communist Red

Cross that Liu unwilling proceed Communist China and that British

Red Cross will render assistance.

Dulles

Limited Distribution. Drafted by Clough.

1573. For Johnson.

Your 1440. You are authorized your discretion handle ­Chinese

names as you suggest provided Wang afforded no grounds for

misinterpretation.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Sebald.

1453. From Johnson.

1. Five-­hour meeting this morning, three hours of which on

renunciation, two hours on implementation. No perceptible progress

on renunciation and attempt in implementation lay groundwork for

renunciation September 10 agreement on basis US failure implement.

Should anticipate heavy propaganda play by Peiping radio this regard

with particular emphasis Liu Yung-­Ming case fantastically charging

our objection to his departure 1949 drove him to insanity, and while

subsequently cured, his confinement on ship and “pressure” brought

on him has caused recurrence insanity.

2. With respect renunciation, threat break off meetings unless

we withdraw self-­defense clause clearly made coupled with demand

­Foreign Ministers meeting.

3. Next meeting Thursday February 9. Am departing Prague

tonight returning Tuesday.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

1454. From Johnson.

Comments on today’s meeting:

1. From full record of meeting Department will note I went long

way, particularly in latter portions give and take, to sharpen and clar­

ify issue on self-­defense clause in renunciation force draft. I am sure

there can now be no possibility of their misunderstanding our posi­

tion. I did not feel I could go any further without danger of errone­

ously implying willingness eventually negotiate away our position

with respect Taiwan. However, would appreciate any specific com­

ments or suggestions Department may have with respect my state­

ments this regard at today’s meeting, or what it feels I could usefully

stress or minimize at next meeting.

2. There was no slightest indication at today’s meeting any will­

ingness their part reformulate self-­defense clause, although he gave

impression he might be expected to offer reformulation. Of course, I

gave no indication intent offer any such reformulation. Thus situation

with respect next meeting is very tight.

3. Their performance at today’s meeting with respect implemen­

tation was probably for purpose attempting demonstrate strength

their public position to denounce September 10 agreed announcement

in event talks broken off and thereby use 13 remaining Americans

as additional pressure on US. I tried expose weakness their position

with respect Chinese in my replies today and at next meeting build­

ing on basis I laid today can well more clearly expose foregoing tactic.

Would appreciate Department’s suggestions as to any further replies I

might make with respect his demand for list imprisoned Chinese, and

whether there is any concrete basis for his charges concerning Chinese

being required present passports to him. His statements with regard

Liu Yung ming were so absurd and designed as desperate attempt

build propaganda case explain his failure return, I considered useless

attempt reply in further detail and indicated ridicule by ironically smil­

ing when he made statements,

4. As far as overall situation is concerned Department will appre­

ciate that it may be very difficult for me to keep talks going much if

any beyond next meeting unless CHICOMS for own purposes desire

Distribution.

to have talks continued for their own sake, or their present tactics are

bluff. There can be no sure answer except that which will be given by

the course of events.

5. Would also appreciate instructions as to whether in event of

break if situation permits Department desires me take any initiative

toward or agree to maintenance any continuing contact between Wang

and myself through Consulate here.

Gowen

1455. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 35th meeting today by reading prepared statement

on renunciation force saying we now holding 16th meeting devoted dis­

cussion on making statement renouncing use force in relations China

US. This subject first submitted by US side. After 16 sessions views both

sides been set out clearly. Responsibility for failure reach agreement up

to this time obviously not that of PRC side.

2. Wang said in line their consistent stand for peaceful solution

international disputes their side proposed that China and US should

jointly announce their intention settle their disputes peacefully. As US

was already using force in regard Taiwan, there had to be some way in

which this desire could be realized, hence their side proposed Foreign

Ministers meeting.

3. Wang said, in order promote peaceful settlement disputes

between two countries their side has refrained from advancing any

prerequisites for renunciation force. However, US side has put forward

and persists in requiring their side recognize US right self-­defense on

China’s territory Taiwan. Obviously this represents attempt block way

to peaceful settlement.

Distribution.

4. Wang said at last meeting I had claimed that action by US in

forcibly seizing Taiwan June 1950 taken to prevent spread of Korean

hostilities. Such actions can in no sense be taken as intended prevent

aggression. Facts have proven to contrary. After US launched aggression

against Korea, at same time it extended its aggression and attempted

spread its aggression to China’s northeast section.

5. Wang said now Korean War long ceased, yet US stepping up

aggressive military activities in Taiwan area. This serves confirm point

that US attempting use pretext of Korean War to whitewash its acts of

war in seizure of Taiwan. However this simply vain attempt.

6. Wang said I had also claimed that tension in Taiwan area not cre­

ated by American acts of aggression; that instead it created by ­China’s

desire exercise sovereign rights over Taiwan. This again is turning

everything upside down.

7. Wang said exercise by state of sovereign right over own territory

could in no way cause tension. Had it not been for outright intervention

US, Taiwan would be liberated long ago, and there would have been no

tension in Taiwan area whatsoever. No amount of sophistry could deny

fact that American seizure Taiwan by force and intervention in Taiwan

by threat of force caused tension in Taiwan area.

8. Wang said I had next claimed that US in Taiwan purely for self-­

defense and that presence American forces on Taiwan in accordance

with collective defense arrangements with Chiang Kai-­shek clique. Fact

is Taiwan is China’s territory and US had no right at all to traverse

Pacific all way to Taiwan and put up defenses on that territory.

9. Wang said Chiang Kai-­shek rule over Chinese people long

been overthrown by Chinese people. Chiang could not represent any­

one. Any treaties signed by his clique null void and could not legalize

­American aggression.

10. Wang said however my assertion that US on Taiwan purely in

self-­defense and that presence in accordance with self-­defense arrange­

ments fully proves my draft proposal for renunciation force amounts to

requiring PRC side recognize occupation of Taiwan as well as recognize

treaty between US-­Chiang Kai-­shek clique so as to legalize American

occupation.

11. Wang said I had repeatedly stated US side does not demand

PRC accept its views. In fact it not only demands they accept US posi­

tion but also demands PRC recognize US actions of aggression as legal.

He wanted say again that this could by no means be accepted.

12. Wang said it American occupation Taiwan which created ten­

sion Taiwan area. Their side proposes that conference Foreign Ministers

be held by two countries, whereas US proposes that US must be given

prior recognition status quo Taiwan so as to legalize occupation. As to

just which side has sincerity towards settlement our problems, it plain

to everybody.

13. Wang said if US side desirous peaceful settlement it must there­

fore withdraw its unreasonable demands. If US side should continue

persist in its unreasonable demands, Wang saw no point in continuing

these dragged out talks.

14. In partly extemporaneous partly prepared reply I said he had

given his views on how he saw situation in which we find ourselves

and had renewed charges against my government and discussed mat­

ters which I couldn’t see would help us advance in reaching agreement

on problem directly in front of us. I, too, was seriously concerned with

situation with which we confronted in our talks which could and still

can have such favorable potentialities not only for our two peoples

but for world. I would like to discuss that situation with him with

utmost candor. I did not want to make charges or engage in fruitless

debate but would like him understand how situation appeared to me

at present moment.

15. I said I came here on August 1 last year with hope that his gov­

ernment fully shared spirit which led my government propose these

talks and with hope real progress could be achieved by exercise of good

will and understanding of each others point view, and would continue

carry this out to best my ability.

16. I said it was not through accident, or lightly, that in its specific

proposal for these talks my government placed matter of return civil­

ians first, and had hoped that acceptance of that by his government

proved that it also appreciated great importance of promptly resolving

that matter. At very outset our conversations I carefully tried explain to

him not only official attitude my government with regard this matter

but also exactly how American people felt about it and relationship it

had to atmosphere in which we might seek resolution of other matters

facing us.

American airmen led me to hope that his government also fully appre­

ciated importance this matter and was desirous of promptly and com­

pletely resolving it. In order show its goodwill with regard matter and

in hope it would facilitate prompt resolution of problem of Americans in

his country, my government unilaterally rescinded all measures under

which some few Chinese had been prevented from returning his country.

I had informed him of this at very outset our talks.

18. I said no attempt was made to hold these people to extract

political or other concessions from them nor was action in any way con­

ditioned on taking of action by his government with respect Americans

in his country. As I had pointed out to him at time, taking of similar

action by his government with respect Americans in his country could

have promptly and quickly settled whole problem of return of civilians.

19. I said, however, he stated that his government not willing

take simple steps necessary to match action taken by my govern­

ment which would have disposed of problem, but insisted on third

power arrangement. Although it clear that only action by his gov­

ernment could remove impediments to departure of Americans from

his country, in order meet his point of view I agreed with such third

power arrangement. I even accepted his position there be no ­specific

time limit set within which action to permit all Americans return

would be completed, and agreed to his suggestion that simply term

“expeditously” be used in this regard. Thus agreement was finally

reached on our announcement September 10 last year, first agree­

ment between us.

20. I said as I pointed out to him at time, people of my country

would interpret agreement to mean just what it said and would expect

expeditious return from his country of all Americans who desired

return. Agreement was received with much satisfaction my country

and there was general hope that it portended opening of new phase

in peaceful resolution of other questions between us. Additional

announcement of release 10 Americans on day of agreement greatly

encouraged belief that remaining 19 Americans would in fact quickly

be released in accordance pledge made by his govt in announcement.

Thereby this problem and irritant in our relations would quickly be

removed.

21. I said, thus, if his govt genuinely desired establish conditions

for improvement our relations and atmosphere which would permit

fruitful discussion questions it desired raise, it had it entirely in its

power and ability do so by simply carrying out promptly and in good

faith clear commitment into which it had freely entered.

22. I said, however, his govt appeared deliberately to be dissipating

these possibilities. Instead of carrying out its commitment in prompt

and straightforward manner that would command respect and confi­

dence, it brings forward all kinds excuses and involved rationalizations

for not doing what it full well knows it said it would do. Longer it

delays in carrying out its pledged word, more inevitable is conclusion

by American people, as well as people of world, that purpose is to con­

tinue hold these unfortunate human beings as political hostages. I was

reluctant to come to conclusion his govt adopting such abhorrent pol­

icy but from statements made by his govt and continued failure release

these people it increasingly difficult for me avoid doing so.

23. I said I also concerned with increasingly obdurate attitude his

govt adopting concerning our simple and straightforward proposal

Oct 8 and its persistent attempts misrepresent that proposal. I had at

one time thought we were in general agreement as to principle that

without prejudice to our respective views and peaceful pursuit our pol­

icies we would make it clear we would not threaten or initiate war in

attempt solve those differences.

24. I said once this had been done, we could in such atmosphere

calmly and rationally discuss our differences with real hope that mutu­

ally satisfactory solutions could be found. If we were to be successful

in such high purpose it essential we refrain from attempting ­anticipate

settlement those disputes or prejudice position of either side with

respect our differences. It seemed to me this proposition so self-­evident

there could be no objection to it and until recently I had assumed it also

accepted by his govt, and our only remaining difficulties were those of

words by which it would be expressed.

25. I said in my opening statement Oct 8 I very specifically set

forth it was not suggested that either of us should renounce any policy

objectives which we felt we were legitimately entitled achieve, but only

renounce force in implementing those policies. This was also explicitly

set forth in draft I presented Nov 10. I felt satisfied amendments sug­

gested to his draft Dec 1 also carried out same intent. I still feel that

is case. I said I thought he and his govt had mistakenly interpreted

amendments which suggested there was no intent whatever to preju­

dice his views regarding peaceful pursuit his policies. I did not think

there was any better way accomplishing common purpose than in

amendments I presented. I still haven’t thought of any better way but

again repeat my willingness hear any suggestions he had.

26. I said, however, it has become increasingly clear intent of his

govt, apparently from beginning our discussion this matter, was vastly

and fundamentally different. It has become clear that purpose his

govt is utterly to reverse whole spirit and intent of any such declara­

tion into document which on one hand would explicitly or implicitly

constitute unilateral renunciation by my govt its solemn international

undertakings as well as its views and policies. On the other hand the

intent appears to be to reserve to his govt. right to initiate war to oppose

views of my govt. I said I do not believe I was unfairly misrepresenting

­situation if I stated it in simple terms as an attempt to get my govt to

say it recognizes his govts right to start war in Taiwan area if it desires

to do so, and if it does so my govt renounces its right to defend itself or

its allies. This is not declaration of renunciation force, but rather decla­

ration intent of one side use force. Proposition is so absurd, I do not see

how some could seriously attempt support it, and if one is to speak of

unreasonable demands this is certainly most unreasonable of all.

27. I said I did not question his right to hold his views with

regard our dispute Taiwan area, or elsewhere for that matter, no mat­

ter how opposed to them I might be. Nor did I dispute right his govt

peacefully oppose views my govt. All I have asked, and continue to

ask, is that he accord same respect my views, and two of us assure

world of determination our govts that mutual opposition our policies

will not lead to war. I do not see how any proposition could be more

simple or universally accepted as just, reasonable and in accord with

accepted standards international conduct. Can we not again approach

this matter from this standpoint?

28. Wang said I had just given a general outline and review of our

talks from the start last August up to present. He would like point out

he found himself unable accept some of my standpoints in relation past

events and in relation problems encountered in our talks.

29. Wang said in particular they could not accept unfounded and

unreasonable charges against his govt regarding its implementation of

agreed announcement.

30. Wang said he would set aside for time being until later fuller

discussion of return of civilians and other such matters referring to item

one of agenda.

31. Wang said, in first place he would make some comments on my

statements concerning our discussion second agenda item, that is, on

matter of issuing statement renouncing use force. There are two points

in approach this problem which must be set clear between two sides.

32. Wang said first point is in connection objective in making such

declaration between us. Second point is what exactly is nature of differ­

ence between our two sides. If we could set these two essential points

in proper light, then remaining matters in connection with them could

be easily settled.

33. Wang said, now concerning first point: it been their consistent

view and stand that any such declaration or statement should be aimed

at relaxing existing tension between two sides in Taiwan area, and that

any such statement or declaration must provide effective and peace­

ful measures by which disputes between China and US could be con­

cretely settled.

34. Wang said, hence it been their constant effort and attempt to

incorporate in such declaration or statement, as much as they could,

those points and views which acceptable by either side, while setting

to one side matters on which we do not agree, so as to promote chance

of peaceful settlement disputes between two of us. They have tried

accomplish this purpose of peaceful settlement without involving any

compulsion on other side.

35. Wang said, however US in its various proposals, including

amendment it last put forward, there was always attempt include

so-called right self-­defense in Taiwan area by US. This attitude of

US amounts to compelling their side accept position which it finds

absolutely unacceptable. This precisely is greatest obstacle in way mak­

ing such statement by both sides.

36. Wang said I had properly said that we hold different objectives

in matter making statements. He agreed with this view.

37. Wang said if proposed text of my draft accepted it would really

be what I had termed it—a declaration of intent to use force instead

of statement renouncing use force. Such declaration [he] noted, runs

counter to objective in peaceful settlement of disputes.

38. Wang said, next point is what exactly is nature dispute Taiwan

area? I had asserted we should not anticipate settlement of differences.

He found it hard agree any such statement.

39. Wang said as he had repeatedly declared utterly unjust and

unreasonable situation, then this situation is exactly armed seizure

­Taiwan by US. That is international issue between China and US which

we confronted with. This exactly situation which required solution and

which they hoped could be peacefully resolved between two countries.

41. Wang said in approaching settlement this dispute, if we do not

have clear understanding this situation then it would be very difficult

find out correct means for finding settlement.

42. Wang said now he proposed enter into discussion some con­

crete facts I had mentioned my statement this morning. I had stated

that we agreed on desirability for making of statement renouncing

force, and that only remaining difficulty was find form words agreeable

both which could express this idea. I also had stated and again repeated

this morning that I did not demand their side renounce its views or its

policies. I had denied I demanded any prerequisites from their side in

making any such statement, and I had asked their side to respect views

of US.

43. Wang said however their side has always respected any views

US which could facilitate relaxation tension Taiwan area, which condu­

cive cement relations two countries, and which could help in smooth

resolution differences between us. All these views respected by them.

But he must point out most views presented by US on question making

declaration renounce use force were unreasonable and unacceptable

their side.

44. Wang said for instance, I stated there already existed common

view on question of making declaration and only remaining difference

one of choice words expressing that idea. But he could not accept this

view my side because it tends ignore substance our differences over

declaration.

45. Wang said orally I had stated I did not require of their side any

prerequisites, but in statement I included demand right self-­defense.

This nothing but prerequisite.

46. Wang said it always been their view that each state in accordance

UN Charter had right self-­defense—self-­defense its own territory. But US

has absolutely no right claim self-­defense on territory of another country

and they strongly and firmly opposed to this view of US.

48. Wang said to claim right self-­defense on territory of another

country would tend remind people of events leading to Hitler annex­

ation Austria and Sudeten area Czech. No matter how Hitler at time

tried explain his action as exercise self-­defense, history has recorded to

contrary.

48. Wang said I had also repeatedly stated I did not intend prej­

udice their rights, policies, or position—these words sounded rather

attractive and nice to hear. But these words also tend remind Chinese

people of days before Japanese war when Japanese Prime Minister

Hirota declared his ignoramus policy toward China. This gentleman

Hirota also tried expound so-­called policy of coexistence and copros­

perity between China and Japan. But this Japanese gentleman in fact

harbored only motive of creating puppet regimes in China, such as

Pu Yi state in northeast and traitor Wang Ching-­wei state in Nanking.

Therefore this so-­called coprosperity-­coexistence policy only resulted

unilateral prosperity Japan.

49. Wang said turning now present situation, while I asserting I not

requiring their side renounce position, views, or policies that matter,

yet at same time I demanding right self-­defense Taiwan area by US—

this last proposal had turned nice words into empty statements.

50. Wang said at last meeting I also stated that renunciation

so-­called right self-­defense in Taiwan area by US would amount to

requirement submission on part US, stated this what US absolutely

could not agree to. They could not accept this presentation of this

statement. Submission means country or state is forced renounce

its sovereign rights in its own territory. If US persists in demanding

so-­called right self-­defense Taiwan area by US, it amounts to demand­

ing submission by China rather than by US.

51. Wang said if US should withdraw demand for so-­called right

self-­defense in Taiwan area, would not be submission but observance

UN Charter and in no way could be viewed as submission on part US.

52. Wang said they also share view we now encountering difficul­

ties in conduct our talks. I had asked how we should approach pres­

ent situation. As he has stated if I would only withdraw demands for

untenable self-­defense in Taiwan area, it would seem him then that our

talks would be able advance and I probably could see their side had

made repeated efforts in making their drafts meet points of our side.

53. I said I would ignore his remarks implicitly comparing my

country and its policies to those of German Nazis and Japanese mili­

tarist aggressors. I did not understand how he felt such remarks could

contribute to our making progress here. I simply wanted remind him

of expenditure of blood and treasure by American people to free world

of scourge of their aggression including freeing of China from Japanese

militarists.

54. I said next wanted correct two apparent misunderstandings he

appeared have concerning my previous remarks.

55. I said first he quoted me saying this morning we should not

anticipate any settlement our differences. I might not have made myself

clear my original statement. Sense my statement was that we should

not in this declaration anticipate what settlement or any particular set­

tlement of our differences. That is, what settlement would be. I would

not be sitting here with him unless my government hopeful have set­

tlement with them.

56. I said what I do say is that we should not, in this initial step of

agreeing that our differences would not lead to war, confuse that with

the next steps.

57. I said next misunderstanding he apparently might have con­

cerning my remarks that I wanted clear up was his statement he under­

stood me as saying we agreed on principle but only disagreed on words

express this. What I in fact said was that until recently I had thought

that to be case. I had then said that it had however become increasingly

clear that apparently purpose their government from beginning was

require my government explicitly or implicitly to renounce its solemnly

undertaken international agreements as well as its views and policies.

This not something which in these discussions this declaration I asking

his government to do, and is something which my government is cor­

respondingly not willing do.

58. I said again I say, let us not confuse this essential first step of

agreeing that differences would not lead war, with differences of our

views themselves. As he said this morning, and I agree we should in

discussing this declaration put to one side things on which we do not

agree.

59. I said I would like make as clear as possibly can and see if I

could not cut through this difficulty of understanding that seems exist

between us.

60. Said he holds certain views with respect Taiwan area and rela­

tionship my country that area. As I said this morning in discussing this

declaration, I trying respect their right hold those views no matter how

opposed to them I may be.

61. I said my government holds its views regard that area. I respect

his right peacefully to oppose those views. These are matters of dispute

between us.

62. I said I did not feel any proposals I had made sacrificed or prej­

udiced their views with regard this dispute. I thought for his govern­

ment to read such meaning into proposals I had made gave it meaning

not there at all and not intended be there.

63. I said on other hand, as negotiations have developed on this

and in light statements he made here and again made this morning and

public statements made by his government, seems very clear that what

his government attempting do is demand that in this declaration US

renounce its views on our dispute.

64. I said he perfectly free oppose those views. I not asking him

agree to them. He free oppose them in any peaceful way.

65. I said what I saying was that it would be complete perversion

original purpose this declaration and something to which US could and

would not agree—to renounce in this declaration its views.

66. I said seemed very clear me they thus asking US do something

that entirely unreasonable, something we not asking them do.

67. I said that was putting situation as I saw it just as clearly and

plainly as I could.

68. Wang said he had given number of illustrations this morning in

order help understanding situation we now facing. Of course nobody

would deny fact US participated in struggle against Naziism. Nobody

would deny fact US also suffered attack by Japanese and was thus com­

pelled join in battle against Japan. People have recognized contribu­

tions made US in struggle both in East and West and Chinese people

have been in very good cooperation in operations against aggressors

with US. And blood shed by Chinese people during eight-­year war

resistance cannot be measured. They finally achieved victory.

69. Wang said it always been their wish US would follow policy

laid down by former President Roosevelt. And it not desire Chinese

people that US should follow path former Japanese militarists and

­German Nazis.

70. Wang said Chinese people have suffered tremendously under

aggression imperialists very long time. But his people would never be

forced into submission before any external power. This compares also

with American people who did not submit before event forced on them

by Pearl Harbor incident.

71. Wang said in view Taiwan is under occupation of US, they can­

not find better way illustrating this situation.

72. Wang said I had stated he had misunderstood my statements

and that we should not confuse what I called two steps in settlement

our disputes. He did not know how he had misunderstood.

73. Wang said it also their opinion we should approach settlement

our disputes step by step and after first step go on to next step and

finally try achieve complete settlement dispute.

74. Wang said on their part, they had no prejudice or what I had

called anticipation of settlement. On contrary they found selves unrec­

oncilable to position of US in making such a prejudice or anticipation

by demanding right self-­defense in Taiwan area.

75. Wang said if US persisted demanding in declaration right to

so-­called self-­defense in Taiwan area, it would seem this declaration

tantamount requiring China recognize occupation by US of Taiwan as

being legal.

76. Wang said if US should insist in demanding so-­called right

self-­defense in Taiwan area, it would exactly confuse what I called

two essential steps toward settlement our disputes. I stated first step

should be both sides make clear disputes not lead war and second to

resolve disputes themselves. But my demand self-­defense in Taiwan

area exactly confuses these two steps.

77. Wang said if US would withdraw this unreasonable demand,

then would enable two of us advance orderly fashion to settlement our

disputes. This made necessary in view fact US has already resorted

force in Taiwan area, which gives rise to tension there. That why he

had asked my side withdraw such unreasonable demand, so as show

world common desire peaceful settlement disputes. If US genuinely

desires such settlement, did not see why it should insist this unreason­

able stand.

78. I said he had asked me withdraw demand I had never made.

79. Wang said did I mean I had never demanded right self-­defense

in Taiwan area?

80. I said that I had never demanded they prejudice their position

with regard that or any other aspect our dispute. What I had said was

they demanding that US in this declaration renounce its position. I

found it impossible interpret his remarks on this in recent weeks in any

other way. Public record also clear on that.

81. I said most recently in his Prime Minister’s speech January 30,

in discussing question of our declaration, he specifically stated, “an

announcement on renunciation force by both sides must lead to

removal of force already used by US”. It impossible for me interpret

and, in view public record, impossible world interpret withdrawal of

amendment I proposed concerning self-­defense as other than renun­

ciation by US of its position. I could not see that amendment which

we suggested in this regard was requiring them recognize anything

they did not choose recognize, or that they thereby prejudicing their

position. However, if they believed it did that, as I had said, I willing

listen any suggestion they had as to how the purpose might be accom­

plished in any other way, and which would at same time meet prob­

lem that would be produced concerning position my government if

phrase were withdrawn.

82. Wang said I had just stated I not requiring their side accept or

recognize what their side would not accept or recognize, and that I not

asking them prejudice their position. But if US should insist in right

self-­defense in Taiwan area, that nothing else but requiring their side

recognize US occupation Taiwan. And this exactly prejudicing position

Chinese people in exercising sovereign rights over Taiwan.

83. Wang said I had said if US should withdraw defense clause

in draft it would be interpreted by world as renunciation by US of

its right. Speaking of rights, there are rights in conformity with UN

­Charter and therefore proper rights, but there are also so-­called rights

which against spirit UN Charter and which interfere internal affairs

other states. If it position US in Taiwan area to claim this co-­called

right as natural right, it not only would be opposed by Chinese people

but also be opposed by people whole world.

84. Wang said he not see how position US would be prejudiced

by withdrawing this clause from amendment. Just to contrary, absence

that clause in statement will demonstrate that two countries China and

US genuinely desirous seeking peaceful solution disputes and renounc­

ing war between them. If, however, I should insist on this unreasonable

clause, he did not see how this could lead further progress in talks.

85. I said what he just said seemed me simply confirm what I just

saying, that their purpose in this declaration was obtain renunciation

by US of its position. That seemed me be real difficulty.

86. Wang said it quite obvious that such declaration provided for

peaceful settlement disputes and also at same time provided for parties

to declaration to undertake not interfere in internal affairs of others.

Chinese people strongly and firmly will oppose to end right of US to

self-­defense in Taiwan area, which no more than intervention Chinese

affairs.

87. Wang said they already made great efforts in discussion dec­

laration and remained for US to make corresponding efforts and take

further steps to relieve us from present position. If I had any further

constructive suggestion make, they also looking forward to them.

88. I said my constructive suggestion was they withdraw from

position which requiring US in this declaration to withdraw from its

position.

89. Wang said they could not on their part renounce their position

that US should renounce its position. Position of US is one which insists

in occupying territory of China. This position indefensible. They had

never asked US accept any position their side which meant internal

intervention affairs US or occupation US territory.

90. Wang said if I had nothing further he would like bring up

another matter.

91. I said all right.

92. Wang then rapidly read long prepared statement on implemen­

tation. Said he would now make observations concerning my opening

statement regarding implementation first agenda item. As for their

side, they always been faithfully carrying out agreement.

93. Wang said however number incidents occurring of late com­

pelled him raise this subject. On many occasions I had tried cover up

fact US Government violating agreement by continuing obstruct return

Chinese students. But no amount sophistic statements could hide inhu­

man treatment accorded Liu Yung-­ming. Liu’s presence now in Hong

Kong showed up my sophistic statements. Must be pointed out that my

side, without justification, prevented return Liu with result that he lost

his mind.

94. Wang said it only recently, after their side had made represen­

tations concerning Liu, that our side compelled release him. However,

Liu never violated any US law but yet US expelled him under deporta­

tion procedures.

95. Wang said furthermore, on his return passage our side kept

him apart from other Chinese, stepped up use of threats against him,

and made him mentally unbalanced again. Moreover, he not yet able

return. In name Chinese Govt. Wang protesting such inhuman acts in

persecution Chinese students. US side must bear responsibility this.

96. Wang said furthermore he had itemized various things in four

lists containing names eighteen Chinese and had asked me for account­

ing why they not returned. As he had pointed out, all desired return,

all prevented from doing so. They unable return thus far, and unable

communicate with families on account obstructions my government.

Chinese people demanded rectification this situation.

97. Wang said had further list seven Chinese in US whose return

being prevented (names in fol tel). He raising this with me and asking

for accounting along with others. Experience these people showed US

side not only failed observe agreement September 10 but also deliber­

ately has broken agreement.

98. Wang said experience Chinese student Liao in present list pro­

vided example whereby not difficult see how US Govt. continuing offer

obstruction return even after issuance agreed announcement return

civilians. Mr. Liao went US end 1948, studied Univ. Chicago. Was on

staff teaching mathematics at Agriculture and Mechanics College Still­

water, Oklahoma. Already on way home in 1952 when intercepted by

US Government at San Francisco. Later, he formally requested from US

Government permission return September 1955, however so far unable

return.

99. Wang said he had merely cited single case, there many more.

Asked that US take note, immediately stop obstruction, and give report

on situation these Chinese students.

100. Wang said on other hand, he had many occasions inquired as

to innocent Chinese kept US prisons, but I had submitted no lists. This

­contrasted strongly cooperative attitude Chinese side which submit­

ted complete lists of Americans in China. He once again asked US side

­submit complete list these prisoners. If my side sincerely interested imple­

mentation it should immediately submit such list. (Here Wang handed

me list, saying it full list of seven students, giving full particulars.)

101. I said, first with reference Mr. Liu, I astounded at statements

he made about him. According statements in Wang’s letter concerning

him, he became mentally ill May 1949. What relation that could have to

fact that several years afterwards US imposed restrictions on some few

Chinese regarding their departure, I could not understand.

102. I said Mr. Liu simply a very ill man, who been cared for at

­public expense over long period years. He not only cared for at US

public expense, he returned Hong Kong at US public expense. Far

from indicating any violation agreed announcement, I thought action

US Government his regard spoke for itself. I wished might be possible

have same prompt action concerning cases I had raised with him.

103. I said not quite clear me what their charge concerning Mr. Liu

was. He had arrived Hong Kong. My understanding he being cared for

by British authorities there. Could not believe Wang could be alleging

British authorities preventing his return China if he so desired. This

really carrying charge that US obstructing people from returning to

absurd degree.

104. I said next these vague statements he continuing make con­

cerning US breaking agreement simply unable stand in light facts. I

did not ask him accept my word on it. I sure he had available from

Indian Embassy in Washington full and real facts. He well knew that

in spite free communication Chinese in US enjoy with Indian Embassy,

there not been any case in which Indian Embassy felt facts justified any

representations to US Govt. that it obstructing departure any Chinese.

105. I said for most part, names and information concerning per­

sons in US allegedly being obstructed departing seem to come down

to simple question their writing to people his country. I did not see

how he could possibly interpret failure some individuals in US to write

letters his country either as evidence they want go his country or that

they encountering obstruction in return. As indicated to him in past,

my government did not undertake in agreed announcement nor could

it undertake any obligation investigate case somebody who does not

write letter his country. Nor could it force him do so.

106. I said obligations under agreed announcement very clear. Obli­

gations are not to obstruct departure of any Chinese in US who desires

return his country. Obligation is also that people who desire return and

feel they encountering obstruction may freely communicate Indian

Embassy. Obligation is to permit Indian Embassy investigate facts and if

it finds obstruction allow it make representations. Obligation my govern­

ment receive such representations. My government has in past and will

continue fully carry out its obligations. I willing discuss with him here

and take up with my govt. any case where there appears any possibility

we not carrying out those obligations.

107. I said however my government did not intend investigate

cases in which there no showing US Government obstructing departure.

108. I said my authorities investigating case Mr. Yuan Jui-­hsiang,

in which there claim he being detained by INS. I would inform him

results as quickly as available.

109. I said I simply did not understand his persistent reference to

persons in US applying for return and being prevented. For example,

case Mr. Liao he mentioned this morning—Wang stated he formally

requested return from US Government in September 1955. Wang’s

information that regard simply could not be correct. As I had said over

and over again, there no exit permit, no exit visas, no procedures of any

such kind which required of any alien in US. They do not have to apply

anyone. All have to do is go.

110. I said I again repeated statement that I entirely satisfied my gov­

ernment not obstructing any way any Chinese who desires do so from

departing country. I wished same was situation regarding ­Americans his

country. Repetition these vague charges concerning Chinese in US does

not conceal fact this not case with Americans in China.

111. Wang said American Government cannot evade responsibility

in case Liu Yung-­ming. I had just said Wang recognized in his letter that

Liu in mental disorder. This not correct. In his letter, Wang had made

quite clear Liu when went US not mentally ill. Far from being ill, he

attended university and obtained masters degree. This proof enough

he well and not ill at all. Only because desired return and prevented

doing so that drove him mental disorder. Very inhuman act, and US

Government should bear responsibility.

112. Wang said he would read me letter written by Dr. Hoctor,

supervisor hospital Missouri. In letter to friend of Liu, Hoctor wrote,

“your friend continues get along very well. However, we have had no

recent word from immigration officials about his departure.” This was

written December 1950. In February 1951, Hoctor again wrote that Liu

improved sufficiently that I think no need further delay in arranging

return Hong Kong.

These letters of Dr. Hoctor exactly refuted statement made by me

previous meeting that Liu although recovered yet not fit for travel.

Then, after authorities hospital stated Mr. Liu improved sufficiently

that could make departure, US Government kept him there. For this US

must also bear responsibility. After PRC side made representations con­

cerning Mr. Liu and US took steps enable his departure, although Liu

had committed no offenses against US law, yet evicted from country

under punishment deportation. This another action US Government

responsible for.

113. Wang said when Liu on board ship sailing for home, he very

delighted finally permitted return, but US authorities kept him in isola­

tion from other Chinese on ship and sent personnel to talk with him and

exert pressure on him while ship sailing China. This caused Liu another

mental attack. US Government must bear responsibility this also. From

this case of Mr. Liu, inhuman acts of US authorities in persecuting and

obstructing Chinese in US are fully confirmed.

114. Wang said after his side had made representations with me

concerning these 25 Chinese, whose names given me in various meet­

ings, I again tried defend my position by arguing US Government did

not require permit for return, that Indian Embassy free communicate

with Chinese, and that Chinese in US not being obstructed departure.

But facts turn out contrary to what I had alleged on question of Taiwan

entry permit requirement, Indian Embassy had made representation

US Government and Indian Embassy desired make public announce­

ment on this question. However prevented doing so by US Govern­

ment. These 25 persons he had so far raised with me were all desirous

returning but were actually prevented doing so.

115. Wang said there had been cases Chinese already departed

US and on way home but intercepted by agents INS halfway. Also of

­Chinese who had submitted passport to INS for visas, but no action

taken permit departure. Therefore question arises as to which side’s

information not correct. I stated information by Wang not correct. On

other hand, many occasions he had asked me as to exactly how many

Chinese kept in American prisons but I had failed make reply up to

present moment.

116. Wang said therefore if US not willing promptly stop its

obstructions and carry out agreement between both sides, it should

bear responsibility for breaking of agreement.

117. I said I not going take time today attempt answer in detail

these statements which I could only term for most part as fantastic and

not supported by single shred fact. For example, he had said Indian

Embassy been prevented making public announcement. US Govern­

ment has no way, even if it would, of preventing Indian Embassy stating

anything publicly it desired state. He had talked about Chinese being

intercepted by immigration authorities. What Chinese? When? Where?

I positive there been and is no such case. He had certainly brought up

no such case.

118. I said there were such cases of Chinese attempting evade pre­

ventive departure order, but that long in past. I had told him over and

over again that preventive departure order—which only measure ever

taken by my government to prevent departure any Chinese—long ago

rescinded.

119. I said he continuing speak of Chinese presenting passports

to INS for visas. I did not know how many times I had to tell him that

­Chinese need obtain no visas from INS or anyone else for departure

from US. He aware as well as I that Chinese continually departing freely

from US. I had no way knowing whether or not they intend to or do

proceed his country—as far as we know, they free do so. Press reports,

including press reports his country, indicate some them going his coun­

try. With exception small group against whom preventive departure

orders issued, that always been case. It now the case without exception.

120. I said if it intent his government to denounce our agreed

announcement September 10, it should be clear to him that there were

no facts with regard US performance under that announcement that

could remotely justify such action. I satisfied that this would be recog­

nized by all honest and disinterested persons everywhere. That was all.

121. Wang said I trying hard defend US failure carry out agreed

announcement relating return Chinese from US. No amount argument

could achieve that purpose. What I said orally not necessarily rep­

resents what actually being carried out. Fact is their attention continu­

ally been called to cases Chinese, not having committed any offenses in

US, yet unable return homeland. This is situation we now facing.

122. Wang said I had enquired as to what Chinese been intercepted

by INS and which Chinese presented passports to INS. He might

merely refer to case of Liao, who named in list he gave me. This Liao

one of Chinese intercepted half way on way home mainland.

123. I asked was this in 1952? If so, probably correct.

124. Wang said I correct on interception 1952, but what took place in

1952 also influenced things in 1955. Therefore, might remind me to inves­

tigate all these cases first before I asked questions as to which intercepted

or which presented passports to INS.

125. Wang said if US authorities have in fact refrained from

obstructing departure these Chinese, he did not see why their attention

repeatedly been called to Chinese who desire return but unable do so.

And he also awaiting accounting as to Chinese in US prisons. Point is,

since two sides already have reached agreement, duty both is to faith­

fully implement agreement.

126. I said exactly. I still had to see single case in which US has not

done so.

127. Wang said but fact is people desire return but have not yet

returned.

128. I said fact is thirteen Americans in his country unable return.

This undisputed fact.

129. Wang said this was open to all and quite clear. He meant cases

these 13 Americans. Outside these thirteen, most of rest have returned.

But as far as known his side, more than thirteen Chinese to date being

prevented departure US. Latest number he had given me 25. And their

attention would be further called to more such cases. This also serves

demonstrate respective manner in which both sides implementing

agreed announcement.

130. I said neither these 25 or any other Chinese being prevented

from leaving. If they thought they were, entirely free communicate

with Indian Embassy.

131. Wang said if only they could freely express their opinions in

the US. However, did not see that they could freely express their desire;

freedom express desire in US was restricted.

132. I saked if he meant say they afraid write or telephone Indian

Embassy.

133. Wang said it seemed even such freedom extremely restricted.

And one might ask why US refuses rescind requirement entry permits

Taiwan. Unhappy experience Mr. Liu showed how Chinese desiring

return driven to mental disorder. All these cases show there been pres­

sure and mental threat against people who desire return their country.

134. I said these cases show nothing except apparent desire Wang’s

government, I did not know why, to build case against US on this ques­

tion which facts simply would not support. Anybody who knows any­

thing at all about US knows facts would not support such allegation.

135. Wang said fact is people desiring return not able do so. Agree­

ment is bilateral so cannot unilaterally ask Chinese implement agree­

ment while no action other country permit departures of Chinese. US

concerned with its thirteen men in China. Why cannot Chinese people

Chinese in US? Fact he felt it necessary raise these cases with me was

because Chinese people will not tolerate existing situation.

136. I said I had no more to say.

137. Wang said he had no more also.

138. I asked was he agreeable meet next Thursday, February 9?

139. Wang said all right.

Gowen

3173. Reference: Depcirtel 500.

1. Coverage limited to factual stories and editorials local Chinese-­

language newspapers based primarily on US statement; no specific

attention to CHICOM January 24 reply. No radio coverage known.

Definitely no newsreel coverage. Vietnamese press coverage of all for­

eign news now reportedly restricted by official censors who order con­

centration on domestic politics (approaching elections).

2. Editorial comment, following general pattern of criticizing

Geneva Ambassadorial talks, stepped up demand for breaking off nego­

tiations, pointed to CHICOM “lack good faith” as evidence ­CHINAT

warnings against negotiations had been right all along. Must be kept

in mind in this connection that Chinese Legation here now reportedly

exercises virtual joint censorship powers with Vietnamese Government

over local Chinese press.

3. No public comment by Vietnamese officials. Only available pri­

vate comment that of FonOff Political Affairs Director Lam, who said

after CHICOM January 18 statement he found action not surprising,

supposed it might well mean end of Geneva talks. Chinese officials

here follow “told you so” line, but some businessmen (possibly in hope

being assured to contrary) have expressed view Dulles-­Chou talks

inevitable.

Reinhardt

1457. From Johnson.

Fol list handed me by Wang 35th meeting Feb. 4:

[text not declassified]

Gowen

1591. For Johnson.

Guidance for February 9 meeting.

1. Refer to return of Liu Tung-­ming to mainland (Hong Kong’s

114). Point out no restriction was imposed his return to Communist

China and clear US carried out agreed announcement. Use informa­

tion contained Hong Kong’s 112 to Geneva showing 35 Chinese arrived

Hong Kong January 31 en route Communist China. Mention cumula­

tive figure of 189 in this category since Jan. 1955.

2. Continue stress failure implement Agreed Announcement.

Regarding our own implementation reiterate there are no restrictions

on departure of any Chinese; full circulation and publicity of announce­

ment has been made, and no report from Indian Embassy of any ­Chinese

in US appealing to it that they prevented from leaving. Regarding pris­

oners, would not discuss them specifically.

3. With respect to renunciation of force continue along lines of your

last presentation and also of our last public announcement. Point out

that Communist argument really adds up to demand that US concede

to Communists all points in dispute instead of leaving them subject

Distribution. Drafted by Phleger; cleared by Sebald, McConaughy, and Dulles.

for discussion after renunciation of force has been agreed to. Particu­

larly point out that Communists continue to insist that US concede that

­Taiwan and off-­shore islands are Communist territory when fact is that

US position is that they have never been Communist territory and par­

ticularly that Taiwan ceded to Japan by China was captured from Japan

by forces under US orders and now lawfully administered and held by

sovereign GRC.

4. FYI It seems evident from Wang statement that Communists are

not willing to agree to an announcement that would reserve right of US

self-­defense in area. Whether Communists will break off talks because

they now realize that US will not concede to their position, cannot be

predicted but if they are determined to break on this point we cannot

make concession of US rights to prevent break. However you are under

no circumstances to break off talks but continue to argue our position

with firmness.

5. If break by Communists comes you should give out statement at

once that Communists have broken off talks because they cannot have

their way in insisting US give up right of self-­defense against armed

attack in area. State we hold Communists to Agreed Announcement on

prisoners and hope they will be promptly released. Remark to Wang

and publicly state that further communications between Communists

and US can be transmitted through Consulates in Geneva. Any further

statement will come from Washington.

Dulles

1467. From Johnson.

Re last sentence paragraph 3 Department telegram 1591.

My recollection is that surrender by Japanese Forces on Taiwan

to Chinese was accomplished under general order No. 1 issued by

MacArthur as SCAP rather than as U.S. Commander. Would appreciate

Limit Distribution.

confirmation that our position is that this constituted “capture” but that

action was carried out by “forces under U.S. orders”.

Gowen

1592. For Johnson.

amended to read as follows:

“And particularly that Taiwan ceded to Japan by China was

surrendered by Japan in 1945 under SCAP orders and now lawfully

administered and held by sovereign GRC”.

Dulles

­Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and Phleger.

1474. From Johnson.

1. Four hour fifty minute meeting this morning. No progress what­

soever. Only unusual development Wang took twenty minute recess

immediately following my opening statement. Although I received

impression this was for purpose conferring on whether my opening

statement fitted in with some contingent action they had planned,

Limit Distribution.

subsequent developments in meeting gave no indication as to what it

might have been.

2. General impression is that while no sign whatever any shift their

position, threat of break on renunciation force has somewhat receded.

3. He was prepared omit any discussion implementation today

but in response my initiative again took strong line on Liu Yung-­ming,

Taiwan entry permits, lists of Chinese US prisons, alleged US attempt

force application for permanent residence, etc.

4. Because of Spring Festival he asked for next meeting Feb. 20 and

when I hesitated, suggested Feb. 18 which I accepted.

5. Departing for Prague tomorrow morning.

Gowen

1476. From Johnson.

As situation has developed, believe there is possibility Wang might

agree some formula stating US–PRC disputes to be settled “only” by

peaceful means and preserving right of “self-­defense” between US

and PRC if declaration broken, including Taiwan area. Just possible

they may offer some amendment this regard. Clear they feel that any

acceptance by them our right “collective self-­defense” in Taiwan area

extends measure of recognition by them to legitimacy GRC which they

not willing accord. Do not see any possibility their receding beyond this

position.

Would appreciate Department’s instructions on attitude I should

adopt if they should offer any amendment along lines first sentence or

degree to which I might direct discussion in that direction.

Gowen

1479. From Johnson.

1. I opened 36th meeting with following prepared statement on

renunciation force:

A. In announcements made by our governments last year on July

25, purpose of our talks was set forth very clearly. That purpose was

two-­fold: to aid in settling matter of repatriation civilians who desired

return, and to facilitate further discussions and settlement certain other

practical matters at issue between both sides.

B. What were these practical matters? We each recognized most

important and urgent matter under this category was situation Taiwan

area. However, our respective approaches to problem were very dif­

ferent. Against background of continued threats by your government

to initiate hostilities in area, you proposed we immediately abandon

these talks and there be meeting of FonMins our two countries to dis­

cuss question. In other words you were suggesting US undertake nego­

tiations with you at that level under continued overhanging threat you

would resort to hostilities if agreement entirely satisfactory to you was

not promptly reached. Stated another way, you were asking such nego­

tiations be conducted under what was in effect [garble] ultimatum.

C. US for its part suggested approach to problem should be first to

remove this aspect by making clear neither side intended resort to war

enforce its point view, and in that atmosphere undertake discussion

our differences only by peaceful means and only to seek their fair and

equitable solution.

D. This was proposal I made October 8 last year. So grave was over­

hanging threat by one side resort to force, particularly in Taiwan area,

as to make peaceful and constructive discussion impossible, unless this

overhanging threat were removed. In circumstances, to have rejected

this proposition would have been admission of lack of real desire or

intent settle our disputes peacefully.

E. I proposed whatever was said this regard be fully reciprocal;

that it apply with equal force both parties, not asking of one party any

more than of other, and only requiring of both parties they declare their

Distribution.

intention settle their disputes peacefully and refrain from threat resort

to force attain their policy objectives.

F. I proposed this be expressly applicable to Taiwan area, as well

as elsewhere. I felt then, as now, if threat resort to force were removed

elsewhere but allowed remain Taiwan area, such declaration would be

of no real purpose.

G. Finally, I proposed declaration make clear neither side was,

by subscribing to it, prejudicing its inherent right self-­defense. Since

January 12 we have been considering emended draft, which like my

previous drafts, was consistent with all these propositions. At our last

meeting you indicated you were prepared accept this draft, with excep­

tion of last of my propositions, reference to self-­defense.

H. You have stated in our recent meetings, and your government

has declared publicly, it does not object to principle self-­defense, either

individual or collective. I will pass over without comment grudging

manner in which this admission made, reluctance particularly surpris­

ing in country which is party to collective defense arrangements its

own, and which even now has troops on foreign territory in defiance

United Nations in what it claims to have been exercise of this very right.

I. You have stated, and your government has declared publicly,

your only objection is to exercise of this right by US in Taiwan area.

I should like to ask you for moment to consider self-­defense clause in its

proper context. That is, in its relationship to other propositions embod­

ied in our declaration. This relationship is, I think, perfectly clear in my

amended draft January 12.

J. Taken in context, implication of self-­defense clause is clearly con­

tingent. What it says in effect, is this: if either party should, in viola­

tion of this declaration initiate hostilities, or if either party should be

attacked by any other party, then party which has been attacked may

defend itself.

K. Thus placed in context, which is only way in which I have asked

you accept it, self-­defense clause not only does not conflict with other

propositions embodied in proposed declaration [garble] corollary and

supplement to these other propositions. It is completely reciprocal. It is

applicable, with complete reciprocity, to Taiwan area.

L. Frankly, Mr. Ambassador, if we take self-­defense clause in its

proper context, I see only one thing which could render it objection­

able. It would be objectionable, certainly, if one side were entering into

declaration with false intention of nevertheless initiating use hostilities.

It would be objectionable, certainly, from point view of whichever side

was insincere renouncing use force to settle our differences.

M. I am reluctant believe all during four long months we have

spent discussing this proposition there has not been any real intent on

part your government to take this first and essential step toward find­

ing genuinely peaceful solution our differences. I am reluctant believe

you have all along been contemplating declaration that would not have

been reunification force at all, but rather only pious repetition in bilat­

eral form of hope that our two countries might settle their differences

peacefully. Was that hope not already implicit in agreement both sides

to hold these talks? Was it not our purpose in these talks progress from

hope to realization of hope?

N. As I say, Mr. Ambassador, I am truly reluctant believe your

objective in these discussions has been, not to carry us forward, but to

take us back to July 25 last year or even prior that time.

O. I am left, however, with just two alternative conclusions. First

is, as I have previously pointed out, your position constitutes demand

that in negotiating this declaration, US concede to you all points in

dispute in Taiwan area, rather than properly leaving them for discus­

sion following agreement between us to declare we will not resort

force settle those disputes. Second, is that your objection to self-­defense

clause arises from fact that you view it in different context from one

in which it was intended to be seen. I have tried make it clear, in its

intended context, self-­defense clause implies no more nor less than this

utterly reasonable proposition: if either party should in violation of

declaration initiate hostilities, then other party may defend itself. I am

unable suggest any [garble] in which that can be set forth than in my

amended draft January 12. If you have other suggestions I shall be glad

hear them.

2. Wang said he had difficulty understanding my statement and

its interpretation, would like retire with assistants to another room

to check notes. I agreed. Wang and assistants were out of room from

3. On his return, Wang said he had spent few minutes checking

notes with interpretation of statement I had made this morning. He

agreed that we holding these talks in order settle more important and

urgent dispute now existing between China and US.

4. Wang said they had always held hope dispute between two

countries might be settled peacefully without use force. At same time

they had hoped that Ambassadorial level talks might achieve results

they  called upon to achieve. However, with reluctance he had to

say they disappointed every time.

5. Wang said this been caused by rigid attitude on part US

­Government which delaying progress and success talks. We find

selves at moment still confronted with most urgent and grave dispute

unsettled between our two countries. For instance, situation exactly

so with regard to negotiations on declaration between both sides, as

result continued US persistence in what it terms US right self-­defense

in Taiwan area, which greatest obstacle in talks.

6. Wang said, as he had said over and over again US has no right at

all claim right self-­defense Taiwan area. He noted that in my statement

this morning I again trying justify position US with regard self-­defense

Taiwan area. I had again tried defend that position with all sorts argu­

ments. I was alleging that so-­called self-­defense clause was corollary

and supplement to statement.

7. Wang said actually US is trying to make China accept, by means

this self-­defense clause, US occupation Taiwan as legal and compel

China accept US prerequisite.

8. Wang said I had also stated that this clause on self-­defense

applied equally both sides. However, self-­defense clause, instead being

applicable both parties equally only applies in favor US.

9. Wang asked whether US could possibly claim right self-­defense

on foreign territory. Present situation could not be interpreted as

­Chinese forces being sent American territory to claim self-­defense there.

Therefore they could not accept my statement this clause applicable

both parties.

10. Wang said it no one else but China which had proper right claim

self-­defense on own territory. Any other foreign country has absolutely

no right speak of self-­defense on Chinese territory.

11. Wang said furthermore I had made various charges which

reversed right and wrong, such as my use term “warlike ultimatum”

and my attribution this to China, and such words as “overhanging

threat of force”.

12. Wang said it no one else but US which threatening other coun­

tries by occupying their territory. Remarks made by Mr. Dulles recently

actually such threats as I had described. Chinese people never going be

frightened by such threat and would never be brought into submission

by threats. Chinese people want exercise own sovereign right and want

remove all threats against them.

13. Wang said he also noted that I said Chinese forces in foreign

land in defiance UN. Actually Chinese people were rising in opposition

to aggressive forces headed by US in gross abuse name of UN, forces

which threatening security China.

14. Wang asked whose forces first gone to Korea. If had not been

for US armed aggression in attempt threaten security China, Chinese

people would not have exercised right self-­defense.

15. Wang said next he noted I had said that draft he presented

on December one represented retrogression. He could not accept my

statement this regard. His draft of Dec one exactly great contribution

towards making declaration. His December one draft did not contain

anything which not acceptable to either of two sides.

16. Reading now from prepared statement, Wang continued that as

US already used force in Taiwan area, any announcement by both sides

on non-­employment force must necessarily lead to solution of next

step. It exactly with this in mind that his draft provided for continua­

tion of talks to seek practical and feasible means for settlement disputes

between two countries.

17. Wang said his side firmly of opinion conference of Foreign

Ministers should be held settle by negotiation question of tension in

Taiwan area. This not what I had said this morning, that they wanted

stop present talks in favor of holding FonMin conference. They had

never advanced any suggestion along that line or made any sug­

gestion of stopping present talks, and immediately holding Foreign

Ministers conference. They had only said that holding conference at

Foreign Ministers level is natural outcome of Ambassadorial talks.

18. Wang said however their side had not advanced in their draft

announcement any prerequisite, nor had it in draft announcement

demanded that my side accept any views which not acceptable. On con­

trary, it US side which demanded PRC side accept in draft announce­

ment so-­called right self-­defense on Chinas territory Taiwan.

19. Wang said on number occasions in previous meetings I even

repeatedly alleged that US holding on to Taiwan purely for self-­defense

and that holding US forces in Taiwan entirely in conformity with

arrangements of collective self-­defense. These remarks serve confirm

that what I had wanted with insertion so called right self-­defense was

that PRC side recognize status quo of American seizure Taiwan as well

as US-­Chiang treaty. How could this be explained away as not requir­

ing PRC side renounce its position?

20. Wang said at last meeting I had stated and again had made sim­

ilar statement this morning, that I willing listen any suggestions that

would meet problem that would be produced for my govt if clause on

self-­defense were simply withdrawn.

21. Wang said if US position indeed as I had put it, as not desiring

prejudice position or views either side, then their draft exactly on that

line, as it does not contain any prerequisite nor does it require submis­

sion of either side. If, however, position is to require their side accord

recognition to American seizure Taiwan as well as US-­Chiang treaty

and accept American aggressive acts as legal, then US must give up this

position, as it would require submission their side, and would deprive

continuation of talks of all meaning.

22. Wang said I had repeatedly stated that I willing listen any

suggestion their side might have; their suggestion very simple and

straightforward: their draft announcement of December one last year

is proposal acceptable to either side. If there real intent make such

announcement, he failed see any reason why we could not reach agree­

ment on draft of their side of December one.

23. I replied it seemed me that we faced somewhat same problem

which I had often discussed and did not intend belabor this morning.

That is, whether our objective here is to momentarily give world sur­

face appearance of agreement, but in fact, because lack of meeting of

minds, there would be no agreement. I did not conceive this to be real

purpose and did not believe it would really contribute anything to situ­

ation to follow such course. In fact, seemed me that in end it could only

be counterproductive.

24. I said question between us of most fundamental nature was

whether either side intends initiate hostilities in Taiwan area in attempt

settle our dispute there in that manner. We really renounce all appeal to

force settle that dispute.

25. I said I had carefully attempted avoid discussion substance this

dispute itself at this stage. Wang had in past and again this morning,

and his govt had in its public statements, it seemed to me, continued

confuse this question of substance our dispute and question of agreeing

simply that we would not use force settle this dispute. Neither one of us

questioned fact there is dispute there.

26. I said Wang had often set forth his position re substance that

dispute. As I had said last meeting, I did not dispute his right hold

those views and advocate them by all peaceful means. He well knew

I opposed those views but I not trying force my opinions on him at

this stage.

27. I said Wang well knew it position my govt that Taiwan and off-­

shore islands we had just been discussing not their territory and never

been their territory. I was not asking Wang accept that view. However,

appeared to me, at this stage in discussing this declaration, Wang was

continuing insist my govt concede to their view on that matter.

28. I said view my govt is Taiwan, which ceded to Japan by China,

was surrendered by Japan 1945 under orders SCAP and that it now

lawfully administered and held by GRC which sovereign govt. It is

with that govt that US has treaty relationships and obligations. How­

ever, this all concerns substance our dispute.

29. I said position he taking seemed me required US in effect to say

it has no rights in Taiwan area and to abandon its position with regard

to our dispute. As he had again said this morning, he looked upon

declaration we discussing as of necessity leading to, if I understood

correctly, abandonment by US of its position. I think it entirely wrong

to regard this declaration as “leading to” abandonment its position by

either side.

30. I said what it should lead to is establishment of conditions

under which solution of these difficulties by peaceful means can be

achieved. It not proper to regard this declaration as of itself effective

solution of these disputes.

31. I said as I pointed out this morning, it hard for me to reconcile

his objection to self-­defense clause with genuine intent not to use force

to settle our disputes. If both sides say they will not use force to settle

their disputes and genuinely carry that out, there would be no need to

call into operation by either side of the self-­defense clause. It would

only be if one party did not carry out statement it had made regard­

ing not using force that self-­defense clause would become operative.

Therefore, if his govt really intends to declare that only peaceful means

will be used in settlement of our dispute, it can have no objection to

self-­defense clause.

32. I said I shared his concern over time we had spent still without

settling these problems between us. I certainly have not taken any rigid

attitude on this question. I simply trying make certain that we thor­

oughly understand each other. If there could be real understanding and

agreement regard to this question of use of force without reservations,

we could have long ago have said so and proceeded to discussion those

other matters. I continue hope that it will be possible for us do so.

33. I said, however seemed be that we still faced with lack real

agreement between us on this subject. I still in doubt whether his govt

agrees that only peaceful means will be used in settlement disputes

between us. If I wrong, hope he will correct me.

34. Wang said they had always held that we should employ peace­

ful means and by means negotiations should settle Sino-­US disputes in

Taiwan area. If not been for purpose peacefully settling these disputes,

he would not have been sitting with me and engaging in these talks.

35. Wang said position his side on settlement of disputes in ­Taiwan

area has been made clear repeatedly. Their position is liberation of

­Taiwan and exercise of their own sovereign rights.

36. Wang said I had set forth views of US Govt in this respect. He

shocked by my statement, which seemed extremely absurd and which

entirely distorts history on question of Taiwan. I had stated that Taiwan

and offshore islands have never been part of Chinese territory. This

entirely a self contradictory statement.

37. Wang said he understands that in US there are two parties in

politics. But existence of different parties in any state does not represent

existence different governments within that state. What been done by

Republican or Democratic parties cannot be argued away as not done

by US.

38. Wang said as matter history, Taiwan and offshore islands

belonged China and been part Chinese territory long before US emerged

as a state. Chinese island of Taiwan has been subjected number times in

history to occupation by foreign imperialists. However, all those impe­

rialist occupations Chinese island of Taiwan have always ended even­

tually in downfall imperialist rule and Taiwan always returned to arms

of China. It highly insulting to Chinese people to claim that Taiwan and

offshore islands not belong China.

39. Wang said it served no purpose in this conference room to reit­

erate such claims. On their part, they never had asserted New York not

part US territory. Nor asserted US of today still British colony. They not

think any such assertions would serve any useful purpose.

40. Wang said I had also set forth position US as having so-­called

treaty relations with Chiang Kai-­shek regime. As he repeatedly had

pointed out, regime Chiang Kai-­shek long been overthrown by Chinese

people, long been discarded by Chinese people, and it had no right

sign any treaty with any foreign country. All such excuses with regard

treaty obligations toward regime Chiang Kai-­shek were no more than

vain attempts argue away untenable position of occupation by US

of Taiwan, which Chinese territory. This situation which now facing

reminds them of what Japanese imperialists had done in asserting they

had treaty relations with puppet regime in Manchukuo and with pup­

pet regime Wang Ching-­wei.

41. Wang said such treaty relationships have never been recognized

by Chinese people and to insist in such recognition is greatest farce in

eyes people world. Neither puppet Pu Yi or traitor Wang Ching-­wei in

past, nor Chiang Kai-­shek regime of today, can ever be considered as a

state. US attempt to justify occupation of Taiwan by excuses of having

treaty relations with Chiang Kai-­shek regime is something like drown­

ing man grasping at straws.

42. Wang said I had stated that making of declaration would lead

to abandonment of US position. As he had indicated above, such posi­

tion of US cannot be considered as proper position at all. Wang asked

if we could find any clause in UN Charter as justifying one country’s

seizing territory of another country?

43. Wang said their position as he had said had always been that

we, in atmosphere of calm and peaceful discussion, and without hos­

tilities, and with conciliatory attitude, should both sides together try

reach solution. If we should demonstrate ill feeling these talks, did not

see how we could succeed.

44. Wang said I might recall that proposal for making such decla­

ration made by US, not by their side. And they accepted this proposal

of US and agreed with necessity for making such declaration. They also

recognized that making of such declaration would be useful. It would

be useful in that it would demonstrate to world that two of us, China

and US, determined settle disputes peacefully without resort ­hostilities;

such declaration not only conforms to interests both peoples but also

meets aspirations of people world.

45. Wang said we however faced with tremendous difficulties on

our way to making such declaration. This is fact we have both recog­

nized. Might be asked, wherein lie our difficulties?

46. Wang said now difficulty we facing is that of US persistence

insisting inclusion clause US called right self-­defense in Taiwan area in

agreed announcement. His views regard this matter set forth over and

over again and he not able enumerate how often he had set forth such

views. Might be asked if we should not try overcome this difficulty. On

their part, they always maintained position we should overcome this

difficulty we facing and make progress in talks. We should not give up

efforts advance talks in face difficulty we facing. Question remains is

how shall we overcome this difficulty?

47. Wang said in his opinion, two essential points will help us in

our efforts. First, each of us should show spirit conciliation; that is,

make joint efforts. Without spirit mutual conclusion and mutual concil­

iation, no agreement can be reached.

48. Wang said I would recall that Oct 27 original draft their side

contained three paras, first two quoting clauses UN Charter and last

clause dealing with FonMin conference by two countries. Afterwards,

I had advanced objections to certain respects this draft. After I expressed

objections, their side made tremendous efforts and concessions and

finally put forward amended draft of Dec. 1, which amended some of

wording their original draft. This effort was made to meet my points.

However, all US proposals—whether our proposal Oct 8, or draft

Nov  10, or Jan 2 draft amendments—have persisted in inclusion

so-­called self-­defense clause.

49. Wang said by comparing our respective drafts, can be seen

which side making concessions and which side not making conces­

sions. That why he said we should make mutual concessions. If only

one side required make concessions, we cannot make progress talks.

50. Wang said second point he wanted make, in order overcome

our difficulty, was that both sides should first try find those points in

common and thereby then overcome points of difference. It true on this

matter that there some points common both sides and some points dif­

ference between us.

51. Wang said for instance, desirability making declaration renun­

ciation force is point common both us. Then both agreed that in making

such declaration no prerequisite should be advanced for either side.

Then it agreed we should not confuse step of making declaration with

substance our disputes. We also agreed that making of such declaration

would create favorable atmosphere between us. We have no disputes

between us on points mentioned above.

52. Wang said if we agreed that two steps should not be confused,

he really found difficult see why US should insist inclusion self-­defense

clause which exactly confusing making of declaration with substance

of dispute.

53. Wang said as he viewed situation we now confronting, we have

many difficulties confronting us, but we should try settle differences

one by one. If we do share this common understanding of trying settle

problem step by step then and only then can there be better hope our

settling our disputes.

54. I said he had listed four points on which he had stated we were

in agreement. I agreed with him that if we were in genuine agreement

on those four points, plus one more point I about to mention, we should

be able arrive at agreement on announcement.

55. I said additional point I would add would be whether we were

in agreement that only peaceful means will be used settle our disputes.

Not that peaceful means will be, as he previously termed it, used “if

possible”. “If possible” would be by whose standards? Or who would

judge “if possible”? Settlement of disputes by peaceful means can be

meaningful only if both sides unconditionally subscribe to this doctrine.

56. I said he had also said that we agreed that there be no prereq­

uisites. However, I wanted ask how it possible me interpret position he

taken here and his government taken publicly with regard withdrawal

self-­defense clause, other than conceding to them by US of most funda­

mental points our dispute in Taiwan area.

57. I said other question I wanted ask, to see if we could advance

understanding between us, was what he thought should happen if, in

violation of declaration, one side should initiate hostilities.

58. Wang said he might point out there two aspects what I said in

my statement: One, relationship between China and US, and other rela­

tionship between China and Chiang Kai-­shek regime. Seemed him we

should not confuse these two aspects with each other.

59. Wang said regarding relationship with Chiang Kai-­shek clique,

as had stated previously, they will try to bring about peaceful settle­

ment if circumstances allow. They not changed this position right up

to now.

60. Wang said, however regarding disputes with US, they always

stated that they should settle disputes with US peacefully without use

force between two countries.

61. Wang said as he had often said, Chinese people and American

people friendly to each other and these two countries should try settle

disputes by peaceful means without any fighting between two of them.

62. Wang also said this intent was clearly included in their draft of

statement December 1, in which they stated two countries should settle

disputes peacefully without resort to force and they want make this

determination known whole world. This really declaration of peace.

63. Wang said then they had said they would continue to seek nec­

essary practical means for realization settlement of disputes. That idea

also accepted by myself. He thought this statement which both sides

should agree to and did not see how it could be objected to.

64. Wang said on other hand, by withdrawing self-­defense clause

by US from proposal, US would sustain no loss or harm their drafts,

in addition to declaration determination peaceful settlement disputes

between two countries, provided for further research into peaceful

means for settlement disputes between two.

65. I said this not very directly answering questions I asked, and

which I asked in honest effort see whether we could not get ahead on

this. I hoped if I could not have my answers today, that he would con­

sider them and answer me at next meeting.

66. Wang said their views been set forth very clearly, could not

be any clearer than he had stated it. Their view is we should strive for

making statement. He hoped I would give further consideration Dec 1

draft and be in position to state my views at next meeting.

67. I said I had nothing further but would like turn to another

question.

68. Wang said good. (At this point they started gather up papers

then, noting I still seated, Wang continued:) Oh, you have another

matter to take up?

69. I said if it were all right with him. I then read following pre­

pared statement on implementation:

A. At our last meeting you made series charges against my govt

concerning case unfortunate Mr. Liu Yung-­ming, these charges were so

exaggerated and so at variance with plain facts I found it hard to credit

you were serious in stating them.

B. Facts with regard Mr. Liu are perfectly plain. In May 1949,

Mr. Liu, then student in US, became ill. His sickness was of mind: type

sickness against which, unfortunately, scholastic degree is no magic

amulet.

C. Mr. Lius illness is fact. It is also fact had Mr. Liu not been inca­

pacitated by illness and had he desired return China, he would have

been able do so. There were no restrictions on departure of any ­Chinese,

students or otherwise, from US at that time. To contrary, it is fact that

approximately 1,000 Chinese students returned your country in 1949

and 1950. This number not only returned but 637 of them had their

passages paid by US Govt.

D. Mr. Lius need for continued treatment beyond his initial period

in hospital is also fact. Between 1950 and 1951, Mr. Liu had apparently

reached stage at which travel would have been possible. Hospital

authorities, desiring return Mr. Liu his home if possible, communicated

with Mr. Lius father in Hong Kong, only one Mr. Lius relatives who had

taken trouble correspond with hospital about him. They did not say

Mr. Liu had no further need treatment. On contrary, that was clearly

communicated to Mr. Lius father, and father expressly requested

­hospital continue its treatment.

E. Hospitals treatment Mr. Liu was in fact continued at public

expense so long, and only so long, as there appeared be no responsible

relative Mr. Lius ready and able assume responsibility providing him

care he needed. As soon as my govt. was informed, and was able pass

info on to hospital that Mr. Lius wife had expressed wish to have him

return, arrangements were made and carried out for Mr. Lius prompt

departure. Mr. Liu sailed from San Francisco Jan 8 on ship President

Wilson, and arrived Hong Kong Feb 1.

F. These arrangements Mr. Lius departure were communicated to

Indian Embassy, which expressed its entire satisfaction. Arrangements

were also made known to Red Cross Society your country. Arrange­

ments were made known you here. Your govt thus knew Mr. Liu was

arriving Hong Kong Feb 1. Your govt also knew, as I made it clear to

you here, Mr. Liu was not fully recovered, and still required care and

attention.

G. Why, if your govt was genuinely concerned about Mr. Lius wel­

fare, were no arrangements made by your authorities for his reception

and care? Why did Mr. Lius wife not arrive Hong Kong until Feb 5, four

days after Mr. Lius arrival?

H. I am afraid, Mr. Ambassador, and I say this with reluctance,

these facts point to conclusion as inescapable as it is repugnant. Quite

deliberately, your govt chose exploit for propaganda purposes Mr. Lius

unfortunate mental condition.

I. This conclusion, repugnant as it is, is completely consistent with

the recent efforts erect propaganda smoke screen behind which conceal

stark failure your govt carry out provisions our agreed announcement

Sept 10 with respect return Americans your country.

J. You stated at our last meeting you expected to have your atten­

tion called to names of additional Chinese in U.S., to 250, or to 2,500.

And why not? Unhampered by any regard for facts or evidence, and

without any consideration for desires individuals or their families, why

could not your govt multiply these numbers endlessly?

K. Mr. Ambassador, there are 13 Americans in prison your country.

You know they are there, I know it, and world knows it. We all know

they want to come home. We all know they are being prevented from

doing so, in spite of clear promise made on Sept 10 last year.

unsupported by facts, unsupported by any evidence, unsupported by

Indian Embassy, cannot balance off these thirteen Americans. Nor can

any number hypothetical cases obscure or justify attempt your govt use

these 13 Americans extract political concessions.

M. If your govt is really interested improving our relations, it

will no longer delay in carrying out its obligation with respect these

Liu Yung-­ming sufficed demonstrate how cruel US Govt been in its ill

treatment Chinese nationals in US who desire come back China. He

would make further observations concerning case Liu in few minutes.

73. Wang said next he would call my attention concrete fact that US

Govt compelling Chinese students obtain entrance permits ­Taiwan and

apply for permanent residence. Chinese student, Mr. Tseng Kuang-­chih,

wrote family 1952 that he would be coming home after graduation in US.

However, recently New Years card reached family in which he wrote that

he been obstructed from returning by US Govt many years and not been

able return up to present, and that US Govt was trying induce him apply

permanent residence.

74. Wang said another Chinese student, Mr. Chao Chung-­yun

previously often wrote to family and he also indicated he would come

back after completion studies. However letter from him mid-­August

1955 stated US Govt insisting on keeping Chinese nationals in US and

that US Govt was annoyed with those Chinese who insist on return­

ing home, and US Govt giving them lot of trouble and trying to com­

pel Chinese students who did not apply permanent residence in US to

apply Taiwan entry permits instead.

75. Wang asked were not difficult plights encountered by these two

Chinese to whose cases our attention been called, were not these cases

clear evidence of US violation of agreed announcement?

Could above tactics employed by US Govt be explained away as

not intended deprive Chinese forever of ability return to homeland?

76. Wang said I should look into situation these two ­Chinese

­students and give accounting of them and immediately stop those

unjust acts, or else bear all responsibility for breaking agreed

announcement. (Here Wang handed me list two names, transmitted

in separate tel).

77. Wang said so far US has failed give accounting of Chinese pre­

vented from returning and whose names he gave me in five separate

lists with request that I give accounting.

78. Wang said moreover, even in cases those 103 Chinese students

whom US admitted it had prevented from returning, so far 32 them

not yet returned. These people all been subjected obstruction by US

and return was prevented. He wanted say most emphatically once

again that US has all responsibility to give accounting for every one

these people.

79. Wang said I had asserted that Indian Embassy so far not made

representations with US Govt concerning any obstruction in departure

Chinese and that Indian Embassy so far had not indicated its ability per­

form its functions under agreed announcement been interfered with. He

must point out that US so far failed submit list Chinese nationals in US

so that Indian Embassy finds it difficult perform its functions. US had

even refused permit Indian Embassy make announcement accordance

with agreed announcement setting forth information that all Chinese in

US including those who been compelled apply permanent residence or

been compelled secure entry permits Taiwan are all entitled return. Was

this not grave act in violation agreed announcement?

80. Wang said he wanted raise question Chinese in prison in US in

all seriousness. Although he had made repeated ref regarding Chinese

in prison, my side had so far not taken any measures regarding Chinese

in prison US. This situation not satisfactory.

81. Wang said I had once asserted that in my knowledge there no

Chinese in US prisons. Fact is, in accordance with reports from Chinese

who returned recently there many innocent Chinese in prison US. As

to exactly how many Chinese nationals being imprisoned by US and

exactly what their status and condition, US side must speedily give

accounting for all of them.

82. Wang said there many points in my statement re Liu Yung-­ming

which at variance with facts. As matter fact, Liu sent US to further his

studies and when he went he was in normal health. He even completed

his studies and obtained degree, which also indicates that during that

period he enjoying normal health.

83. Wang said Liu suffered illness of mind simply because US pre­

vented his return which caused his nervous breakdown. Wang must

strongly protest to US against such acts of persecution Liu.

84. Wang said in bringing up case Liu US Govt has made many

false and dishonest statements about Liu. First, it was stated Liu in

hospital and not fit travel. Then US stated Liu could not obtain transit

visas Hong Kong. All this false. All this at variance with facts, and

fabrications.

85. Wang said when Liu began journey home, state of mind was

normal. However, on way home and while he on board ship, ­Americans

often came to talk with him and terrorize him. This resulted in fresh

nervous breakdown on part Liu. Even when ship anchored Yokohama,

somebody came aboard with fake letters from family with which they

tried deceive Liu and change his mind. Similar incidents also took place

while Liu in refugee camp in Hong Kong.

86. Wang said US authorities and US Red Cross originally informed

PRC side that Liu would be escorted or sent to border town of Shumchun

on Feb 1. Chinese Red Cross specially sent doctor to accompany Mrs. Liu

and other members family to proceed to border and receive Liu.

87. Wang said however soon as Liu arrived Hong Kong, fresh

fabrication again made to effect Liu did not desire return China and

attempts made keep him in Hong Kong. Attempts were thus made

detain Liu again. If one to speak about repugnant or inhuman acts this

most repugnant and inhuman act of all. Man has already been terror­

ized into becoming crazy man and still attempts being made persecute

this unfortunate person.

88. Wang said experience Liu suffices show how Chinese who

desire return subjected to that sort of treatment. This could not fail to

add all more to increasing concern of Chinese people over vast number

Chinese remaining in US.

89. Wang said Chinese had not yet seen any action taken by US to

withdraw requirement for Chinese in US to secure Taiwan entry per­

mits. As indicated on list he had given me, fresh attempts been made

cause Chinese in US apply for permanent residence in US. This unheard

of in history international affairs, violates human rights and violates

agreement between both sides.

90. Wang said from stories given by Chinese who recently returned

from US, picture can be drawn of how USINS authorities gone wild in

their treatment of Chinese. In eyes of Chinese nationals, INS become

symbol of hell.

91. Wang said Chinese nationals have full lawful right ask for

return their country. This been made provision in agreed announce­

ment of Sept 10 last year. What right had US compel these unfortunate

people obtain American citizenship and stay in US for so long? If US

thought its population not big enough, even in that case it could not

resort to this means of increasing its population.

92. Wang said this contrasts strongly with treatment of Americans

in China by Chinese authorities. Even in case American who refused

to return to US for moment and even if it happened that in future

he changes mind and desires return to US, Chinese Govt would not

attempt detain him. This attitude of Chinese Govt beyond comparison

with action of US Govt in forcibly detaining Chinese in US.

93. Wang said I had said that number of Chinese who desire return

as given me by him were what I termed empty, fanciful, unsupported

by facts. Might he ask about 103 Chinese students who US admitted

had been prevented from returning, was it not fact that 32 of them still

not been able return? Was it not fact that 27 persons including those

named on todays list not yet returned?

94. Wang said it quite true there are still 13 Americans in Chinese

prisons. But how many Chinese are locked up behind bars in US prisons

and whose names US has failed submit to Wangs side?

95. Wang said if US refuses take measures improve treatment

Chinese who desire return in accordance with agreed announcement

between two sides, and if US refuses make accounting of Chinese of

whom he had asked accounting, then US has no right ask about these

relate to Chinese who desire return and on other hand to those who

desire remain US or do not desire return his country. I wanted point

out agreed announcement concerned only those who wanted return

his country. Those who desire stay US or go other destinations are not

proper subject our discussions here.

100. I said however with regard persons who do desire stay US,

I wanted point out few simple facts. I mentioned these before, but

apparently he not understood.

101. I said under US immigration laws, person coming US for tem­

porary visit is admitted for certain definite period time. If admitted as

student—in student status, with what we call student visa—his stay

there dependent on maintaining student status. In any event, when he

applies for visa, must be able show that at end temporary stay he able

proceed another destination. If temporary visitor, and end approaches

of time for which he originally admitted and he desires extend stay, he

must be able proceed another destination at end his extended stay. If he

desires change status from that of temporary visitor or that of student

and wishes remain US to accept employment, he must change status to

that of permanent resident.

102. I said this all matter perfectly free choice of individual. In gen­

eral, these laws been in effect US over long period years. Apply equally

all non-­Americans.

103. I said as far as becoming American citizen concerned, process is

long and surrounded many safeguards both for individual and ­country.

US never has, and I satisfied never will, force anyone become US citizen.

Such policy would obviously be against our self interest. Our interest is

that persons who do become citizens be attached to principles our govt.

We certainly do not want any reluctant citizens.

104. I said to return to subject aliens. Regardless status under immi­

gration laws—whether temporary visitor, student, permanent resident,

or whatever status—he at all times free depart US for any destination

his choice. This applies all aliens in US, Chinese as well as others.

105. I said he also continued speak of supposed 32 Chinese out of

the 103, who still not returned. As said many times before, and seems

necessary say again: I never said those 103 against whom preventive

departure orders issued, desired return his country. Some may have, as

shown fact they returned; some may not have. Those preventive depar­

ture orders, as I had explained, were issued without regard whether

individual desired return. Issuance preventive departure order was no

evidence one way or other individual wanted depart or not. Each per­

son concerned this order individually informed when order ­withdrawn.

Thus, apart from question their knowledge agreed announcement, each

knows he entirely free depart. If does not do so, it matter own choice. If

feels being obstructed, can communicate freely Indian Embassy at any

time.

106. I said I would not take our time further discuss case Mr. Liu.

He and I both been at universities. Illness Liu suffered from, as we both

know, is unhappily not absent any group students. My experience,

expect in his also, it often most brilliant students who often susceptible

this illness. Liu evidently very brilliant person of this type.

107. I said Liu very unfortunate young man and we had done our

best care for him and cure him. Regretted he not fully recovered before

he returned his country. Hoped that recovery which he has started will

be completed and he will be entirely restored his faculties.

108. Wang said in any case, could not find acceptable explanation

regarding Liu by explaining illness as frequent occurrence among bril­

liant students. All this is device intended obscure true responsibility.

109. Wang said I had asked why, if persons desire return, they not

communicating Indian Embassy. Answer is because these students and

nationals now residing in US. Confronted by measures taken by US

Govt, difficult for these people express own free will. Fact that Indian

Embassy, as foreign mission in US, is prevented from making public

statement it asked to make—this helps make them understand situa­

tion Chinese students.

110. Wang said I had enumerated laws of INS. I had said some

laws and regulations INS of long standing. But such immigration laws

and regulations must not prejudice agreement between us. If any such

immigration laws can be used to prejudice agreement, what is use of

such an agreement between our two sides?

111. Wang I said had repeated statement that Chinese in US free

depart. However as far as their information concerned, 27 Chinese in

addition to 32 who desired return are still unable do so. Unless these

32 and 27 return, they cannot bring themselves believe assertion they

free return.

112. Wang said I had stated US does not force anyone acquire US

citizenship. However cases two students whose names given me this

morning show to contrary that people being forced remain in US. Until

these two persons accounted for, they cannot believe US not forcing

people acquire US citizenship.

113. Wang said as he already suggested, it necessary both sides

faithfully implement agreement between us. He again asked US Govt

change and improve treatment Chinese desiring return.

114. Wang said until requirement for Taiwan entry permits with­

drawn, until requirement forced permanent residence withdrawn,

until all Chinese desiring it are returned, until accounting Chinese

in US prisons is given, they cannot say US is faithfully implementing

agreement.

115. I said he seemed be talking about Chinese who wish remain

US, not those desiring return.

116. Wang said he given me names 27 persons, all desiring return.

He requires me look into situation these people. Could I say all these

did not desire return?

117. I said I did not understand him. He seemed be saying in

some mysterious way, I did not know how, US was selecting people,

permitting some return some not. I did not understand. To best my

knowledge, no way know exactly where they go after leaving US. At

least 189 travelled his country since Jan last year.

arrived Feb 1, on Pres Wilson at Hong Kong had proceeded his country.

I did not know how many others may have gone by other routes.

119. Wang said what he had said quite clear: US was obstructing

return. He asked that US change situation. What he saying to me con­

cerns those desiring return who not yet returned. Did I mean say 32 of

103 whose names he had given me, after I had made investigation I able

establish all 25 did not desire return now? Have they decided they do

not want return?

120. I said I had never I said 103 wanted return. They may have,

they may not have. Only test is whether they do return. All free return.

121. Wang said what about 25? Did I say they free.

122. I said I did.

123. Wang asked did I carry out investigation?

124. I said I said they free return.

125. Wang said was this formal reply after investigations.

126. I said I had nothing add.

127. Wang said it cannot be established these able return. He

recalled I had stated I would account for one of the Chinese, but he had

seen no accounting.

128. I said I had no report as yet but would give it him when avail­

able. Wanted point out agreed announcement provided there be no

obstruction departure people. Did not say there would be screening all

nationals to determine what they wanted to do. I said they free decide

what wanted do. Every Chinese national is free decide.

129. Wang said as matter fact, in spite words of US saying they

free go, on other hand there are obstructions. I had indicated I not yet

obtained information regarding Yuan Jui-­hsiang and not able today

give any accounting. Yet how could I have information that all these

25 free return?

130. I said I knew that under laws and regulations my country

there no obstructions departure.

131. Wang said I said there no obstructions, but he had list here

25 been obstructed and not yet able return. He asked US cease all

obstructions. Before return these Chinese, cannot realize US has ceased

obstruction. Said had nothing more.

132. I said I had nothing more, and suggested meeting on Thursday,

Feb 16.

133. Wang referred to next week being a Chinese holiday and sug­

gested following Monday, February 12. On my hesitating and consult­

ing calender, Wang suggested alternate of next Saturday, Feb 18.

Gowen

486. Memorandum from McConaughy to Robertson

Washington, February 9, 1956

SUBJECT

Recent Reactions to Continuance of the Johnson-­Wang Talks in Geneva

Summary

Adverse reaction to continuation of the talks has been noted in

1. Thailand

2. Hong Kong

3. Taiwan

4. Japan

5. Viet Nam

6. Republic of Korea

No reaction was noted in

­Kahmann (FE/CA). A copy was sent to Lockhart (FE/P) and Phleger.

1. Australia

2. Austria

3. Belgium

4. Cambodia

5. France

6. Italy

7. Laos

8. New Zealand

9. Philippines

No survey of reactions was taken in countries that have recognized

Communist China.

Thailand

Quoted from Bangkok’s telegram of January 12, 1956.

“In recent conversation acting Foreign Minister Ran (repeat Ran)

told me Thai Government concerned over fact that Thailand Chinese

becoming increasingly pro-­Chinese communist. He attributed this shift

primarily to impact U.S.-­Chinese Communist Geneva talks, suggested

U.S. use all (repeat all) means possible counteract.

“Comment: Chinese Communist star has been rising here as result

of Geneva talks as well as other developments of which Department is

aware . . . It is highly unlikely that our explanations can offset impact of

fact that U.S. is talking with Chinese Communists. Even if talks should

collapse, it would be most difficult erase effects of developments last

six months on attitude local Chinese. So long as Chinese Communists

continue play their propaganda cards as cleverly as they have been

doing, they stand to hold if not increase gains already made.”

Hong Kong

Letter dated January 23, 1956 from Consul General Everett F.

Drumright.

“. . . Already the tide is running against us, partly because of our

own hobnobbing with the Chinese Communists at Geneva and partly

because of the weak-­kneed attitudes being shown by our allies out

here. I am afraid the trend of drift to the other side is likely to continue

and even to be accelerated unless we and our allies dig in and truly con­

vince the uncommitted people out here that we are not seeking accom­

modations with the Communists and that we really mean business in

pushing back Communist expansionism which has become much more

dangerous, subtle and varied during the past year.”

Letter dated January 30, 1956 from Consul General Everett F.

Drumright.

“.  .  .  So long as we continue negotiations with the Chinese

­Communists, it is going to be impossible to convince people out here

that we are not seeking some accommodation which will be at their

expense. In such a climate, no matter how good our information

­program may be, it cannot be expected to achieve any measurable

success among those we want to influence.”

Taiwan

Aide Memoire transmitted by Taipei’s telegram of January 26,

1956. The Chinese Foreign Minister said in part:

“The Chinese Government views with particular concern the offer

made by the U.S. to enter into a bilateral declaration with the Chinese

Communist regime concerning the renunciation of the use of force. Such

a declaration would be tantamount to an admission by the U.S. to equal

responsibility for the existing situation in the Taiwan Strait, for which

the Chinese Communists should and must be held solely responsible.

In the form now proposed by the U.S. it might be understood to imply

a tacit de facto recognition of the Chinese Communist regime. It would

be construed by the free peoples in Asia and elsewhere as a further

retreat of the U.S. position and would consequently weaken their deter­

mination of resisting Communist inducement . . .

“It has been the consistent view of the Chinese Government that

the Geneva talks, once permitted to go beyond the practical question

of civilian repatriation, would inevitably degenerate into a favor­

able platform for Communist propaganda and provide opportunities

for neutralist countries to further exert pressure on the U.S. toward

appeasement. This view has unfortunately been borne out by recent

events.

“It is the considered opinion of the Chinese Government that, in

the interests of the U.S. and the Republic of China as well as the free

world as a whole, the Geneva talks on the renunciation of the use of

force should be brought to an end as soon as possible.”

The point of view stated in this aide memoire was also expressed

by several Taipei newspaper editorials and articles as reported in

­January Weekas from Taiwan.

Japan

Quoted from Tokyo’s telegram of January 31, 1956.

“. . . In spite of all which has been said publicly by the Secretary

and others, there is still a large body of opinion in Japan which believes

that American policy towards Red China is changing and there is con­

siderable concern lest an abrupt change be made without Japan know­

ing in advance so that she can adjust her own policy accordingly.

“I assured Mr. Kishi that I had seen no evidence of any coming

change in our policy toward Red China and while obviously no one

could say what would be the situation after passage of several years,

nevertheless I could assure him that our policy in fact was the same that

it has been stated to be time after time by our public leaders. I empha­

sized that the Ambassadorial level talks in Geneva were purely for the

purpose of obtaining release of Americans imprisoned in Red China

and for the purpose of obtaining if at all possible a commitment on the

part of Red China not to use force in the Formosa area but that these

talks in no way implied any recognition of Red China or any intention

to recognize Red China in the future.”

Viet Nam

Newspaper editorial comment in Viet Nam has consistently criti­

cized the Geneva talks and has recently stepped up demands for break­

ing off the negotiations. (Saigon’s telegram of February 4, 1956.)

Republic of Korea

Light newspaper editorial comment in the Republic of Korea has

been skeptical of the value of the Geneva talks.

Austria, France, Belgium, Italy, Philippines, Cambodia, Laos, Australia, and

New Zealand

No comment indicating concern by these governments over con­

tinuance of the Geneva talks has been received recently by the respec­

tive desk officers.

In countries that have recognized Communist China no survey has

been made of reactions to continuance of the Geneva talks.

1619. For Johnson.

Guidance for February 18 meeting.

1. Refer to your statement at October 27 meeting, repeating reasons

US believes Communists have information concerning 450 missing

servicemen. Wang stated at November 3 meeting he did not consider

this proper subject for discussion at Geneva. He said such information

should be sought from MAC in Korea. US accepted this suggestion in

good faith and presented list again at Panmunjom on November 26.

Communist representative declared that individuals held outside

Korea do not come under authority of MAC and therefore irrelevant

to discuss them in MAC. Also declared MAC has no connection with

POW’s disposed of by PRC. Communist representative accepted list

but to date has provided no information. US is entitled to reply either

from MAC or from Wang, for this is one of practical matters at issue

which Ambassadorial talks were convened to consider.

2. Inform Wang that in reviewing record of past several meetings,

we still do not understand Chinese Communist position on renunci­

ation of force. They agree neither side should go to war over its dif­

ferences with other. But it appears that if hostilities should break out,

Chinese Communists would expect deprive US of natural right of

Distribution. Drafted by Phleger and McConaughy; cleared by Dulles in draft and by Sebald.

self-­defense. Would not Chinese Communists exercise their right of

self-­defense if US should go to war in violation its commitment? Then

how can Chinese Communists seek deny US identical right? Would not

Chinese Communists consider that their forces stationed outside their

borders had right to defend themselves if attacked?

3. Point out that Wang does not seem to understand US draft does

not require either party to give up its position with respect to merits of

its claims. Any draft declaration must be couched in such terms as not

to discredit or prejudice claims of other side. Therefore Wang’s tirade

at last meeting about alleged US occupation of Taiwan and lack of

any US right defend itself individually or collectively in Taiwan area

has no relevance to proper substance Agreed Announcement about

renunciation of force. Wang’s tirade deals with merits of respective

positions. It is premature to take up this issue of merits of respec­

tive positions before Agreed Announcement on renunciation force is

issued. A discussion of merits of issues can only come after renuncia­

tion force by both sides.

4. FYI. Our present draft is product of long and careful consider­

ation and we are not disposed to alter it. If, however, Wang proposes

amend renunciation force draft along lines suggested your 1476, state

only that you will receive his proposed amendment, give it careful and

serious study, and state US view of it later. Make certain Wang submits

his formulation in precise and specific terms indicating where in draft

his revised language would appear, so we will have complete text in

form Communists would be willing sign. END FYI.

5. Again protest vigorously continued Chinese Communist failure

to live up to their obligations under Agreed Announcement. If Chinese

Communists should release any of imprisoned Americans on occasion

of Chinese New Year moderation of tone might be desirable.

6. Inform Wang that Immigration Service has now received replies

from all its field offices and none is able to identify Yuan Jui-­hsiang.

Request additional information from Wang to assist further investiga­

tion, including date and place Yuan allegedly taken into custody by

Immigration and alternate spellings Yuan’s name.

Hoover

Letter No. 30

Washington, February 13, 1956

Dear Alex:

We expect to be forehanded with your guidance for the February 18

meeting. We had a meeting with the Secretary on your instructions at his

home on Saturday the 11th on the eve of his departure for his vacation in

the Bahamas. Early in the week we had a meeting with the Secretary on

the guidance for your February 9 meeting. Judge Phleger expedited his

return from a visit to Puerto Rico in order to participate in drafting the

guidance for the February 9 meeting.

You have received some very fine bouquets all along the line for

your superior handling of the meetings. Gratification has been expressed

by all who are in on this subject at the way you have handled both

your prepared presentations and the give and take of the impromptu

exchanges. Your tactics have been superb and your approach precisely

in line with the prevailing thinking here.

We believe that you have Wang on a pretty weak wicket now. He is

close to being on the prongs of a dilemma if we hold steady. His choices

are (1) to accept our formulation; (2) to continue the talks indefinitely

with all the inhibitions which that places on aggressive action by them;

or (3) assume the responsibility for breaking off the talks, which would

be a considerable onus and one which they presumably are reluctant to

assume. The danger which the Secretary feels that we must avoid is the

appearance of extreme inflexibility. If we appeared to adopt an abso­

lutely rigid stance, the Communists after a break off might be able to

transfer a good part of the onus to us arguing that our unyielding atti­

tude on phraseology was deliberately designed to provoke a break. We

want to avoid giving any plausibility to this sort of allegation. I would

characterize the Secretary’s attitude toward the stance you should take

as “firmness without rigidity”. He does not feel that it is necessary or

desirable for you to propose any amendment or transposition in our

proposal, but you do not close the door to serious consideration of any

amendments proposed by Wang which do not do violence to the basic

principles on which we stand.

You will be interested in a view which was expressed in the

­Saturday meeting and which did not encounter any challenge. This

was to the effect that a renunciation of force declaration by the Chinese

Informal.

Communists which specifically included the general area of Taiwan

would tend to compound the seriousness of the implication of any sub­

sequent attack by them on Kinmon or Matsu.

You probably have been impressed with the paucity of information

in our telegrams on the issue of Chinese prisoners in Federal and State

penitentiaries in this country. As you have probably gathered the sparse

guidance reflects not a lack of awareness or concern, but a feeling that

if we get into this subject we “open a can of worms”. We have explored

the problem in a cautious way with the Federal Bureau of Prisons and

the I. & N.S. We know there are at least 30 Chinese aliens in Federal

penitentiaries. There is no estimate of the number in State institutions,

although Judge Phleger is sure there are a lot of Chinese in San Quentin

for murder and other felonies. If we enter into correspondence on this

subject with all the wardens and State Governors, there is no telling

where we will come out. A few of the prisoners might want to go to the

Mainland, or claim that they did. It is by no means certain that pardons

or paroles for deportation could readily be obtained in all cases. It could

be argued that any Chinese Communist agent in this country would

in effect be given immunity if he could be sure of immediate deporta­

tion to his home base after the commission of a crime in this country.

The Indian Embassy would probably get into the act in a big way once

we started polling Chinese prisoners. We fear that the issues would

become confused, our compliance with the Agreed Announcement

might become clouded, the right of the GRC to represent Chinese in

this country might appear compromised, and a propaganda field day

might be afforded the Communists. So all in all it seems better to play

our cards close to our chest on this, relying on the fact that probably all

Chinese inmates of jails have heard about the Agreed Announcement

and could write to the Indian Embassy if they wanted to. We know that

some prisoners on their own initiative stated they would prefer remain­

ing in prison to being sent to Communist China. If the Indians receive a

request from a prisoner, we will cross that bridge when we get to it. In

the meantime we are not pressing any further inquiries into the subject.

We hear there are 50 known Chinese aliens in mental institutions in this

country. We are keeping our fingers crossed on that.

We will give you any interesting information we may receive in the

course of our private checks with the I. & N.S. on the names handed you

by Wang. So far the information is mostly negative. Of course in cases

where there is no allegation of obstruction, we are not going beyond

the information already on hand in Washington on these cases and the

check is only for our own background illumination.

We are enclosing a number of documents which may be of interest

to you as follows:

1. Full record of O’Neill’s conversation of Jan. 11 with Chang

Han-­fu.

2. Round up of reports from our Far Eastern Posts on the effects of

the talks.

3. Exchange of correspondence with the Indian Embassy on the

Taiwan entry question.

Doug Forman has sent Dave a copy of the study by Spielman of the

Historical Division on the course of the talks to date. I wish you would

tell Dave that we would like for him to check this over during his spare

time, if any. We feel he is unusually well qualified to do it. This work

of course is on a contingency basis and is not intended for any current

declassification unless there should be a break off.

We hear that DRF has funds to keep Stanley in Geneva until the

end of March when he is slated to go to Taipei. This is no immediate

problem but I wanted you to be alerted to the fact that the question

will arise in about five weeks as to whether we should try to extend

his detail with you, send another specialist or try to make do with the

part time services of a Geneva Vice Consul. I hope you have no steno­

graphic problem with the unfortunate departure of Helenka Osborn.

Let us know if you are in a jam.

I was glad to get your letter No. 21. It was passed around as usual

and was read with interest.

Congratulations on that successful Porgy and Bess party in Prague

Saturday night. It was played up in the New York Times this morning

as something pretty special and just about without precedent in Prague.

You are juggling two pretty tricky balls with phenomenal success.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

489. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Prague, February 16, 1956

Dear Walter:

I am writing this from Prague as it looks as if my plane is going to

be very late today. I do not know if I will get a chance to write to you

this week end from Geneva.

­Personal–Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

I would hope that before the Secretary departs for his SEATO

and Far Eastern trip you will raise the question and let me know

what I should do to keep him informed concerning Geneva develop­

ments. I also presume that Phleger and Robertson will be accompa­

nying him and that this may complicate the problem of instructions

for a meeting or two. I would think it might be wise for me directly

to repeat to them a fairly full summary of whatever meetings take

place during their trip. The problem will be how I could best and

most quickly reach them.

I have had almost a full week here in Prague which has been most

helpful and useful and enabled me to handle the Porgy and Bess visit

to the best advantage.

It later occurred to me that it may not have been clear from my

messages concerning the last meeting as to why I hesitated about agree­

ing to the Monday meeting. However as he put the question it was

clear to me that what he had in mind was a Monday meeting as a sub­

stitute for this week’s meeting and then another meeting during the

week. This of course I did not want to accept or get in to an argument

about and I therefore took his suggestion of a Saturday meeting. I hope

that I can now get us back on the regular Thursday schedule.

All the best, I remain

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

Ambassador

Letter No. 31

Washington, February 17, 1956

Dear Alex:

This letter is mainly to transmit a number of documents for your

background illumination, some of which I believe you will find of

more than ordinary interest. If you don’t go back to Prague after the

­February 18 meeting (assuming there will be no break-­off), you may

Informal.

have time to study these at some length before the following meeting.

They are listed with brief identification below:

1. Paper on Chinese Communist Treatment of Imprisoned American

Civilians.

This is the projected “white paper” on maltreatment of jailed

Americans by the Chinese Communists from 1949 to date. It has been

prepared on a contingency basis for possible release to the press in the

event of a break-­off at Geneva. The study is mainly the work of John

Lindbeck of FE/P who has been working on it almost full time for

­several weeks. The individual case summaries which are to be attached

as a sort of appendix are not completed yet and they are not being sent

to you. There will be over a hundred of these. We would like the frank

reaction of yourself and Dave Osborn to the general approach and the

contingent of the study as it now stands. It is not firmed up yet and

there is still time for amendments, either broad or of the nit-­picking

variety. As you will see Lindbeck has taken a fairly restrained line while

still seeking to get considerable impact. I believe it is objective and on

a sound factual basis. Frank Harris the American from Hong Kong

who used to run Rediffusion there and who has made himself quite an

authority on the subject of imprisoned Americans, is reading over the

material and making some helpful suggestions from the standpoint of

an informed ­private American citizen. His comments are all the more

helpful because he has recently talked to Harriett Mills and Malcolm

Bersohn and other ex-­prisoners. We will welcome criticism of either the

constructive or the destructive variety, from you and Dave.

2. DRF Intelligence Report entitled “Communist China’s Interest in a

Foreign Ministers’ Conference with the United States”.

This study by DRF is based on their full access to the Geneva

reports and the presence of one of their men on your staff. Herman

thinks it is a good job. He mentioned it to the Secretary at the meeting

on the 11th. If you have any comments on this, both FE and R will be

glad to have them.

3. Report of Secretary’s discussion with Selwyn Lloyd on China matters on

Jan. 31 during Eden visit.

This is the record of the China portion of the discussion with the

British at the Foreign Minister level on the morning of Jan. 31. It is an

excerpt from the full record of the Eden visit to Washington. It has not

been officially cleared by the Secretary yet. I had to get special permis­

sion to send this to you and of course it should be very closely held by

you. This meeting took place in the Department and practically all the

chief participants on both sides were present except the President and

the Prime Minister. You will be particularly interested in the Secretary’s

discussion of the Geneva conversations on the first two pages, and in

the Secretary’s exposition of the reasoning behind our China policy,

stated in very broad terms, from page eight through the middle of page

eleven. The discussions of trade controls against ­Communist China and

the off-­shore islands issue were also of more than ordinary interest.

4. Contingent Press Release in the Event of a Break-­Off.

Early last week we decided that we should have a carefully

drafted press release ready for instant use if Wang should break

off the Geneva talks. Our early draft was considerably revised by

the ­Secretary. The enclosed statement which was approved by the

­Secretary on ­February 9, is substantially his original draft with some

very slight amendments which he accepted. This statement represents

an effort to strike a just balance of strength and restraint. You will

see the various touches designed to show up the weaknesses in the

Communist position without burning all the bridges. If you have

any suggestions on this, it will not be too late to consider them, again

assuming that the talks will continue.

5. Robertson-­Koo Conversation of February 1.

You will be interested in reading the record of the long conver­

sation of February 1 between Amb. Koo and Mr. Robertson. Koo had

returned the day before from consultations in Taipei and, stimulated

by the strength of the sentiment he had encountered in Taiwan, he gave

the most vigorous presentation of the GRC objections to the Geneva

talks that we have yet had from him. I believe you will find much of

interest in the tact that Mr. Robertson took in answering Koo’s argu­

ments and questions.

In connection with the foregoing you will also want to study the

reassurances which we gave to the Chinese Government in our Aide

Memoire of Feb. 13 in answer to their Aide Memoire of Jan. 25. The

Chinese Aide Memoire was repeated to you from Taipei as their 159

to Geneva. Our Aide Memoire went to Taipei as the Department’s 481

and has been repeated to you by pouch. It should arrive at the same

time as this letter. Our Aide Memoire was personally approved by the

Secretary on Feb. 11.

We are working on a talking paper on the Geneva conversations

to be used by our representative at a forthcoming session of the NATO

Deputies sometime early in March. It seems that Amb. Perkins will

have to make this presentation. Livy Merchant feels that it is important

to give our NATO allies a fairly full confidential briefing on the current

situation in the talks right away. He feels it cannot wait until the next

ministerial level NATO session in April which will be attended by the

Secretary. It is unfortunate that the presentation to the Deputies will

have to be made by a representative who has had no opportunity to

acquire any particular background on the talks, especially since there

will be a discussion period during which some fairly tricky questions

will be asked. We will arm Amb. Perkins as well as possible, but this

may not be sufficient. It is possible that you will be asked to go to Paris

to brief Amb. Perkins some time before the Deputies meeting. We feel

this would be invaluable to our spokesman. We are assuming that you

could work this short trip into your schedule without too much dif­

ficulty unless the Prague demands on you are unusually heavy. No

orders have been issued yet and there might be a change in the think­

ing. This is merely to alert you to the possibility and give you a chance

to react in advance if you want to.

I will be standing by for your first report of the meeting on Saturday

afternoon and earnestly hoping that all goes well.

Regards and good wishes,

Walter P. McConaughy

491. Letter from Lindbeck to Osborn

Washington, February 17, 1956

Dear Dave:

I enclose copies of a number of memoranda dealing with the paper

I have been working on relative to Chinese Communist treatment of

imprisoned American civilians. Walter McConaughy is transmitting a

copy of this paper to Alexis Johnson today. I was too tardy to get this

material included in the packet so I am sending it on to you for his

information and yours.

Sincerely,

John M.H. Lindbeck

Official–Informal.

1509. From Johnson.

1. Three hour forty five minute meeting today. No progress whatever.

2. I developed theme of paragraphs two, three, Department’s

1619, taking increasingly explicit position that proper interpretation

self-­defense clause is simply that each side is, on own behalf, making

clear that declaration is made without prejudice to what it considers its

inherent right individual collective self-­defense, and does not in any

way require other side recognize or accept merits of claims.

3. Wang entirely failed meet my point this regard, confined self

to reiterating previous positions, however with intimation of plea we

offer reformulation self-­defense clause.

4. Wang took initiative on implementation, confining self to and

pressing hard on Chinese in United States prisons, their alleged lack infor­

mation about agreed announcement, et cetera. Alleged we had refused

Indian request transmit text announcement to imprisoned Chinese.

5. I replied by reiterating previous position on no Chinese being

obstructed in return and contrasted situation 13 Americans.

Shillock

Limit Distribution.

1512. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting.

1. Nothing particularly noteworthy to add about today’s meeting

except that atmosphere even easier than last meeting. From full record

Distribution.

Department will note that Wang gave no signs of impatience and that

I did my best to contribute to business like attitude and keep discussion

to text declaration. However, there was no sign of any change whatever

in their attitude toward self defense clause.

2. With respect implementation he senses he may have struck soft

spot with regard imprisoned Chinese and is pressing it to maximum.

Would appreciate Department’s instructions as to what if anything fur­

ther it believes I could usefully say this regard next meeting.

3. Department will also note details our exchange re Liu Yung-­ming

medical records. Would appreciate instructions this regard for next

meeting. Spite their attitude on this case I feel we have nothing lose

something gain by making response their request to extent hospital

able and willing.

4. His response on missing military personnel was as expected but

I hope our exchange will expedite some reply in MAC. His thought that

I was linking this with Chinese prisoners in US was understandable in

context meeting and I thought it well immediately correct any implica­

tion we prepared give them list imprisoned Chinese in exchange their

accounting for missing military personnel.

Shillock

1513. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 37 meeting with prepared statement saying he

would like make further observations regarding statement I made at

last meeting. First, it was US use force against China in Taiwan area

which created serious dispute between China and US. Nevertheless

during Afro-­Asian Conference China proposed China and US sit down

and enter into negotiations about dispute. That proposal gave expres­

sion to China’s desire for peaceful settlement dispute between two

countries.

Distribution.

2. Wang said in course these talks US side asked that both sides

make announcement renouncing use force and threats. PRC side agreed

to this idea of making announcement and took initiative in presenting

draft announcement, which PRC side later amended after considering

US views.

3. Wang said thus problem confronting us evidently nothing else

but how desire for peaceful settlement disputes, as specified in pro­

posed announcement, can be realized. As US already used force and

threats against China, desire for peaceful settlement disputes cannot be

realized unless practical feasible means are sought for.

4. Wang said if US side genuinely sincere in desiring peaceful set­

tlement disputes between two countries, should make honest effort fol­

low announcement of declaration by seeking practical feasible means

realize this. Foreign Ministers conference is precisely such practical and

feasible means.

5. Wang said secondly it out of question for US to talk about any sort

of self-­defense rights on China’s territory Taiwan and coastal islands.

No amount of arguments such as put forward at last meeting, alleging

Taiwan and coastal islands never been their territory could alter facts.

6. Wang said aggressive acts of US in seizure of Taiwan and inter­

vention in internal affairs of China could in no way be turned into

self-­defensive acts by treaties between US and Chiang clique, which

long been overthrown by Chinese people. China absolutely would not

renounce its sovereign right over Taiwan and coastal islands. To require

their side in making this announcement to give recognition to US right

self-­defense on China’s territory, to give recognition to Chiang treaty,

to give recognition to American seizure Taiwan, is asking impossible.

7. Wang said thirdly as to by what means China would accomplish

liberation Taiwan, that entirely internal matter of China in which US

has no right whatsoever interfere. Desire expressed by China to strive

for peaceful liberation Taiwan if circumstances permit has nothing to

do with US.

8. Wang said at last meeting US side asked that China undertake

to use peaceful means for liberating Taiwan. Such is unscrupulous

intervention in China’s internal affairs which China absolutely will not

tolerate.

9. Wang said I had repeatedly indicated that US had no intention

prejudicing position PRC side regarding our disputes. As matter fact

ever since discussion on making this announcement began US side

all along has clung to demand that China renounce its claims. US side

has never indicated slightest change in its position. US side has even

demanded PRC recognition seizure Taiwan by US. How could I explain

this as other than demanding their side renounce its position?

10. Wang said, outside conference room, moreover, US contin­

uously stepping up military activities in Taiwan area. Recently US

openly declared it would stage large scale military maneuvers with

Chiang forces in Taiwan area. Obviously this further act of provocation.

11. Wang said he asked that US make explicit answer as to whether

it intent of US, after announcement of declaration, to maintain status

quo of its seizure Taiwan and intervention China’s internal affairs, and

its interference in China’s liberation Taiwan and coastal islands, mean­

while refusing hold Foreign Ministers conference.

12. Wang said if that is intent of US, then is it not lot of empty words

to talk about “not prejudicing position and rights” of PRC? Would this

not be making it impossible to realize desire for peaceful settlement

disputes between two countries?

13. I replied that it didn’t seem me statement Wang had made

helped advance us in task we facing in attempt reach agreement on

declaration on renunciation of force. It seemed me his statement tended

again lead us down side road of discussing substance our disputes.

14. I said in attempt to see whether or not we could not advance

understanding between us, I had asked him at last meeting two simple

questions which I thought would help clarify situation. As I recalled

it, first question was whether we were in agreement that only peaceful

means would be used settle our disputes.

15. I said other question was what he thought should happen if in

violation declaration one side should initiate hostilities.

16. I said he had again referred this morning to his interpretation

of draft we discussing as requiring him to renounce his position and

recognize positions which he did not desire recognize. I had tried to

deal with this question at last meeting, just as plainly as I could. I had

hoped I made myself clear, but apparently I had not.

17. I said I had tried make clear draft we discussing including self

defense clause did not require either side give up position with respect

merits any disputes. What I had been trying do was place self-­defense

clause in that declaration, to which Wang objected, in its true rela­

tionship to remainder of declaration and show that it meant only this:

proposition I set forth was that if either side should violate declaration

and initiate hostilities as means of attempting make its views prevail

over other, or if either side should be attacked from any other quar­

ter, it would be clear that side attacked would not by declaration have

renounced its right self defense.

18. I said I had given much thought to this, and had tried think

of some way in which I could make this perfectly clear. Therefore, it

not with any intent of getting into substance our disputes, or saying

things that would lead us down byroads, but with intent of making our

interpretation and understanding of this just as explicit as possible that

I want try again explain my position.

19. I said let me put it this way. Wang disputed position of US with

regard to Taiwan area, and did not recognize merits, nor did he wish to

say anything that gave appearance we recognizing merits of position of

US in that regard.

20. I continued from prepared statement that Wang said he did not

dispute merits of assertion by US of right of individual and collective

self-­defense at some places but that he did dispute merits of US claims

this regard with regard Taiwan area. He said US must abandon its claim

with respect right self-­defense with respect Taiwan area. I believed that

this was honest summary his position, as I understood it.

21. I said on other hand they had claimed and still claimed for

themselves right individual and collective self-­defense in areas admit­

tedly beyond borders their country and where US considers they have

utterly no basis for claiming that right. I did not and would not say

anything in this declaration that would recognize or give appearance of

recognizing merits their claims this regard, and I did not believe draft

we considering did this.

22. I said surely he did not wish issue a declaration in a form that

would imply that if their forces attacked they would not defend selves.

Surely if after making declaration US should in violation its commit­

ment initiate hostilities, their forces would exercise what they would

consider their right individual collective self-­defense and defend selves.

It was difficult me to understand how then he could attempt to deny to

forces of my country very same right.

23. I said Wang had said he would not deny our forces that right in

some places but did deny them that right in Taiwan area. My point was

that draft we discussing did not in any way and should not attempt

deny other’s views or embody agreement between us as to merits

respective claims. Confrontation our respective claims does not belong

in present stage of discussion.

24. I said all I had suggested was that in making this declaration

not to employ force to settle our disputes each of us simply state that

in doing so we were neither of us renouncing what we considered to

be our inherent right of individual and collective self defense. In agree­

ing join with Wang in making such statement I did not consider I was

in any way sacrificing or prejudicing my views with respect to merits

their claims with regard to places at which they asserted that right.

25. I said, similarly, I did not think that it sacrificed their views with

regard to merits of claims of my government concerning that right.

26. I said I thought this entirely proper and in accordance with

original purpose of not attempting in this declaration to discredit or

prejudice views of either. Discussion of merits of respective claims

and working out by peaceful means of solutions to those problems

where our policies confront each other can only be accomplished after

we have made clear that only peaceful means will be used in finding

those solutions.

27. I said question Wang had asked this morning was one I could

only term as prejudging solutions to problems facing our two countries.

As such, I didn’t believe it proper or constructive question to ask at this

stage our discussions.

28. I said the US earnestly hopes for and will do everything its

power to bring about peaceful solution these questions. The US had no

reservations in its determination that only peaceful means would be

used in their solution.

29. I said if Wang agreed to issuance of draft we discussing, US

would have no reservations in its determination that we seek together,

as set forth in draft, “practical and feasible means realizing this com­

mon desire.” US continues hope we can reach that stage. US continues

hope we will not be longer delayed in reaching that stage by useless

attempts get US agree that if its forces attacked they would not defend

selves.

30. Wang said he noted that I had expressed hope we would be

able to reach agreement on issuance of announcement quickly so that

we could enter into discussion other matters. He shared this concern

that we had spent much time in discussion this announcement without

reaching an agreement on this up to present moment.

31. Wang said that in his opening statement this morning he had

pointed out repeated efforts their side to reach agreement by putting

forth various drafts which embodied points of view common to both

sides and which acceptable to both sides. If indeed my view that we

should quickly reach agreement on an announcement, it hard for him

to see why US still continues not to accept their draft announcement so

that we can advance to discussion other matters.

32. Wang said he had repeatedly made clear that our draft unaccep­

table to their side because our draft only serves view of US side. Because

US draft only gives consideration to US interests and prejudices posi­

tion their side, therefore it unacceptable to their side. This view of their

side had been made clear repeatedly in previous meetings.

33. Wang said it entirely unjustifiable for us to include clause on

self-­defense of US in Taiwan, which was what their side would not

accept. Observations I had made this morning, it seemed to him, in

main continued to defend position of US regarding US self-­defense

in Taiwan area. That, as he had said, was principal obstacle in way of

reaching agreement on issuance of announcement. He did not see how

this repetition of this position could advance in any way discussion by

both sides on issuance of announcement.

34. Wang said with regard to statement I made this morning, there

seemed to be three points on which we must be clear. In first place, my

statement tended to confuse aggression with self-­defense.

35. Wang said it quite true that they endorse and do not dispute

right every country, in accordance United Nations Charter, to individ­

ual and collective self-­defense, and that this includes United States.

However, such right of self-­defense can only be used in protecting and

defending territory of own country against external aggression and

attack. This right of self-­defense has nothing in common with armed

aggression against other countries. So these two things must not be

confused with each other.

36. Wang said I had pointed out that they had self-­defense arrange­

ments beyond their borders. It true that they have exercised that right

of self-­defense. If there had not been foreign forces threatening their

border and foreign military aircraft violating their airspace, they would

not have exercised that right. Chinese exercised that right of self-­

defense simply in order protect their territory from being violated by

foreign powers. However, action of foreign forces in starting aggressive

acts on foreign territory cannot be termed exercise of self-­defense.

37. Wang said let him put it more concretely and with respect dis­

putes between China and US in Taiwan area. Present grave hostilities

between China and US in Taiwan area chiefly result of US action in

forcible seizure Taiwan, which Chinese territory. No amount talk, argu­

ment, or sophistry can turn Taiwan into state or territory of America.

Therefore action of US in forcible seizure of Taiwan can only be termed

aggressive action and can never be termed act of self-­defense. Same

is true other way around—Chinese forces would have no right speak

about self-­defense if they should forcibly occupy American territory of

San Francisco.

38. Wang said I had stated this morning that if American forces

were attacked they would not forego right to self-­defense. However,

present situation is not one in which US forces being attacked, but is one

in which US forces have used force against Taiwan and have attacked

China. [garble] logic seemed to be equally absurd as that of man who

beats up another and while beating him still claims it is self-­defense.

How can this action be termed self-­defense?

39. Wang said from this it should be clear that we should not try

confuse aggressive acts with self-­defense. These two acts should be

clearly separated from each other. By this he meant we should not try

explain aggressive action as action of self-­defense.

40. Wang said as he had said, they have full right to expel pres­

ent occupation of Taiwan by US forces. Nevertheless, they still propose

settle this question by means peaceful negotiations. This demonstrates

peaceful intention of Chinese regarding settlement international

disputes.

41. Wang said second point he wanted make was that we should

not attempt confuse international dispute with internal matter. This

question has always remained before us.

42. Wang said I had asked whether or not China would only use

peaceful means in settlement Taiwan problem. It seemed him this ques­

tion went beyond terms of reference present talks. It entirely matter for

Chinese people themselves as to by what means they would accom­

plish liberation Taiwan. This matter in which US has no right interfere.

They would oppose any attempt interfere this matter. Same is true in

other respect: that is, China has no right interfere in internal matter of

disputes between political parties in US. They had made clear in pre­

vious meetings this point of view: that such matters, which essentially

internal matters of China, beyond scope these talks.

43. Wang said what we should discuss in these talks is question of

grave tension created Taiwan area as result US occupation Chinese area

of Taiwan, and we should attempt find solution to this situation.

44. Wang said thirdly he wanted deal with question of relationship

between issuance announcement and substance of our disputes. They

had always proposed that these two questions should be separated in

their order of solution, and this is given expression in draft put forward

by their side. It is a practical way—to try to solve disputes between our

two countries step by step.

45. Wang said that was why they did not in their draft announce­

ment raise any prerequisites or raise any matter which US could not

find acceptable. Whereas in US proposal, US has attempted confuse

these two steps and raise self-­defense clause, which tantamount to pre­

requisite. That is where obstacle in way progress our talks lies.

46. Wang said therefore problem confronting two of us seemed to

him very clear. It quite clear also why we not reached agreement issu­

ance announcement up to present moment. Present fact is that we have

not reached agreement on a proposed announcement. This not what

their side desired. Question of what would follow issuance announce­

ment was not one I had asked—what would happen if declaration were

violated—but the problem was rather that both sides would attempt

find ways and means for realization of provisions which stated in

declaration.

47. I said I was sorry we just did not seem able arrive at meeting of

minds on this. We seemed be arguing somewhat at cross purposes here.

I been trying very hard keep simply to substance of our draft announce­

ment. Whereas he said he agreed with my view that we had to keep

our separate steps apart from each other, yet he continually attempting

bring us back to merits our disputes. He kept referring to his views

regarding our dispute in Taiwan area terming it continuously a matter

of US occupation of Taiwan. I had in past and continue resolutely to

reject validity any such characterization of question. However, I did not

intend repeat that this morning. Because that, I felt, again gets us down

unproductive side road of discussion merits our respective positions.

48. I said however whatever term is used characterize our dispute

that area, seemed me that position he taking was that solution of that

should precede or accompany issuance our declaration.

49. I said he spoke again this morning of what he termed their right

expel American forces from Taiwan area. His government has in its

public statements also often spoken along same line. This is, and can be

interpreted as, nothing else than a threat to initiate hostilities in order

to resolve questions at dispute in Taiwan area in their favor. This is

principal reason we are here discussing whether or not his government

willing give up threat or use of force to resolve our differences.

50. I said this one of reasons I asked him at last meeting and again

asked this morning the question as to whether in issuing this declara­

tion they considered that only peaceful means were to be used to settle

our disputes.

51. I said there no confusion my mind in this regard. I relating my

question exactly to text our declaration. In spite my explanations this

morning, he still insists in interpreting amendments I had suggested as

attempt by US to trick him into prejudicing their position. That neither

my intent nor is it in plain language of draft we discussing. Let me read

that. “The USA and the PRC are determined that they will settle dis­

putes between them through peaceful means—and if I may here leave

out the self-­defense clause—and that they will not resort to the threat or

use of force in the Taiwan area or elsewhere.” However in saying this,

each of us is also saying in own behalf simply that we doing this and

saying this without prejudicing what each of us considers his inherent

rights to individual collective self-­defense. As I said my statement this

morning, neither us by saying that is recognizing or giving appearance

recognizing merits position of other in this regard. (At this point Lai

had whispered conference with Wang over Chinese December 1 draft.)

Both us are simply making clear fact that if either us is attacked we

intend defend ourselves. It simply says, when we in declaration say

we not going use force, that we not carrying it to point of saying we

not intend defend ourselves if attacked. It applies equally to both of us

and, as previously pointed out, I would think they would consider it of

equal importance.

52. I said it just didn’t seem to me that their objections to it had

any validity; and that their demand that it be withdrawn constituted,

in effect, demand that US say that if its forces are attacked they will not

defend themselves. That of course is absurd on face of it.

53. I said I earnestly hoped that he could reconsider his position on

this in light our discussions and my explanations this morning so that

we could see whether it possible for us to reach agreement on this at

our next meeting. I sincerely hoped we could do so.

54. Wang said they could not but want make clear their point view

regarding issuance of agreement. They could not but explain their

views regarding what they consider to be incorrect views concerning

announcement.

55. Wang said they say US is occupying Chinese territory of ­Taiwan

today. Only after American forces in Taiwan area—such as Seventh Fleet

and so on—are withdrawn could I argue that US not occupying Taiwan.

That would be matter which everybody would welcome and be glad see

carried out.

56. Wang said I had talked much about alleged threats. As long

as US forces not withdrawn from Taiwan area, American threat will

always exist in that area. This not threat on part Chinese against US, but

on contrary is US threat against China. This plain fact.

57. Wang said in spite all this their side still willing negotiate with

US in peaceful manner in attempt arrive at solution this dispute. Is not

this attitude Chinese side very conciliatory attitude? Certainly we are

still in present stage of discussing issuance of agreed announcement.

58. Wang said I had stated that we should confine our discussion

at present stage to issuance of the announcement. In course of discus­

sion we should continuously overcome obstacles in our way and keep

advancing. If as I had said we should confine discussion strictly to

question of announcement itself, was I willing accept their December 1

draft, which he considered very reasonable? His draft says that “PRC

and USA are determined that they should settle disputes between their

two countries through peaceful negotiations without resorting to threat

or use of force.” This says both should use peaceful means, rather than

means of war, to settle disputes between them.

59. Wang said certainly he would be prepared listen to any sugges­

tions or opinions I might have regard to this draft.

60. Wang said he had noted that when I read from my January

12 draft I had left out phrase regarding “without prejudice to inherent

right of individual and collective self-­defense.” He wondered if I meant

that I would omit this clause from draft announcement. He would

appreciate it if I would clarify these two points he had just raised.

61. I said first I would not take our time to review my previous

comments regarding his December 1 draft. I had previously set forth

reasons I felt it was defective as meaningful declaration.

62. I said in reading paragraph I had referred to this morning,

I had not left out clause on self defense. I was simply trying to read it

in context so as to make exactly clear meaning and interpretation that

appears there.

63. I said what I was saying was that in making declaration each of

us was saying on own behalf simply that we were doing this and saying

this without prejudice to what each of us considered to be our inherent

rights of individual and collective self defense. By that means I was

attempting to make just as clear as I could what this in fact says, at least

insofar as English is concerned.

64. I said I was doing this in order try clear up apparent confusion

that still existed as to exact meaning and our intention in including it.

I hoped that Wang would reconsider it in this light, because I felt Wang

might not have fully understood it.

65. Wang said (after consultation with Lai) I had stated that I did

not consider their December 1 draft meaningful declaration. However,

I would recall that on December 1, when he put forth that draft, I had

stated that I welcomed their action in putting that draft forward, and

said that it represented progress in talks. My remarks on that occasion

served to prove that December 1 draft of their side was meaningful

declaration.

66. Wang said if I did consider their December 1 draft a consider­

able advance in our discussion on issuance of announcement, he did

not see why we could not continue our progress along that line.

67. Wang said with regard January 12 draft of US side, he had

made it clear at previous meetings that as regards self defense clause

included in that draft, it not question of what sort of words to use to

express that idea. He had said that it was substantive question with

which we must deal.

68. Wang said if I genuinely hoped that we should make further

progress in talks, then he would hope I would be able set forth more

concrete opinions on basis their December 1 draft at next meeting.

69. Wang said if it my intention to insist on this clause regarding

self defense in Taiwan area, and keep heckling about this clause in our

discussions, he just didn’t see how we could make any progress in our

discussions.

70. I replied that I had only two brief things. First, I did say that

I welcomed their draft of December 1 and did consider it advance over

position Wang had previously been maintaining.

71. I said I not only said this, but I had shown that I thought this

was case by my taking his draft as basis for negotiation and by agree­

ing accept it as declaration with two small amendments that we had

suggested. It frankly just had not occurred to me that Wang would find

this self defense clause objectionable or that he would make issue of it.

72. I said I certainly had no intention or desire to build it up into

issue, but Wang had insisted on doing so. Again, Wang had just said

he considered this matter of substance. How else could I interpret his

statements than as substantive demand on his part that US renounce

its views regarding merits of our disputes. I had nothing more to say.

73. Wang replied that I had termed my amendments to his draft as

very small changes, but he did not think they were very small changes.

He considered them to be still insisting on my original position. He did

not consider them amendments in true sense of word. They were rather

a form of insistence on my original position.

74. Wang said I had stated that in making these changes I did not

intend build up issue over self-­defense clause. If, as I stated, it not my

intent to build up into issue, then he didn’t see why I had insisted on

this issue.

75. Wang said I had also said that it not my intent demand or require

prerequisite. In view of fact that self defense clause had become issue

between us and constitutes prerequisite on US part, this self defense

clause had become obstacle to progress of talks.

76. Wang said it was to be hoped that at next meeting I would be

able put forth suggestions and opinions that would help progress of

talks.

77. Wang said if I had nothing else, he would like bring up

another matter. On my assent, he read prepared statement saying that

­Chinese side had at very start these talks submitted complete list of all

­Americans in prison in China. They had all along been concerned with

status of Chinese in prison in US. In spite of repeated requests that we

submit list Chinese in US prisons, US side not only failed submit such

list but declared it had no knowledge of Chinese in prison.

78. Wang said he had long ago pointed out that that assertion did

not tally with facts. According information offered by returned Chinese

there actually many Chinese unjustifiably kept US prisons. He would

again call my attention to question of Chinese in US prisons and would

appreciate explicit answer from me.

79. Wang said he failed see why my side had thus far not taken any

appropriate measures in regard to these imprisoned Chinese, nor could

he understand why US so far refused provide either their side or Indian

Embassy with information about these people, or why US would not

permit Indian Embassy advise these imprisoned people of contents of

agreement between China and US of September 10, 1955. Under such

circumstances, how could Indian Embassy be expected fully carry out

functions provided in agreement. This was situation highly dissatisfac­

tory their side.

80. Wang said Chinese Government and people very concerned

about situation of 27 Chinese whose names he gave me in six separate

lists with request that I look into cases and give accounting for them.

Last meeting, without making any investigation, I had made casual

remark that they all free depart. That remark not made with sense of

responsibility. All these people being subjected obstruction, not able

return. US side had every responsibility look into their cases in earnest,

and give accounting for each individual.

81. Wang said this morning he would again hand me list of four

Chinese whose return being prevented and request me look into their

cases and give accounting of them. Particulars about their situation

were set forth in papers he handing me. (Handed over list, transmitted

by separate telegram).

82. I said I thought it was necessary to recall that we came here to

discuss civilians who desired return. Wang would recall that we dis­

cussed subject of lists, and that when we began talks I had given him

list of Americans who we had positive evidence desired return and

were being prevented from doing so, including those imprisoned in

Wang’s country.

83. I said it no part of terms of reference for these talks or of agreed

announcement to investigate status all Chinese in United States. There

was only one question between us, one question that is concern of

Indian Embassy in US. That is, US has unequivocally and uncondition­

ally stated that Chinese in US who desire return PRC entitled do so.

Sole question is whether US has and is carrying out that obligation.

84. I said I here and my government also had categorically with­

out condition stated that we have carried out obligation. In event that

any Chinese in US desiring return feels he being obstructed, our agreed

announcement sets up definite clear and simple procedure. US had

even gone beyond terms of that announcement and invited anyone

who even knew of any Chinese being obstructed in his desire depart,

or who felt he being obstructed to communicate with Indian Embassy

or State Department.

85. I said thus far, in more than 5 months that had passed since

announcement issued neither these procedures nor any other source

had given any specific evidence of any kind that any Chinese in US

who desired return being obstructed from doing so.

86. I said raising demands and making requests entirely outside

terms reference talks and agreed announcement did not obscure this

fact. None of this could excuse continued failure Wang’s government

carry out its commitments with regard precise Americans we were dis­

cussing at time this announcement issued. There nothing hypothetical

or theoretical about those Americans. There nothing hypothetical or

theoretical about who is interfering with their return.

87. I said in only one case that he had thus far brought my atten­

tion did there appear be any substantial allegation that US could be

obstructing his return. That was case of Mr. Yuan Jui-­hsiang, which

I had told him I was looking into, and whose name he had given me

January 12. Wang’s statement regarding him was to effect he been sum­

moned by immigration authorities, interrogated in July 1954, and taken

into custody.

88. I said I had had very thorough check made of all our immi­

gration offices and had not been able confirm he been taken into cus­

tody at any time, nor been able positively identify that he had had

any business with immigration authorities. However, I would be glad

try to go further into this if Wang would furnish me further details.

Wang’s statement said he summoned in July 1954. If Wang could give

me exact date it would be helpful. It would also be particularly helpful

if Wang could give me particular place where this took place. I should

presume this information should be available from sources Wang had

used. It would also be helpful if Wang could give me any information

on how he spelled his name in English letters. We had looked into pos­

sible alternate spellings under various dialects that might be given to

his Chinese characters, but had been unable to identify him. As Wang

also knew, it entirely possible he might have adopted a personalized

spelling of name—a spelling of his own for his name. Or he might have

partially anglicized his name. Any information Wang could give me in

this regard would be helpful in looking into this matter.

90. Wang said I had said I came here to discuss and resolve ques­

tion of civilians both sides who desire return. I had referred to decla­

ration by US that all those Chinese who desire return free do so. I had

said there no obstruction whatever on part US against their return. It

one thing to say this in announcement, but it important to look into

facts. They had always welcomed any news given him regarding return

of certain batch Chinese and whenever they also had knowledge any

return Chinese they always expressed welcome.

91. Wang said however on other hand, their attention repeatedly

been called to fact many Chinese desire return but in fact unable do so.

That concerns names those people he had given me and request I look

into those cases.

92. Wang said with regard Yuan, their hope was US authorities

would continue look into this matter. When his side received further

information, he would certainly be glad inform me.

93. Wang said he next wanted call my attention to question of

Chinese in US prisons. These people who desire return have not been

informed of agreed announcement between US and their side very

concerned regard welfare these people. Now question of those Chinese

in US prisons is not question of whether or not there are Chinese in

US prisons, but is question of how many them in US prisons. I had

repeatedly referred to imprisoned Americans in China. He sure I able

understand similar concern their part regarding Chinese in prison in

US. They would like learn about information on their situation.

94. I said I had nothing more on that subject but did have another

brief subject.

I had raised with him and discussed at that meeting as well as at 24th

meeting October 3, the question of American personnel missing during

Korean hostilities for whom no accounting been made from his side.

I would not review reasons set forth that time regarding reasons why

we thought his side had information concerning them.

96. I said he would recall that he had said he felt that MAC in Korea

was proper place for discussion this question and I had asked whether

he would recommend his authorities that they agree discuss this ques­

tion there. My government accepted this suggestion in good faith and

in meeting of MAC November 26th raised this question. Although

representatives his side made some statements regarding individuals

held outside Korea as not coming under authority of MAC, I pleased

note that they did accept list. I wanted point out that although almost

three months had passed since lists received and discussed in MAC, no

information yet received and no indication of intent his side provide

information. I simply wanted state at this time that my government

considered itself entitled to reply whether in MAC or here, because my

government considers this still to be one of practical matters between

us which these talks were convened to consider.

97. Wang said I did not seem to have replied to questions he had

put to me.

98. Wang said as to US military personnel missing in Korea, he had

at beginning pointed out this not matter to be discussed these meetings.

It was proper for US to raise question at MAC in Korea. It should expect

any reply in same place—that is, in Korea.

99. Wang said he would like remind me not to confuse those mat­

ters in Korea with present talks between China and US. He did not

consider it proper or wise raise this matter at this conference.

100. Wang said as he had said, if US was concerned over impris­

oned Americans in China, his side also entitled know about situation of

Chinese being imprisoned in US. Their request for information regard­

ing imprisoned Chinese in US was exactly within scope our talks and

was matter which concerned implementation of agreed announcement.

101. I said it not necessary raise matter here if his representatives

in Korea would be instructed give reply. I hoped this would be done.

102. Wang said he did not see how issues in Korean War could

have connection with Chinese in prison in US.

103. I said I had never said there was.

104. Wang said if I not making such a connection, then why did I

not reply his questions regarding imprisoned Chinese in US?

105. I said I did not intend connect two problems.

106. Wang said he had no such intention, but he had raised ques­

tion imprisoned Chinese in US but I in reply was trying excuse myself

by bringing up matter missing persons in Korea. Could only give

impression I was trying confuse these two matters. He had no intention

doing this.

107. I said I recognized that both questions separate.

108. Wang said he agreed with me that they separate.

109. I said we were agreed.

110. Wang said but question of Chinese imprisoned US still remains.

111. I said I had nothing more.

112. Wang said if I had no answer for him on this question he would

hope I would do so next meeting. He had still another matter take up.

113. Wang said this concerns Mr. Liu Yung-­ming. After his return

China and after diagnosis, it confirmed Liu a victim of schizophrenia

and this had something do with ill treatment received hands US. His

government now has decided cure him so he will be restored his health

at early date. Liu was in American hospital for six years, however when

returned hospital did not give him records and information regarding

his disease—­the diagnosis and etiological information concerning his

disease. In order give Liu effective treatment, necessary for hospital their

side get and refer to such information. He would hope our side would

render assistance and give necessary materials so Liu could be cured

early date.

114. I said I be glad look into matter. Had request been made

through other channels?

115. Wang said no.

116. I asked if doctor had written hospital?

117. Wang said no.

118. I asked where he wanted information sent, to doctor or to

hospital?

119. Wang said perhaps we could make further arrangements in

due course.

120. I suggested we return to regular schedule for next meeting.

121. Wang suggested that in order maintain an interval it be Friday,

February 24th. I agreed.

Shillock

No. 22

Geneva, February 19, 1956

Dear Walter:

A very cold Sunday afternoon and a chance to write you as it was

not practical for me to go back to Prague this week. With the plane

schedules and all it would have meant I would only have had Monday

there. I hope I can get back onto the Thursday meeting schedule which

works out best for me. However, I must confess I do not have much

stomach for flying the kind of weather we have been having here. Last

week I went up in the teeth of what can only be described as a real

howling blizzard and it took us three hours for the Zurich-­Prague leg

which is normally about 1¾  hours flying time. There is no GCA at

the Prague airport, and while I have lots of faith in Swissair I just do

not enjoy this roaming around in a snowstorm feeling for the airport

between the hills.

As you can see, I am writing this myself, so please excuse the ­typing.

We have heard nothing concerning Miss Howard’s arrival except for

the Department’s message to Canberra, but I very much hope that she

will show up next week. Fortunately both Dave and John type so that

between them they managed to turn out yesterday’s meeting.

Thanks very much for your helpful and I fear all too generous

letter of Feburary 13. Frankly, I am finding it increasingly difficult to

think up any new approaches, and I find it constitutionally repellent

to just say the same old things. Tactically I also think it is not good. As

you have also noted the less that is done the longer the meeting, and

these straight five hour sessions are really wearing. Yesterday, I tried to

keep it down to a reasonable length, and keep it to the point. There is a

great temptation to try to answer everything every time, but it seems to

me that it serves little purpose. At times I have feared I was somewhat

ahead of the Department, but was particularly glad to note that your

1619 fully confirmed the line I have been building toward and which I

fully developed yesterday.

I presume that everyone is very aware that we have now gone a

long ways towards agreeing to talk with them about “tension in the

Taiwan area” and much related thereto at such time as agreement may

be reached on a declaration. It will be very difficult later to say that we

cannot talk about it because it involves third parties. You will recall I

raised this in para 4 of my 1241 back in December. It worries me a great

deal as I just do not see what we say or do when, or perhaps, if we reach

that stage.

I was a little puzzled by your remark concerning the effect of any

renunciation of force on the offshore islands. I have always assumed

that when we said “Taiwan area” we were including the offshore

islands and I believe that Wang thinks we do. It never occurred to me

that we thought otherwise, and I do not believe I have ever given Wang

any grounds for any other interpretation.

As you can see from yesterday’s meeting I fear the “can of worms”

of Chinese prisoners in the U.S. is finally opening up. I sure hope you

have some good answers to suggest to me for the next meeting.

As a few minor matters. They are obviously keeping Wang very

well informed here, and he has often been ahead of me in such matters

as the details of the correspondence from the hospital concerning Liu

Yung-­ming, your conversations back there with the Indians etc. I cer­

tainly do not want to load the wires with any more telegraph traffic,

but I believe on some of these matters it would be better to give me

fairly complete summaries by telegram rather than rely on the pouch

which is again very slow. On Liu Yung-­Ming for example I had to build

much of my argument around inference and deduction, and at the pre­

ceding meeting he knew all about Robertson’s exchange with Mehta

when I had no information at the time of the meeting. Nothing serious

in the way of harm has happened thus far, but I would be in a much bet­

ter position in such exchanges if I was sure I knew everything there was

to be known on the subject, and there is always the chance I may some

day stub my toe very badly, if I do not have fully current information.

I have been thinking about the question of Stanley’s detail and

have discussed it with him also. First, he is entirely willing to do any­

thing the Department desires, although he is naturally loath to stay

here for a prolonged period separated from his family. Next, I would,

of course, be loath to lose him, but if I can be assured of keeping Dave

would be willing to make a change. Next, the Consulate here is very

hard pressed and I doubt very much they could spare a man for the

approximately two full days a week that he would be occupied with the

meetings. Stanley’s knowledge of Chinese is also a very valuable asset

and as an FSO he should get started in his career. All this brings me to

a thought I throw out for you to work on. Why not assign him here to

the Consulate over-­complement? This would mean that he could start

learning the consular ropes three days a week while working for me

two days a week. He could bring over his family. Whatever happens to

my talks there is likely to be some continuing contact here and it would

be very useful to have some one stationed here with his background

and knowledge of Chinese. It seems to me that it has much to recom­

mend it. He could take his FSI training whenever the situation here

permitted. I have not talked to Gowen about this.

Regards to all

Alex

P.S. Is there any basis for my theory that shift in Wang’s attitude

toward continuation of the meetings has resulted from something

passed from New Delhi to Peiping, and Nehru anticipating his talks with

the Secretary next month? That is, Nehru has told Peiping that if they do

not upset the applecart by breaking off these talks, he will bring pressure

on the Secretary when he sees him to agree to the Fomin meeting.

Geneva, February 21, 1956, noon

1526. From Johnson.

Following list four names handed me by Wang 37th meeting

[text not declassified]

Gowen

1663. For Johnson.

Guidance for February 24 meeting.

1. Continue to affirm established US position both on renunciation

force and implementation Agreed Announcement of September  10.

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger.

Further repetition is necessary in present situation and you need not

hesitate employ it. It is incumbent upon Chinese Communists to act

both on our draft proposal on renunciation of force and on implemen­

tation Agreed Announcement. In absence new move by Wang, we

must continue press our strong case for immediate affirmative action

by ­Chinese Communists in both fields.

2. Draw attention to frequent Communist statements last meeting

which dealt with substance disagreement between US and ­Communists

in Taiwan area, such as “US has used force against ­Taiwan and has

attacked China,” and Communists “have full right to expel present

occupation of Taiwan by US forces.” Point out all these are one-­sided

Communist contentions which demonstrably false and involve the very

points at issue between us. Problem at this stage is not to debate these

contentions, but simply for each side to declare that it will not use force

to impose its will.

3. Remind Communists that latest revision renunciation of

force declaration was presented by US in effort arrive at acceptable

formulation.

4. Remind Communists that we presented list detained Americans

at outset of talks and that thirteen these Americans still held in

­Communist jails, despite Communist pledge September 10 take appro­

priate measures so they could return expeditiously. We did not demand

or use any Chinese Communist list of Americans nor did we at any time

agree to provide any list Chinese in US. Such demands are beyond scope

Agreed Announcement. Latter provided that civilians both sides enti­

tled return and that individual who believed he was being obstructed

might appeal to representative of third power. US has scrupulously

carried out all its commitments contained in Agreed Announcement

including provision for wide publicity in US. No case of individual

claiming obstruction has been brought to US Government’s attention

by Indian Embassy or anyone else, despite publicity given Announce­

ment. Specific US obstruction alleged by Wang regarding only one of

thirty-­one Chinese named in recent Communist lists and information

given this case so meager that US government unable trace or identify.

Other names obviously supplied as part of propaganda effort to gloss

over Communist failure carry out their part Agreed Announcement

and to hide from world unpalatable fact that most Chinese in US do not

wish to return Communist China. (FYI Believe position outlined above

will be sufficient reply to Communist pressure for information regard­

ing Chinese in prisons and names Wang has submitted. No Chinese

alien in prison has applied for repatriation and we do not wish to open

up any hypothetical question in this regard. Discussion could preju­

dice release imprisoned Americans, even though latter held on political

rather than ordinary felony charges and their desire for repatriation not

disputed. END FYI)

5. Inform Communists US Government will inquire whether Liu

Yung-­ming hospital records available and supply if possible. Request

Communists supply similar records for Wilma Bradshaw and Dilmus

Kanady who both suffering from mental illness at time release.

6. This guidance not yet seen by Secretary who returns to ­Washington

22nd. In absence supplementary instructions on 23rd you may assume

his concurrence.

Hoover

Letter No. 23

Geneva, February 22, 1956

Dear Walter:

I tremendously appreciated your letter No. 31 transmitting various

documents which I have found most useful and helpful, and this letter

is primarily for the purpose of replying thereto.

I was greatly disappointed to receive a telegram from Bonn this

morning, saying that Miss King could not arrive here until next ­Monday,

so that means we will go through another meeting session without

a secretary. Miss Ferguson, who formerly worked for me and is now

Mr. Gowen’s secretary, has most generously volunteered to forego her

holiday today in order that I could get this reply off to you.

1. We all feel that Lindbeck’s Paper on Treatment of Imprisoned

­American Civilians is a most admirable piece of work. It strikes an excel­

lent note and, except for the last page where I have fairly substantial

suggestions for rewriting conclusions, we only have nit picks. For your

convenience in handling, I am enclosing a separate sheet giving our

suggestions and I am retaining here the copy of the Paper which you

transmitted to us.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

2. The DRF Intelligence Report on the Foreign Ministers’ Conference.

This is also an excellent piece of work and except for the following

I concur with it.

In the abstract and again on page 3 the paper gives the impression

that the United States supports the GRC “legal” closure of the main­

land ports. I had always understood, and Dave confirms that it was

also his understanding up to the time he left the Department, that we

had never taken a position in support of this port closure. In fact it is

my recollection that we protested it at the time it was imposed and I do

not recall that we have ever withdrawn our protest. In any event I feel

certain that Chou would never raise with us the question of GRC ter­

mination of this measure which he would regard as a “domestic”, that

is GRC-­PRC matter. He might raise the question of U.S. material aid to

the GRC in maintaining this policy and, thus, the U.S. “interference” in

a Chinese “domestic” matter.

With respect to the general thesis of Section IV, particularly the bot­

tom of page 7 and page 8, it seems to me most unlikely that the ­Chinese

Communists would attempt an invasion of Taiwan (as opposed to

the Offshore Islands) as a means of coercing the United States into a

­Foreign Ministers’ conference. If the Chicoms had reached the point of

being able to mount such an invasion, they would be shooting for the

complete elimination of the GRC and the possession of Taiwan. They

would certainly not be prepared to suspend any such invasion for a

Foreign Ministers’ conference or have any interest in such a conference

until the battle had been decided.

While not disagreeing with any of the listed motives under ­Section

III of the Chinese Communists pressing for a Foreign Ministers’ confer­

ence, it seems that this Section slights a very major element. One of the

reasons Chou made his bid for negotiations at Bandung was his appre­

ciation of the strong world and neutralist sentiment for peaceful nego­

tiations and the avoidance of war. On the positive side, the Chicoms

want to enlist this sentiment behind their claims and policies. On the

negative side, the Chicoms appreciate that it would be politically most

unwise for them to initiate military action, even against the Offshores,

without first having established the impression that they had exhausted

all avenues of peaceful negotiation. By pressing for a Foreign Ministers’

meeting they are able to capitalize on this sentiment whether or not we

agree to such a meeting. If we do not agree, they consider they will be

able to reinforce their pose of willingness to negotiate being rebuffed by

the United States. If we do agree to such a meeting and no “reduction of

tensions in the Taiwan area” is accomplished, they will similarly hope to

reinforce their pose of “reasonableness” being frustrated by U.S. “unrea­

sonableness”. In each of these situations they will hope to capitalize on

the almost general absence of international support for the GRC position

on the Offshore Islands and the deteriorating international position of

the GRC as the de jure government of China, further to isolate the United

States in its position with respect to the GRC.

3. Contingent Press Release in Event of Break-­Off. I think that the

Department’s statement is excellent and it well avoids the danger of

slamming doors and accentuating any crisis atmosphere that may be

created. I have no suggestions.

In this regard I am enclosing a copy of the contingent break-­off

statement which I drafted prior to the February 9 meeting on the basis

of the Department’s 1591. I am keeping this in the brief case for use,

if necessary, and would appreciate any comments or suggestions the

Department may have. Of course, both of these statements may require

some modification to fit them to the situation. As far as my statement

is concerned, for maximum effectiveness, it would have to be given out

as I left the meeting room and would have to appear largely extempora­

neous. In any event I suggest that you keep the text handy on meeting

days so that if a break does unexpectedly come, it can be used as a basis

for a telephone call from me letting you know exactly what I have said.

4. White Paper Summarizing Talks. Both Dave and I have carefully

gone over the Historical Division’s draft paper summarizing the talks

to date. Our intention was to transmit our detailed suggestions as with

Lindbeck’s paper. However, we both found that this was not practical

as, frankly, we feel the paper is in need of complete rewriting. I do not

feel that it effectively presents our case, and its shifting back and forth

between the chronological and subject approach can only leave the

reader very confused. I certainly would not want it to represent the offi­

cial summary of our talks. Dave is starting to work on an entirely new

draft which we will go over together and try to get to you as quickly as

possible.

I particularly appreciated the memorandum on the China portion

of the discussions with the British as well as Robertson’s conversa­

tion with Koo. I especially felt that Robertson’s comments to Koo on

­Chiang’s recent statements were very well taken and I was glad to see

this said.

I will, of course, be glad to go over to Paris if it is thought that it

would be useful and I would hope to hear one way or another as soon

as possible in order that I nay make my plans. I have made an engage­

ment in Prague for Sunday, March 4, which I would be loath to break

but could fit in almost any other time.

I should have previously called your attention to the “question”

Wang asked me at the last meeting (paragraph 11 mytel 1513). This is

the best and frankest thumbnail summary of their position that he has

given to date.

I expect to go back to Prague Saturday morning and return here

on Tuesday.

All the best to everyone.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Enclosure

Comments on Draft

Undated

“­AMERICAN CIVILIANS IMPRISONED BY CHINESE

­COMMUNISTS 1949–1956”

Page 1—Introduction

The following is suggested as possibly somewhat preferable

wording for paragraph 5: “The two purposes of this policy that have

emerged most clearly are: first, to utilize these defenseless Americans

as hostages to attempt to obtain political concessions from the United

States; and, secondly, to force these Americans to make spurious con­

fessions designed to discredit the United States.”

Omit “apparently on the contention that he was a prisoner of

war” in penultimate sentence of first full paragraph. I am not clear that

this was in fact Chicom’s contention and its inclusion tends to give an

impression of some justification for Buol’s detention when in fact there

was none.

Typographical error in footnote—should be spelled Shih instead

of Chih.

Delete “civilians” in last line of paragraph ending at top of page.

My talks at that time actually also dealt with military personnel.

Suggest that last sentence beginning at bottom of page would read

clearer if worded “They were, in other words, expected to build a case

against their own country out of their own lives and actions in support

of Communist charges, etc.”

Suggest second sentence, second paragraph, would be somewhat

strengthened by insertion “public” preceding “information on local

political and economic conditions, etc.”

Suggest last sentence, penultimate paragraph, be reworded so as to

make it clear it refers to rights of communication with U.K. Charge, etc.,

covered by Agreed Announcement and not right of release which is not

“trivial”. Suggest some wording along following lines: “Most of them

have even been denied the meager privilege of communicating with

the United Kingdom Charge at Peiping and receiving visits from him

pending their release as was provided for in the Communist pledge of

September 10, 1955.”

It seems to me we need to find some better conclusion than giving

currency to the ostensibly plausible Communist proposition that there

is a difference between those who have “committed offences against

the law and those who have abided by the law”. As it stands I do not

think that we make a convincing case for the valid conclusion of the

last paragraph. My suggestion would be something along the follow­

ing lines as a substitution for the last three paragraphs:

“This commitment clearly applies to all Americans, and partic­

ularly to those in prison. As the Chinese Communists had finally on

­September 6, 1955 agreed to grant exit permits to those Americans who,

although not in prison, had up to that time also been denied permis­

sion to leave the country, only the cases of Americans in prison were

under discussion at the time the Chinese Communists made this public

commitment. It will be noted that the Announcement states and it was

clearly understood that the Chinese Communists had committed them­

selves ‘further to adopt appropriate measures’ so that these remaining

imprisoned Americans could ‘expeditiously’ return.

“Nevertheless the pattern of continued Chinese Communist efforts

to use these innocent and unfortunate victims of Chinese Communist

‘justice’ for political purposes is clear. On the date of the Announcement,

September 10, 1955, and four days before making their demand for a

meeting with the Secretary of State, the Chinese ­Communists announced

the release of ten of these imprisoned ­Americans. On ­October 27, 1955, the

date of the opening of the 4-­Power Foreign ­Ministers’ meeting in Geneva,

and also the date the Chinese ­Communists embodied their demand for

a meeting with the Secretary of State in a formal document, the Chinese

Communists announced the release of two more imprisoned Ameri­

Foreign Ministers’ meeting, the release of three imprisoned ­Americans

was announced by Peiping. Since that time only one American,

Dr. Homer Bradshaw, has been released, it being clear even to Peiping

that in his case Mrs. Bradshaw would shortly pass away in China as a

result of the treatment she had received in prison unless Dr. Bradshaw,

who is a physician, could accompany her from the country.

“In the meanwhile the Chinese Communists have tried hard to

assert that the remaining thirteen Americans imprisoned, equally cov­

ered by their September 10 commitment, are somehow not entitled to

return because they have ‘committed offences against the law’, and, on

the other hand, to intimate that their return depends on ‘improvement

in relations’, that is, the granting to Communist China of political con­

cessions by the United States.

“Thus the Chinese Communist failure to honor its pledge of

­September 10, 1955 to release all imprisoned Americans, and its pattern

of action with regard to those prisoners who have been released, again

conclusively establish the continued efforts of Peiping to use innocent

Americans as political hostages and propaganda pawns.”

Enclosure

Draft Press Release

Undated

PRESS RELEASE

I regret to announce that Ambassador Wang has rebuffed my

efforts to continue to seek with him agreement on a declaration which

would renounce the threat or use of force generally and particularly in

the Taiwan area, and which would unqualifiedly provide that differ­

ences between the United States and Communist China be settled only

by peaceful means.

Ambassador Wang made it clear that his refusal further to meet

with me was based upon the Chinese Communists’ unwillingness to

drop the demand that the U.S. give up its right to self-­defense against

armed attack in the Taiwan area, and in fact concede to them the very

goals for which they would use armed force.

4Ambassador Wang also informed me of the Chinese Communists’

intent to denounce our Agreed Announcement of September 10 with

respect to the return of civilians. Such unilateral action cannot relieve

the Chinese Communists from the obligation which they assumed

in that Agreement expeditiously to release all detained Americans, and

the U.S. continues to expect them to fulfill that obligation and promptly

to release the thirteen Americans still detained in Communist Chinese

prisons.

Chinese in the United States continue to be entirely free to return

to mainland China and the U.S. offers no obstruction whatever to their

departure. The Indian Embassy in the U.S. has not brought to the atten­

tion of my Government any case of a Chinese who claims he is being

prevented from leaving, nor has Ambassador Wang here presented any

factual evidence of obstruction.

5In spite of the Chinese Communist commitment of September 10

last year expeditiously to release all detained Americans, thirteen

Americans still remain in Chinese Communist prisons. The US contin­

ues to expect the Chinese Communists to fulfill that commitment and

promptly release those unfortunate people.

I have informed Ambassador Wang that any further communica­

tions between the two sides can be transmitted through our respective

consular offices here in Geneva.

line carried implication they concerned our intent is to regard declaration

end in itself in maintaining status quo and relieving US any obligation

continue seek “relaxation tensions Taiwan area”.

I replied along lines our firm intent fully carry out all terms dec­

laration and that under last para draft did not exclude any “means”

but at same time entirely unwilling agree FonMin meeting only such

means. In any event such discussion was premature and CHICOM

attempt establish unacceptable condition precedent to declaration.

Did not meet my reiterated characterization self-­defense clause as

unilateral reservation by each right self-­defense along lines it took at

last meeting. He also refused my repeatedly proffered opportunities

deny their intent in demanding withdrawal self-­defense clause was

motivated by desire represent this as renunciation by US its position

with respect Taiwan, sticking to line this required them recognize our

position there. Characterized our insistence on self-­defense clause as

raising question whether U.S. really wanted any declaration. Some sug­

gestion they now unwilling include specific reference to Taiwan.

He led off on implementation with brief statement giving me three

more names and I replied with long statement along usual lines stress­

ing not single fact or solid evidence showing any Chinese obstructed

in departure from U.S. He again pushed prisoner question implying

knowledge “more than hundred” Chinese in U.S. prisons.

Next meeting Thursday March 1.

Departing for Prague Saturday morning, returning Tuesday.

Gowen

1554. From Johnson.

1. I opened 38 meeting with following prepared statement on

renunciation force:

A. Mr. Ambassador, we have now spent much time in discuss­

ing and attempting to arrive at an agreement to a declaration on the

Limit Distribution.

renunciation of force that would enable us to proceed to the next stage

of our talks in an atmosphere free from the threat of war. As I under­

stand the situation the only objection you have had to the draft we have

been discussing was to the clause relating to self-­defense. Your stated

objections to this clause have been based on the assertion that it prej­

udiced the views of your government with regard to the merits of our

dispute in the Taiwan area, requiring your government to recognize

the validity of the U.S. position there and thus preventing your gov­

ernment from peacefully maintaining and asserting its position in this

regard. If this were a fact your objections would certainly have validity

and I would be entirely prepared to recognize them.

B. However, as I have repeatedly pointed out, I have no such intent,

and the plain language of at least the English text has no such meaning

or connotation. I have repeatedly pointed out that all that the text says

is that in making this declaration each of us states that he is doing so

without prejudice to what each of us consider our inherent rights of

individual and collective self-­defense. As I pointed out at our last meet­

ing, this does not mean that your government is recognizing the merits

of any and all U.S. claims in this regard any more than my government

is recognizing the merits of any and all claims of your government in

this regard. I have tried to make this just as clear as I could and partic­

ularly at our last meeting explained it in very simple terms. Therefore,

if this was in fact the basis of the objection of your government to this

clause, I hope that it has reconsidered its position in the light of my

explanations.

C. I hope that it is not the intention of your government to demand

as prior or concomitant condition for the issuance of our declaration

that my government agree to a resolution on your terms of any of the

disputes between us. If this is not the intent of your government I see

no reason you cannot promptly agree to the text of the draft declaration

we have been discussing and pass on to the discussion of other matters

in accordance with the terms of reference for these talks and the text of

that declaration.

2. Wang, reading from his notes, said I had properly stated that we

indeed have spent so much time on discussion of declaration renounc­

ing use of force. It all the more unsatisfactory that in spending so much

time we have not yet been able reach agreement.

3. Chief reason for this delay has been fact that there still exists

difference of principle between two of us on this question. It now for

both us try overcome and resolve differences existing between us.

It also necessary for us to clarify some of points we encountering in

discussion such a declaration.

4. Wang, turning to prepared statement, said I had repeatedly

stated at last meeting that in making declaration it not the intention to

dispute or prejudice views of either side nor to abandon either’s posi­

tion in any our disputes. I had again made statement along that line to

effect declaration does not require any side to prejudice its position or

to give up its views in regard our disputes. At last meeting I had also

stated that my side already had accepted December 1 draft his side as

basis for discussion with only two small amendments.

5. Wang said however the two amendments suggested by me actu­

ally contained the entire demands of my side without any modification,

which requires his side to abandon its position and which my side had

insisted upon all along since beginning talks. As his side has long ago

categorically stated, that was what his side absolutely can never accept.

6. Wang said in first place, my January 12 draft requires his side to

recognize U.S. claim to right individual collective self-­defense in Taiwan

area. I had stated that U.S. is in Taiwan area purely for self-­defense and

that presence of U.S. forces on Taiwan allegedly was in accordance with

collective self-­defense arrangements. In other words, intention my side in

including self-­defense clause in draft was to require his side to recognize

validity of continued U.S. seizure Taiwan and to recognize ­U.S.-­Chiang

Kai-­shek treaty. How can this be explained as other than demand that

their side abandon its position on our dispute?

7. Wang said secondly, my draft announcement proposed and

he would quote “they will not resort to threat or use force in Taiwan

area or elsewhere”. That is attempt to confuse international dispute of

China and U.S. with a Chinese internal matter. As his side had long

pointed out, it was entirely matter China’s internal affair as to whatever

means China used to liberate Taiwan, a matter in which U.S. had no

right interfere. I had once and again indicated that declaration between

us should not involve any third parties, yet every draft announcement

put forward my side precisely tried involve internal matter of China

and Chiang Kai-­shek clique. How can this be explained as other than

demanding his side abandon its position?

8. Wang said his side held that purpose for making declaration

could only be one of giving expression to desire both sides for peaceful

settlement disputes of China and U.S., as well as to give expression to

determination both sides seek means realization this desire. It was pre­

cisely with this purpose that his side’s December 1 draft was presented.

It contained no prerequisites nor did it contain any points which might

not be acceptable. His side did not intend to make use of declaration to

accomplish any ulterior ends which cannot stand public scrutiny.

9. Wang said his side had proposed and will continue to stand

for holding Foreign Ministers’ conference between China and U.S. in

order to discuss and settle question of easing and eliminating ten­

sion Taiwan area, because this is practical and feasible means for

realization desire for peaceful settlement disputes between China and

U.S. in Taiwan area.

10. Wang said at last meeting he had asked me whether it intention

my side following making of our declaration to preserve status quo our

occupation Taiwan and our interference China’s internal affairs while

refusing a Foreign Ministers’ conference. He had not yet received clear­

cut reply this regard. His side considers this question very important to

present stage our talks. For if it should turn out that my intention was

indeed so, then his side sees no point in continuing these talks. If how­

ever this not my intention then my side has no justification whatsoever

to keep insisting his side abandon its position, thus preventing us from

making progress.

11. Wang, turning back to his notes, said in statement I had made

this morning I had stated that if their objections to self-­defense clause

were based on belief that this self-­defense clause prejudiced their posi­

tion and their views with respect to disputes and if this the fact, then

their objections could certainly have validity and I would be entirely

prepared recognize them. In other words, did I mean that in recog­

nizing validity their objections that I prepared withdraw self-­defense

clause from draft announcement?

12. I said his statement this morning here, including his question

which he had asked at last meeting and again repeated this morning,

seemed to me to be still confusing the situation. I had tried at previ­

ous meetings and had tried again this morning to keep very strictly to

immediate and first task in front of us. He had said I had not changed

my position with respect to our declaration. That was true, insofar as

principles which I had enunciated first here on October 8, were con­

cerned. That principle was sound and could not be changed. I had

thought and he had often stated here, that he had accepted that princi­

ple. That principle was that we each make clear that we renounced use

force to make policies of either prevail over other. I had characterized

that as an essential foundation and preliminary of success in discussion

other items.

13. I said we both recognized that area in which our policies con­

fronted each other most seriously was the Taiwan area. I had also

made it clear that the enunciation this principle did not mean either

us were giving up what we considered to be our legitimate rights self-­

defense. That is, if we were attacked we would defend ourselves. All

this comes down to simply saying in a clear and unequivocal form

that we were determined to use only peaceful means in settlement

our disputes.

14. I said recognizing that there was a difference between us

regarding character of dispute between us in Taiwan area, and recog­

nizing the interpretation placed by his government on character that

dispute, in order to leave no possibility doubt concerning that area, it

was considered essential that we both make clear that such declaration

would apply that area. As I had often pointed out, question is not one

of obtaining some form of words that would give impression of agree­

ment between us, but one of genuine understanding and agreement

between us.

15. I said his December 1 draft, the explanations with which he

accompanied it, and public statements issued by his government did

not make clear that there was full understanding between us that he

would not, by interpreting situation in Taiwan area in manner that he

did, subsequently allege that declaration did not apply there and that

he free use force. However the dispute there was characterized, a dec­

laration which did not clearly cover that situation was certainly of little

value. If we genuinely renounce force in settlement our disputes, that

renunciation certainly must cover the principal and most urgent dis­

pute between us. Saying that force would not be used certainly did

not require abandonment by either side its view regarding character

dispute.

16. I said he had said that purpose his draft December 1 was to

set forth desire both sides for peaceful settlement of disputes. Point I

been trying make was that there was vast difference between, on one

hand, setting forth pious hope for peaceful settlement and saying that

if settlement is not satisfactory force would be employed, and on other

hand unequivocally saying that force will not be used as means settle­

ment and only peaceful means will be used. Amendments which I had

suggested to his draft December 1, I believed, were essential to make

this clear.

17. I said he had again said this morning that intent my govern­

ment in including clause regarding self-­defense was to require his gov­

ernment recognize U.S. claims regard our dispute that area. He had

stated this in face my repeated and very categorical statements this not

our intent. I had stated this not only in meetings here, I had stated so in

my original statement this subject October 8, and I stated it very clearly

my draft November 10, which he had rejected.

18. I said question was who was to be master in this situation? Did

plain words have some hidden intent of their own? Were words to be

master in situation? Or did words simply say what we said that they

say?

19. I said I had said this morning that if his objections to words had

validity I would certainly be prepared recognize his objections. How­

ever I did not feel that his objections did have validity. I entirely failed

understand why his government insisted on putting this distorted

interpretation on these words, if in fact it the intent his government

unconditionally to renounce force in settlement our disputes.

20. I said question he had asked again this morning seemed to

me in effect to be whether, when we came to discussion other matters

between us, my government intended to capitulate to position his gov­

ernment with regard points in dispute between us. If I understood him

rightly, he saying that in effect there no point in continuing these talks

unless I would assure him here and now that when we came to discus­

sion these other matters I would entirely concede to his position. This

was hardly in the spirit of negotiation and seeking peaceful means for

settlement our disputes, seemed to me it came very close saying that

he not willing renounce use force in settlement our disputes unless he

first assured that other side would capitulate to his views in settlement

of dispute.

21. I said this was again jumping over question of our declaration

to question of merits of our disputes. As such I did not consider ques­

tion to be a proper one. If he had asked me the question in relation to

our declaration whether it my intent in issuance this declaration that he

abandon his views with regard status Taiwan, or respective merits our

positions with regard thereto, and his views with regard to meeting of

Foreign Ministers, my answer would have certainly been a categorical

“no.”

22. Wang said statements he had made this morning were

intended to clarify our respective points view on question issuance

declaration between us. As he had previously stated repeatedly, in

making such declaration it necessary both sides indicate willingness

make mutual concessions. As he had often pointed out, amendments

put forward my side to December 1 draft turned out to be merely fur­

ther persisting in my original point or without displaying any desire

make further progress our talks. Statement I had just made had con­

firmed that this one case—that is, amendments put forward by my

side did not indicate any modification principles my side put forward

and this showed U.S. side had not made any concessions with regard

to declaration. If one side should hold its own views while insisting

incessantly that other side should give way on own views, then no

agreement could possibly be reached between two sides.

23. Wang said he would point out particularly that it not true

as I alleged that his side had accepted what I termed principles my

­October 8 statement. Could there have been any occasion in which

it could be claimed his side had given recognition to U.S. right self-­

defense in Taiwan area? Was it not fact that point on self-­defense

clause in Taiwan area had always been point of controversy and point

of opposition in course talks?

24. Wang said from opening these discussions he repeatedly had

tried make clear that international disputes between two countries

China and U.S. must be separated from internal issues of China.

Was it not outright interference in internal affairs of sovereign country

in trying to make his side do something or to refrain from doing some­

thing in regard to Taiwan? Was it not fact his side had always resolutely

rejected such a proposition?

25. Wang said question we now discussing was question of mak­

ing declaration renouncing use force. In making such a declaration, we

should make clear that issuance such declaration and actual solution

of practical matters between two countries China and U.S. were two

separate matters. It did not seem to him practical for us to think that

issuance declaration itself resolved practical matters between us. He

believed I also in agreement with him this point. Such being case, we

should attempt resolve issues between us step by step.

26. Wang said such declaration between us must not contain any

prerequisites. Such declaration must not involve domestic matters

either side. And points set forth in such declaration must be such as

are acceptable both sides. If we had such a common understanding

then we would be able settle this question of issuance of declaration.

It especially important that we should recognize that issuance such a

declaration merely gave expression desire two of us to resolve disputes

between two countries in peaceful manner and declaration did not pre­

judge outcome of settlement of issues between our two countries or

how it finally would be accomplished.

27. Wang said if as I had said such declaration should include

the most important dispute between our two sides it would tend give

impression of confusing expression of the desire with the result of the

final settlement. If my point view adopted, it difficult avoid situation

in which one side would attempt make its policies prevail over that of

other or, in other words, impose its views on other. It did not seem to

him that if we put matter in this manner it would help bring us closer to

solution this matter. Therefore, as he had said, purpose in making such

declaration must be one of merely giving expression desire both sides

for peaceful settlement international disputes between China and U.S.

in Taiwan area. At same time, such declaration should give expression

determination of two sides to relax the crisis in Taiwan area.

28. Wang said I had categorically stated that it not intention my side

require them abandon their position regarding disputes Taiwan area, or

to give up their views respect respective merits positions both sides

thereto, and had categorically stated it not my intention demand they

give up or abandon their views regarding holding Foreign ­Ministers’

conference. By making such categorical statement, did I mean say I pre­

pared withdraw self-­defense clause from draft announcement? Could

this statement be interpreted as saying I would not require his side,

following issuance declaration, to prejudice their right of liberating

­Taiwan in exercise their sovereignty in this internal affair of China?

Could this statement be interpreted as agreement on my part to seek­

ing of what they termed practical and feasible means for settlement

of issues between our two states—that is, to seek holding of Foreign

Ministers’ conference?

29. I said first, if I understood him rightly, he had said if we were

to include in our declaration the most important matter between us it

would give impression of prejudging results any settlement. Should I

interpret that as meaning that he not willing make clear that our dec­

laration did cover the most important dispute between us—that is, the

dispute in Taiwan area?

30. I said next he said that our declaration should not involve

domestic matters. Of course we both recognized, I believed, that ques­

tion of whether our dispute in Taiwan area did involve a domestic mat­

ter from standpoint his government or an international matter did go to

very heart our dispute there.

31. I said I had told him that it not my intent to prejudice or pre­

judge his view regard that matter. However if it his intent that in this

declaration the U.S. recognize and accept his view of its being solely a

domestic matter, was that not again jumping ahead of ourselves and

asking U.S. to concede to his views on this matter at this stage?

32. I said with regard self-­defense clause, I had again pointed out

this morning that all it said was that, in making this declaration, each of

us was doing so without prejudice to what each us considers inherent

right self-­defense.

33. I said now for my own government to state that in context this

declaration did not, as I pointed out this morning, mean that he was

accepting merits any and all my claims in this regard any more than

it meant my government accepting merits any and all his claims that

regard. I thought that was keeping very strictly to principle of not pre­

judging merits of any our disputes in issuing this declaration.

34. I said however in light his statements here as well as public

statements made by his government I could only interpret his demand

for withdrawal that clause to mean recognition by U.S. that its claims

this regard in Taiwan area did not have merit. That was prejudging

question. It was something it obvious my government could not accept.

35. I said he had quoted me as saying that it not my intent require

him abandon his views with regard disputes in Taiwan area, regarding

holding of Foreign Ministers’ conference, et cetera. What I had said, and

I repeating, was that it not my intent in this declaration to require him

abandon his views or to prejudice them in any way in these regards.

36. I said it not my intent interpret declaration, or use it as pre­

text for interpreting it, that he had abandoned his views in any these

regards. I was sure that nobody would so interpret it. Declaration

would be interpreted by us, and I sure by world, to mean only exactly

what it said. And what it said did not prejudice his views. I therefore

still found it extremely difficult see why he not able agree to it unless

his intent was that U.S. in this declaration abandon its views.

37. Wang said first thing he would like say was that we still in stage

of discussing proposed declaration. Today he had made effort try make

clear purpose making such declaration, and that in making such dec­

laration does not mean that issuance declaration itself will resolve our

disputes, nor will issuance declaration itself constitute final settlement

disputes.

38. Wang said it might be recalled that joint communique between

our two governments on July 25 last year only set forth that we would

discuss such other matters at issue between two sides. It did not single

out exact matters to be discussed.

39. Wang said what we discussing today is question of making

declaration in view of existence of confrontation of policies two coun­

tries in Taiwan area. Dispute between us very grave indeed. This dis­

pute caused solely by U.S. occupation Taiwan. Problem we facing is to

indicate by what means this dispute might be resolved.

40. Wang said declaration we now discussing just such a decla­

ration in order to indicate desire of two sides for peaceful settlement

of disputes between two countries. Such desire very important thing.

Important though it is, yet it not final solution. With regard outcome

dispute, we had set forth in declaration determination of two sides to

strive seek means for realizing solution.

41. Wang said practical and feasible means they had in mind was

exactly meeting of Foreign Ministers U.S. and China.

42. Wang said he believed by separating these two matters, could

greatly facilitate carrying out of task before us.

43. Wang said international disputes between China, U.S. must

be separated from domestic issues between China and Chiang. These

two matters which distinctly different can be separated. Could it be

said that U.S. intends discuss China’s domestic affairs in talks between

China U.S? They had categorically stated in past and repeated over and

over again that they would resolutely oppose such proposition.

44. Wang said turning now to question of self-­defense, he had

stated that every country entitled to right self-­defense in accordance

with spirit of U.N. Charter. But he had also pointed out at same time

U.S. not justified in claiming right self-­defense in Taiwan area.

45. Wang said I had also stated in past that they did not object in

principle to right self-­defense. Should he interpret this as agreement on

my part, instead of this clause, to rewrite draft in accordance with U.N.

Charter in same manner as their first draft of October 27?

46. Wang said situation confronting us one in which U.S. force

already being used in Taiwan area. I had said that in making such dec­

laration it did not prejudice their views or require their side abandon

its views. However, by continued insistence my side on self-­defense

clause, was it not our intent to require them abandon their position

with regard dispute in Taiwan area?

47. I asked Wang to let me immediately answer his last question.

To let me say again what I had said over and over again, that it not our

intent require him abandon his position regarding merits our disputes

there.

48. I asked Wang let me turn question around and ask if it not his

intent in requiring abandonment this clause to obtain acknowledgment

from U.S. that it does not have right individual collective self-­defense

in Taiwan area, and thereby to accept in this declaration his one-­sided

contentions with regard our dispute there, which involve very points

at issue between us.

49. I said only other point I wanted make was that he had said this

declaration should indicate desire of two sides for peaceful settlement.

My contention from beginning had been and still continued to be that if

that desire honest and unequivocal it must go beyond that and say that

we determined settle disputes only (repeat only) by peaceful means. It

should not be possible for either of us by giving one interpretation or

another to situation with respect those disputes in fact to resort to force

to settle them.

50. I said I thoroughly agreed that this declaration was not the

final result. It in itself settled nothing, except that we determined our

disputes should not lead to war, and in that atmosphere to seek their

peaceful settlement. From very beginning I had characterized declara­

tion as preliminary to discussion our disputes.

51. I said as I had said at last meeting and again this morning, once

declaration issued, it was intent U.S. to carry it out in full and in good

faith. We said in declaration that we determined we will settle disputes

between us through peaceful means. We said that two of us should con­

tinue our talks to seek feasible and practical means for realization that

desire. Wang could be certain that U.S. would carry this out to full. He

could also be certain when U.S. said in declaration it would not resort

to threat use force in Taiwan area or elsewhere, it meant exactly what it

said and that we would not by some twisted interpretation of situation

attempt to get around it.

52. Wang said if there is willingness to make such declaration and

to indicate that neither side would be required abandon its position

then they failed see why U.S. would not withdraw its demand with

respect self-­defense clause.

53. Wang said I had indicated I accepted principle that declaration

should be one which acceptable both sides. How could I expect them to

accept clause in declaration which only in one-­sided interests of U.S.?

Did this continued insistence on unreasonable clause mean that U.S.

unwilling put out this declaration at all?

54. Wang said if in fact I had such a willingness make such declaration

giving expression to desire for peaceful settlement and giving expression

determination of two sides seek practical and feasible means for solution

tension in Taiwan area, (and by this last paragraph of draft they had in

mind holding of Foreign Ministers’ conference)—if I had this willingness,

did it mean also I had same willingness with regard to practical and feasi­

ble means specified in draft, as they understood it?

55. I replied I thought we again getting ahead selves. If he by his

question meant did I agree here and now before declaration issued that

only practical and feasible means for settlement disputes by peaceful

means was through Foreign Ministers meeting, my answer would have

to be no. When I said practical and feasible means I was not excluding

any means, nor was I agreeing that there only one means.

56. I said it seemed me at present stage question is fundamentally

different. Question was whether we really, honestly and uncondition­

ally in this declaration say we will use only peaceful means in settling

disputes and that we will not resort threat or use force and in that atmo­

sphere seek, as declaration says, practical feasible means realize that

desire. I had to confess I still not clear as to whether or not he really did

unconditionally renounce threat or use force in seeking this settlement.

57. I said as far as prejudicing his position concerned, he would

recall that back in my draft of November 10 it was my suggestion we

make specific and categorical statement to effect we not prejudicing

our positions. If this still genuinely his concern, I did not see why he

rejected that draft.

58. I said as I had said I still could only interpret his position as

demanding my government not only prejudice but in fact renounce its

position with respect our dispute. That still my interpretation.

59. Wang said my remarks did not seem to have given reply his

question. I had stated that he had asked me to agree before declaration

issued that only practical and feasible means was Foreign Ministers

conference, and I had said I would answer no. But he had not asked me

to say so before declaration issued. He was talking about what should

happen after declaration.

60. Wang asked if by replying no I meant that I was not agreeing that

holding of Foreign Ministers conference is practical and feasible means.

61. Wang said his next point was that I had asked whether in

making declaration it meant we would only use peaceful means settle

disputes between us. Text of his December 1 draft had given me very

precise and clear answer to this question.

62. Wang said I had stated I still not clear about his intent this

regard. In turn, he would like say he still not clear whether it intent U.S.

following issuance declaration continue its seizure Taiwan.

63. I replied it seemed me Wang still getting us down byroad of

­discussing what happens with regard settlement our disputes after

­declaration issued. I did not see that there would be much purpose in

repeating answers I had consistently given this regard. I wished we could

get agreement on declaration and then we could carry on in accord­ance

its specific terms. I had nothing more say on this this morning.

64. Wang said it was because he had some questions in doubt that

he had put them forward to me. Before these points made clear, issu­

ance declaration would be of no meaning.

65. Wang asked whether I meant, as I had just stated, I would not

agree to holding Foreign Ministers conference following declaration?

Did I have this in mind, or perhaps his understanding not correct.

66. I said if his questions were whether U.S. would, following

issuance declaration, concede to all his views, there could only be one

answer. I could only characterize this as most remarkable prerequisite

for issuance of declaration. I had said with regard to his specific question

on Foreign Ministers meeting that I did not exclude any feasible means

for realization our common desire for peaceful settlement our disputes,

nor did I agree that there only one means for realization this desire. I did

not and would not go beyond words of declaration itself, words which

he had suggested.

67. Wang asked if we then were agreed that we could accept this

draft they had proposed.

68. I said I had already accepted language of last paragraph their

draft.

69. Wang said by that paragraph they precisely had reference to

Foreign Ministers conference. Did I also accept that? Did I mean we had

same understanding with regard that paragraph?

70. I said I couldn’t see how I could go beyond what I had already

said. I fully understood that Wang had in past and probably would in

future contend that there should be Foreign Ministers meeting. I did

not see that anything he said in declaration prejudiced his position that

regard.

71. I said Wang perfectly aware of my position that I consider such

discussion premature at this time. I did not see that anything said in

declaration prejudiced position.

72. Wang said reason why he had forward that question was

because they considered declaration they discussing closely related to

practical and feasible means specified in declaration. They had never

said Foreign Ministers conference should take place before issuance

declaration nor had they contended that we should not discuss declara­

tion at this time but rather discuss Foreign Ministers conference at this

time. He had only said that issuance declaration should be connected

with holding Foreign Ministers conference. Only in this way could we

express desire stated in declaration and at same time have practical

means for peaceful solution our disputes.

73. Wang said of course at present stage most important question

is issuing of declaration. They had made perfectly clear their views this

regard. They had also pointed out what they considered unacceptable.

They would hope that I would reconsider this whole matter in light of

what Wang had said this morning and they would hope we would be

able get closer in this regard next meeting.

74. Wang said if I had nothing further this morning, he wanted

raise another matter. He wanted discuss with me question of Chinese

nationals in U.S. who desired return but being prevented. He recalled

that in previous meetings he handed me names 31 Chinese in this

category. Their attention again been called to fact there three more

Chinese this category who desire return but not able do so. He would

hand me list of names and other information. (Did so)

75. Wang said next thing was he would appreciate if I had anything

to say or any information give him regarding 31 whose names he gave

me and who desire return but unable do so, as well as situation those

Chinese who imprisoned by U.S.

76. Wang said with regard question of medical information about

disease of Liu Yung-­ming which he discussed with me last meeting, he

would appreciate it if I would kindly inform hospital send such mate­

rial to Chinese Red Cross in Peking.

77. I said let us be very clear about this matter. Neither in agreed

announcement nor elsewhere had U.S. accepted any responsibility for

investigating every individual Chinese in U.S. U.S. said it had not and

would not offer any obstruction to departure any Chinese from U.S.

to Wang’s country. Very simple, clear and definite procedures to which

Wang agreed had been set up to insure this was case. U.S. has fully

and faithfully carried out all its obligations under agreed announce­

ment. I had said over and over again no Chinese who desires return

Wang’s country being obstructed in his departure.

78. I said I had explained to Wang procedures for assuring that

this is case. If Chinese have not left U.S. for his country, it purely

because they do not desire do so. I could not accept any obligation to

poll or screen each Chinese to determine why he didn’t want return.

Neither would I be party to bringing any pressure on Chinese to do

so. He entirely free do whatever he wants. If he feels he in any way

obstructed from leaving he entirely free communicate with Indian

Embassy.

79. I said anybody who at all familiar with situation in U.S. knows

that there is such freedom of communication. There are no exceptions.

80. I said I had previously indicated and still would indicate to

Wang my willingness to take up here, if it not taken up through proper

channel of Indian Embassy in Washington cases of anybody who in

fact being obstructed. Almost without exception, cases that Wang had

brought up here appeared to be simply those of persons who had

not written home for some time or might have changed minds about

returning, if they ever had genuine desire return.

81. I said vague statements such as those contained in list Wang

had given me today, for example “continues desire come back but

unable do so due U.S. obstruction”, constitute not slightest shred of

evidence that there any obstruction departure.

82. I said it truly remarkable that if all those whose names Wang

given me desired come back and were in fact being obstructed, not

even one of them, or even a friend of any of them, had brought case to

attention Indian Embassy, or that, if Indian Embassy had thought there

any merit to their complaints, that it had not brought them to attention

my government.

83. I said I could only characterize all this as very transparent and

desperate attempt find some justification for not permitting return of

Americans still held by Wang’s government.

84. I said there nothing vague about desire these Americans return,

or about what is preventing them.

85. I said I had very deeply and sincerely hoped agreed announce­

ment would be carried out by his government. If it had been, it could

have contributed much to our relations. No matter how it regarded, by

no stretch of imagination could it be said that that agreement has been

carried out.

86. I said Wang would recall that when we were discussing this

matter he had said there would be no comparison between time it had

taken to return Americans let out earlier and time it would take to

return this group.

87. I said insofar as prisoners concerned, Wang had talked about

time required to review cases and other such matters. Apparently in

six weeks from beginning talks until announcement September 10, his

authorities able complete reviews and release 10 these people. Twenty

three weeks now passed today since we made that agreement and

Wang entered into that commitment. In those 23 weeks, six persons

been enabled to return. I thought facts spoke for selves.

88. I said I was, as I had promised at last meeting, looking into

availability hospital records on Liu Yung-­ming and would supply them

if possible. I had taken note and would transmit to my government

Wang’s request that they be transmitted to Red Cross in Peking. I pre­

sumed that no further address than that was needed.

89. Wang said that correct; only “Chinese Red Cross Society,

Peking.”

90. I said doctors who attending Mrs. Bradshaw and Kanady, who

both suffering mental illness at time departure Wang’s country would

appreciate receiving similar medical records with regard illness and

treatment. Records could be delivered here to me and I would see they

forwarded to proper people.

91. Wang said I had not yet given clear reply to questions he

put regarding Chinese whose departure prevented and with respect

­Chinese who imprisoned by U.S. He could not accept my explanations

and remarks regarding situation Chinese in U.S. as satisfactory.

92. Wang said they had not asked me make investigation of all

­Chinese in U.S. They had only raised question of those who have defi­

nite names and definite facts and where departure being prevented.

93. Wang said I claimed U.S. carrying out agreed announcement

and carrying out obligation under it. This only one aspect of question.

Other aspect this matter shown by measures taken by U.S. in forcing

Chinese obtain entry permits Taiwan and apply for permanent resi­

dence in U.S., and such other measures which prevent Chinese who

desire return from doing so. I had asked whether it intent their side for

U.S. exert pressure on Chinese force them return home. They not asking

that pressure be put on these people. Only asking that such pressures

which preventing them from leaving be removed.

94. Wang said my argument seemed to be stating that U.S. on one

hand granting Chinese freedom return while on other hand suppress­

ing freedom return and obstructing return.

95. Wang said I had made reference to communications with Indian

Embassy. He had made views this regard clear previously.

96. Wang said I had made remarks to effect PRC side trying use

as pretext bringing up of this question of Chinese who prevented from

returning, trying use that as pretext to prevent Americans from return­

ing. He considered that distortion of facts.

97. Wang asked if I viewed agreed announcement as agreement

solely relating to matter of Americans in China rather than agreement

on return of nationals of both countries.

98. Wang asked if agreed announcement intended require only

Chinese carry out agreement while US exempted from obligation of

carrying it out.

99. Wang said I had made comparison with respect time already

elapsed after issuance agreed announcement and stated that in 23 weeks

after issuance announcement only 6 Americans have returned. If we for

moment followed my logic, then it was fact that six persons had returned

to America after announcement issued. However, in 23 weeks after

issuance announcement, despite fact their side repeatedly brought up

question of imprisoned Chinese in US, their side still not been given any

information regarding these people.

100. Wang said to continue the comparison between Chinese and

thirteen Americans who now serving their prison terms, today their

attention been called to fact that up to now 34 Chinese who have defi­

nite names and surnames, who desire return still being prevented doing

so. And there additional 32 people who not been able return.

101. Wang said they had no information from me as to how many

Chinese imprisoned in US. They believed this not matter running to

few score, but probably running to over hundred. These people not

informed of agreed announcement. These people desired return but

being prevented from doing so. Yet Wang’s side not allowed even

to know about their situation. This contrasts sharply with attitude

of ­Chinese ­Government in supplying me with information respect

to Americans in Chinese prisons. Manner of carrying out agreed

announcement as between Chinese Government and US contrasts

sharply with each other.

102. I said all I could say was I still have to see single fact or evi­

dence that any Chinese in US been obstructed, prevented or hindered

in returning to Wang’s country if he desired return. That was all.

103. Wang said until all these people whose names he had given

me, and until Chinese in US prisons accounted for, and until they

actually able return, he could not consider US carrying out agreed

announcement. They could not consider valid contention that Chinese

free return. They still awaiting reply regarding these people.

104. Wang said, (consulting note passed him by Lai, who got infor­

mation from printed booklet entitled Mei-ch’iao Fen-­lei Ts’ai-­liao—

material on overseas Americans by category) regarding my request for

medical records on Bradshaw and Kanady, his information indicated

that they not been hospitalized in China, and as far as his information

concerned, Bradshaw been cared for by her friend Mrs. Laura Lau,

who American. He not sure if medical records available. Of course, he

would look into this matter and if they available, he would be glad

comply with my request.

105. I asked if it agreeable to Wang to meet next Thursday, March 1.

He agreed.

Note: I have no comments on today’s meeting beyond those con­

tained my preceding summary telegram.

Gowen

Letter No. 32

Washington, February 24, 1956

Dear Alex:

The guidance situation won’t be quite as bad here during the

month of March as you surmised it might be when you wrote your

letter of February 16. While the Secretary and Robertson will be away

most of the month, Phleger will be here. He is not making any part of

the trip to the Middle and Far East with the Secretary. Of course Bill

Sebald and I will be on the job here. The Department of course will con­

tinue to be the central clearing house for your instructions. However

it will be a good idea to keep both the Secretary and Robertson cur­

rently informed on any important developments. You should use your

judgment as to which messages you will repeat for the information of

the Secretary and Robertson. We will repeat the guidance telegram to

them, and any others which we feel they should know about. We will

also repeat as we consider necessary telegrams or extracts of telegrams

from you which you have not repeated. We understand that ordinarily

they will wire any comments they may have to the Department. If they

should wire you direct they will repeat the messages to the Depart­

ment. In this way we should have good coordination although at some

additional expense. You will of course not be necessary to repeat the

full reports of the meetings to either of the travelers. We will try to keep

the traffic on the Geneva talks at a minimum both for reasons of econ­

omy and because their time will be so fully occupied. The schedules of

both are enclosed.

2. We have had some tentative second thoughts on the subject

of  Chinese prisoners in U.S. jails. When the Secretary got back from

his vacation he expressed the thought that maybe we could get some

dividends out of offering to deport some Chinese dope traffickers and

murderers to Mainland China at Chinese Communist expense. It was

his thought that it would be good riddance, would impose a burden on

the Chinese Communists, take some wind out of their propaganda sails,

and maybe improve the prospects of our imprisoned citizens. Of course

it was understood that deportability under our laws would have to be

established first, and presumably the prisoners would have to express

a desire to return to the Mainland. We are making some very cautious

and tentative efforts to explore the situation further. We are asking

Official–Informal.

the Attorney General to use the resources of the Federal Bureau of

­Prisons and the Immigration and Naturalization Service to find out just

what aliens are in Federal and State penitentiaries, what their offenses

are, and the length of their terms. This is being done in a very discreet

way under an injunction of complete secrecy. There will be no consulta­

tion with the prisoners, at least at this stage. We are aware of the fact that

if the Communists got the names of Chinese aliens in prisons it would

be quite a windfall to them which they could exploit actively. Undoubt­

edly they are making great efforts to come up with the names of some

Chinese aliens in prison in this country. Unless we are able to establish

in advance that all could be paroled for deportation, it would probably

be better not to stir the waters on this at all. We have made no decision

beyond the very limited one to have this list compiled. We will decide

what if anything we do with the information after we have studied it.

If you have any thoughts on this, we would welcome them. We can not

be sure from your messages just how effective Wang’s complaints on

this subject have been. Enclosure No. 2 is a contingency statement we

have drafted for possible use in the event of a breakdown of the talks if

we decide not to do anything about Chinese imprisoned in this country,

and if the Chinese ­Communists try to make a major propaganda point

about it. Bear in mind that it is not yet certain we would take this public

position in any event. It is all tentative. Again we would like your reac­

tion to it. I consider the thesis somewhat vulnerable in some respects, in

view of our unqualified position on American prisoners, and our con­

tention that nothing in the oral give and take of the discussions affects

the literal wording of the Agreed Announcement. This statement was

drafted before the ­Secretary’s return, and our thinking on this subject

has changed somewhat since it was drafted.

3. We wired you yesterday about the formation of a Subcommittee

of the House Foreign Affairs Committee to investigate the mistreat­

ment of American civilians in Communist China. We gather that this

was done on fairly short notice and without any very definite ideas

as to what the scope of the investigation would be, or how it would

be conducted. So far the Subcommittee has only asked us for the

names of all American civilians imprisoned at any time by the ­Chinese

­Communists, and their present addresses. Apparently the thought

is to invite (not subpoena) a number of them to come to Washington

to testify before the Committee. We do not know whether public or

closed hearings are contemplated. We would guess that the former is

more likely. It would seem that there is no thought of censuring the

Department in connection with this investigation. The attitude is one

of cooperation. However we would be concerned if the investigation

should adversely affect the Geneva talks or the prospects of the impris­

oned Americans. If we should give them the Lindbeck study (which

is now undergoing a final revision), they might well publish it at any

time and we would lose control of the timing of the release. We would

like to have your assessment of the effects on your talks and American

prisoners of a well publicized Congressional Investigation, with sev­

eral victims telling their stories before the cameras and microphones.

4. We are not sure now that the proposed NATO briefing by Amb.

Perkins will come off. There is really not much that he could say beyond

what was contained in the January press release. There might be a feel­

ing of disappointment on the part of the NATO representatives and an

unfounded but nevertheless real suspicion that we were holding out on

them. So it might be counterproductive. At the moment Phleger and FE

are inclining to the view that it might be better to avoid the subject at

NATO until the Secretary gets there for the ­Ministerial Meeting in April.

But the subject is still under consideration.

The instructions for todays meeting were pretty stereotyped but it

seems necessary to play the same old record. We are devoting consid­

erable speculation to the reasons for the rather abrupt disappearance of

Wang’s impatience.

Good luck at today’s meeting and renewed congratulations on the

more than satisfactory way you are handling the rugged assignment.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Press Release No. 62 (Secretary’s schedule)

2. Mr. Robertson’s schedule

3. Draft Contingency Statement

1558. From Johnson.

Fol list names handed me by Wang 38th meeting February 24:

[text not declassified]

Gowen

1693. For Johnson.

Guidance for March 1 Meeting.

1. Implementation Agreed Announcement.

Lay particular stress on long time lapse since last ­American,

Dr. Bradshaw, released Dec. 20. Contrast this record of complete non-­

performance for over two months with steady flow of voluntary depar­

tures Chinese from this country to Mainland China. At least 114 such

since December 20. You should again draw attention to these sizeable

figures. Note that current Chinese Communist record on fulfillment

of its obligations under Agreed Announcement, far from improving,

is even worse than unsatisfactory standard established Autumn 1955.

Record can only be construed as evidence of Chinese Communists

contempt for their publicly pledged word and that they do not expect

achieve anything constructive on other topics. Wang must be aware

constructive achievement unlikely in atmosphere engendered by open

flouting of Chinese Communist undertaking.

2. FYI We are requesting on confidential basis solely for our own

guidance a survey by Attorney General of identity, status and eligibility

for voluntary deportation all alien Chinese prisoners in Federal and

State penitentiaries. Would like your own views as to whether Wang

has gotten or can be gotten into position where if we were to deport

such prisoners PRC would feel bound to release and deport US prison­

ers in China.

3. FYI We are telegraphing separately summary of conversation

with Indian Embassy officer in which he requested our assistance in

ascertaining current addresses of Chinese whose name submitted to you

by Wang. Indian Embassy wishes to mail copies Agreed ­Announcement

to all these individuals. END FYI

4. Renunciation of Force.

Adhere to and restate as necessary principles already fully enunci­

ated. You should again take no repeat no initiative to reposition either

of controversial clauses.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger in draft.

1694. For Johnson.

FYI Indian Embassy officer said February 28 that Embassy had

sent copies Agreed Announcement to some of individuals on lists given

you by Wang and asked whether Department could provide addresses

of remainder. He was told we felt adequate publicity had already been

given Agreed Announcement and did not consider it necessary send

copies to individuals named in these lists. We had told Wang in Geneva

we did not intend investigate names he gave us unless he showed these

persons obstructed from leaving. He had made such specific allegation

in only one case which we had investigated but had been unable locate

individual and had asked Wang for additional facts to enable us to

investigate further.

In response inquiry regarding publicity given Agreed ­Announcement

in prisons, Embassy officer was told we had investigated and satisfied

ourselves information about Agreed Announcement was available to

prisoners through newspaper and radio facilities provided in prisons.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by Clough.

Letter No. 24

Geneva, February 28, 1956

Dear Walter:

I have just come in from Prague this afternoon and have read your

very interesting and helpful letter No. 32.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

I have noted and will carry out your suggestions with regard to

keeping the Secretary and Robertson informed while they are on their

trip.

The following are my thoughts with regard to the subject of

­Chinese prisoners in the United States:

The quid pro quo for the release of the 13 are not Chinese in United

States prisons (they have no real interest other than propaganda in

them) but the agreed announcement of the Renunciation of Force and

the ­Foreign Ministers’ meeting. We would get a few more releases if

and when agreement is reached on the agreed announcement, partic­

ularly if we made some concession that would permit agreement to be

reached. We would then probably get the remainder of the 13 if and

when they saw agreement in sight on a Foreign Ministers’ meeting.

They would probably be willing to make some deal whereby announce­

ment of the completion of the release of the remainder of the 13 would

be made prior to the announcement of the Foreign Ministers’ meeting.

Do not misunderstand that I am necessarily advocating any of the

foregoing which is only what I consider a realistic and cold-­blooded

assessment of their position.

They have seized on the issue of Chinese in United States pris­

ons only as a convenient and somewhat telling counterattack against

our stress on the 13. They have been somewhat feeling their way and

are becoming increasingly convinced that they have an effective point.

However, for us now to come forward with some release of Chinese

in United States prisons would only serve to strengthen their point by

demonstrating that after all these months since the agreed announce­

ment the United States is belatedly and partially admitting to the

validity of their complaints and its failure “expeditiously” to carry

out the Agreement. I do not think that this would result in any addi­

tional release of Americans and would only serve to give Peiping an

additional propaganda weapon. Only a full and impartially confirmed

release of all Chinese in prison desiring to or willing to return when

they heard about this could serve to bring any real pressure to release

the remaining Americans. I frankly do not see how such an operation

would be practical, even if desirable, and there is no assurance that it

would result in the release of all Americans.

As you know, I was very doubtful of the wisdom after our

­September 10 announcement of belaboring the question of implemen­

tation the way we did. Not with any intent of recrimination and only

for the purpose of attempting to analyze the present situation, I feel that

the belaboring of implementation during that period caused them to

search frantically for a counter and finally strike on this issue of ­Chinese

prisoners. However, since we have reached the situation, I see little

choice but to continue to pursue our same tactics. However, we should

not be under any illusions that they will produce any significant release

of Americans, as they now feel that they have struck a sufficiently good

propaganda counterpressure on us with the issue of Chinese in United

States prisons. And they will continue to belabor that issue as long as

we belabor the 13. I think it possible that if I were to let up on the 13 he

might well let up on the Chinese in United States prisons, but I do not

know whether this would be a good idea at this time. It would only be

good in the sense that I have always thought that the more we make an

issue of the 13 the harder it becomes for them to release them, the more

they become convinced that our only interest in the talks is getting the

release of all the Americans, and the more valuable they estimate the 13

may be to them in extracting political concessions from us.

What worries me is the inevitable day he comes along with the

name of a Chinese in prison. I thoroughly agree with you that they

must be making every effort in this direction. A thorough search of their

files of United States newspapers should alone produce some names.

I frankly do not know what we do at that point except to do our best

to persuade the man that prison in the United States is preferable to

returning to Communist China and when we are sure that he will say

this, let the Indians see him and have him tell it to them.

I do not think much of the contingency press release upon prison­

ers but I am not holding up this letter to make a redraft. I will send my

ideas along as quickly as possible.

After seeing Lindbeck’s study and reconsidering the matter from

the standpoint of the situation at which we have now arrived, I am

inclined to think that its publication now could do little harm as far as its

effect on subsequent releases of the 13, and it might be a useful counter

to Chinese charges on Chinese in United States prisons. Its sober, care­

fully balanced tone eliminates some of the objections I previously had to

the publication of a White Paper on this subject and, in any event, I feel

the situation is somewhat changed. I, therefore, offer no objection to its

publication if the Department considers it would otherwise be a good

idea to put it out now. It occurs to me that it might also help in handling

the Foreign Affairs Sub-­committee hearings.

As far as those hearings are concerned, I can only say that I can­

not see how a publicized and inevitably sensationalized camera and

microphone show can help at this time in obtaining any releases of

any additional Americans, and I feel it may well hurt whatever slim

chances they may now have. I would, therefore, suggest from my

standpoint that the Department attempt to discourage this type of

hearing, using my views if you think it would be useful, but not take

any strong position of opposition. I do not think that the Department

should open itself to any possibility of charges that it is attempting to

suppress such information.

As of this writing, I have not received instructions for Thursday’s

meeting. I assume that you are working on them today and that they

will be in tomorrow morning.

Kind regards.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S.

Have received the instructions for the March 1 meeting this morn­

ing since writing the above. My views on Chinese prisoners asked for

in Para. 2 of the instructions are largely incorporated in this letter. How­

ever, I want to think about it some more and will reply by telegraph.

I am somewhat disturbed by the answer given the Indians in the

second sentence of your 1694, although I am not sure I would have

been able to suggest a good alternative. If we felt giving the Indians

the addresses would establish an undesirable precedent, I feel we

should have found some grounds for refusing other than we “did not

feel it necessary” to send copies to the individuals named. The Agreed

Announcement provides the Indian Embassy may also give publicity

thereto and I do not feel we should be in a position that could be inter­

preted as preventing them from doing something that comes within

the strict terms of the announcement and which they consider desir­

able. There is also the question of consistency with the position we have

taken with respect to O’Neill’s functions.

However, as a broader matter, I would be inclined to go a long way

in keeping the Indian Embassy completely satisfied and well informed.

We “invited” them to undertake their functions and our position is so

strong with regard to the freedom of the general run of Chinese in the

United States to depart if they desire to do so that we can well afford

to let the Indians fully satisfy themselves on this. They can be our most

useful ally in establishing the strength of our position and I feel we

should make every possible effort to cultivate their support. Nothing

could so effectively further spike the Communist charges as the Indians

sending the text of the announcement to some individuals and getting

back replies that they did not desire to leave. Let us hope they get such

replies in those cases where they have transmitted the announcement.

I wonder, for example, if it might be a good idea to read them

some of Wang’s milder charges. I know you have all of this very much

in mind, but I wanted to express my feeling that on the basis of what

I have seen of our exchanges with the Indian Embassy we could in some

cases with advantage to ourselves be somewhat more forthcoming than

it seems to me we have been.

UAJ

Washington, February 29, 1956

1695. For Johnson.

Communists returned to UNCMAC February 25 list of 2720 miss­

ing UNC personnel handed them by UNCMAC November 26. Notation

in Korean after each name indicates individual disposition. Notations

presently being translated and UNCMAC expects transmit Washington

with comments and analysis March 3.

FYI Message from CINCUNC indicates 1084 still carried on list as

“no data available”. We are not repeat not sanguine that any useful

new information provided, although can not be certain until translation

completed. END FYI

Dulles

­Priority. Drafted by Clough. The time of transmission is illegible.

Washington, February 29, 1956

1697. For Johnson.

Our 1693 first paragraph.

In citing arrivals Chinese in Communist China from US you may

make further itemization. Our records show minimum 67 arrivals

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy. The time of transmission is illegible.

1569. From Johnson.

Padmanabhan, recently arrived Indian rep here, whom I had not

previously met, paid “courtesy call” on me yesterday evening. During

course conversation he gave me understand he had been instructed

talk with me and report to New Delhi prior Secretarys arrival there.

Not clear how much was New Delhi’s initiative and how much

Krishna Menons.

I talked to him at length along lines Depts Jan 21 statement point­

ing out no change since that time. I strongly stressed CHICOM failure

carry out commitment release imprisoned Americans, influence this

having on American opinion and with increased passage time increas­

ingly serious effects. Faithful carrying out commitment immediately

following Sept 10 could have had very favorable effects, less favorable

now, and more time permitted pass less favorable any effects will be.

U.S. will not trade political concessions for release. CHICOM attempt

create smokescreen with unfounded charges concerning Chinese in

U.S. etc. Also explained issues on renunciation force stressing Wang’s

lack denial attempt obtain in declaration renunciation our position

with respect Taiwan, absence rigidity our approach exact wording

declaration but Wangs refusal reciprocate, my suspicion their exact

position etc.

He said Indians had expected prompt release all Americans fol­

lowing announcement and were at loss explain why it had not taken

place.

In reply his statement Krishna Menon had asked him tell me he

would be glad to see me any time I thought he could be helpful. I said

I would always be glad see Krishna Menon whenever he wanted

see me. I made it clear did not welcome Krishna Menons suggestion

­Padmanabhan have Wang and me to meal. However, I let him know

I had taken initiative in having Wang to meal shortly after opening

our talks.

Gowen

Distribution.

1571. From Johnson.

1. At three hour 25 min meeting this morning no progress what­

ever, even some retrogression Wang’s part.

2. Essence of his position this morning was if we insist on spe­

cific mention Taiwan in declaration must be coupled with agreement

on Foreign Ministers’ meeting as set forth their October 27 draft. If

we not willing now agree Foreign Ministers’ meeting only acceptable

form declaration is their December 1 draft. “Ambiguous” U.S. attitude

on Foreign Ministers’ conference and insistence on U.S. amendments

to December 1 draft show U.S. purpose is to “procrastinate” Foreign

Ministers’ conference in order maintain status quo “its seizure Taiwan

and interference in liberation offshore islands”. Four successive times

during meeting he carefully coupled “liberation” with offshore islands

and not with Taiwan as formerly.

3. U.S. insistence on both amendments to December 1 draft is for

purpose obstructing issuance declaration.

4. After my reiteration our position he said there was “no point

in continuing this sort of discussion” and that PRC was “considering”

issuance of public statement. I regretted and deplored their again going

to public as indication real lack desire on their part make progress and

asked for reconsideration, but expressed willingness let public judge

side preventing agreement on meaningful declaration. Could get no

indication when and where statement will be made but presume if

made will follow same pattern as previously that is, issuance by Peiping

with copies made available here.

5. Implementation took familiar lines with my including points

contained para 1 Deptel 1693.

6. Next meeting Thursday March 8.

7. Am going Prague tomorrow morning, returning here Tuesday.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

1572. From Johnson.

Re para 2 Deptel 1693. My answer to last sentence is negative. Believe

their principal interest in Chinese prisoners in U.S. is as counterweight

to our emphasis on their failure release 13. Their quid pro quo for 13

remains political concessions. Agreement on renunciation force declara­

tion would result some additional releases and assurance agreement on

FoMin conference would probably result in release remainder.

Deportation some rpt some Chinese prisoners after present lapse

of time since agreed announcement would only be used by them as

lending substance their charge we have heretofore been violating

agreement. If practicable deportation all rpt all Chinese prisoners able

and willing go confirmed by Indians would undoubtedly serve as

some pressure on PRC release additional Americans but doubt whether

actual result would be release of all.

Gowen

1574. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting.

1. Department will note from full record today’s meeting Wang

no longer making even any pretense of meeting or responding to my

arguments.

Distribution.

2. My analysis their actual present position is that they willing

“renounce force” with specific reference Taiwan if we agree Foreign

Ministers meeting but they would not consider any such renuncia­

tion valid beyond point Foreign Ministers had met and failed achieve

peaceful settlement on substantially their terms of “problem of reduc­

tion tensions Taiwan area.” It possible they would consider even such

a limited renunciation not applicable offshore islands. I do not consider

this necessarily implies any immediate intention attack offshores but

only that they not willing even in this limited sense bind themselves

with respect to them.

3. Foregoing is of course poles removed from our position on

renunciation of force and unless further outside influences are brought

to bear on them makes possibility of any agreement on declaration on

our terms very remote. Difficult to see how any further progress can be

achieved solely on basis discussion in meetings.

Gowen

1577. From Johnson.

1. In view Wang’s evident reluctance open, I opened 39th meet­

ing by saying that in thinking over our discussion at last meeting, it

seemed to me we were still tending to get away from principal and

immediate task before us, that is question of declaration. Details of

our respective substantive positions with regard our various disputes

seemed to be obscuring real object at this stage in our talks. To use a

vernacular English phrase, we seemed to be getting into position of

not seeing forest for trees.

A. I continued from prepared statement, what we ought to be try­

ing to do is to agree on declaration renouncing use of force. That is

where agreement is essential at this stage. It would be fine if would

agree on everything else too, but past weeks have shown that we have

difficulty enough without borrowing more. Can we not at this stage

Limit Distribution.

seek agreement where it is essential to task at hand and leave our other

differences for settlement when we reach that stage?

B. Here is an example of what I regard as an area where agreement

is essential at this stage. Purpose of proposed declaration is to facilitate

peaceful settlement of our disputes by first renouncing use of force in

regard to those disputes. Declaration can have this effect only if renun­

ciation of force is unconditionally binding with respect to all our dis­

putes. Neither of us should be able, following issuance of declaration,

to claim that peaceful settlement portion applies to a certain dispute

but renunciation of force portion does not apply to that same dispute.

C. I hope you follow me thus far. Unless words of our declaration

have this meaning for both of us, it seems to me that we can only talk

in circles.

D. However, with respect to this same part of declaration, there

is an area where disagreement at this stage is not only permissible but

inevitable. With respect to nature and origin of our disputes, you have

your views, and I have mine. You have your views as to what kind of

a settlement of each these disputes would acceptable. I have mine. Dif­

ferences as to merits of our respective views need not, however, prevent

our agreement as to unconditional and binding nature of our commit­

ment not to use force against one another in support of these views.

E. Similarly, with respect to last paragraph of my January 12 draft,

which is identical with that of your December 1 draft, there are both an

area where agreement is necessary and an area where disagreement at

this stage is permissible. We must be in agreement in our determination

without reservation to seek practical and feasible means of realizing

common desire set forth in preceding clauses. We must be in agreement

as to desirability of continuing these talks in search for such practical

and feasible means. However, we do not at this stage have to determine

just what the practical and feasible means are. Must we find what we

are going to seek before we begin our search?

F. Situation with respect to self-­defense clause is parallel. Should

both be able to agree that in conformity with UN Charter and with

international law, each of us is entitled to make clear in this declaration

that we are not renouncing our right of self-­defense. It is only essential

that we agree at this stage that neither of us is renouncing that right.

However, here too, as with other clauses, a distinction can be drawn

between area where agreement is necessary at this stage and area in

which some disagreement is not only permissible but inevitable.

G. You have your views as to places and circumstances in which

US would, in case of necessity exercise that right. I have my views,

which differ from yours, regarding places and circumstances in which

your country has claimed exercise of that right. To attempt at this stage

to iron out all such differences, past, present, and future, actual and

potential, would be futile and can only have purpose if intent is to block

rather than reach agreement on our declaration.

H. I have outlined my views point by point and in concrete fash­

ion, concerning areas in which I consider agreement is essential to reach

an understanding in our declaration. If you are in agreement with me

on these points, let us proceed with issuance of declaration. If we are in

agreement in these essential areas, may we not leave our disagreements

in other areas to be ironed out in later stage of seeking practical and

feasible means for settlement of our disputes?

2. Wang said, reading from notes, I recall it is 20th meeting today

since we started our discussion on issuance of a declaration. We had

hoped it would be possible for us to reach an agreement on this question.

3. Wang said, such an agreement as I have previously pointed

out, must not be taken as capable of resolving all questions between

us. Such an agreement would only indicate a common desire of US to

settle issues between us. Such a desire should be one that is acceptable

to either of us. How can we be expected reach an agreement if one side

tries to impose its views on other?

4. Wang said, at last meeting he said to me that he hoped I would

be able to put forth further concrete opinions at this meeting. However

after listening carefully to statements made at this meeting he found we

still remain in same place as we found selves previously. We have now

spent so much time discussing declaration renouncing use of force that

respective positions and views of our two sides have now become quite

clear. He didn’t see any point in letting conferences proceed in this man­

ner. It seemed to him that we turning in circles and always finding our­

selves in same place in discussion of such a declaration. Such manner of

discussion is not what they originally expected it to be. Wang said I said

this morning we should not turn round in circles in discussion. He is

willing to explore ground with me in all frankness to see if there is any

hope reach agreement in this respect.

5. Wang turned to prepared statement and said he would like to

point out once again that clause on self-­defense right advanced by my

side in draft declaration was absolutely unacceptable to their side.

For, as his side repeatedly explained, it was intent my side by self-­

defense clause to get them into recognizing in effect status quo US sei­

zure ­Taiwan and US interference in China’s internal affairs in offshore

islands. Statements I had made at last few meetings indicated that

my side itself has been aware that self-­defense clause can be removed

from declaration. Therefore, no point arguing. Should my side insist

on self-­defense clause his side can only come to conclusion that my

side not desiring reach agreement.

6. Wang said, as regards my other amendment to his Dec 1 draft,

“they will not resort to force in Taiwan area or elsewhere”, his side has

pointed out that this is attempt to confuse international issue between

US and China in Taiwan area with internal affair of China in exercising

right of sovereignty over Taiwan and offshore islands.

7. Wang said I stated at last meeting that US did not acknowl­

edge exercise by China of sovereignty rights over Taiwan and off­

shore islands as internal matter of China. This has all more exposed

my attempt confuse international dispute with China’s internal affairs.

Thus, if declaration were to include ambiguous terms of my amend­

ments, even if self-­defense clause were removed from declaration, US

could still accomplish its ends of seizure of Taiwan and its interference

in liberation of offshore islands.

8. Wang said, furthermore in light of ambiguous attitude which my

side has so far taken regarding holding of Sino-­US FonMin conferences,

it threw more light on my attempt calculated at obtaining by trickery a

vague declaration which would enable US to interpret China’s internal

matter as allegedly being covered by scope of Sino-­US declaration and

thus justifying continued seizure and obstruction of China’s exercise of

sovereign right of Taiwan and offshore islands while on other hand US

would procrastinate over a long period and refuse hold FonMin confer­

ence in order maintain status quo US seizure Taiwan and interference

liberation offshore islands. He must say frankly that his side has seen

through such design and his side would not be easily duped.

9. Wang said his side must restate: that China’s exercise sover­

eignty over Taiwan and offshore islands, which is internal matter, and

international dispute between China and US in Taiwan area must be

separated. It entirely matter China sovereign right and internal matter

as to whatever means will be used for liberation Taiwan and offshore

islands and US has no right whatsoever interfere. His side would never

permit to see China’s internal affairs involved in Sino-­American decla­

ration or to make it subject of negotiations with US.

10. Wang said as regards international dispute between US and

China, issuance Sino-­American declaration is only first step towards

settlement and earnest efforts must be made to seek practical and fea­

sible means to achieve final settlement. His side considers FonMin

conference is exactly such practical and feasible means. In view fact,

that US has already resorted use of force and threat in Taiwan area, if

after issuance declaration US fails take actual action to give evidence of

desire expressed in declaration, then declaration itself would become

scrap of paper.

11. Wang said I had said at last meeting that Dec 1 draft of his

side did not cover Taiwan area. He would like remind me that during

April 1954 when Chou En-­lai at Bandung made proposal that China

and US enter negotiations, he specifically stated that purpose was to

settle through negotiations question of easing and eliminating tensions

in Taiwan area. In first draft which he had put forward Oct 27, it also

clearly provided that China and US should hold FonMin conference to

settle through negotiation question of relaxation and eliminating ten­

sions in Taiwan area.

12. Wang said it could thus be seen that his side was not evading

disputes between it and US in Taiwan area though disputes addition­

ally included Korean question, implementation of Geneva agreement

on Indochina and especially South Vietnam, and US creation of Manila

Treaty which aimed against China, and such other questions. However,

it was obvious dispute between China and US in Taiwan area is main

issue of all. That dispute arose solely as result US occupation Taiwan

and interference liberation offshore islands.

13. Wang said his side held that FonMin conference between

China and US must be held to settle this grave dispute. His draft of

Oct 27 specifically provided for this last point. It merely because my

side only willing make declaration of principle and would not agree

to declarations specifically mentioning Sino-­American conference of

­FonMin. Thus his Dec 1 draft did not concretely mention Sino-­US dis­

pute in ­Taiwan area. However, just in same way as my side asserted

that practical and feasible means did not exclude Sino-­American dis­

putes in Taiwan area. If my side desired dispute Taiwan area be specif­

ically mentioned, then my side must agree to declarations specifically

mentioning FonMin conference, without which his side would be left

with no assurance whatsoever.

14. Wang said question now before us quite clear and simple: if it

desired that declaration mention specifically holding FonMin confer­

ence as well as dispute in Taiwan area, their Oct 27 draft is there. If how­

ever it not desirous to mention FonMin conference and Sino-­American

dispute in Taiwan area, but that concrete problems mentioned above

should be left as next step, then their Dec 1 draft stands. As to which of

two drafts will be adopted, they not insistent. I might make my choice

between either of two. He only wanted state here that in neither these

two drafts did his side demand prior commitments nor that I accept his

position. This fair and equitable. That was precisely fundamental dis­

tinction between his drafts and mine. If my side still desirous of mak­

ing renunciation of force declaration, he saw no possibility outside two

drafts which his side had presented.

15. Wang said in interest of arriving at agrement without further

delay he had exhausted all clear words available in stating his views

and he hoped my side would make careful consideration.

16. I said in early part his statement I thought he struck at heart

of one of differences and apparent lack of understanding between us.

He referred to this declaration, which we discussed, as only indicating

common desire to settle issues between us. Later on he had referred to

declaration as a renunciation of force in settlement of dispute between

us. It seemed that he had tended to approach matter from former

standpoint.

17. I said I thought therefore that part of our problem was whether

this declaration was to be only pious repetition of desire to settle dis­

putes or whether it was to genuine renunciation of appeal to force to

settle our disputes and then in that atmosphere to seek means peace­

fully to settle them—this was heart of differences in approach between

us. As I had said this morning, question seemed to be whether we were

in this declaration unconditionally renouncing appeal to force with

regard to all our disputes or whether we only piously saying that we

desire to settle disputes peacefully but that renunciation of force applies

only to some of them.

18. I said statement he had made this morning with regard to inclu­

sion of specific reference to Taiwan in our declaration, seemed to me to

bear out this view of mine. I must say that I find myself entirely unable

to follow logic his position this regard.

19. I said what it seemed to me he had said was that he was willing

make specific mention Taiwan only in context of FonMin conference.

That is, he was willing make statement expressing hope for peaceful

settlement of dispute between us in Taiwan area if US agreed in advance

that only means of discussing such settlement was FonMin conference.

20. I said on other hand his position seemed to come down to an

unwillingness to make clear that renunciation of force also applied our

dispute in Taiwan area. It seemed me he suggesting that, however our

dispute in Taiwan area might be characterized, they were free to use

force in that area.

21. I said it hard for me believe he could seriously consider that

it would contribute to peaceful discussion and settlement of our dis­

putes if they were to resort to war in very area where he himself agreed

our policies were in greatest conflict. He himself had said this morning

that our principal dispute lay in Taiwan area. He had said this morn­

ing that his Dec 1 draft specifically covered Taiwan area. If this case, it

entirely incomprehensible to me why he unwilling accept mention of

Taiwan area in form suggested in my Jan 12 amendment if he were in

fact willing renounce force in settlement our dispute in that area and

seek peaceful means for its solution.

22. I said he had again repeated this morning that he found clause

on self-­defense as suggested my Jan 12 amendment as absolutely unac­

ceptable on grounds it was intention my side by that clause to obtain

recognition by his side of US position with regard that area. It hard for

me to recall number of times I had here said that there was no such

intent and that this did not require him to recognize any particular state

of affairs contrary to his views, any more than it requires US to recognize

any particular state of affairs contrary its views. I could assure him US

was not submitting to his government for its approval or ratification

any of our treaties or agreements with other countries.

23. I said in its proper relationship to other parts of declaration,

self-­defense clause only stated fact that if one side violated declaration

by using force other side would not have renounced what it considered

its legitimate right to self-­defense.

24. I said opposition to self-­defense clause could be based on only

two possible grounds. That is, that intent of one side in issuing this

declaration is not consistent with exercise of self-­defense in case of

necessity by other side. Only other alternative was that one side was

attempting to get other side to renounce its views with regard to char­

acter our dispute in Taiwan area. This I wanted make clear was abso­

lutely unacceptable my government.

25. I said however I continued my willingness to strive reach with

him agreement upon this tremendously important subject. I felt way to

reaching agreement was not giving of what were in fact ultimata, or of

take it or leave it positions, but to continue to strive to see whether or

not agreement could be reached.

26. I said it was in this sense that I had made my opening statement

this morning. I had tried very hard in it to avoid introducing extrane­

ous issues not germane to our immediate task. It was utter nonsense

to say that because US not willing in this declaration unilaterally to

renounce its views with respect Taiwan area and concede to his views,

that it did not desire declaration.

27. I said he had spoken this morning of ambiguous terms of our

Jan 12 draft. It seemed me that shoe was on other foot. His objections

to that draft appeared be based precisely upon grounds that it removed

ambiguities of his Dec 1 draft. If declaration was to have any real mean­

ing rather than just appearance of agreement where no agreement

existed, those ambiguities must be clarified in his Dec 1 draft. I had

indicated essential points upon which we considered ambiguities must

be removed.

28. I said I had indicated way, in the declaration, that I felt those

thoughts might be expressed. I still thought that language which I had

suggested was best way of doing it, and if there was genuine agreement

on these essentials, there should be no objection to that language. How­

ever, I have never put this forward on any ultimatum or take it or leave

it basis. I had repeatedly indicated that if he had any thoughts on how it

could be better expressed I was willing listen his suggestions and give

them careful consideration. It not possible for me see how I could be

any more reasonable than that.

29. Wang said in his opening statement this morning he had again

made attempt frankly express thoughts his side in order explain more

fully their views regarding declaration. He failed see any portion my

long argument I had just made which could contribute progress our

discussions.

30. Wang said I had stated that he had first made proposal that

declaration we were discussing should simply express desire for peace­

ful settlement, and then that he had referred to declaration as renun­

ciation of force declaration. He did not think that there were any two

declarations that he had been referring to, and there were no points

of contradiction in his statement. When he said declaration should

express desire for peaceful settlement, he did not mean desire that two

sides should go to war to effect settlement. Instead it was declaration

of desire for peaceful settlement and they regarded declaration we dis­

cussing as something which would help peaceful settlement disputes

between us and they regarded declaration as first step toward such a

settlement. He recalled that I had also said in previous meetings that

declaration in itself settled nothing.

31. Wang said I had also repeatedly referred to his opinion that

issuance of declaration must be separated from actual settlement of

practical issues between us. These were two separate things. However,

views advanced by me at previous meeting and again this morning

tend to confuse these two things.

32. Wang said text their December 1 draft was quite clear and

no distortion any portion it was possible. He would read portion of

December 1 draft. It stated: “PRC and USA determined they should

settle disputes between their two countries through peaceful negotia­

tions without resorting to threat or use of force.” Let him also read last

paragraph their October 27 draft: “In order realize their common desire

PRC and USA decide to hold a conference of Foreign Ministers to settle

through negotiations question relaxing and eliminating tension Taiwan

area.”

33. Wang said thus texts these two drafts have clearly expressed

desire for settlement disputes between two sides. Also give expres­

sion to our determination to seek practical and feasible means settle­

ment our disputes. How can it be said that such views as expressed in

these drafts had any disadvantageous effect against U.S.? Could there

be found anything in these drafts which tended to require that U.S.

abandon its view.

34. Wang said however U.S. did not accept even these drafts and

instead U.S. alleged groundlessly that his side insisted on using force

to settle disputes. Was not that utter nonsense? First I had referred to

position of U.S. as one of absolute unwillingness to accept views stated

above. However I had followed up that statement by saying I willing

strive for agreement. Was not that self-­contradictory statement?

35. Wang said he had repeated many times that unjustifiable

amendments of U.S. regarding his December 1 draft were absolutely

unacceptable his side. These were unacceptable precisely because of

U.S. attempts to use these amendments to interfere in China’s internal

affairs and exercise of its sovereign rights. Must China ask for approval

and ratification by any other government of its actions taken in order

to exercise its sovereign right in liberation of its own territory? Was not

this again utter nonsense? Therefore views of both sides on this issue

were quite clear.

36. Wang said they had made repeated efforts on this question of

issuance of declaration. They had no intention in this declaration to

impose their views on U.S. They considered their views to be accept­

able to both sides.

37. Wang said these views were intended to facilitate issuance of

declaration. However U.S. is doing to contrary, it had all along been

insisting on these unreasonable clauses. U.S. had been insisting on its

unreasonable stand for considerable period of time. I, on behalf of U.S.,

had stated that these reasonable suggestions of his side were unac­

ceptable to U.S. How could we expect to arrive at agreement in this

situation?

38. Wang said after such a long time of discussion if I and my side

still so adamant its position, how could one not arrive at conclusion

that U.S. not willing agree on declaration and was obstructing issuance

of such declaration? He saw no point continuing this sort of discussion.

39. Wang said if we still unable to make declaration at present time

responsibility did not lie on his side. In view fact we not been able to

arrive at agreement for such long time his side considering to make

public views of his side on this question, so that public might be able

make own judgment.

40. I said I would like try to get down to some fundamentals with

him. I had tried in my opening statement this morning but did not seem

successful in doing so.

41. I said he had again in his last statement spoken of this declara­

tion as “help” in settlement our disputes. He had also spoken of it as

first step toward settlement our disputes. As he knew I entirely agreed

with him on latter part—it is only first step and I had always so char­

acterized it.

42. I said however question still seemed to exist between us, as to

what this step consisted of. I considered this step to be unconditional

and unequivocable statement that we will not in any manner or under

any pretext initiate hostilities against each other in attempt to settle

these disputes. I would like to ask clear question as to whether he so

considered it.

43. I said having said that and in conjunction with that, we each

say we will settle disputes through peaceful means. One without other

did not give real meaning to our expression of desire to settle disputes

by peaceful means.

44. I said having said that, how could he say that it was unrea­

sonable on my part to suggest that we say that both of these aspects

apply to dispute that we both agree is most serious between us? How

could he say that it was unreasonable for each of us in stating that, that

if either is attacked in violation this declaration or by others we will

defend ourselves? Objection to either of these simple and fundamental

principles I found hard to interpret as other than desire avoid issuing of

meaningful declaration that would genuinely be real first step toward

settlement our differences.

45. I said if he thought that this position on his part would appear

reasonable to public, it certainly his choice as to whether or not he

desired again to initiate public exchanges between us. I reiterated view

that I had expressed previously that I genuinely did not see how such

public exchanges advanced agreement between us or could be recon­

ciled with real desire for agreement. I therefore regretted and deplored

issuance of a public statement by his side and hoped that they would

reconsider it.

46. I said however if it was their decision to issue such statement

I was perfectly willing that public judge as to which of us was genu­

inely willing to renounce force and willing to seek peaceful settlement.

I entirely willing let public judge which side was in fact obstructing

issuance of meaningful statement between us.

47. Wang said he felt all these points I just raised had been con­

cretely answered by December 1 draft their side. They had given much

discussion to these points in our previous meetings. Therefore he did

not think it necessary for him to repeat all views he had advanced

previously.

48. Wang said their intent and attitude is quite clear and definite.

They had accepted proposal I had put forward to effect that we make

declaration between us as first step in actual settlement. This first step,

as we have characterized it, is expression of determination of two sides

to settle disputes peacefully without resort to force. And merits of

­practical disputes might be left for settlement at next step. There was

nothing ambiguous in it and there was nothing hidden which could not

be brought out for public scrutiny.

49. Wang said I had questioned public airing of discussion and

I had termed it as not advancing our talks. However if discussion was

to go on in same manner as we were, how could anyone expect to make

any advances in talks? They believe public would be able make fair

judgment between positions of two sides. He had nothing further and

if I had nothing further he had another matter to bring up.

50. Wang said their attention had again been called to fact that

Chinese nationals being prevented from returning. At last meeting

aggregate number Chinese nationals being prevented returning was

34 persons. Today he would like to raise cases three more persons.

51. Wang said case of Mr. Tan Wen, which he would later present to

me, could serve as example to illustrate Chinese in U.S. Mr. Tan applied

permission to return ever since 1950 but U.S. had refused permission.

In August 1955, that is when our talks got underway, Tan again applied

return and wrote his family after application that he expected permis­

sion to be granted end last year. However, wrote again last January that

unable return in February and had to wait another two months. Mr. Tan

said in letter that he was among first to apply to return and also handed

in his applications most frequently, however he was unable to return

up to present time. This specific case of Mr. Tan has increased their con­

cern over Chinese in U.S. who find selves in same situation.

52. Wang said during talks I had repeatedly assured him that ­Chinese

in U.S. free to return and that U.S. was not offering obstructions to their

departure and that no procedures of whatever sort have been set up to

prevent their departure. However case of Tan Wen and latest facts about

his failure to return had revealed situation that U.S. was not consistent in

its actions and its words. From treatment of Tan, how could it be said that

U.S. was carrying out its obligations under agreement?

53. Wang said it was clearly stated in agreement that parties to

agreement would facilitate return of nationals and that no obstructions

should be offered to their departure. Mr. Tan never violated any law

of U.S. and what was reason he encountering repeated obstructions

against his return?

54. Wang said in addition to case of Tan, and they had raised many

similar cases recently, it was evident Chinese still encounter obstruction

in their return. This situation necessitated that I give accounting in each

these individual cases.

55. Wang said in addition to this category he had raised repeat­

edly question of Chinese who were in prison in U.S. and they were

still awaiting reply from my side. (Handed over list, given in following

telegram).

56. I said he seemed to have considerable detailed information on

Mr. Tan. Wang’s statement here said that Tan again put in application

in August 1955 and expected receive permission return at end of year.

I would like to ask for details from his correspondence with Wang—to

whom did he make application? I would also like ask what his cor­

respondence indicated he applied for—that is, he applied for what? I

would also like ask whether Wang’s correspondence with him indi­

cated whether Tan communicated with Indian Embassy and if not, why

not, if he felt he being obstructed in leaving?

57. Wang said it was stated clearly in list that Tan had applied

with INS. From statement in his letters, could be seen that Tan made

repeated applications and had not given up hope. He first indicated

that he expected permission would be granted by end last year, but

wrote again he expected permission in February and then his depar­

ture further delayed by two months. Although he still hopeful that he

will one day be granted permission to return, he has been delayed so

long. This is situation, so far as they knew, regarding Tan to which their

attention has been called. It precisely because they cannot understand

nature obstruction against his return that Wang has requested me make

inquiry.

58. I said I was trying to get some facts on this, these statements

that he gave me here were utterly inexplicable. He does not need apply

to anybody for return, I had said that over and over again, neither he

nor any other alien in U.S. Wang did not have to accept my word on

that. Indian Embassy or anyone familiar with U.S. could confirm it.

59. Wang said this was not individual case of Tan. Tan was only

one example. I had requested facts about Tan. If I required any facts

about Americans in China then they had these facts. But Tan was now

in U.S. and how could they give me facts about his being obstructed?

60. Wang said I had stated that it not necessary for Tan apply

INS, however as he had told me Tan precisely refused permission

by INS. If I myself unaware this situation, how could I expect him to

understand it.

61. I said U.S. INS does not deny or grant permission any alien

leave U.S. He was one who was alleging this not correct and that Tan

being obstructed. I was asking for some facts—he evidently had close

communication with Tan—on how he being obstructed. Statements

made here made no sense whatsoever in light of what everybody

knows about departure aliens from U.S. This was similar to allegations

made in many these other cases.

62. I said I could not consider it as slightest evidence U.S. was

obstructing departure any of these. Because I knew facts quite to con­

trary. I also asked why, if Tan did think he being obstructed, he had not

communicated with Indian Embassy in accordance with procedures we

had established. If he communicated with Wang and Wang’s author­

ities, it clear he able freely communicate with Indian Embassy if he

desired do so.

63. Wang said he wanted clarify that Tan’s correspondence was

between him and family and not between him and Wang’s authorities.

It because they did not know actual facts about his being obstructed

in U.S. that they had asked me inquire and look into his case. If state­

ment given by me were true that any aliens in U.S. including Chinese

were free to leave or enter the U.S. without application INS or any other

U.S. authority; if it true INS does not set up any procedures controlling

exit of foreign nationals, if this true then action taken by INS against

Chinese in U.S. defy reason and that is something they request me to

investigate and correct this state of affairs. I have to tell INS to stop all

such illegal acts because such illegal and wild acts taken by INS are in

violation of agreement between us on return of civilians.

64. I said first let me say I did not say that U.S. INS does not exer­

cise control over entry of aliens to U.S. I have continued to refer only to

departure of aliens from U.S.

65. Wang said case of Tan not one of entry U.S. but one of departure

U.S.

66. I said that was right and I was discussing it in those terms.

In case of Tan and these other cases he had continued to make vague

statements regarding their being prevented from departure. It utterly

incredible me, if there were any factual basis any these cases that at

least one person would not have called attention his case to Indian

Embassy in accordance procedures we established for handling this.

I simply could not give credence to these charges in view lack any fac­

tual evidence. I satisfied there was no factual basis.

67. I said facts show that not single case been called to attention

my government in accordance agreed announcement but that ­Chinese

have steadily and regularly been traveling from my country to his

country. According best information available to me, at least 114

Chinese had arrived in his country since beginning talks. 67 arrived

between September 10, date our announcement and December 20.

Since December 20, a period during which not single American had

been released from his country, my information was that at least 35

Chinese had arrived his country. I had no way knowing how many

others might have arrived.

68. I said as for situation regarding Americans his country, I could

only conclude we were going backwards. Subsequent to September 10

his authorities on October 27 announced release of two American pris­

oners. Three weeks later on November 17 his authorities announced

release of three Americans. About one month later on December 20

his authorities announced release of one American. This was aver­

age of about one every two weeks. More than ten weeks have passed

since December 20 and in that time no American been released. I had

extremely difficult time reconciling this with agreement September 10

which specifically covered these Americans and reconciling this with a

desire to bring about improvement in our relations or with a desire to

obtain genuinely constructive achievements in these talks. It certainly

bore no relationship to facts with regard to free return of Chinese to his

country.

69. Wang said I had made comparison between number of

­Americans who departed China and number of Chinese who departed

U.S. and had stated that during period since our announcement made

on September 10 that 102 Chinese had left U.S. Although this number of

Chinese had come out from U.S. even this number very unsatisfactory

to them. If we made calculation of proportion of people released he

could show me that of Americans in category of criminals alone 27 of

41 been released. Number of released comprises two-­thirds of number

of people who were in prison and in addition this number criminal

offenders released, there are Americans in other categories who have

left China. These are 16 in number. And it can be seen that almost over­

whelming majority of American criminal offenders have been released.

If we take Chinese students alone, putting aside question other ­Chinese

nationals in U.S., we may take figure of 5,000 for these Chinese stu­

dents. What would number of 102 students who have come out of U.S.

compare with total of 5,000—what ratio would it make? From this pro­

portion it is quite clear as to whether more Americans left China or

more Chinese left U.S. Is not this clear indeed?

70. I said proportion proper to talk about is that of those desiring

to return. There was still not slightest evidence any Chinese desiring

return was being prevented from doing so. Now, almost six months

since September 10 announcement, both know there are 13 desiring

return who are still being prevented from doing so although it was said

that they could do so expeditiously.

71. Wang said I had talked of proportion of people who desired

return. The 37 whose cases he had raised with me in these meetings

were exactly people who desired return. They have not as yet gotten

any reply from me concerning those who desire return but are in prison

in U.S. He still awaiting my answer concerning situation Chinese

imprisoned U.S.

72. I said I had told him again and again any Chinese in U.S. who

feels obstructed was entirely free communicate Indian Embassy.

73. Wang said this was only one aspect of question, the other was

U.S. obligation give accounting these Chinese in prison.

74. I said U.S. Government has obligation faithfully and fully carry

out provisions agreed announcement. This U.S. has done and will con­

tinue do.

75. Wang said if those people who desire return still prevented

doing so and unable return, he could not consider U.S. Government

carrying out fully obligation under announcement.

76. I asked whether next Thursday March 8 was satisfactory for

next meeting. Wang agreed.

77. After we stood up to leave, I asked if he would send me copy

of their public statement. Wang said that if it were made he would do

so. I asked if he could give any indication as to time. Wang said he had

none.

Gowen

1578. From Johnson.

Following list three names handed me by Wang 39th meeting

March 1:

[text not declassified]

Gowen

Letter No. 33

Washington, March 2, 1956

Dear Alex:

I will be going to the airport shortly after noon today to see the

Secretary and WSR off for Karachi. We did not anticipate any special

administrative problem in handling the correspondence with you while

they are away, although if a crisis should develop with time a crucial

Informal. The enclosures are not printed.

factor in connection with some important decision, obviously we will

have something of an added problem.

We met with the Secretary yesterday afternoon. No particular

decision was made except to hold firm on the position we have clearly

staked out. We believe it is a good and eminently defensible position.

If Wang should precipitate a break, we believe we can more than hold

our own in a public exchange. The Secretary feels that we may be able

to do something with the Chinese prisoners question which could be

helpful to our cause, at least from a public information standpoint later

on. We have already sent you a copy of the letter dated Feb. 28 to the

Attorney General requesting a survey. We are not quite as inclined as

you apparently are to discount entirely the possible utility of seeking

to arrange the voluntary deportation of some Chinese aliens in prison.

While it is probably an academic question, the Secretary did

express the view that if Wang should request a recess of the talks during

the next few weeks, we should raise no objection. It was the consensus

that we should not propose any recess for the period of the Secretary’s

absence from Washington. No new tack of any sort is planned for you

to take during this period, but it was felt that it would be a mistake

for us to propose a recess. We understand your distaste for having to

repeat ad nauseam the same old things, but it seems necessary under the

circumstances. While it is naturally repellent and frustrating, we doubt

whether it is harmful from the tactical standpoint in the given situation.

Everyone agrees with your surmise that the Secretary may be pre­

sented with some sort of package proposal when he gets to Delhi. All

the signs point this way. We anticipate that the Indians and the ­Chinese

Communists may have sought to enlist at least the moral support of

several of the SEATO powers for some sort of scheme which would

involve the off-­shore islands and a higher level meeting. The ­Secretary

anticipates that the pressure on the off-­shore islands question is going

to be greatly stepped up in connection with the campaign for a higher

level meeting. He expects to have a very full and frank review of this

whole problem with the Generalissimo in Taipei on March 16. The dis­

position here is to adhere to the position already stated on the higher

level conference question. In this connection the letter which ­Senator

George wrote to the Secretary last October was recalled yesterday. This

is an important statement which is still believed to accurately represent

the position of the majority of Congress in both parties. I don’t believe

you were ever sent a copy of this letter. It is now enclosed. Moreover

we are very mindful of our pledge to the GRC not to discuss matters

involving its rights, claims or essential interests without its presence or

concurrence. We find it difficult to visualize Chou En-­lai sitting down

at the same conference table with George Yeh and the Secretary. (You

will be interested in the enclosed article by Chalmers Roberts which

appeared in today’s Washington Post.)

together on February 27. They have been read with great interest by the

usual inner circle. I am sorry that I was so guarded in my reference to

the off-­shore islands in my letter No. 30 of February 13, that you missed

my meaning. Of course I had something more in mind than the obvious

truism that the off-shore islands are in the Taiwan area and would be

included in our renunciation of force draft. What I was trying to get

over was an intimation that Public Law No. 4 would be more likely to

come into the picture in the event of Communist action limited to the

off-­shores after a renunciation of force declaration.

Enclosed is a copy of Ralph Clough’s conversation with Munsiff

of the Indian Embassy on February 28. What Clough said is now some­

what outdated, since we have subsequently decided to send copies

of the Agreed Announcement by registered mail, with return receipt

requested, to each of the Chinese named by Wang at Geneva whom we

can identify and locate. We will be prepared to exhibit to the ­Indians

as appropriate and desirable the signature of the Chinese on the return

receipt. But we will be careful not to let the Indians see the U.S. address

of the individuals concerned. It will be a matter of principle with us

to protect these Chinese from possible Communist pressure, by not

divulging their whereabouts.

Also enclosed is a copy of a telegram from Mort Rosse, the ­American

Asiatic Underwriters’ representative here, to their representative in Hong

Kong regarding the Charles Miner case. It now looks as if Miner may be

able to get out fairly soon after a payment of an additional $6,000 of extor­

tion money. We anticipate that Treasury will probably license this added

sum. We have informed the British Embassy and they will ask O’Neill to

hold off on any additional representation in Miner’s behalf for the time

being in view of the more favorable prospect.

It looks as if we may be heading for a turning point of some kind

in the talks. Our intuition to this effect is confirmed by your 1574 of

March 1, which unfortunately was not distributed in the Department

until after we met with the Secretary yesterday afternoon. But it has

been called to his attention since then.

I hope the flying weather between Geneva and Prague is better

than it has been. Good luck, and be assured that we are all with you.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

1585. From Osborn.

According information from reporters, statement being released at

(repeat at) Chinese Communist Consulate General 3: p.m. local time

today.

Gowen

­Priority. Originally received as telegram 1538 but corrected to 1585. Repeated for infor­

mation Priority to Prague for Ambassador Johnson as telegram 26.

1586. From Osborn. My telegram sent Department 1585 repeated

information Prague 26.

Reporters say Chinese Communist Consulate General has

announced postponement release, no indication until then.

Gowen

­Priority. Repeated for information Priority to Prague for the Ambassador as telegram 26.

1587. From Osborn.

statement Ministry Foreign Affairs PRC. Copies addressed Ambassador

Johnson delivered half-­hour ahead. Presume Department receiving by

ticker as release made simultaneously Peiping.

Statement parallels Wang’s prepared statement last meeting.

­Reiterates demand for Foreign Ministers’ conference, says “One can­

not but deem that purpose of American side is to trick statement out

of Chinese side, then put off indefinitely Foreign Ministers’ conference

so as to maintain present status US occupation Taiwan, interference

with China’s liberation coastal islands.” Gives US two choices: If it is

desired declaration specifically mention Taiwan dispute, must choose

­Chinese October 27 draft; if it desired statement not (repeat not) men­

tion ­Foreign Ministers’ meeting, must choose December 1 draft.

Final sentence: “Chinese side cannot agree to talks being dragged

out as it is, nor can it allow talks be used by US as tool to prevent China

from exercising sovereign rights.”

Gowen

Repeated Niact to Prague for Ambassador Johnson as telegram 28.

2083 to Karachi captioned

For the Secretary and Robertson.

Hoover

ity. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Sherwood (S/S).

Control No. 540.)

Hoover

­Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy.

Tosec 10. For Secretary and Robertson.

1. Re Tosec 3. We believe our reply to Communist statement

March 4 should be prompt and should consist merely of statement to

press by Lincoln White as follows:

QUOTE

The Chinese Communist statement of March 4 contains nothing

new. Its failure, however, even to mention that the Chinese ­Communists

still hold 13 Americans in prison, despite their agreement of last

­September that these Americans would be permitted “expeditiously”

to exercise their right to return to the United States, cannot be over­

looked. This only reemphasizes that these Americans are being held as

political hostages.

The reply which the United States made on January 21 to a similar

Chinese Communist statement of January 18 is equally applicable to

the Communist statement of March 4. The concluding paragraphs of

that reply read as follows:

INNERQUOTE

1. Four months after the Communists announced that they would

adopt measures to permit Americans in China to return to the United

States, 13 Americans are still held in Communist prisons.

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in substance by Phleger and Sebald.

2. The United States proposed that the parties renounce the use of

force without prejudice to the right of individual and collective self-­

defense against armed attack, in order that the discussions might take

place free from the threat of war.

3. The United States made clear that this renunciation would not

prejudice either side in the pursuit of its objectives and policies by

peaceful means.

4. The Communists, while stating that they accept the principle of

the renunciation of force, have deprived such acceptance of its value by

refusing to agree that it is without prejudice to the right of individual

and collective self-­defense against armed attack and that it is applicable

to the Taiwan area.

In short, the Communists so far seem willing to renounce force

only if they are first conceded the goals for which they would use force.

The United States, for its part, intends to persist in the way

of peace. We seek the now overdue fulfillment by the Chinese

­Communists of their undertaking that the Americans now in China

should be allowed expeditiously to return. We seek this not only for

humanitarian reasons but because respect for international undertak­

ings lies at the foundation of a stable international order. We shall also

seek with perseverance a meaningful renunciation of force, particu­

larly in the Taiwan area.

END INNERQUOTE QUOTE

2. We have requested Johnson to comment from Prague, repeating

to Karachi. Request your views on above proposed reply.

situation following last meeting. We believe he correctly states situation

now confronting us.

4. Proposed guidance to Johnson for March 8 meeting being sent

separately.

Hoover

1718. For Johnson.

Guidance for March 8 meeting.

1. Although Chinese Communist statement of March 4 may indi­

cate approach turning point in Geneva talks, we wish to proceed along

established lines as if break not anticipated. Your basic tactic should

be to keep onus for any prospective rupture squarely on Wang while

maintaining integrity our position. You should pitch your discussion

in moderate key at same time avoiding defensive posture and main­

taining continuous pressure on Wang on both repatriation and renun­

ciation issues.

2. Restate US view that public statements, particularly those

couched in terms approaching ultimatum such as March 4 statement,

can only hinder progress of talks. Read US reply for record and note

that US will continue to set public record straight whenever need for

such action created by Chinese Communist misrepresentations.

3. Take up Communist March 4 statement item by item, answer­

ing it with same type argumentation you have effectively used past

meetings.

4. Press for Communist release of 13 Americans, emphasizing

increasingly obvious Communist use of them as political hostages.

5. Continue to reject Communist demands for investigation status

individual Chinese in US in absence specific allegation of obstruction.

Since Wang has specifically alleged that Tan Wen refused permission

depart by INS, Department is investigating this case. FYI ­Department

has requested INS discreetly obtain pertinent information on all

­Chinese named by Wang. This will not be turned over to Communists

but will be useful in event Wang alleges specific obstruction to depar­

ture or individual should become center of public attention. END FYI

6. Inform Wang that Department will send copies Agreed

Announcement by registered mail to 37 Chinese named by him if

current addresses can be found. Remind him that no case of Chinese

claiming obstruction in departure has been brought to Department by

Indian Embassy.

Hoover

by Clough and McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger and Sebald. Repeated Priority

to Karachi for Robertson as telegram Tedal 13.

1603. From Johnson.

Would appreciate information soonest on when Department plans

release reply to CHICOM March 4 statement and confirmation of text.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

1730. For Johnson.

Medical case history Liu Yung-­ming received from Missouri State

Hospital No. 4. It is being forwarded promptly to American Red Cross

for transmittal to Red Cross in Peiping. You may inform Wang to this

effect at tomorrow’s meeting.

Hoover

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy.

1611. From Johnson.

1. Two-­hour 25 minute meeting this morning with no (repeat no)

change.

2. Wang was obviously marking time and refused to respond to or

be drawn into discussion on renunciation.

I also characterized his position at last meeting and CHICOM March 4

statement as constituting retrogression from apparent previous position

and stated my understanding their present position was they refused

to renounce force even temporarily with respect Taiwan area unless US

first agrees to Foreign Minister meeting and that this logically leads

question what new conditions and prerequisites would be presented

in connection with Foreign Minister meeting, that is, would they con­

sider renunciation binding only up to and during such meeting and

if meeting did not result complete concession their views would they

then consider themselves free use force? Such position is complete per­

version renunciation force principle and glaring reversion to war-­like

ultimata and holding negotiations under threat by one party of initiat­

ing hostilities in absence peaceful surrender by other party. Contrasted

with US position particularly as set forth in January 21 and March 6

statements stressing last paragraph both statements.

3. Wang completely failed respond these points stating respective

positions fully developed last 20 meetings and their views set forth

their March 4 statement to which he had nothing to add. Hoped next

meeting I would make choice between their two drafts. I hoped he

would correct me if my foregoing statement their position in error.

4. I made very strong statement on implementation, characteriz­

ing situation in this field also as retrogression with CHICOM receding

to same positions they held before agreed announcement both with

respect Americans in China and Chinese in US. During course of give

and take I said, “insofar as desires your government with respect to

our talks here are concerned, policy continuing to hold 13 as political

hostages can only be counterproductive”.

Limit Distribution. Repeated for information Priority to Karachi for the Secretary and

Robertson as telegram 7. An additional transmittal note reads: “Also request confirma­

tion receipt and delivery Geneva’s 1611 to Secretary. If not (repeat not) delivered retrans­

mit immediately to New Delhi.”

5. He renewed usual charges concerning US “obstruction”, repeated

demand for accounting for names he had given me, and ­Chinese in

US, and alleged interception mail from families to Chinese in US, and

alleged requirement Chinese apply permanent residence or obtain

­Taiwan entry permits. In latter connection made and reiterated charge

US interfered in Indian Embassy desire make public statement. When

I replied US does not have to agree or disagree to Indian Embassy mak­

ing any public statement it desires within proper sphere its activities

diplomatic mission, he said “atmosphere here appears to be somewhat

different that in Washington”.

6. In rebuttal my continued stress on 13 he said if they covered by

agreed announcement Chinese US prisons were covered and renewed

his demand for “accounting”.

7. Next meeting Thursday March 15.

8. Proceeding Prague tomorrow morning returning Tuesday.

Gowen

1614. From Johnson.

1. Wang’s performance today’s meeting confirmed my previous

feeling they awaiting assessment success their efforts influence us

through January 18 and March 4 statements and probably more impor­

tantly through GOI during Secretary’s visit.

2. Before deciding next move they may only await reports they

receive on any discussion this subject during Secretary’s visit New

Delhi or possibly they may wait to see if any new moves our part fol­

lowing completion Secretary’s FE trip.

3. They are retaining flexibility of action with regard continuation

talks but have left selves very little flexibility on text any renuncia­

tion force declaration in absence United States concession on Foreign

­Minister’s meeting. However, dependent on what reports they receive

tribution. Repeated Priority to New Delhi for the Secretary and Robertson as telegram 29.

from New Delhi they may well make move towards break or even carry

out break at next meeting.

4. Would appreciate being informed any developments at New

Delhi that would assist me in anticipating or assessing situation here.

Gowen

1615. From Johnson.

1. I opened 40th meeting by telling Wang I had given very careful

study to position of his government as outlined in his statements at

our last meeting and his government’s public statement of March 4.

I continued from prepared statement:

A. I have searched hard for some evidence that your government is

genuinely willing to respond to proposal of my government for renun­

ciation of force—proposal that meets aspirations of peoples of all polit­

ical persuasions throughout world, who seek an end to discredited and

outmoded means of attempting settle disputes by an appeal to force.

B. Essential purpose of my proposal was to remove overhanging

threat of appeal to force by one side and thus make possible free dis­

cussion differences and search for their fair and equitable solution by

peaceful means. I had felt that in spite our difficulties we were largely

in agreement in principle and that with sincere desire both sides make

progress there was real hope of narrowing and finally eliminating our

area of disagreement. I have been doing my best to approach matter

from this standpoint and to spend whatever time was required in

patient effort to clear up misunderstandings and to remove doubts.

C. However, I find your statement at our last meeting and action of

your government in releasing its statement of March 4 very disturbing.

I cannot but feel that your position is intentionally or unintentionally

dragging our talks on this subject backwards.

D. I hope that this trend can be promptly reversed and that we can

again move forward. I do not believe that way to progress lies in issuance

tribution. The telegram is unsigned.

of ultimata, and in particular I do not believe that public statements such

as that issued by your government on March 4 can contribute to progress

we seek.

E. As I understand position you set forth at our last meeting you

categorically assert that only means of peacefully discussing and

­settling our disputes in Taiwan area is by meeting of our respective

Foreign Ministers.

F. Also, as I understand your position, you refuse to renounce

force, even temporarily, with respect to our dispute in the Taiwan area,

unless my government first agrees with your government’s contention

that only means of discussing and settling this dispute is by meeting of

our Foreign Ministers.

G. Establishment of this prerequisite and condition with respect to

renunciation of force in Taiwan area logically leads to question of what

new conditions and prerequisites would be presented in connection

with such meeting. For example, would you consider such a renunci­

ation of force binding only up to and during holding of such meeting?

If meeting did not result in complete concession to your views would

your government then consider itself free to use force? Any such posi­

tion would, of course, be complete perversion of principle of renunci­

ation of force and settlement of disputes by peaceful means. It would

be most glaring reversion to practice of war-­like ultimata and holding

of negotiations under threat by one party of initiating hostilities in

absence of peaceful surrender by other party.

H. I thus find your present position difficult to reconcile with your

previous apparent acceptance of at least some of principles of my pro­

posal of October 8. I also find it hard to reconcile your present position

even with your December 1 draft as I had understood it. I thought that

you had assured me that your December 1 draft did cover situation in

Taiwan area. I did not recall your having stated it covered our dispute

there only on condition that we agreed to Foreign Minister’s meeting.

In fact, as I recall it, you often said that you were establishing no condi­

tions or prerequisites. Now, in statement issued by your authorities on

March 4, I find demand for Foreign Minister’s meeting stated not only

as condition, but in terms approaching an ultimatum.

I. You will note that in necessary statement of reply made by my

government it carefully avoided any such aspect, and I have and will

continue to avoid such aspects here for I am convinced that they cannot

contribute to that peaceful settlement of our disputes which we con­

tinue to seek.

J. Position of my government was carefully and soberly set forth in

its statement of January 21 and in its response your government’s state­

ment of March 4 copies of which you have. I want particularly to stress

closing words of both of these statements. “United States for its part,

intends to persist in way of peace. We seek now overdue fulfillment by

your government of your undertaking that Americans in your country

should be allowed expeditiously to return. We seek this not only for

humanitarian reasons but because respect for international undertak­

ings lies at foundation of stable international order. We shall also seek

with perseverance a meaningful renunciation of force, particularly in

Taiwan area.”

2. Wang said we have spent much time in our discussions for reach­

ing agreement on issuance of declaration on renunciation of force. They

have made very clear views of their side in all our previous meetings.

His government had recently issued public statement in which position

his side also very clearly set forth. This allowed no misunderstanding

or deliberate misinterpretation by anyone.

3. Wang said at last meeting he had indicated that if there were

genuine desire for agreement on declaration their two drafts were

there—that is, their October 27 and December 1 drafts—and he had

indicated any these would have served for agreement between us,

and he asked that I make careful choice either these two drafts. Their

December 1 and October 27 drafts were consistent and there was noth­

ing which could be termed inconsistent between those two drafts.

Their draft did not in itself set forth any prerequisite conditions.

4. Wang said therefore as he saw it if we were to make declaration

at all we would have to be clear on three points. First, such a declaration

must be on equal footing and be reciprocal. Second, such declaration

must not prejudice the sovereign rights of any of parties. Finally, such

a declaration must be acceptable both sides. Their objections my pre­

vious drafts had all been based on grounds my drafts did not conform

with three points mentioned above.

5. Wang said he had carefully studied statement issued by

Department on March 7 and examined that statement in accordance

with three principles above but fail find in that statement any reply

their questions mentioned above. In same way they found selves dis­

appointed with my opening statement this morning because he did

not find anything in it which could lead us forward or which could

contribute our progress.

6. Wang said we have now come to stage our discussions in which

not a question of setting forth respective views because these views

been made clear in course discussion. It would be very difficult for dis­

cussions get forward if at every meeting we should repeatedly set forth

views which been set forth before. We had in front us task of resolving

question regarding declaration.

7. Wang said he noted I had stated desire for our disputes being set­

tled peaceful means and for narrowing down area disagreement. If this

case, then should we not make genuine effort and get on to agreement

on basis drafts he had advanced? If one should, on one hand, claim

desire for solution but on other hand refuse touch on subject of dec­

laration itself, how could we make any progress? They consider there

no point in going on in this way by repeating all our previous ground.

8. I said I had tried this morning not to repeat previous ground.

Had tried during these weeks obtain real understanding his position

in order we could make progress. As he here and as his government

in its statement of March 4 again persisted in confusing discussion of

merits our disputes, which belongs at later stage, with our immediate

task of declaration renouncing use force, I found very difficult get at his

exact position this latter and essential question. Way to understanding

between us was, in these talks and in privacy this room, to try meet and

understand each others points view.

9. I said I had in my opening statement this morning set forth just

as simply and clearly as I capable my very frank understanding his

position. I asked some simple and straightforward questions, not with

desire engaging in controversy but with very honest desire of attempt­

ing understand fully his position.

10. I said I disappointed he had not answered these questions. He

had spoken of misinterpretation his position. If in fact I had misinter­

preted it I would appreciate his telling me where.

11. Wang said if at present stage we still talking about understand­

ing each others position in order help in progress he would say we

had adequate understanding because we had held 20 meetings our dis­

cussions already and these 20 meetings spent solely in explaining each

others positions. If anyone wanted genuinely seek understand points

view other side it would not take 20 meetings do so.

12. Wang said as far as position his side concerned, their position

been always clear. And their position embodied in two drafts which

they had presented. All questions raised by me been answered these

two drafts. I entirely free make choice between these two.

13. Wang said again statement he made last meeting also suffi­

ciently clarified and set forth their views. There nothing unclear in it.

There nothing concealed in it. If I considered we ought make decla­

ration at all, then I should make choice either of two drafts they had

presented.

14. I said I inclined agree his statements were fairly clear. And I had

set forth this morning what I thought they clearly said. I hoping I was

wrong or that I had possibly not understood them. For they seemed me

to be long ways from clear renunciation force and peaceful settlement

our disputes.

15. I said I hoped he would study interpretation I had placed on it

this morning and if I wrong any respect that he would clarify at next

meeting. If he nothing more on this this morning, I had another matter

would like bring up.

16. Wang said he had stated his views regarding opening state­

ment I made this morning. In my opening statement this morning I had

again repeated previous old tune. All arguments advanced by me in

opening statement been refuted our previous meetings.

17. Wang said as he had stated, if I still thought we should make

declaration at all then there were two drafts of their side and I entirely

free determine on either them. Both these drafts contained reasonable

principles for settlement our disputes.

18. Wang said if I not in position determine on one these drafts we

would better leave it until next meeting when he hoped I would do so.

If I had anything else bring up, he prepared listen.

19. I then read prepared statement on implementation: I have spo­

ken this morning of what appeared to me to be something like reverse

trend in our discussions under second item of our agenda. It is hard

to avoid drawing parallel between that situation and situation with

respect to our first item, return of civilians desiring to do so.

A. In order to dispose of matter of return of civilians, we worked

out an agreed announcement recognizing right to civilians desiring to

do so to return to their respective countries. It specified that measures

would be or had been adopted to permit our respective civilians expe­

ditiously to exercise that right. We worked out third party arrangement,

in order fully to meet your point of view, as an assurance in implemen­

tation of agreement.

B. Our agreed announcement not only expressed subjective intent

of our two governments to allow civilians to return freely and expedi­

tiously when they desired to do so; it also provided third party arrange­

ment as means of making objective test of whether this intent was in fact

being carried out. For while, our agreement seemed to be producing

some results. Apparent intent of your government to allow Americans

to depart seemed to be evidenced by announcement of release of num­

bers of Americans formerly detained.

C. Then, gradually, your country started to behave as though

your agreed announcement had never been issued. First, as regards

Americans in your country, you began to ignore plain fact that you were

responsible, under agreed announcement, to adopt measures permit­

ting them expeditiously to exercise their right to return. You ignored, or

turned aside with flimsy excuses, objective and reasonable statements

of U.K. Charge when he pointed out that return of these Americans was

being obstructed.

D. Then as regards Chinese in United States, you started to revert

to same position you held in our early meetings in August. You alleged

that United States had instituted measures to prevent Chinese who

desired to return from doing so. You made these allegations partly

on basis of certain entirely normal and proper requirements of my

government applicable, not to Chinese who desired to return, but to

Chinese—or to any other alien—who desired to stay in U.S. Partly, your

allegations seem to have been based on no more than supposition that

all Chinese in U.S. desire to return, and that therefore failure of any

Chinese to return is of itself evidence of obstruction.

E. More seriously, you made these allegations in apparent disre­

gard of third party arrangement, to which we both agreed in making

our agreed announcement. This arrangement provides an objective test

of whether in fact Chinese feel they are being prevented from leaving

my country. By this objective test, I think it is evident that Chinese in

U.S. do not consider that they are being prevented from leaving.

F. You nevertheless allege that some Chinese are being prevented

from leaving, and you have given me names of 37 persons who you

say fall into that category. My country has already fully complied with

terms of agreed announcement as regards these 37 persons, as well as

all other Chinese in U.S. Most important and essential thing is that any

of these 37, or any other Chinese in my country, if they desire to return,

can exercise their right return your country whenever they choose and

expeditiously as they choose. Next most important and essential thing

is that any these persons who feels he being obstructed from departing

can communicate with Indian Embassy. I have informed you repeatedly

and in detail of wide publicity given agreed announcement my country

in accordance terms announcement. However, in view your allegations

these 37 persons, my government willing go beyond matter of agreed

announcement and ensure that each them, insofar as can be positively

identified, has copy of full text announcement. Also desire inform you

medical case history Liu Yung-­ming is, accordance your request, being

transmitted by American Red Cross to your Red Cross Society.

G. I would like ask you just how far you prepared go in comply­

ing terms our agreement with regard Americans your country. Can you

assure me each of 13 Americans whose names I given you and who do

indisputably desire return can now expeditiously exercise right return?

20. Wang said statement by Department State of March 7 as well

as my statement this morning had again raised question 13 Americans.

They thought such manner of raising question not in conformity truth

and intended stir up argument.

21. Wang said it precisely attempt use this question as pretext cover

up fact obstruction against return Chinese in U.S. It precisely Chinese

side instead U.S. side which feels highly dissatisfied with situation

return its civilians.

22. Wang said it true we had agreement on return civilians and this

agreement provided for expeditious return those civilians who desired

do so. It also true we had agreed on third nation arrangement in order

insure smooth return civilians and implementation provisions this

agreement. All these arrangements been made with view expediting

adoption measures permitting civilians return.

23. Wang said however ever since announcement agreement they

not seen adoption by U.S. Government of measures to expedite return

his civilians. Instead U.S. had adopted measures which forcibly required

Chinese obtain entry permits Taiwan in order obstruct return these

civilians his side. And what is more U.S. had further adopted measures

to forcibly require Chinese in U.S. apply permanent residence.

24. Wang said India as third nation had not been in position dis­

tribute texts agreed announcement their civilians in U.S. and had not

been allowed even make announcement regarding forcible require­

ment of obtaining entry permits Taiwan imposed by U.S. on Chinese

civilians.

25. Wang said furthermore in spite fact I had made assurances all

along in previous meetings that Chinese in U.S. have freedom commu­

nicate, they found in case Mr. Lu Cho [illegible in the original] son Lu

Chih Wei former President Yenching, his family had written 20 letters

him but he received only two, remainder been intercepted by U.S. In

U.S. terms, can this be called freedom of communication?

26. Wang said and then of 103 Chinese students they had discussed

previously, 32 them still not returned.

27. Wang said as regards 37 persons whose names he had given

me previous meetings, I had not been able up to now give accounting

them as to whether U.S. Government will no longer obstruct them. I

had stated U.S. Government would be willing furnish each of 37 with

copy text agreed announcement. However failure of return those 37

was not just question their lack information agreed announcement but

because of deliberate obstruction offered by concerned U.S. agencies

which preventing their return. Therefore no matter how U.S. tried to

excuse self on question return Chinese in U.S., if no definite accounting

forthcoming with regard questions he had raised, how could possibly

believe U.S. was in fact implementing agreement?

28. Wang said question before us was whether U.S. had already

adopted measures to remove forcible requirement for Chinese in U.S. to

obtain Taiwan entry permits? Question was whether U.S. would adopt

measures to remove such requirements as forcibly requiring Chinese in

U.S. obtain permit for long-­term residence U.S. Question was whether

U.S. would no longer obstruct Indian Embassy in U.S. from making

announcement this regard. Question was whether U.S. would stop

intercepting mail of Chinese in U.S., which was against practice of

civilized nations. This was practice of secret police. Question was also

whether U.S. would be willing make inquiry into cases he had raised in

order remove all excuses for obstructing return these cases.

29. Wang said I had again this morning raised charge regarding

going to rescind agreement.

32. Wang said in addition 37 names he had given me previously,

this morning he had five more names he would like give me, whose

return being prevented by U.S. (handed over list; names in following

telegram). It stated in this list that all these persons want return but

being prevented doing so.

returned and he stated his failure return was due deliberate obstruc­

tion offered by U.S. agencies. There not slightest indication that failure

return of these 32 persons was due to change of their minds. Failure

their return due to obstructions.

34. Wang said he continued to await accounting by my side of all

these questions he had raised.

35. I said he had rightly said that it was question who was in fact

carrying out our agreed announcement. As I had pointed out this

morning this was not question of opinion or vague charges but very

fortunately was question of fact. It question of facts that can be deter­

mined by objective impartial test. Third country arrangement which

established by our agreed announcement was established exactly as

such test.

36. I said facts were, and he as well aware of them as I, that out of

many thousands Chinese in U.S. there not yet been one case in which

Indian Embassy had called attention my government any obstruction

in departure any Chinese. This a record that was clear and for all world

to see. This fully confirmed statements which I had repeatedly made

here ever since August 1 last year, that no Chinese was being obstructed

in returning his country.

37. I said facts were also that Chinese were steadily returning his

country. Not only since August 1 last year but also prior August 1 last

year. Questions his government continually raised and which he raised

again this morning, as I repeatedly had pointed out, had no relation to

Chinese who desire return his country. It absurd on face of it to say U.S.

forcibly requiring people do this or do that in order require them stay in

our country. We had no interest whatsoever in requiring Chinese or any

other aliens to remain in U.S. who did not want remain there.

38. I said he knew and I knew that as far as Americans in his country

concerned our discussion concerning agreed announcement revolved

around those specific Americans whose names I had given him and

who he knew and I knew desired to return. I had from very beginning

our discussions here, in most earnest desire of removing these imped­

iments to improvement our relations, explained to him exact relation

these detained Americans that situation. I had very frankly explained

that our attitude regarding these persons was not one arbitrarily taken

by my government but one about which American people feel very

strongly. I had most earnestly hoped this problem could be and would

be removed when we made our agreed announcement.

39. I said I simply was at loss understand why if his government

genuinely desirous improve our relations, it had not taken advantage

this opportunity remove this irritant. As I had said here many times

and as we had said our public statement, I just could not avoid conclu­

sion these Americans continue be held for political purposes. I did not

know how I could make clear to him that, insofar as desires his govern­

ment with respect our talks here were concerned, such policy had been

and could only continue to be counterproductive.

40. I said I had spoken very frankly about this and in what one

might call this personal vein because its tremendous importance and

my very deep feelings regard to it. I hoped he would accept it in that

spirit.

41. Wang said I had spoken about desirability of removing causes

misunderstanding between peoples our two countries on question

return our two nationals. It exactly in this spirit that his side been car­

rying out agreement respecting Americans in China.

42. Wang said it hard him to reconcile this with actions adopted

by U.S. with respect Chinese, which were unfriendly and completely

contrary what they had done. Attitude adopted by U.S. Government

toward Chinese nationals did not contribute improvement our relations

but rather worsened relations between us. He might frankly inform me

that Chinese people very indignant over steps U.S. Government had

taken which inconsistent with its words.

43. Wang said I had spoken about failure Indian Embassy bring up

single case with my government. He wanted ask why U.S. Government

should interfere with Indian Embassy to prevent it making public

statement this respect. Did U.S. think this action its part would help

Indian Embassy in performance its functions? He wanted ask whether

I willing remove such obstructions against Indian Embassy’s making

announcement on question of so-­called exit permits Taiwan.

44. Wang said since I had raised question 13 Americans in prison,

then he wanted know whether I was going to make accounting of

Chinese imprisoned U.S. All these problems were covered by agreed

announcement between us. Therefore they fully entitled raise this mat­

ter. And U.S. in same way has obligation give accounting.

45. Wang said that why they had mentioned both sides should

make reciprocal effort improve state affairs on question return civilians.

First of all must be made very clear in our thinking that both Chinese

and Americans were human beings and were equal. Their personal

rights must be respected equally. It not proper be concerned with one’s

own civilians while adopting unfriendly and contrary attitude towards

civilians other side. If such inconsistent attitude be adopted, how could

relations between two countries be improved?

46. I said U.S. under agreed announcement had no obligation

give what he called accounting Chinese in U.S. U.S. had obligation not

obstruct return any Chinese who desires return his country. We will­

ing receive and promptly act upon any facts which indicate we not

carrying out that obligation. We willing do that for Indian Embassy

in U.S. or I willing do that for him here. I still have not seen any facts

on any obstruction. We in past and will continue fully cooperate with

Indian Embassy in carrying out functions it assumed under agreed

announcement.

47. Wang interrupted to ask did this mean I willing agree to Indian

Embassy making public announcement?

48. I said U.S. did not agree or disagree to Indian Embassy’s stat­

ing anything publicly it desired state. Press in U.S. entirely free and

Indian Embassy could say anytime anything it desired say and it would

be published. I recalled I brought up here some weeks ago statement

made by Indian Embassy being published in U.S. I thought it was last

December.

49. Wang asked did I say that U.S. Government had never interfered

with Indian Embassy’s making any public statement? Could it be said if

there should have been anybody who interfered with Indian Embassy’s

making public statement it entirely action his own responsibility?

50. I said I did not know what he talking about. U.S. Government

was in no way keeping Indian Embassy from saying anything it desired

within proper sphere its activities as diplomatic mission.

51. Wang said they had noted this question and had noticed atmo­

sphere in Washington somewhat different from what he had experi­

enced here. (Wang asked whether I had finished before continuing).

52. Wang said I had spoken about U.S. having no obligation under

agreed announcement to make accounting Chinese in U.S.

53. I said I did not follow his point.

54. Wang said I stated I had no obligation give accounting for

Chinese. If they followed my logic, would they ask if 13 now in prison

had no relation with agreement between us?

55. I said I just did not follow point. We had obligation not obstruct

return Chinese, to permit them expeditiously return. He had exactly

same obligation regarding Americans his country, including as we both

knew specifically those 13 as they were ones we talking about when we

made announcement. Their return indisputably still being obstructed.

56. Wang said I had claimed U.S. did not obstruct return Chinese.

Now regarding failure return 32 plus 42 persons, could I explain it as

no obstructions being offered them; if these 13 Americans were related

to agreed announcement between us then Chinese in U.S. prisons were

also related to agreement. They wish be informed situation them, and

this also within scope agreed announcement. Could not be said this

beyond scope agreed announcement.

57. I suggested next meeting be Thursday March 15. Wang agreed.

1617. From Johnson.

Following list five names handed me by Wang 40th meeting March 8.

[text not declassified]

Gowen

Letter No. 34

Washington, March 9, 1956

Dear Alex:

We have received your 1614 analyzing the March 8 meeting, and

two out of seven sections of your 1615 giving the record of the meeting.

We don’t see how we can give you any variant to freshen the atmo­

sphere at the next meeting. It is vexing to have to waltz around the

floor to the same old music for the umpteenth time. We understand and

share your antipathy for this business but our strategy requires us to

stand fast and to do nothing to precipitate a walkout. Your pertinacity

will put an extra star in your crown.

One of the 37 Chinese named by Wang came in to see us yesterday

in a state of great agitation. He is [text not declassified]. A senior mem­

ber of the University faculty accompanied him. The occasion of the visit

was his receipt of a letter from Wang, enclosing a copy of the Agreed

Announcement. It was posted in Geneva February  28. An informal

English translation of the letter is enclosed. We do not know how many

of these letters Wang has mailed, but the presumption is that he has sent

the letter to all the Chinese whose addresses are known to the PRC. [text

not declassified] suspects that his name and address were obtained from

one of the students who recently returned to the Mainland. There is a

printed list of the members of the Chinese Students Club at the University

of Illinois, and this list was probably taken back to China by one of the

recent travelers. [text not declassified] thinks that the letter to him signi­

fies that his wife and two children will be pressured in some way if he

does not return. Of course he does not want to go back. He is completely

adjusted and committed to life in this country, and has already taken out

his first citizenship papers. He would like to bring his family over. But

he is not willing to intimate in any way either in a letter to the Mainland

or in conversation here outside of the Department that he wants to stay

here, or that he has not been prevented from returning to the Mainland.

He is scared to death, so much so that he insisted that we blank out his

name and all other identifying data from the letter sent him before we

photostated it. The letter apparently is a circular form, with blanks to

be filled in as appropriate. This man will not talk to the Indian Embassy

or do anything to disillusion the Chinese Communists or otherwise set

the record straight, so long as his close relatives are at the mercy of the

Informal.

Chinese Communists. This case is probably typical of what we are up

against.

Hubert Graves told me at lunch on the 5th that he had just received

an informal note from O’Neill stating that Chou En-­lai or Chang

Han-fu—I forget which, had recently mentioned to a diplomat in

Peiping that the PRC has a list of 200 Chinese who are in American pris­

ons, which the Chinese Communists are holding in reserve for possible

future use. We surmise that the PRC does not intend to produce this list

at Geneva, at least for the present, but is keeping it as an ace in the hole

for exploitation when the recriminations start, if there is a break off.

My guess is that if there is a list of 200, the great majority are American

citizens of Chinese race, but this would not necessarily prevent the PRC

from getting some propaganda mileage out of the list.

The Chinese Embassy here, and the large Chinese community

in San Francisco and New York, are greatly upset over the extensive

Federal Grand Jury investigation of the Chinese passport fraud racket.

A very energetic Assistant District Attorney in San Francisco is pushing

an unusually vigorous investigation there, with the officers of many

Chinese benevolent, fraternal and family societies, being subpoenaed to

appear before the Grand Jury with all their records. Many ill-­informed

Chinese apparently think that the information sought is eventually to

be turned over to the Chinese Communists as part of some deal grow­

ing out of the Geneva talks. It is a far fetched apprehension, but appar­

ently is real and widespread. The Chinese Embassy claims that many

Chinese are in a state of near panic. We are sending you a copy of a

memorandum of conversation on this subject.

In reference to the unaccounted for military personnel, Col. Monroe

says Defense is working on the list of 450 and expects to have a revision

ready about the middle of next week. There will be a reduction in the

total number of names resulting from the identification of some addi­

tional bodies. There will also be some new information on many of the

names. Also the list will show what the recent Communist “accounting”

at Panmunjom was with respect to each name. (Incidentally, Defense

will be sending a message to the MAC shortly stating we consider the

accounting inadequate and spelling out why.) A copy of the above list

will be sent to us and to you.

I think nothing further need be said about this at Geneva for the

time being.

We spent last Sunday afternoon at the Department studying the

Chinese Communist statement and deciding how we would handle it.

I gather you agreed with our decision not to be hasty in our reply, and

to itch it in a restrained key. Neither the Chinese Communist statement

nor our reply got any appreciable play from the press. We think it was

just as well no great attention was paid to the exchange. I apologize for

the slip which resulted in your not ­getting our reply until 24 hours after

it was issued. We had been assured through FE/P that you would get

it promptly through the USIA bulletin. For some unaccountable reason

USIA did not carry it in its ­European ­Service, although it was carried in

the Far East and Middle Eastern ­Service. I had a copy telegraphed you

early on the morning of March 7, just on a hunch that you might have

missed it. It was on its way before you telephoned. But you should have

had it immediately and in the future we will see that anything of com­

parable interest is telegraphed especially to you at once. We will not rely

on USIA for this service.

A few short miscellaneous items. There was an error in my last

letter in the amount of Miner’s account. The total amount for which

the C.V. Starr Company is requesting a license from Treasury is approx­

imately $88,000. Prospects seem to be pretty good that Treasury will

license the full amount requested, and that the local authorities will

accept the settlement and give Miner his exit permit.

We have sent the Liu Yung-­ming dossier to the American Red

Cross for transmittal to the Red Cross in Peiping.

We are working on the possibility of temporarily detailing John

Holdridge to Geneva in place of Stanley. Holdridge is here on home

leave from Hong Kong and could return to Hong Kong by way of

Europe with very little extra travel expense. Hong Kong has been

anxious to play a somewhat more active part in the Geneva talks, and

this would give them their chance. The experience would be good for

­Holdridge and his observations would be useful to all our political

reporting people in Hong Kong when he returns there. He is a China

language officer with a good record although he is young. This is all

tentative but I wanted you to know the way the wind is blowing. Pre­

sumably he could not stay in Geneva indefinitely, but it is questionable

if the talks will continue indefinitely.

The House Foreign Affairs Committee is very fully occupied with

the Foreign Aid Bill, and for this reason has postponed the hearings on

Chinese Communist mistreatment of Americans prisoners until May.

Lindbeck has finished his work. He has winnowed out the 50 most sig­

nificant cases of mistreatment and has included case summaries of only

these 50 with his report. He took into account your very constructive

suggestions when he revised his first draft.

warmly welcomed.

We ought to be hearing something from New Delhi over the week­

end. Regards and good luck,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Copy of letter to [text not declassified]

2. Despatch No. 484 from Taipei

1621. From Osborn.

Chinese Communist Consulate General 3: p.m. today issued

copies 700-­word “Statement Ministry Foreign Affairs PRC” dated

March 11. Sent usual two copies addressed Ambassador Johnson.

First two-­thirds statement devoted implementation. Charges U.S.

with failure take any measures in regard Chinese imprisoned U.S. Says

U.S. has “forbidden” Indian Embassy issue announcements. Cites other

familiar “facts” which “serve to expose beyond dispute distortion made

by Department of State” in its March 6 statement.

On renunciation, statement contains one-­paragraph summary

their current version of U.S. position: “Has refused express definite

attitude on (Foreign Ministers meeting) and even demanded so-­called

right individual and collective self defense on China’s territory Taiwan.

One cannot but consider aim is require China accept U.S. occupation

Taiwan, interference liberation coastal islands.” Does not repeat not

contain line of March 4 statement, that U.S. must choose either October

27 or December 1 draft.

Concluding paragraph: “U.S. not only violated agreement already

reached and obstructed further progress of talks, but is stepping up

military activities Taiwan area. Chinese Ministry Foreign Affairs deems

necessary point out United States must bear full responsibility for all

consequences resulting from this state affairs.”

Of course not commenting here. However, local Reuters man,

noting this first public charge US holding Chinese in prison, inquired

Limit Distribution.

of Garnish whether anything to charge. Garnish unattributedly dis­

counted charge as unfounded Chinese Communist effort cover up own

failure implement, suggested [garble] read too much significance into it.

Gowen

Secto 43. Reference Secto 41.

Following is summary of Chou En-­lai memorandum to Nehru,

dated March 2 for discussions with Secretary. Johnson-­Wang talks con­

cern two principal questions, one implementation of agreement on

Nationals, two declaration on peaceful settlement disputes. As regards

American Nationals out of 40 prisoners only 13 remain. Cases of remain­

ing are under review. No difficulty exists in case of prisoners. However,

as regards Chinese Nationals in US many difficulties have arisen. Out

names of which 628 wish to come back. US however, have told them

permission to return has been given to only 103 students. Of these 31

have still not returned and 3 are missing. Names and addresses of all

have been given to Indian Embassy. Chou En-­lai mentioned following

specific US obstructions: (a) US has taken no action communicating text

agreed announcement to Chinese prisoners; (b) have refused to give

list of prisoners; (c) Indian Embassy has no facility for communicating

agreed announcement to Chinese prisoners; (d) Formosa entry permits

and permanent resident permits.

As re declaration on peaceful settlement of disputes the text of the

four drafts have been made available to Indians. Last American draft

raised two fundamental questions: (a) right of self-­defense; (b) specific

mention of Formosa area. Under no circumstances could PRC agree to

any statement regarding US so-­called right of self-defense in Formosa

area. Chou En-­lai intimated that US might withdraw clause re self-­

defense in order to insist that Formosa area be specifically mentioned

in text. PRC would not object to Formosa being specifically mentioned

in draft as one of existing disputes provided Foreign Ministers’ con­

ference also mentioned as agreed method of settling these disputes.

Unless US willing accept this compromise declaration should be in

general terms as suggested by PRC draft of December 1. Chou En-­lai

listed three reasons why US insists upon mentioning Formosa while

avoiding reference to Foreign Ministers’ conference: (a) they wish to

show superficially to world that declaration has softened tension in For­

mosa area while actually it would freeze situation there; (b) they wish

to tide over election year and have no (repeat no) intention of agreeing

on Foreign Ministers’ conference; (c) they wish to increase their armed

strength in Formosa area under pretext of helping Chiang Kai-­shek.

Chou En-­lai said present American tactics hidden conspiracy to cheat

and deceive China. PRC have seen through plot and would not agree to

“their designs.” PRC position is that US can accept either of two Chinese

drafts: (a) draft of last October or, (b) draft of December 1. In case of US

continuing obstructive tactics PRC intends releasing entire proceedings

of discussions of second item of agenda.

Following is memorandum given to Cooper for delivery to Nehru

re release Nationals: “At time the Johnson-­Wang negotiations began

detained in China, 29 in prison or under house arrest, and 12 being

denied exit permits.

“On September 16 Chinese announced release of the 12 exit-­

permit cases. Therefore only the 29 prison and house arrest cases were

under discussion between Wang and Johnson at the time the agreed

announcement was made on September 10. On that day the Reds

announced the release of 10 of these imprisoned Americans. This left

ber have returned since the agreed announcement of September 10.

“With reference to Chinese Nationals in the US the Chinese

Communists first demands concerned only students. They later asked

for list of all Chinese in US thus seeking to establish position of being

lawful representative of all Chinese in America.

“All of the approximately 5,000 students in US at time of

Communist takeover of Mainland in 1949 held National Government

of China passports. The overwhelming majority of these students were

and are adherents of the National Government. No exit restrictions

were ever imposed except on a small number (approximately 175)

during a period beginning with the Red Chinese entry into the Korean

War. All restrictions were rescinded in the spring of 1955. At that time

the restrictions covered 103. Chou En-­lai’s statement that ‘the Chinese

Government have ascertained that 628 wish to come back’ and that ‘US

Government have, however, told them that permission to return has

been given to only 103 students’ is pure fabrication.

“The US Department of State in press release December 16, 1955

publicly invited any person who knows of any Chinese who claims

he is being prevented from returning to China Mainland to commu­

nicate at once with the State Department or the Indian Embassy. The

Indian Embassy has not (repeat not) questioned US compliance with

the terms of the agreed announcement and has made no (repeat no)

allegations of interference with the departure of any Chinese. Not a

single case of a Chinese claiming obstruction has been reported. The

so-­called ‘Formosa entry-permits’ and permanent resident permits

obstructions are nonexistent”.

Attachments: one, agreed announcement September 10, 1955 one

copy; two, Department of State press release December 16, 1955.

With regard to 5,000 students it would be helpful to give cooper­

ative breakdown of how many have returned to Mainland over past

years insofar as our records cover, indicating how many had returned

at US expense.

Please repeat reply to Secretary for attention Robertson.

Dulles

Tosec 54. For Secretary and Robertson.

(Code room: Repeat text Geneva’s 1621 control 6674.)

Hoover

Drafted by McConaughy and an officer in DCT. Also sent to Prague for Johnson as tele­

gram 289.

Chinese Communist blast March 11 appears to have evoked little

or no public interest in this country. Correspondents asked no repeat

no questions regarding it or any other phase of Geneva talks at regu­

lar press briefing today. Department intends make no repeat no offi­

cial reply this statement. In unlikely event subject raised later by press,

spokesman will characterize it as mere rehash of previous Communist

statements. If he is queried about reference to Indian Embassy he will

affirm that US Government has never forbidden Indian Embassy to

issue announcements. Spokesman will refrain from saying anything

explicit on Chinese in US prisons.

Hoover

Limit Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy. Repeated Priority to Geneva for Johnson as

telegram 1749.

1750. For Johnson.

Code Room: Please repeat Colombo’s Secto 43, Control 6696,

March 11, 1956.

Hoover

Drafted by Clough.

1751. For Johnson.

Guidance for March 15 meeting.

1. Although Chinese Communist public statement of March 11

and Chou En-­lai’s memorandum to Nehru (Secto 43 repeated Geneva

1750) afford little ground for optimism regarding progress talks, they

do not appear to threaten early break. Maintain steady pressure on

Wang on both renunciation force and implementation issues by earnest

re-­exposition United States position.

2. Note issuance Chinese Communist March 11 statement without

prior notice contrary understanding regarding public statements. Call

attention false allegations in Communist statement, specifically setting

forth that US has never forbidden Indian Embassy issue any announce­

ment it wished.

3. Refer to assertion in Communist statement that all Americans

can contact office British Charge and ask for report failure seven of

Americans in jail to communicate with British Charge.

Hoover

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and Phleger. Also sent Priority

to Bangkok as telegram Tosec 61.

1636. From Johnson.

In response to request from Wang who said it necessary he leave

here March 14 for Warsaw “on urgent business” I agreed next meeting

ority. Repeated for information Priority to Saigon for the Secretary and Robertson as

telegram 15.

be postponed to Thursday March 22. Also agreed his suggestion press

announcement only state this “agreed upon by both sides for adminis­

trative reasons.”

Gowen

4. From Johnson.

Wang called tonight asking postpone our next meeting to March 22

stating it necessary he leave here March 14 for Warsaw “on urgent

business”.

In order assist in assessing this move would appreciate any infor­

mation you can discreetly obtain as to what if any “urgent business”

might require his presence there.

Gowen

information to the Department of State as telegram 1632.

1754. For Johnson.

National Catholic Welfare Conference has learned from letters sent

by Father Houle to his mother that he was tried October 30, 1955 and

sentenced 4 years retroactive to date of arrest June 1953.

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Phleger and McConaughy. Repeated Priority

to Saigon for Robertson as Tosec 70.

Without citing Father Houle’s letters as source inform Wang you

have learned of his sentencing and protest in strongest terms this fur­

ther flagrant violation Agreed Announcement.

Hoover

2293. Reference Secto 43 and memorandum given to Cooper for deliv­

Chinese to pursue studies in U.S. and, among this group, provided

travel funds to 771 who needed money to return to mainland. Slightly

­Official totals on all Chinese definable as students who have returned

to mainland since 1949 not available.

Hoover

by Nagoski; cleared by Sebald and in substance by German (USINS), Nelson (IES), and

Withers (SOA). Repeated to Taipei for Robertson as telegram Tosec 78 and to Geneva for

Johnson as telegram 1759.

Letter No. 25

Geneva, March 15, 1956

Dear Walter:

I received your letter No. 34 of March 9 which I appreciated very

much.

Your account of Wang’s letter to Chou confirms the feeling that

I have had that many of the Chinese in the United States, who while

mal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The enclosure is not printed.

not desiring to return, are being careful to play both sides of the fence,

sometimes to protect relatives, and probably sometimes to not slam any

doors if later they change their minds. I agree that this is a very difficult

situation to handle and for the moment have no thoughts on what we

may be able to do. I have been trying to think of some way that I could

casually make the point to Wang during the give and take for what it

might be worth. I think it entirely possible that apart from their obvious

desire to use this for their propaganda play, they are, in fact, also being

somewhat misled by the situation.

I sent your office a telegram last night on Wang’s request to post­

pone this week’s meeting. It was as welcome to me as I am sure it was

to you. You will see that Warsaw suggests he may be going back to

attend the funeral of Bierut. I had not thought of this and think it may

well be correct. At the same time, I think it entirely likely that they may

be planning some new move for the next meeting. While, as you see

from my telegrams, I feel that we are pretty near the end of the road,

we nevertheless cannot forget the Communist ability to ignore every­

thing that has happened in the past and radically shift positions. I agree

that Chou’s memorandum to Nehru does not appear to threaten an

early break but do not understand how they feel that publication of the

“entire proceedings” on the second agenda item constitutes any pres­

sure on us. The entire substance has certainly been made public in our

respective statements and it does not seem to me that there is anything

substantial that can be added thereto.

Incidentally, while I greatly appreciate the copies of the memoran­

dums contained in your 1750 I am left a little puzzled as to whether

Nehru simply handed the Memorandum over without discussion, or

whether there was some discussion between himself and the Secretary,

and if so what its nature might have been. I hope that I know at least

as much about what may have taken place in this regard as Wang may

know. I would also be interested in knowing whether or not there was

any discussion of Indian functions under the Agreed Announcement

and Implementation beyond that indicated in our Memorandum for

Cooper to give to Nehru. That is, I would be very much interested in

knowing to what degree the Indians may have expressed satisfaction

or dissatisfaction, as this would assist me in governing the statements

I make here to Wang in this regard.

In the absence of any instructions to the contrary, I will assume that

your 1751 will still be applicable to the March 22 meeting. I am not very

impressed with the point in the first sentence of paragraph 2 of those

instructions and in this regard will plan to confine myself to expressing

disappointment over their making the March 11 statement rather than

the violation of our understanding with regard to making statements.

He had told me at the previous meeting that they were going to make

a statement on renunciation and I only implied that we might make

a reply and did not say our reply would cover implementation. Our

March 6 statement did very properly, I believe, include implementation

and their statement of March 11 was a reply thereto. I therefore do not

believe that any exchange based upon technicalities of our understand­

ing with regard to public statements can be very useful or fruitful but

we should rather keep to the substance.

If he pursues his tactics of the last meeting of simply not meeting

my arguments and chanting his refrain on accepting either their two

drafts, the situation may get fairly sticky. If their purpose is to bring

about a break they will, of course, try to maneuver me into a position

where it would appear the initiative had come from me. However, I will

be alert for all such situations and do my best to avoid them. I think that

my best line will continue to be a willingness and desire to continue to

strive for an agreement with them and a willingness to listen to any

alternative formulations they may have with respect to the substance

of our January 12 draft.

I will also make the point contained in your 1754 with regard to

Father Houle. Although this point has never seemed very impressive to

me as the usual pattern in the past has been “trial and sentencing” just

prior to release. My position has always been that I am not interested in

their legal mumbo-­jumbo but only the fact of the release of the Americans.

I am enclosing an original and two copies of our draft of a White

Paper summarizing the talks. This, of course, contains blanks that

require filling in as time passes. However it embodies my thoughts

on how this whole complicated and in many ways esoteric subject

can most clearly be presented in White Paper form. Dave Osborn has

done the writing and deserves whatever credit the paper may merit.

I have approved it and, therefore, deserve the full share of whatever

blame may be attached to it for errors. In any event, I hope that the

Department may find it acceptable as a basis from which the final

product can be produced.

Kindest regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. In looking over the postscript to my letter No. 24 I note that

there is a typographical error in the first sentence of the last paragraph

which completely reverses the meaning. It should have read “wilder

charges” rather than “milder charges”.

Is there any conceivable factual basis for this continued repeti­

tion in Chinese students’ letters to “applying for permission to INS” to

return? In the absence of word to the contrary I am assuming I am still

on absolutely solid ground in saying they do not apply to anybody for

anything. I have in mind the income tax clearance but that has never

been raised.

If the assignment of Stanley here, which I still think is the best plan,

cannot be worked out I would agree that the detail of Holdridge would

be useful.

UAJ

1474. Foreign Office official has informed Embassy representative

that Chiao Kwang-­hua, Chinese Communist Deputy Minister Foreign

Affairs, discussed with Zeeman, Netherlands Charge Peking March  4

communique which Chinese Communists issued re Geneva talks. Chiao

pointed out that, although communique threatened US with rupture

talks unless either October 27 or December 1 proposals accepted, Chinese

Communists had deliberately fixed no time limit for such acceptance.

Zeeman reported that he feels this observation was made to him

for specific purpose of relay to US Government. It was his impression

that Chinese Communists were willing, despite tenor of communique,

to continue talks in Geneva.

Matthews

for information to Geneva as telegram 17 and to Taipei as telegram 1.

1769. For Johnson.

2. Telegraphing separately for your background reports Secretary’s

conversations in New Delhi Taipei and Tokyo.

3. Also telegraphing separately for your background report on

Grand Jury investigations New York and San Francisco into passport

frauds among persons Chinese race since Wang might seize this as pre­

text charge persecution Chinese in US.

4. Return soon Spielman history of talks to date with your sug­

gested revisions as this might be required on short notice if Communists

broke off or carried out threat publish complete record.

Hoover

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Phleger in substance and by McConaughy.

During past several years investigations by Consulate General

Hong Kong have revealed extremely high incidence of fraud among

Chinese claimants to American citizenship. Many such fraudulent

claimants to American citizenship on being denied passport Hong

Kong took advantage of provision of law which permits claimant to

institute civil action against Secretary of State in Federal Court to prove

citizenship. Some 1350 such cases now pending including 700 in San

Francisco.

In February 1956 Grand Juries were empaneled in New York and

San Francisco investigate passport fraud cases. In San Francisco Grand

­Priority. Drafted by Clough.

Jury subpoenaed officers of large number Chinese associations, direct­

ing them submit records of membership, financial contributions and

photographs in order obtain independent, accurate records Chinese

family relationships in this country.

Chinese communities in US were alarmed by Grand Jury action

and appealed to Chinese Government which made representations to

US. Alarm reportedly due in part to rumor that Grand Jury compiling

roster of names Chinese in US to turn over to Chinese Communists.

Department assured Chinese Embassy no truth in rumor and empha­

sized that legal rights of all Chinese residents US fully protected.

Department pointed out investigation directed solely at fraudulent

claimants to American citizenship and those who aid and abet them.

Hoover

1771. For Johnson.

(Code room: Please repeat Taipei’s 848, March 18, Control

10953.) Re: Summary of Conferences with President Chiang.

Hoover

McConaughy.

1652. From Johnson. Re Deptel 1769.

Distribution.

Reports conversations New Delhi not (repeat not) yet received

other than summaries of memos contained Deptel 1750. Tokyo conver­

sation also not received.

Draft history talks transmitted by letter March 17.

Gowen

1772. For Johnson.

(Code room: Please repeat Colombo Dulte 22, March 11, Control

6737)

Hoover

Re: Summary of views Nehru expressed to Secretary.

by McConaughy.

1776. For Johnson.

Following is text Tokyo’s 2237:

Hoover

by Clough.

1658. From Johnson.

Concur Clough’s memo to McConaughy March 12 that not rpt not

desirable ARC attempt by letter seek assistance CHICOM Red Cross

release 13. Nicholson should however utilize all possibilities at May

meeting to impress on CHICOM Red Cross American concern contin­

ued detention 13.

Gowen

1661. From Johnson.

1. One hour forty minute meeting this morning. No change

whatever.

2. Wang’s opening statement was devoid of any new content and

closed with reiteration I choose between their two drafts. In response

my last meetings characterization his position as war-­like ultimata

he made this charge against US citing alleged statement by Air Force

Major General Hunter Harris to effect in event outbreak fighting

Matsus would be no question but that there would be joint air support.

I reiterated our position including willingness listen any reformulation

essential points our January 12 amendments contrasting with their ulti­

matum and take it or leave it attitude. Renunciation closed with each of

us hoping other would meet position of other at next meeting.

3. I attacked their March 11 statement as not helpful to negotiations

and as containing gross distortions and misstatements of fact including

charge we had prevented Indians making statement, I had admitted

Limit Distribution.

Gowen

1663. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting.

While there was some indication Wang might be attempting goad

me into saying I saw no point in continuing talks given their present

position, he did not push hard and made no attempt move further

toward break. In accordance pattern last few meetings he did not make

any attempt meet my points and rebuffed my efforts draw him into

substantive discussion. In general might characterize his attitude today

as willingness continue endurance contest and continued unwilling­

ness make slightest move to break deadlock.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

1668. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 41st meeting saying statement I made last meeting

entirely unsatisfactory. He gave only points to lack sincerity my side to

reach agreement proposed declaration. One would not fail see it was

attempt my part by distorting statement he made March 1 to evade

reply his question as to which of two drafts his side I prepared accept.

2. Wang said at that meeting I even termed his proposal for FonMins

conference a prerequisite and war-­like ultimatum, such assertion entirely

unfounded. Exactly contrary my allegation, FonMin conference has been

accepted throughout world as proven means resolving international dis­

putes. Their insistence FonMins conference is manifestation their sincere

desire peaceful settlement disputes. However, in light my unjustified

insistence confusing international disputes and matters China’s internal

affairs as well as US intent continue seizure Taiwan and offshore islands,

it clear it exactly my side which making threats and ultimata.

3. Wang said recently for instance Chief Operations FEAF Maj General

Hunter Harris known to have declared that in event outbreak fighting

Matsus, joint air support would be out of question (apparent intent of

Wang was to say, “would be unquestioned”). His revelation amounts to

declaration to Chinese people that US prepared use force against China.

That is another flagrant example of war clamoring. Against this he must

lodge serious protest. If my side will not promptly stop such provoca­

tive actions, situation could only be interpreted attempt disrupt talks and

grave consequences must be borne entirely my side.

4. Wang said I had also said at March 1 meeting I found hard rec­

oncile his statement that meeting with his previous position. This again

distortion fact. After 21 sessions between us could it be possible posi­

tion their side this regard not been amply clear? Was it not consistent

stand their side to insist removal self-­defense clause and to categori­

cally reject any attempt interject China’s internal affairs into negotia­

tions or make them subject negotiations between us? It consistent also

with their insistence on FonMins conference. As regards their proposal

FonMins conference, he been stressing on more than one occasion that

without such conference no way to carry out declaration and declara­

tion would consequently become scrap paper.

Distribution.

5. Wang said in order reach agreement speedily on declaration, two

drafts which been put forward by their side were exclusively fair and

reasonable proposals. Which of these two drafts was I willing accept?

This was the one question to which their side continued seek answer

from me.

6. In response, I said as I told him at last meeting, I felt position

embodied his govt’s statement of March 4 and which he had set forth

our meetings before and again set forth today, was only resulting drag­

ging our talks backwards. Since Oct last year, I been trying find basis

for agreement with him on declaration use force.

7. I said US had, in its obligation under UN and in its arrangements

for collective self-­defense in Far East as well elsewhere in world, made

clear beyond question or doubt it would never initiate use force in set­

tlement international disputes. These not only words, but been fully

established by actions US. US has in past and has many times reiterated

however that it will never supinely surrender to aggression or initiation

of use force by others, and if other nations do use force US is deter­

mined defend itself and its allies. No statement made by any respon­

sible spokesman US Govt has ever been contrary to this and I satisfied

none ever will be.

8. I said when we came here it well known to world that one side

in these discussions was threatening to initiate use force to resolve

situation with which it was dissatisfied. Purpose of proposals which

I had made this regard was remove overhanging threat force and make

possible peaceful discussion and settlement disputes between our two

countries. I thought he shared this purpose. I thought he agreed me as

to general character declaration we sought. Obviously such declaration

must apply unequivocally to all situations where danger resort force by

one side existed. Yet he still persisted in refusing embody in such dec­

laration statement that made clear it did apply all such situations. He

refused make it clear that declaration applied precisely to that situation

where threat use force been most explicit.

9. I said such declaration I thought we both agreed must not

embody any prerequisite conditions. Yet their position, that they had

set forth publicly and set forth our meetings here, with respect FonMins

meeting I could only interpret as effort establish pre-­conditions. His

evasion at our last meeting and again this morning of reasonable and

logical questions which I asked him in this regard only further demon­

strated that this the case. I raised these questions he would recall, in

order demonstrate that declaration on conditions he laid down would

be entirely lacking in any meaningful content as a renunciation force.

10. I said as I pointed out our last meeting his govt seems be pro­

posing these terms almost as ultimata. He had presented two drafts

here which met his position. He said that US could choose between

his two drafts. It hard to call that serious or sincere negotiation. Way

to negotiation did not lie in issuance such take-­it-­or-­leave-­it positions.

11. I said in contrast his position, I withdrew previous draft of

Nov 10 my side to which he objected and adopted his draft Dec 1 as

basis our negotiations. At our Jan 12 meeting I embodied amendments

to his draft which I considered essential to make it meaningful. He had

continued to misinterpret and misrepresent intent in plain words that

Jan 12 draft.

12. I said I had often said here I thought that his position was not

well taken. However, if he had other thoughts on way concepts therein

could be stated I would be glad listen them. I had issued no ultimatum,

I had taken no take-­it-­or-­leave it positions. I had and would continue

try do my utmost to reach real agreement with him on basis honest

negotiations. I did not see how he could feel that issuance ultimata such

as he had again issued this morning helped in progress our talks here

and in resolution tremendously important problems we called upon to

deal with here.

13. I said I did not see how his govt felt that statements such as

it again made March 11 were helpful to us. For example, in his govt’s

March 11 statement it says my govt had forbidden Indian Embassy

make announcements. I could only characterize this as willful and com­

plete misstatement of fact. I had told him here that even if it desired

do so my govt had no way prevent Indian Embassy from making

announcements and had not sought do so. Anyone having slightest

familiarity my country would immediately recognize absurdity this,

and other such statements in March 11 statement his govt. I honestly

did not see how it helped these talks. I did not believe it even accorded

with genuine interests his own side. I might mention another distor­

tion fact his March 11 statement, attempt made there to give impression

I had admitted my govt’s restriction departure 32 Chinese. What pur­

pose was served by this sort juggling of words? Again why did his govt

declare that all Americans his country free to contact office UK Charge

d’Affaires when we knew as matter fact then only 6 of 13 remaining

persons desiring return had been permitted do so?

14. I said I had hoped it not intention his govt in issuing statements

this kind to face my govt with what amounted to ultimata, to force my

govt to agree his demands. I could assure him that no tactic could be

more mistaken or more certain of failure. I had hoped that if this was

intention his govt it had been abandoned. However, his statement this

morning gave me no grounds for feeling it had done so. I would hope

that by next meeting his govt would have abandoned his intention and

we would be able proceed in orderly manner to discussion of declara­

tion unequivocally and unconditionally renouncing use force. I would

hope that it would enable us resume progress we seemed for time to

be making, rather than be dragging us backwards where we were last

October.

15. Wang said it seemed I had not made any attempt my statement

this morning to answer questions he had raised previously. We knew

our discussions had been dragging on quite long time, in spite fact that

their side had submitted concrete proposals and in spite my statement

that I had accepted their December 1 draft as basis discussions. If basis

for our negotiations already existed, he saw no reason why two sides

should not advance on this basis.

16. Wang said he recalled that drafts he put forward had been sub­

mitted after his side had given due consideration my views. And their

drafts had undergone amendment. Their drafts also embodied views

my side. Since their drafts had taken into consideration views both

sides they were therefore capable of being accepted by both sides.

17. Wang said if amendments put forward by my side did not

involve internal affairs of China and did not raise any prerequisite con­

ditions, such amendments would be certainly considered by his side

if reasonable and equitable. Therefore it seemed him fact we not been

able so far reach agreement on declaration and even that there had been

retrogression in our discussions was not fault their side but was respon­

sibility US side.

18. Wang said I had declared that US had never intended to initi­

ate use force in settlement international disputes and that US had not

only demonstrated this intent by words but also by deeds. He might

ask questions as to whether declaration made by Maj Gen Harris in an

official utterance, as he had mentioned this morning, was not represent­

ative of position of US? If Maj Gen Harris did not make his declaration

as spokesman of US Govt, then his revelation entirely exposed ground­

lessness my statement. We now in this room discussing declaration for

renouncing use force. Could such war-­clamoring declaration of Gen

Harris help our discussions here?

19. Wang said I had referred to some points in March 11 statement

by his govt. These points in their statement were not advanced without

bias. They were by no means juggling of words. US could only live

up to its words by taking actual actions to correct what it had done.

Two drafts they had proposed could by no means be termed as any

ultimatum.

20. Wang said he sure I also felt we had spent enough time this

question. Discussions we been conducting on question of declaration

were not discussions for sake of discussions. They must be aimed at

genuine effort to reach reasonable and peaceful solution of problem.

This a hope which their side continued maintain.

21. Wang said they continued hope that I would make my atti­

tude clear about these two drafts, so that we might in long run come

to agreement on this question of renunciation force. If we would work

along this line we would be helping our talks forward rather than pre­

venting any progress.

22. I said our difficulties with regard to draft—and let me say not

only with regard to words of draft, but with regard understanding

between us—seemed to revolve around two points primarily. First, was

specific mention of Taiwan area and other was self-­defense clause. He

had said many times these meetings, that any declaration would cover

Taiwan area. I found it completely inexplicable that he unwilling accept

specific mention Taiwan area in his December 1 draft, if that were correct.

23. I said the other point—with regard self-­defense clause—was

that neither us would in this declaration be renouncing what we each

considered to be our legitimate right of individual and collective self-­

defense. These were two simple and fundamental propositions.

24. I said I had given him my thought over and over again about

how I thought they should be embodied in declaration. If he continued

to disagree to form of words I had suggested for embodying these two

thoughts I would hope that at our next meeting he would be able sug­

gest form he would consider more desirable. I felt both thoughts were

fundamental to meaningful declaration. But I had not taken hard and

fast position on exactly how they should be stated. I not able think of

any better way of stating them than what we had already suggested.

If he had other thoughts, as I had said, I would certainly be glad listen

them. I did not see how my position could be any more reasonable or

show any greater desire to get ahead with this.

25. Wang said with regard two points I had mentioned, namely

specific mention Taiwan area and self-­defense clause, he had already

made his position adequately clear and did not think necessary him to

repeat his previous statements. He must however remind me that our

discussions which we been conducting should be directed to seeking

reasonable and peaceful solution disputes between our two countries.

There would be entirely no meaning for conducting these talks if they

were to allow US to achieve design of continuing seizure of Taiwan by

any formula or any way. If US should in any way still cling to illusion

that his side might in any way concede or capitulate to this position my

side it would be futile.

26. Wang said as regards mentioning of Taiwan in our declaration

he should say that this was precisely what they had done in their draft

of October 27. They had asked me to choose from two drafts of their

side. If I were really concerned with mentioning Taiwan area, then why

not accept their draft October 27.

27. Wang said I had said I would be ready listen and consider any

thoughts he might have. His thoughts were very simple. As he had said

they have two drafts. I might choose either these two. He also hoped at

our next meeting I would be able make choice from these two drafts so

that our talks would move forward. If I had no other matters at hand he

would like raise another matter with me.

28. Reading from prepared but handwritten statement Wang

continued. He must lodge serious protest against my side over out­

rage of my authorities in causing death of Chinese student Mr. Daniel

Pao. Pao went to US in 1948 study civil engineering at University of

Florida. He applied return after receiving master’s degree 1950. How­

ever my authorities refused him permission and put him under sur­

veillance. This was an overwhelming pressure on his mind. In May

1952 in order strengthen surveillance over him my authorities forcibly

sent him sanatorium on pretense his contracting TB. Two months later

he mysteriously died obviously he died as result persecution of him

by my authorities.

29. Wang said I had often repeated in our meetings pledge that my

side had never persecuted Chinese nationals. But no amount sophistry

could cover up fact such persecution. He must again demand my side

promptly stop such wanton persecution against Chinese nationals and

give responsible account death Mr. Pao.

30. Wang said next he would also appreciate any information about

these Chinese students and nationals he had asked me to make inves­

tigation of and if there any information available he would be ready

listen to it. Also he continued await reply from me about status Chinese

in US prisons.

31. I said I wondered what extent his government was willing go

in attempt make these absurd allegations regarding Chinese in US in

order attempt confuse people regarding their failure release people

they said they would release on September 10 last year. His statement

regarding Mr. Pao apparently came down allegation that US maintains

institutions called sanatoriums where we liquidate people for reasons

which are not clear. I had heard many allegations concerning my coun­

try over years but I must say this was new one. Liquidation of people or

their execution without public and due process of law was something

that happily not known my country, contrary situation in other coun­

tries with other forms government.

32. I said simply on basis information he had given regarding

Pao it appeared very simple case of somebody who contracted TB,

was sent to one of sanatoriums which maintained throughout US for

treatment this disease, and unfortunately he did not recover. To jump

from that to statement that he obviously died of persecution was con­

clusion that even most gullible person knowing anything about my

country could not accept.

33. I said I had not brought into our conversations here what

I could only call the barbarous treatment that Americans imprisoned

his country had undergone. People who had died in his prisons and

who we had only heard of years later, people who had emerged from

his prisons broken in mind and body, people who will never forget

the terror, the physical treatment they received—I had not discussed

them here, but if it his desire do so I could certainly well do so. These

not been isolated experiences but been common experiences not only

Americans but of people other nationalities. However, when we came

here to begin these discussions I said I did not want engage recrimina­

tions with regard past but would look to future and I continue do so.

34. I said one of best and most recent examples I knew of way his

authorities carrying out commitment they made was that exemplified

in case Father Houle. He would recall I specifically mentioned his case

October 20. We had now learned that on October 30, just ten days later,

this man who had been under arrest since 1953 was finally tried and

sentenced long term imprisonment. It hard call this permitting his

expeditious return to US. Over three months have now passed without

single one Americans, who subjects our September 10 announcement

being permitted return. It dismal record.

35. Wang said he must say I had again failed give proper answer

to what he raised. Allegations made regarding Americans in China

entirely without factual basis. Even in these unjustified allegations my

side I had not been able cite single instance in which measures against

law-­abiding Americans his country had been taken. I not been able cite

any instance in which people different skin color had been put to death

without any legal procedures. Such barbarous act against humanity

could never happen his country.

36. Wang said yet cases unhappy Mr. Liu mentioned previously

and Mr. Pao whose name told me this morning were examples how

people could be turned into madmen or dead men. I had said this was

something new me. He would not say it anything new, but would say it

frightening revelation. It extremely inhuman act. It most barbarous act.

It immense insult against civilized people. They shocked when heard

this incident. Pao did not die any disease, but died result obstructions

and persecution against him. It be unconceivable if U.S. did not correct

this act.

37. I said I willing let world judge. I had nothing more this morning.

38. Wang said world will know in whose country most barbarous

outrages have taken place.

39. I asked if he had anything more. He said no. I suggested next

meeting Thursday March 29. He agreed.

Gowen

550A.



Letter 35 to Johnson

Washington, March 23, 1956

shown in face of Wang’s provocative and belligerent conduct is admi­

rable. It is desirable that these talks continue and extremely important

that any break should be on Wang’s initiative and in such a way as to

be clearly demonstrable to public. We know you have in mind that you

must furnish no basis for any claim that you caused break.

Hoover

1809. For Johnson.

Following for your background.

1. Re Wang’s reference last meeting to General Harris statement,

Taipei Weeka 12 states local press erroneously quoted Harris as saying

US would give air support if Communists attacked Matsu. US pub­

lic information officer following day denied that General Harris had

made statement attributed to him. Consider your best tactic avoid any

comment this subject as you did last meeting.

2. Re your letter March 15 only discussion between Secretary and

Nehru on China problem summarized Dulte 22 rptd Geneva 1772.

There was no repeat no discussion of Indian functions under Agreed

Announcement. Indians have never expressed dissatisfaction at

co­operation afforded them by Department in carrying out their func­

tions, although in certain respects they have indicated sympathy with

broader interpretation of their functions under Agreed Announcement

favored by Chinese Communists.

3. INS has assured us Chinese students do not repeat not have to

“apply to return”. They are, of course, required to show they have dis­

charged income tax obligations.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Phleger, Sebald, McConaughy, and in SOA.

Letter No. 26

Geneva, March 28, 1956

Dear Walter:

I came back last night from Prague and found your most interest­

ing letter No. 35. I am not particularly surprised at the news it contained

nor with the PRC proposal which I am inclined to think is genuine and

not just a brainchild of Krishna’s. As you know, I have thought all along

that they want to do business with us, on their terms of course, but they

find our terms on renunciation of force too hard for them. I think that

they are substantially right in saying that accepting our formulation

would in fact be an acceptance by them of the status quo. And at present

they feel entirely too self-confident and sure of themselves to feel under

any compulsion to accept the status quo, particularly with respect to the

offshore islands.

It is apparent that they feel that they can get easier terms from us

if they can find some way to by-pass the Department. Hence their stip­

ulation that our man be a direct representative of the President and not

a career Foreign Service officer. This may also indicate that they are

having some second thoughts about a Foreign Ministers’ meeting.

As far as my talks here are concerned, while on the one hand

they may be reluctant to break this contact as long as they feel there is

any chance of it developing into something further, and are reluctant

to accept the onus for breaking them, on the other hand they may

shortly come to the point where they estimate that only by bringing

about a break (possibly accompanied by increased actual or threat­

ened stepping up of military activity in the Taiwan area) can they

bring maximum pressure on us. In any event, I reluctantly come to

the conclusion that these talks are going to be sterile of further results,

and the length of time they will continue very problematical unless

I am able to introduce some new element. I feel I have gone to the

very outer limits of my instructions in holding out a pot of gold at the

end of the rainbow to them and in trying to get across the thoughts

contained in Senator George’s letter to the Secretary. I also feel that

I have gone as far as I can in the other direction without getting so

far down the slippery slope which would lead up to a break that I

would not be able to draw back. I know that the Department appre­

ciates that this leaves fairly narrow limits within which I can operate.

Official–­Informal; Eyes Only. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

In connection with the Department’s recent guidances, including the

guidance for tomorrow’s meeting, you can be sure that unless clearly

and specifically instructed I am never going to bring about a break

and will do my maximum to avoid giving him any basis for claiming

I have caused a break. Perhaps my telegrams have at times indicated

a greater degree of frustration and exasperation than I have intended

and possibly given rise to a little concern I might sometime go too far

in a meeting, but you can be sure that I will do my best not to do so.

I full well realize that this is a situation which completely transcends

in importance any personal feelings I may have and I will not give

way to them. I do appreciate the kind and generous words in para­

graph 3 of the Department’s 1804. I assure you that they give me a big

lift. I assume the Department approves of my tactics at a few of the

recent meetings of not attempting to drag out the meeting in the face

of Wang’s unwillingness to enter into any real discussion but close it

off after I have made my points.

Thanks very much for the new Defense material on prisoners.

I do not clearly understand whether it is supposed to include all of

whatever “accounting” the Communists rendered at Panmunjom

in February of this year. I have not yet found any specific mention

of this “accounting” under any of the individual names in the new

book and the only information I have received on this was Deptel

1695. That telegram indicated that of the 2,720 missing UNC person­

nel 1,084 were carried on the list as “no data available.” I am curi­

ous as to what information was given as regard to the others and

whether it covered any Americans. I am also interested in informa­

tion on how to reconcile this new list with the previous list. From a

cursory examination of the new list it indicates that it now contains

detailed study which I hope to make will explain this, but I would

appreciate any readily available information on how these figures are

to be reconciled. I am immediately sending back by surface pouch

rather than burdening Stanley’s baggage with them the briefing book

for ­Hammarskjold and the previous roster from Defense of missing

American personnel which I presume you mean by “prisoner book.”

I am not clear as to what else you mean by the latter and if this is not

correct, please let me know.

I will be looking forward to the arrival of Holdridge.

To break the monotony, Pat and Jennifer are coming down here

Thursday and we plan to drive up to Paris on Friday to spend the Easter

weekend. I have only been through on rush trips with the Secretary and

Pat had never seen it so this seems like a good opportunity, and I hope

that neither Wang nor the Czechs spoil my plans.

My very best to all,

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

1706. From Johnson.

1. Calm and mild one and a half hour meeting this morning with

Wang soliciting and even urging new draft by U.S. and I tossing ball

back to his court.

2. I opened meeting with prepared statement incorporating para­

to meet, but receding from take it-­or-­leave-­it attitude on their Octo­

ber 27 and December 1 drafts, stated “If U.S. still found those drafts

unacceptable, U.S. should put forward new constructive proposal and

submit new draft”. I, of course, countered pointing out by all logic and

normal negotiating procedures it was their turn put forward draft if

they genuinely shared our desire for declaration. Much inconclusive

fencing during remainder of meeting on point of who should submit

new draft.

3. His reply my statement on implementation was very brief, reit­

erating in low key charges U.S. not carrying out agreed announcement

and stating if U.S. has in mind only Americans in China and does not

give due consideration problem Chinese in U.S., “this problem can never

be resolved”. Again raised failure account Chinese in prison and on lists

given me and asked for information on Pao’s ‘‘mysterious” death.

4. He proposed and I agreed to next meeting Monday April 9.

In order I could make plans I asked whether he would agree next

Limit Distribution.

following meeting Thursday April 19. He asked decision be deferred

until next meeting and I told him I expected make proposal April 19

meeting that time.

Gowen

1707. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

Believe Wang considers that his shift today from former take it or

leave it attitude with respect his October 27 and December 1 drafts was

move on their part to get talks off dead center, and that next move is

up to us. Do not believe he will submit any new draft next meeting.

However I feel his move today gives us opportunity present new draft

without same disadvantages as heretofore, if we desire do so.

Gowen

Distribution.

1709. From Johnson.

1. I opened 42nd meeting with prepared statement saying I was

very disturbed at course of last few meetings, as well as at apparent

Distribution.

absence of intent Wang’s government take those simple and fundamen­

tal steps that could lead to improvement our relations.

2. I said I had come here last year with high hopes that two of

us could, notwithstanding obvious difficulties, find solutions to more

pressing practical problems existing between our two countries and

thus open road to mutually satisfactory resolution other matters. Suc­

cess in this could mean much to our two peoples as well as to all other

peoples. My hopes had not yet been realized but I felt that issues were

too important to permit discouragement or impatience.

3. I said my government proposed and his government agreed first

item to be resolved was return of civilians. It was well known when we

came here this fundamentally involved from US standpoint question

Americans imprisoned in his country or denied exit permits.

4. I said his government had professed concern over question

restrictions imposed during Korean war by my government on depar­

ture of some few Chinese students with militarily useful technical

training. It was well known that all other Chinese have at all times been

free to depart if they desired to do so. As I had told him at outset of

these talks removal these restrictions had been completed by that time.

No amount vague and unfounded charges concerning Chinese in US or

introduction extraneous issues could obscure fact. Third party arrange­

ment he had suggested to confirm Chinese in US desiring return his

country were free to do so had in fact confirmed it.

5. I said at very outset these talks I had spoken of importance sat­

isfactory resolution problem of Americans in his country. I had pointed

out then, and have continued to point out in every way which I am

capable, that early and satisfactory settlement this problem would have

provided solid basis for further progress. At time we issued agreed

announcement I had pointed out very favorable effects its prompt

and faithful execution by his government could have on our relations.

I had often pointed out to him here optimism over future our relations

that was engendered in my country by issuance announcement and

release some Americans effected by his government at that time. These

releases were understandably taken as grounds for hoping that there

would in fact be full implementation agreement and that this unneces­

sary irritant our relations thereby removed. However, as long months

had passed since then, this optimism had, I greatly regretted to say,

naturally been replaced by a sense of disillusionment. It simply impos­

sible for my government and people understand why his authorities

chose continue flout their pledged word in our agreed announcement

of last September 10, if there is serious desire really to improve rela­

tions with my country. They could only interpret attempt obscure this

failure by resort to vague charges concerning treatment Chinese in

my country, charges which every American and every person familiar

with my country immediately recognized as unfounded, as attempt to

place pressure my country for political concessions. I said I had consist­

ently pointed out that such policy could only be counterproductive.

I could not stress too often or too strongly that if his authorities seri­

ously intended to reach understanding with my government on issues

outstanding between us there must be fulfillment of first agreement

reached between us, our agreed announcement of September 10 last

year, that is, Americans still detained in his country must be released.

I did not know how I could make words any plainer, or how I could

better persuade him of overriding importance this matter. And if I had

again spoken at some length on it, it was because of my desire to stress

its importance and implications for future of our relations.

6. I said we both agreed that next important practical problem con­

fronting us was situation existing in Taiwan area. In this regard first

and most urgent task was to assure that our differences with regard

to this problem would not lead to war. I said my proposition was and

is very simple—it is just that while we disagree about issues there, we

agree we will not plunge our peoples or world into war about them

but will discuss them as rational human beings. In putting forward a

method of stating this proposition I had tried to respect his views and

even offered specifically to agree to his saying that it would be clearly

understood that whatever was said was without prejudice to peaceful

pursuit of his policies.

7. I said yet he was unwilling to accept this simple proposition.

He saw tricks where there were no tricks. He split hairs about what he

termed international and domestic matters in an apparent attempt to

obtain declaration which would sanction use of force by his country

whenever it felt its desires with regard to Taiwan area were not being

met. He said he would not agree peacefully to discuss matter unless

I first agreed with him that meeting between our two Foreign Ministers

was only way it could be discussed. He said his ears were closed to fur­

ther negotiations on text of any declaration and only choice open to us

was between two drafts which he had submitted embodying his points

of view. In short his position seemed to be one of renewing his threat

to resort to force unless I surrendered to his demand that there be prior

agreement to immediate holding of meeting our Foreign Ministers.

8. I said I continued to hope this not his real position and that if he

continued to object to form in which I incorporated my amendments

to his December 1 draft in my January 12 draft, he would this morning

offer alternative language that would enable us proceed to negotiation

of meaningful declaration that would honestly assure world that we do

not intend to go to war about our differences but would strive to seek

their settlement in spirit of peace and goodwill.

9. Wang replied (speaking only from notes) he must say he dis­

appointed after listening my statement and surprised I had again

indulged in unfounded charges concerning Americans in China. He

noted I had failed give concrete opinion on question of making dec­

laration between us. I did not seem to have put forward any fresh or

constructive opinion which would enable further progress our talks.

When we now meeting 42nd time between us he did not see how I

thought it would help talks to renew old contentions they had repeat­

edly refuted in course talks.

10. Wang said when he came these talks last year he also had good­

will and desire resolve differences between us and thus open road to

practical settlement differences and improvement relations between us.

They also well aware present talks between us not only concerned our

two peoples but also have important bearing on peace in whole Far

East. If we genuinely desirous settling outstanding issues between us

and thus improving relations between us we should accordingly make

effort resolve disputes between two countries Taiwan area by peaceful

negotiations instead of going to war to resolve them.

11. Wang said if we have these desires it not matter words but of

deeds. Even on question of issuance of declaration between us which

we now discussing he could hardly find such a desire on part of US.

­Proposal for making such declaration between us was initiated by my

side. They went along with this idea. Two drafts presented by their side

and which we had often discussed lately had actually been put forward

after due consideration been given my opinions as well as their opin­

ions. These two drafts should therefore be acceptable both us.

12. Wang said in regard these two drafts there no element of coercion

in least. As he repeatedly been making clear amendments submitted by

me were not acceptable his side. After so much discussion situation con­

fronting us, seemed to him, if I could not find drafts his side acceptable

to US (repeat US) then I should put forward constructive new proposals

and submit new drafts which I deemed reasonable. Only in this way

could spirit of negotiation be demonstrated.

13. Wang said if I refuse accept their proposals and their drafts on

one hand while refusing produce new drafts of my own he did not see

how could proceed any farther. Therefore if I had genuine desire make

progress in talks and eventually reach agreement on question of decla­

ration in talks, he would hope I would be able submit new and concrete

proposal and draft on behalf US.

14. Wang said next he wanted discuss question return civilians.

I had in my statement made many unfounded charges against his side.

All these charges he must reject. I had not fair attitude when I  dis­

cussed this problem. It must be clear that agreement last September 10

between us was agreement on question civilians both sides. If I only

had in mind 13 Americans in China while neglecting fact there innum­

berable Chinese in US who have not been able return—in view this

situation how could relations between us be improved on this question

of civilians? In dealing with this problem if one only has in mind one

side, without due consideration other side he would say this problem

could never be resolved.

15. Wang said he might bluntly inform me that Chinese Government

and people have every day been asking this question: Why US so far

been refusing implement agreement and still obstructing return and

still refusing give accounting Chinese imprisoned US? He had here in

these meetings requested we look into situation 42 Chinese and he not

yet received any information from me.

16. Wang said today he would like bring up question four more

Chinese in US who not able return his country. Information about them

contained this paper which he handing me (names in following tele­

gram). He again requested I make investigation these four individuals.

17. Wang said about case Mr. Pao, which he raised last meeting—­

mysterious death Mr. Pao cannot be explained Chinese people and

Chinese Government. They request account by me as to cause his

death and actually how he died in US. He would say this question

humanitarianism.

18. I said first regarding question our declaration I must say

I not entirely able follow his logic. He would recall history our nego­

tiations on this. As he mentioned I made proposal for declaration

first on October 8. He presented draft on October 27. I explained

reasons why US did not consider draft satisfactory and presented

new draft November 10. He did not find that acceptable and on

December 1 he presented draft. I carefully explained why, although

I thought December 1 draft represented some advance over his pre­

vious position, I felt it defective some respects and, withdrawing

my November 10 draft, I presented draft on January 12 in which I

incorporated amendments which I considered essential to make his

December 1 draft meaningful declaration.

19. I said if his statements regarding his desire issue such declara­

tion and to find point at which our views could be reconciled have any

meaning, it certainly by all laws logic and normal negotiating proce­

dures up to him at this time to submit alternative suggestions if he still

did not agree my January 12 draft.

20. I said I tried my best in January 12 draft to produce something

which I felt met both our points of view and which I felt he would

find acceptable. That draft fully incorporated our views regarding his

December 1 draft. If we going get ahead on this and if he really desired

get ahead on this it clearly up to his side produce alternative that meets

essential points contained my January 12 draft.

21. I said I had not taken any arbitrary positions on this and I had

in past and continued to express willingness give consideration any

thoughts he might have on how thoughts expressed my January 12

draft might be better stated. I had hoped that this morning he would

have such suggestions which would enable us get on it. I, of course, dis­

appointed that he had not. I hoped he would have at our next meeting

so we could again resume progress on this.

22. I said with regard to civilians I had little to add to what I already

said. What I said was very carefully considered and as I pointed out,

very important. I only wanted add that statements here, statements on

radio, press, vaguely charging that Chinese in US desiring return his

country were not able do so, did not constitute facts or evidence that

such is case.

23. I said very clear objective test was set up to determine whether

or not our agreement regarding civilians was being carried out both

sides. This test was third-­power arrangement. That test had provided

very clear and irrefutable evidence as to who was and who was not

carrying out our September 10 agreed announcement.

24. I said in list he gave me this morning I noticed in case Mr. Chen

and Dr. Wang he referred to their having made application for permis­

sion return. His information this regard, I could only say, simply could

not be correct. I had said over and over again here, and I categorically

repeating, that any alien in US including any Chinese alien who desired

depart US makes no application to US Government or any authorities

for permission leave.

25. I said we had no exit visa, exit permit, or any other such

requirement regarding departure from US by alien. He simply goes

down, buys ticket on boat or airplane and goes. I did not ask him accept

my word on this. Anyone familiar with US, including Indian Embassy,

knows this to be fact and can confirm this to him.

26. Wang said again on question of declaration in statement I had

just made I had spoken about this question in such way as to say that

“if Chinese side desires make such declaration Chinese side should do

thus and so”. Now he must ask me whether this indicated US not will­

ing make such declaration.

27. I said I did not quite follow his point.

28. Wang said he might quote actual words. I had said if his state­

ments regarding desire issue declaration and find point on which our

views can be reconciled—“et cetera”. It appeared from my statement

that I said if his side desired make such statement his side should

undertake produce what I had termed alternative suggestions. In view

this statement he might ask me if this indicated there no such desire

make such declaration on my part. I referred to declaration as desire

on their part.

29. I said I did not follow his point. I had submitted draft which

I had hoped met his point view as well as our point view and upon

which we could find agreement. He had not so far found that accept­

able and had said that only choice we had was to choose between his

two previous drafts. Last draft before us was one incorporating my

amendments his December 1 draft.

30. I said my point simply was that by all laws logic and normal

negotiating procedures, if his desire was to find draft on which agree­

ment could be reached, it clearly up to his side to submit alternatives

that they would find acceptable and would incorporate thoughts it

contained, I had expressed willingness consider any thoughts he might

have this regard. I did not know how I could be any more reasonable

or show any greater desire to push ahead with essential task of issu­

ing such declaration. My assumption had been that there had been an

equal desire to reach such declaration.

31. Wang said if as I said both sides desire to reach agreement then,

of course, I could not ask one of two sides arbitrarily to do what I had

said.

32. I asked what was there arbitrary about normal, natural and log­

ical procedure of doing such things?

33. Wang said problem was way I had put things in my statement

which created impression that it only Chinese side which had been so

desirous make such declaration. That why he felt necessary to clarify

this matter. If we put things as if one side had desire and other side

was without such desire, then pattern our discussions would be quite

different.

34. Wang said if matter confronting us was, as I put it, that both us

had desire reach agreement then his position regarding making dec­

laration has been quite clear and he had repeatedly indicated January

12 draft presented by me unacceptable his side. And again I had not

been able state definitely whether I could accept two drafts submitted

by him. I had failed accept two drafts his side despite fact these drafts

incorporated points view both us.

35. Wang said so that we could get ahead on this matter it was

hoped I would produce new reasonable and constructive formula.

And so he looked forward to any new proposals and opinions which

I would put forward our next meeting. He desired know if I was going

make such new and reasonable proposal next meeting.

36. I said I had already said if there were equal desire get ahead

on this certainly all logic and normal negotiating procedures would

require him to present some constructive suggestion our next meet­

ing that would meet points view I had expressed here regarding his

December 1 draft and I would hope at next meeting he would have

such suggestions.

37. Wang said if issuance this declaration was equal desire both us

the effort to make progress should be forthcoming from both sides. If I

on one hand would not accept their drafts but on other hand would not

put forward new proposals it hard him call this attitude of reasonable

negotiating.

38. Wang said on matter return civilians if return Chinese in US

so simple and straightforward that they need only go to buy ticket

on boat or plane for passage home and there been no requirements

whatever to do with US authorities, then it would seem be entirely to

no purpose his bringing up cases 46 Chinese in US these meetings. It

would be highly desirable on their part if rosy picture I painted were

actually true in case Chinese.

39. I said I had nothing more this morning.

40. Wang said he looked forward to new proposals forthcoming

from me next meeting.

41. I said it up to him. I presented last draft.

42. Wang quipped these meetings are negotiations—we not play­

ing football.

43. I suggested next meeting Thursday April 5. Wang suggested

Monday, April 9.

44. I said that was all right. What was his thought regarding meet­

ing after that so I could make plans.

I would suggest meeting Thursday following week, 19th. Wang

said we might discuss that matter next meeting. I said I would probably

so propose at next meeting.

Gowen

1713. From Johnson.

Following list four names handed me by Wang 42nd meeting:

[text not declassified]

Gowen

Letter No. 36

Washington, April 2, 1956

Dear Alex:

enclosing copies of the two highly classified memoranda of Krishna

Menon’s recent conversations in Washington, with Sherman Adams

and [text not declassified]. I am sending you the text of these two doc­

uments since the flavor is somewhat different from that described in

my last letter. My description was based on an oral briefing given me

by [text not declassified]. My last letter was written before I had seen the

memo of conversation with [text not declassified]. My oral briefing was

based on a conversation of [text not declassified] and may more accu­

rately convey the tenor of the conversation than the written memo. I

have no way of judging that, but in any event we think that you should

have the written summary of the conversation.

We discussed this latest Krishna Menon move with the Secretary

shortly after I wrote you last. His reaction was that the move was

probably an effort by the Chinese Communists to take an intermedi­

ate step in the direction of an eventual Foreign Ministers’ Meeting.

His off-­hand reaction was that we had nothing to gain by assenting

to Krishna Menon’s suggestion, and that we would be walking into a

trap if we did.

We all anticipate that Nehru may follow up on Krishna Menon’s

initiative when he comes to Washington in July. This looks as if it is

preparatory to a more active espousal of this proposal on the part of

the Indians.

Wang’s more flexible and moderate attitude at the last meeting on

March 29 amply confirms our feeling that the Chinese Communists are

not contemplating an immediate break. Mr. Robertson is in Richmond

today but we will have a meeting in ample time to consider the latest

developments and get your instructions to you before the next meeting

a week from today.

Drumwright rather objects to giving up Holdridge for any

extended period. He points out that the important reporting on Main­

land China developments from Hong Kong will suffer. With the pat­

tern of the talks now getting pretty set, and with the big job of revision

Official–Informal.

of the possible White Paper now finished, we may have to consider

cutting you down to one advisor in the near future. Do you feel that

you could get along reasonably well with just one man in addition to

Col. Ekvall?

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosure

Memorandum from Hoover to Dulles

Washington, March 21, 1956

Enclosed is a memo of conversation between Gov. Adams, Krishna

Menon and Ambassador Mehta. The meeting was at the suggestion of

the Indians.

We supplied Gov. Adams with appropriate briefing memoranda

prior to the meeting.

Herbert Hoover, Jr.

Enclosure

Memorandum from Adams to Hoover

Washington, March 19, 1956

SUBJECT

Meeting with Krishna Menon and Ambassador Mehta on March 19, 1956

The purpose of the meeting seemed to center upon the suggestion

made by Krishna Menon that overtures should now be made toward

a meeting between the Communist Chinese Government and the

Americans. The rationale of the suggestion was based on the desirabil­

ity of exploratory discussions toward the resumption of diplomatic and

trade relations.

Prompted by a reference to the possibility of the Formosan ques­

tion being raised, it was readily admitted that the matter would unques­

tionably come up, but that the inclusion of Chiang Kai-­shek in any such

meeting was an obstacle which ought not to be permitted to intervene.

In answer to my emphasis upon the showing by the Chou En-­lai

Government of good faith and the willingness and ability to support

and maintain guaranties and commitments respecting Far Eastern ter­

ritorial integrities and like questions, Menon made the statement that

those were precisely the points that the Chinese themselves raised

in their discussion of possible negotiations. The purpose of any such

conference in Menon’s mind was designed principally to show that

a meeting could develop both solutions and good will. In answer to

my questions he suggested such a meeting could be held in Vienna,

and would be attended by Chou En-­lai and a Presidential designee. He

thought the Secretary of State would doubtless be too much engaged.

The Indian Ambassador spoke of the Nehru visit. Apparently he

wished to convey that the change in Nehru’s plans had been brought

about only with considerable effort.

No mention of nuclear tests or disarmament was made, and

German reunification came up only with perfunctory reference, mainly

by Menon’s reference to the fact that he had never believed that the

Soviets should oppose free discussions between the peoples of divided

Germany.

SA

1836. Verbatim text. For Johnson.

We are considering having you introduce following reformulation

renunciation force announcement at April 19 repeat April 19 meeting:

QUOTE

1. Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan, on behalf of the Government of

the People’s Republic of China, and Ambassador Alexis Johnson, on

behalf of the Government of the United States of America, agree to

announce without prejudice to the pursuit by each side of its policies

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and in substance by Phleger.

by peaceful means or its inherent right of individual or collective

self-­defense:

2. The People’s Republic of China and the United States of America

are determined that they should settle disputes between their two

countries through peaceful negotiations without resorting to the threat

or use of force in the Taiwan area or elsewhere;

3. The two Ambassadors should continue their talks to seek prac­

tical and feasible means for the realization of this common desire.

UNQUOTE

We believe above reformulation, while not dropping any elements

we consider essential, provides opportunity for Chinese Communists to

abandon previous adamant position without loss of face, should they be

inclined do so. From US point of view it has advantage constituting fur­

ther effort on our part find suitable formula and thus permit us maintain

strong public position. If this reformulation is adopted we are thinking

of having you tell Wang at next meeting that US giving further study to

renunciation of force announcement and might have proposal make at

following meeting.

Reformulation has not yet been considered by Secretary. Would

appreciate your comments.

Dulles

426.

1. Following are my comments on text re formulation contained

Deptel 1836. A. Do not see any advantage from our standpoint of inclu­

sion at this stage phrase “to the pursuit by each side of its policies by

peaceful means.” Also do not believe it makes paragraph any more pal­

atable for CHICOMS who have already rejected it as part of November

10 draft. If Department concurs in its inclusion I would in any event

prefer to leave it out of initial draft and be authorized offer its inclusion

during course of debate if appeared be useful tactic.

to Geneva as telegram 36.

B. In light foregoing as well as from standpoint style suggest fol­

lowing for phrasing latter portion first paragraph “Agree, without

prejudice to the inherent right of each side to individual or collective

self-­defense, to announce:” (if phrase mentioned subparagraph “A”

above included suggest same order of words, that is “agree” at begin­

ning of clause and “to announce” at end.)

C. With respect paragraph 2 sugguest substitution of “means” for

“negotiations” and “and that” for “without” as in our January 12 draft

for reasons considered that time. If Department willing accept wording

this paragraph set forth Deptel 1836 would still prefer adhere formula­

tion as in our January 12 draft and be authorized offer accept form this

portion December 1 draft during course debate if appeared be useful

tactic.

2. Do not believe there much likelihood that CHICOMS will accept

any of the foregoing formulations as “individual and collective self-­

defense” has now become such a red flag to them. Therefore likely issue

will again become crystallized around those words in spite of their

repositioning. However believe introduction such reformulation pro­

vides useful material for several subsequent meetings, gives CHICOMS

opportunity to move if they are looking for way to do so, and greatly

improves our public position.

3. However, dependent on our immediate objectives suggest con­

sideration could alternatively be given to inclusion some general phrase

in first paragraph such as “without prejudice inherent rights either

side” which would preserve our position, make draft much harder for

CHICOMS to reject and should give us even better public position if

they do so. However, anything of this nature would have to be done

in initial new draft as reintroduction of self-­defense clause may again

face us with situation where its acceptance by Wang or alteration by us

could appear as yielding on substance Taiwan area dispute.

4. Am returning Geneva Saturday.

Johnson

1841. For Johnson.

Guidance for April 9 meeting.

1. Maintain strong position that Chinese Communists must imple­

ment their commitment release imprisoned Americans. Tell Wang that

Chinese Communists should discard any illusion that their continued

failure live up to their agreement will gain them political advantages.

Also that failure carry out in good faith agreement already made is

unpropitious basis for attempt make further agreements.

2. FYI We have asked General Swing ascertain from appropriate

authorities whether all fifty Chinese aliens now known to be in Federal

and State prisons can be released for deportation. If this can be done,

we can consider whether their deportation would be advantageous

move in securing release of Americans. Our reasoning is that this

might improve our public position vis-­a-­vis Chinese Communists and

Indians, increase pressure on Chinese Communists release Americans,

and provide face-­saving pretext for them do so. Decision not repeat not

taken as yet, but under consideration. Request your comment. Bearing

this in mind, it appears desirable for Wang continue advance claim that

Chinese in prison are covered by Agreed Announcement and entitled

exercise right return to China, thus laying further basis for our claim

regarding imprisoned Americans, and placing Communists in diffi­

cult position if Chinese in US prisons are deported. You should not of

course intimate in any way we are considering extending our inter­

pretation Agreed Announcement cover Chinese prisoners, but at same

time avoid giving Wang opening to claim American prisoners not cov­

ered. END FYI

3. On renunciation force restate US position, but tell Wang posi­

tions both sides being restudied and intimate that new US draft may be

forthcoming April 19.

4. Propose next meeting April 19.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and Phleger; cleared in substance by Dulles and by

McConaughy and Sebald.

562. Memorandum of Conversation, Robertson and Koo

Washington, April 6, 1956

SUBJECT

Geneva Talks

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Wellington Koo, Chinese Ambassador

Mr. Robertson, Assistant Secretary, FE

Mr. McConaughy, Director, CA

Amb. Koo asked about the progress of the Geneva talks.

Mr. Robertson said the situation was the same. There was no progress.

The two sides at Geneva were repeating the same arguments over and

over. It was about as if each side were playing a phonograph record.

In response to a question, Mr. Robertson confirmed that the

Secretary was keeping in close touch with the Geneva talks. Our posi­

tion on renunciation of force and the Chinese Communist obligation to

release the American prisoners remained firm.

(See separate memoranda of conversation entitled, “Recent Asian

Trip of Secretary Dulles”, “Situation in Cambodia and Viet Nam”,

“Canadian Position on China Policy Questions”.)

McConaughy.

Letter No. 37

Washington, April 6, 1956

Dear Alex:

You were probably in Paris when we sent you the wire inviting

your comments on the prospective rearrangement of our renunciation

of force formula. We still want your comments, although since we sent

you the initial telegram, the Secretary has approved the idea and your

Informal.

guidance telegram for the next meeting has been dispatched. Since you

will not submit the reformulation at the next meeting on April 9 but

merely intimate there will be a new draft later, there is still time for us

to consider your reaction.

Our thought is that the reformulation will provide a further test

of Chinese Communist attitudes and will afford another token of our

desire to reconcile the opposing positions. We have changed the ref­

erence to the Taiwan area so that it is no longer contiguous to the ref­

erence to the right of individual and collective self defense. We have

adhered to the wording of their draft at every place where we could,

and we have given them a peg on which they can gracefully hang a

modification of their position, if they have any desire to come to an

agreement. We doubt that they will accept the new formula but we

at least have something to gain tactically by introducing it, and we

do not depart from our essential position. The redraft is the work of

Judge Phleger. It was approved by the Secretary on the afternoon of

April 4 when he reviewed the entire course of recent developments

at Geneva.

While there may not be much material for new discussions in this

revision, it does at least give you a little something to chew on and

should take care of the meetings through the 26th of April, which is

the earliest date on which Wang could give a Peiping reply to a revised

draft introduced on April 19.

We told you in the guidance telegram yesterday about our deci­

sion to have I & N. S. actually ascertain if deportation would be possi­

ble in each of the 50 cases of Chinese aliens in the U.S. penitentiaries.

This is quite a project, but the preliminary survey seems worth while.

Enclosed is a copy of our letter requesting the survey which gives our

background thinking. We are aware of your view expressed in a recent

letter that deportation of Chinese prisoners would not bring about the

release of the American prisoners since the detention of the Americans

is linked to political demands. We agree with you that the Chinese

Communists are using the American prisoners to try to extort political

concessions, including a Foreign Minister’s Conference. But some of

the people working on the matter at this end believe that the release

of Chinese prisoners would at least give us a better club with which

to hammer the Chinese Communists on the prisoner issue and might

well put the Chinese Communists in dutch with even their neutralist

friends if they fail to release the Americans following release of Chinese

prisoners. Although you have commented at length on this matter in a

recent letter to me we invited your reaction to this proposal so that we

will be sure that we have your latest view on this, and also that we may

have it in the official record.

I am not surprised that you discovered discrepancies in the figures

given in the new Defense Department list of missing military person­

nel. NA discovered the same discrepancies in reviewing the figures and

called them to the attention of Defense. Corrected sheets have been pre­

pared by Defense for your book and are forwarded herewith. There is

also enclosed an additional sheet with detailed information on Captain

Malcolm Edens which should be filed under Tab 2 in your book.

There is enclosed a copy of the “accounting” given by the Chinese

Communists in UNCMAC last February. We delayed sending it to you

expecting a more detailed report from UNCMAC, but it later turned

out that this was all they had. As you will see it is far from satisfactory.

We have been working with Defense on an instruction to UNCMAC

asking further specific questions about the accounting. This has not

yet gone out due to clearance problems in Defense, but we expect it

to go shortly and we will see that you get a copy. The feeling here in

both State and Defense was that we should exhaust all possibilities in

Panmunjom before we ask you to bring the matter up again in Geneva.

The Prisoner Book which we would like back if you do not need

it is a gray loose leaf binder containing miscellaneous memoranda and

other documents collected by Ed Martin when he was Prisoner Officer

here. Please send it by air pouch. Dave Osborn should be familiar

with it. With the increasing Congressional interest in the problem of

Americans detained in Communist China, and queries as to what the

Department has done about this problem in the past, we felt this book

would be needed more here than in Geneva.

Mr. Robertson is having a little stomach trouble again and is sup­

posed to be taking a rest in bed. However he is insisting on staying on

the job for at least a couple of weeks. He is planning to take two weeks

rest in bed around the end at this month.

It was good to get your letter No. 26. Messrs. Phleger, Robertson

and Sebald read it too and we all found it of particular interest. We hope

you and Pat had a good relaxing Easter weekend in Paris.

Regards and good luck,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Additional Sheet for Tab 2 of Defense Book.

2. Copy of the “accounting” by Chinese Communists in UNCMAC.

3. Army Telegram No. FE 800650 from CINCUNC Tokyo.

4. Copy of letter to General Swing.

1735. From Johnson.

Re paragraph 2 Department telegram 1841.

1. Am still of same opinion set forth Mytel 1572. Important note

Wang has thus far not specifically advanced claim that Chinese in prison

are covered (perhaps because he has considered it unnecessary in light

my claim concerning coverage imprisoned Americans) but by agreed

announcement for most part has rather attempted to maneuver me into

position of admitting “distinction” between prisoners and “ordinary”

civilians and that prisoners can only be released accordance our legal

processes thus accepting justice his position with respect imprisoned

Americans.

2. While deportation all rpt all imprisoned Chinese aliens, or

deportation those willing to go with confirmation by Indians of those

unwilling to go, would improve our position with public and Indians

and constitute some pressure on CHICOMS for additional releases it

would not assure release all rpt all Americans. CHICOMS could resist

such pressure as this might constitute by continuing their major theme

of U.S. “obstruction” to departure students and others. Unfortunately

experience with Victor Chou and others indicates we cannot count on

much help from students in demonstrating falsity CHICOM charges

either to public or Peiping.

3. Political concessions will remain price for release all Americans.

CHICOMS still estimate our primary objective these talks is release

Americans, and once this accomplished we will cease any further

movement toward adjustment relations.

Gowen

1736. From Johnson.

Stanley’s orders expire April 13. If Holdridge or replacement will

not arrive prior to April 19 meeting request extension Stanley’s orders.

Consider it absolutely essential someone be available during meetings

with sole duty maintaining accurate notes so that Osborn can be free

to advise and assist me as necessary. Have to anticipate this might well

become more important in future than during recent meetings. It is not

possible for Osborn to do both jobs and also believe any reduction my

staff present at meetings, to only officer and interpreter would tend

give impression we downgrading talks. Stanley’s Chinese-­language

ability has also proven be very valuable and useful and would be desir­

able replacement also have language qualifications.

Therefore if Holdridge or other similar replacement cannot be

detailed strongly renew my suggestion for over-­complement assign­

ment Stanley to ConGen Geneva as most efficient and economical use

personnel.

Gowen

Letter No. 27

Geneva, April 8, 1956

Dear Walter:

I returned last night from Prague and was very interested in read­

ing your letter No. 36 giving further details on Krishna Menon’s recent

conversations. I greatly appreciate your keeping me so fully and com­

pletely informed on this. It would seem from the written Memorandum

Official–Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The enclosure is printed as Doc­

ument 567.

of Conversation that Menon’s approach carries more of the flavor of his

own ideas than that of a message from Peiping. I would certainly agree

that we should not at this time give any consideration to assenting to

his suggestion. In fact, it seems to me that in some ways the meeting

with someone designated as the President’s personal and special envoy

carries with it from our standpoint even greater disadvantages than a

meeting of the Foreign Ministers. It is also quite obvious that it would

tend to give the impression, which Peiping would probaly be quick to

exploit, that there is a divergence of view between the President and the

Department with respect to the Chinese Communists.

I am enclosing a separate letter on more general subjects.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Letter No. 28

Geneva, April 8, 1956

Dear Walter:

I was remiss in not letting you know that I had left Geneva and

returned to Prague last week, my plans for a trip to Paris Easter having

fallen through [text not declassified].

[text not declassified]

I was very disappointed to hear about Holdridge and today sent a

telegram which summarizes my views. Obviously the man in Stanley’s

job is fully occupied only on meeting days and I am concerned that

something can be worked out that will usefully occupy the person in

that job the rest of the time. As I said in my telegram, I still think that

Stanley’s assignment to Geneva for consular training is a logical and

efficient answer from every point of view. The pace of the meetings

is of course not my choice and obviously my staff here is not heavily

pressed. However, when I need people, I need them and it seems to me

the issues are important enough to meet my very modest requirements.

Dave has assisted Stanley in keeping notes and they provide a very

Official–­Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

useful cross-­check with each other. However, if Dave were to have full

responsibility for the notes he would have to concentrate entirely on

this and would be unable to offer me any advice or assistance. Even

during the recent meetings I have found his advice very useful, he feed­

ing me ideas that occur to him, providing some one with whom I can

crosscheck my impressions of often very fine nuances, and searching

through folders for materials that I may unexpectedly need. Wang has

two men doing nothing but feeding him ideas and materials (his inter­

preter keeps their notes). It seems to me that I would be placed at a

considerable disadvantage unless I am able to continue something com­

parable. All of this has, of course, not been of vital importance during

recent meetings as issues have been very cut and dried. However, no

one can predict when things might become more complicated and

active and I cannot honestly feel I can do my best without something

comparable to my present setup. Incidentally, as I mentioned in my

telegram, although Ekvall is a splendid interpreter it is still very useful

to have someone in the room with Stanley’s knowledge of Chinese and

by comparing impressions and discussing the matter he and Ekvall are

often able to clarify subtle and obscure points often made by Wang and

which come out only very imperfectly from his interpreter. Also, inci­

dentally, it is entirely out of the question for Ekvall to keep full notes of

the meeting.

In this regard, Ekvall’s time will be up in June and we may well be

having to persuade Defense for a new extension. I hope that you can

pave the way on this so that there will not be too much trouble, as he is,

of course, absolutely essential.

Also, Miss King’s time will be up May 27. I will be very happy

to have her stay and she is entirely willing to do so, although she

naturally hopes to and should have her home leave before too much

more time has passed. If she cannot be extended I would, of course,

very much hope that some way could be worked out to send Helenka

back here. This would be ideal from the standpoint of both Dave

and myself. Incidentally, Dave is making very good use of his time

studying Russian at his own expense. I have told him to write to

the Department and see whether something could not be worked out

that would pay for his lessons and give him credit for the work.

Spring is as slow in coming here as the Chinese Communists are in

thawing with regard to the release of Americans. It is still very cold here

in Geneva and we were having a really heavy snowstorm in Prague as

I was leaving.

All the best to everyone.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Geneva, April 9, 1956, noon

1737. From Johnson.

1. Very mild one hour 10 minute meeting this morning.

2. Wang opened with statement hoping I would have construc­

tive suggestions that would enable us to make progress. I replied with

expression disappointment he had no concrete suggestions; unrea­

sonable expect me offer suggestions meet his objections which I did

not consider well-­founded; willing cooperate find language meet both

points of view and listen any suggestions he had consistent with princi­

ples I consider essential. I hoped that he would at this morning’s meet­

ing “at least have some thoughts that would enable me to give further

detailed consideration this matter prior to our next meeting”. He cut off

any further discussion, moving to implementation.

3. Implementation was along familiar lines, he giving me three

more names, I making points contained para one Deptel 1841. Although

I gave him many openings to do so he seemed deliberately to avoid

any mention whatever of Chinese prisoners in US, concentrating on

“almost 50 names” he had given me for which I had not accounted.

In my rebuttal I cited his failure give me any additional info on Yuan

Jui-­hsiang or reply to my request for medical records on Bradshaw and

Kanady as well as focusing discussion on fact Indian Embassy has not

yet brought to our attention single allegation of obstruction.

4. He demurred my suggestion next meeting April 19 pressing for

Monday April 16 but finally yielded to Thursday April 19.

Gowen

Distribution.

1742. From Johnson.

Departing for Prague morning April 10 returning Geneva April 17.

Have no comments on today’s meeting other than those contained

my telegram 1737.

Gowen

1746. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 43rd meeting, consulting notes to say he recalled

at last meeting having said in order advance our talks he had hoped

I would at present meeting be in position make new suggestions on

subject issuance declaration and so he ready listen anything I had to

say this subject.

2. I replied from prepared statement that it was I that hoped that

he would have some new suggestions this morning. At our last meet­

ing he took position that it up to me to offer suggestions meet objec­

tions he had voiced to amendments I offered January 12 to his draft

December 1. As I explained him at time I found his position inexpli­

cable if he really shared my desire arrive at agreement this subject. It

obviously unreasonable expect me offer suggestions meet objections

which I did not consider well-­founded. As I had consistently stated

I entirely willing cooperate finding language that would meet both

our points view. I had consistently stated I would be willing listen

any suggestions he had that were consistent those principles which I

considered essential. I had long hoped careful detailed explanations

Distribution.

I had made of our January 12 amendments would lead him perceive

his objections thereto did not have real validity. Failing that I had

hoped he would offer concrete suggestions for alternative language.

If he did not have such concrete suggestions this morning I hoped he

would at least this morning have some thoughts that would enable me

give further detailed consideration this matter prior our next meeting.

3. Wang said he believed he had already made his points very clear

at our last meeting. Therefore, he rather disappointed I had failed again

offer fresh suggestions this morning this subject. It sincere hope his part

that at next meeting I would be able do so by offering new suggestions.

If I had no new suggestions put forth this morning he would like bring

up another matter.

4. Wang said their attention been again called cases three Chinese

in U.S. whose return being obstructed. He would now hand me names

these three persons and would appreciate if I would make investigation

their cases. Particularly case of Chou, even after agreement on civilians

which reached last year between us was announced his return still been

obstructed.

(Handed list—names following telegram). This seemed inexplica­

ble his side.

5. Wang said to date he had made representations on nearly 50 per­

sons, including names three persons he given me today. Almost three

months had passed since he handed me first batch persons in his letter

January 5 to me. So far I had not given any account or information

regarding these persons nor had any one these come back China.

6. Wang said his side very dissatisfied with obstructions offered

them in their return. Fact these people had not yet been able come back

could hardly be reconciled with pledge for expeditious return in our

agreement. All these people have desired return their motherland, but

been prevented doing so up to now. Fact they been prevented from

returning cannot be disputed. My side cannot escape or evade respon­

sibility for unjustified obstructions against their return. His side will

keep pressing this matter as long these people not being permitted

return.

7. I said in this list names he given me this morning here I noticed

that under name Chou statement made that after our agreement

September 10 last year Mr. Chou “again applied return”. I did not know

upon what information he based these continued references these per­

sons applying to return but I satisfied it not correct.

8. I said I had told him in past he need not accept my word that

there no such thing in U.S. as aliens applying leave country. Indian

Embassy or anyone else familiar my country could confirm this fact for

him. I just did not know how make this clear him.

9. I said situation regarding aliens departing my country was just

as clear, straightforward and simple as it is with regard aliens here in

Switzerland, with which we both familiar. Or for that matter in any

other country here in Western Europe, with which I sure he also famil­

iar. He and I both knew that ourselves or any other foreigner here in

Switzerland if he wants leave gets in his auto and drives to Annemasse

or anywhere else without any exit permit, exit visa or any other proce­

dures. Or he goes down to airport, buys ticket, gets on plane and goes

anywhere he wants go. Situation very similar in U.S.

10. I said these people did not apply anybody to leave. They free

go any time they desire. I just could not be any clearer or any more

categorical in saying that they certainly not been obstructed by any

authority in U.S.

11. I said it incredible that, in more than six months that had now

passed since we made agreed announcement, if in fact any them being

obstructed that at least one case would not have been brought our

attention by third power arrangement established for just this purpose.

To say that just because somebody does not return his country he being

obstructed by my government simply does not bear light of facts.

12. I said in only one of cases he mentioned me here was there spe­

cific allegation of obstruction—that was case Yuan Jui-­hsiang. I went

into that case but information he gave me was not sufficient, as I told

him sometime ago, enable me identify him. Some weeks ago I asked

him for further information that would enable me go into case further.

But I not yet received such information.

13. I said I might also mention that some weeks ago he asked

me for medical records on Mr. Liu and I was pleased be able very

promptly reply his request. I had also asked him for similar informa­

tion and records regarding Mrs. Bradshaw and Kanady but had not

received his reply.

14. I said facts were clearly that Chinese desiring return his country

free do so. They steadily arriving his country from U.S.

15. I said situation regarding Americans still remains vastly dif­

ferent. It now approaching four months since last American released

from his country to return U.S. I had pointed out many times here and

would not go into details this morning that my people and my govern­

ment increasingly feel these specific Americans who were clearly sub­

ject our agreed announcement were being held in expectation and hope

of extracting political concessions from my government in exchange

their return.

16. I said I had said over and over again and I again said this morn­

ing that no policy could be more mistaken. I found it very difficult

understand why his government did not even in its own interest carry

out agreement with regard these specific Americans. Whole situation

certainly does not establish very sound or hopeful basis to consider

entering into new agreements.

17. I said facts of matter were that neither my government nor

anyone else could consider that our agreement September 10 was

really being carried out by his authorities with respect these specific

Americans. I again renewed my request that this agreement be imple­

mented and these Americans be permitted return.

18. Wang said my statement with regard ability of foreign nationals

to depart freely sounded very good. He would very much like take my

words here for granted. However, fact that nearly 50 persons, whose

names given me, had not been able make departure and still under

obstructions from doing so made it very hard accept my statement.

19. Wang said he entirely prepared accept information given by me

regarding exit procedures currently being practiced in European coun­

tries including Switzerland. However, in Switzerland their Chinese

nationals had never been subject obstructions their departure by Swiss

authorities and he had never heard of such setup as immigration service

in Switzerland. If situation was indeed similar to practice in Switzerland

in which foreign nationals including Chinese nationals could freely make

their departure, then it would have been entirely superfluous for both us

to make agreement which we did last September.

20. Wang said specific persons whose names he had given me and

whose number about 50 persons had in fact encountered obstructions

and difficulties in departure. It a matter for steps to be taken to look into

cases all these nearly 50 people and is not matter of one or two persons

encountering obstructions.

21. Wang said in speaking about implementation our agreement

last September, first of all they expect American side to implement or

carry out agreement between us. For since agreement reached between

us U.S. Government not known to have taken any necessary measures

to help Chinese in U.S. make free departure. U.S. Government also has

not taken measures to permit expeditious return of Chinese nationals.

Any excuses with regard this matter cannot explain matter of return

of Chinese. I had said I found it very difficult make this matter clear to

them. Best method in which I could make this clear them was to allow

these Chinese return.

22. I said if these people he had mentioned or any others really

desire return and really felt they being obstructed, why was it that at

least one them has not brought his case to attention Indian Embassy

and if Indian Embassy felt there any substance his allegations it has not

brought case attention my government?

23. Wang said he had told me reasons in this regard many times

in past. Chinese nationals in U.S. were constantly under unreasonable

oppression of U.S. INS and fact was that many people were not able

make known their free will. This quite sufficient explain existing situa­

tion with regard Chinese.

24. I said I recalled as long ago as last December seeing public

statement by Indian Embassy to effect it in communication with many

Chinese in U.S. Certainly if any them alleging any obstructions by my

government and Indian Embassy felt there any foundation for it, it

would have said something us about it.

25. Wang said I had said Indian Embassy in communication with

many Chinese in U.S. Did I mean that U.S. Government has already

handed Indian Embassy lists Chinese in U.S.?

26. I said I only referring what Indian Embassy said. On December 20

Indian Embassy issued statement first paragraph of which reads: “Since

Embassy India announced details repatriation procedure for Chinese in

U.S. wishing return Chinese mainland, Embassy at Washington, D.C.

and Consulates General of India New York and San Francisco have

received inquiries and applications from Chinese seeking advice and

assistance.” Only citing this shows that as long ago as last December

Indian Embassy said it in communication Chinese in U.S. Certainly if

any real obstruction any these people, Indian Embassy would certainly

called it our attention.

27. Wang said his information indicates Indian Embassy willing

inform Chinese in U.S. of agreed announcement between us last year

but Indian Embassy had found this job be very difficult because fail­

ure U.S. Government provide list Chinese in U.S. They continue hope

U.S. Government would cooperate this matter by submitting such lists

Indian Embassy so as help Embassy in fact communicate with Chinese.

However all that only one aspect of solving this matter.

28. Wang said essential thing was what attitude U.S. ­Government

was adopting with regard expeditious return Chinese. If U.S.

­Government would not openly abolish such unreasonable requirements

as entry permits Taiwan and requirement application permanent res­

idence U.S.—if U.S. Government fails take these steps, pressure hith­

erto exerted minds Chinese would not be relieved.

29. I said essential thing was whether U.S. in fact obstructing

departure any Chinese in U.S. who in fact desires return his country.

Fact was that not single fact showing any obstruction in any case has

yet been demonstrated and I satisfied none would be. I wished it were

same situation with regard 213 Americans his country.

30. Wang said greatest fact was that about 50 specific persons had

not been able return. I had not yet given account about these about

50 persons. So long as every last one these people had not yet been

able return, they would continue press this matter these meetings. They

would continue do so until these people had in fact returned.

31. I said if he had nothing more I proposed next meeting Thursday

April 19. Wang inquired whether I would consider April 16 Monday?

I said that would be very difficult for me, and would much prefer

Thursday April 19. Wang said he would not insist.

Gowen

1856. For Johnson. Your 1736.

Holdridge departing Paris for Geneva April 13 flight 738 Air

France. Stanley to depart as planned.

Dulles

by Serey (FE/EX); cleared in substance by Clough and Manning (R).

1860. For Johnson. Your 426 from Prague.

1. We believe restoration of phrase “to the pursuit by each side of

its policies by peaceful means” in paragraph one strengthens our pub­

lic position and provides you firmer stance from which rebut Wang’s

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and Phleger.

argument US trying trick Chinese Communists into recognizing status

quo. Inclusion this phrase makes it unmistakably clear that in draft dec­

laration we seeking only debar use force to alter status quo. Statement

in fact reiterates what you have stated in discussions on numerous

occasions.

2. We do not envisage use minor changes in wording as negotiat­

ing tactic unless at later stage it would appear that such minor textual

changes would lead to final agreement. We prefer table text which will

give us strongest public position in event break and thereafter avoid

proposing minor changes for bargaining purposes.

3. Concur your suggestion place “agree” at beginning clause and

“to announce” at end.

4. Your suggestions for revising paragraph 2 are good and would

improve it somewhat from our point of view. However, we think this

consideration is outweighed by psychological desirability of retaining

unchanged as much as possible from Chinese Communist December 1

draft.

5. Re paragraph 3 Urtel, Dept not repeat not prepared authorize

deletion reference to “individual and collective self-­defense.” Broad­

ness proposed substitute wording would permit Communists interpret

so as to nullify their renunciation force pledge. Furthermore deletion of

self-­defense reference after we have insisted on its retention could be

readily misrepresented by Communist side as implying that we have

receded from our original position.

6. On basis above considerations, reformulation to be introduced

April 19 should be that contained Deptel 1836 with change approved

7. Reformulation will be referred to as “Second US Revision of

Chinese Communist December 1 Counterproposal.”

Dulles

324. For Amb Johnson.

Following is text Department’s 1860 to Geneva:

QUOTE

(Code Room: Please repeat Department’s 1860, Control 04671,

April 11, 1956)

UNQUOTE

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by Clough.

327. For Johnson.

Geneva’s 1739. Close check through Department shows that no

repeat no change in Department’s position on passports valid for

Communist China has taken place. Policy not to reexamine question

prior to release of imprisoned Americans remains unaltered. Department

unable to find any indication of recent approach by Catledge or any other

New York Times representative on this subject.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Sebald, Robertson, Phleger, Donovan (EE),

Chase (SCA), McIlvaine (P) and Macomber (S).

1874. For Johnson.

(Code Room: Please repeat Department’s telegram to Prague 327,

Control 05588, April 12.)

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy.

Letter No. 38

Washington, April 13, 1956

Dear Alex:

We are glad that you were able to get the 10 day interval between

the last meeting and the next one. Everyone back here is aware that

your life is a hard one while you must bear the heavy dual responsibil­

ity. The extra breathing space must be welcome.

You may have been somewhat disappointed with the ­Department’s

1860, since the reasoning departed somewhat from yours. We went to

some lengths in our telegram to spell out our rationalization so that you

would not think your ideas had been summarily dismissed. I believe

you will recognize the Department’s position as tenable regardless

whether you see completely eye to eye with us.

Judge Phleger in particular believes it is important to leave in the

reference to the right of pursuit of policies by peaceful means, in order

to undermine Wang’s argument that we would trick him into accept­

ing the status quo. Judge Phleger also thinks that it is very important

from a psychological standpoint to adhere as closely as possible to the

wording of the Communist draft. This will give more substance to our

contention that we are going a long way to meet Wang’s proposition

Informal.

and that our limited amendments of his draft should not make the

document unacceptable to him. We are willing to accept slightly less

desirable wording in paragraph two in order to preserve this position.

Mr. Robertson concurred strongly with Judge Phleger on these points.

The feeling was unanimous that we could not possibly consider

doing away with the specific reference to the right of individual and

collective self defense. This seems to us a cardinal point, and the cession

of the point could undermine the foundations of the protective com­

mitment we seek. Our misgivings on this score assume redoubled force

in the light of the importance we have attached to this provision in the

discussions to date. If we abandon this phrase now after an issue has

been made of it, great significance would inevitably be read into our

action, with possibly dangerous consequences.

We are sending you separately a communication delivered to the

British in Peiping, by the Chinese Communist Foreign Office propos­

ing a general conference on the NNSC and on a political settlement in

Korea. This was delivered to us by the British only 24 hours ago and is

still under preliminary consideration here. If you have any thoughts

on how this ties in with Communist strategy as observed by you at

Geneva we would like to have them.

Mr. Robertson saw Congressmen Richards and Dodd yesterday on

the matter of the proposed House investigation of the maltreatment of

Americans in Communist China. He explained our request to the Sen­

ate Subcommittee to postpone a similar investigation, and expressed

the hope that the House Committee would do likewise. He stressed

that the timing of such an investigation might be wrong at this moment

although it could well be useful later on. He felt that we should not dis­

sipate the impact of a forcible campaign by letting the story of the out­

rages come out in driblets. If and when we start a campaign it should

be well organized and we should got the benefit of the full impact of

the whole story. We understand that Father Rigney is testifying before

the Senate Subcommittee next week. This is isolated testimony in con­

nection with the book he has written on his experiences which is to

be published in a few weeks. We have not objected to his appearances

before the Committee.

We have not yet had a reply from Justice to our request for the

survey of the deportability of Chinese prisoners. It is undoubtedly a

tedious and delicate project. We are continuing to give I & N.S. the data

provided by Wang on the Chinese alleged to be encountering difficulty

in returning to Mainland China. I hope Nagoski will have some of the

information from I & N.S. soon. Of course it is intended only for our

own confidential background illumination.

We are running into a real budgetary and personnel problem in

keeping you supplied with officer manpower. Hong Kong feels that its

reporting on Communist China is going to suffer through ­Holdridge’s

absence. FE/EX feels that it is a regrettable waste of scarce officer man­

power to have two good men there with little or nothing to do between

the sessions. FE/EX has suggested that I inquire of you whether a

deal might not be worked out with the Consulate General in Geneva

whereby Osborn’s services could be made available to the Consulate

General a couple of days a week in return for the loan to you of the

services of a Geneva Vice Consul on meeting days. This would make it

possible for us to release Holdridge fairly soon, and it would give

Osborn something to do between meetings. It should also benefit the

overworked Geneva staff since they would receive more help than they

would be giving. FE/EX thinks that this arrangement, while rather

unconventional, should be workable. Please let me have your reaction

in your next letter.

Regards, and the best from us all,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosure:

Text of Note received by the British in Peiping.

1892. For Johnson.

Guidance for April 19 meeting.

1. Go over usual ground once more on implementation Agreed

Announcement. Deplore long drawn out Communist flouting

­September 10 obligation. Observe that absence any developments

whatever for 4 months affords clear evidence Communists have will­

fully ceased any pretense of compliance. State that effect on American

public opinion, US Government’s estimate of dependability Chinese

Communist pledged word and on US assessment of character Chinese

Communist motives can only be adverse to progress in reaching further

agreements. Place on record that 9 Chinese from US known to have

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger and by Clough.

of at least 130 Chinese who have traveled from US to mainland China

by ship via Hong Kong since talks began.

2. You granted full discretion as to introduction reformulation

renunciation force draft at this meeting. If tactical situation seems to

indicate desirability new move along this line on your part, you should

introduce it. If you believe circumstances not propitious this meeting,

you may refrain from introducing new draft. If draft not introduced

meeting, you should in your discretion either lay groundwork for intro­

duction at next meeting or continue urge merits last US proposal and

give Wang full opportunity propose counter draft. If you do introduce

revised US draft you should lay stress on lengths to which we have gone

in effort to retain as much as possible Wang’s draft both in substance and

form. You should point out new location self defense clause in preamble

and express your belief Wang can find no reasonable grounds for objec­

tion to draft in this form. State you assume reference to right self-­defense

is as important from Wang’s standpoint as from ours. Recall that Wang

has already implied he would be agreeable to inclusion reference to gen­

eral area Taiwan in proper context. We believe new formulation affords

context he should be able accept.

3. In order insure there will be no misunderstanding full text refor­

mulation as approved by Department quoted verbatim below:

QUOTE

Second US Revision of Chinese Communist December 1

Counterproposal

1. Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan, on behalf of the Government of

the People’s Republic of China, and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson,

on behalf of the Government of the United States of America, agree,

without prejudice to the pursuit by each side of its policies by peaceful

means or its inherent right of individual or collective self-­defense, to

announce:

2. The People’s Republic of China and the United States of ­America

are determined that they should settle disputes between their two coun­

tries through peaceful negotiations without resorting to the threat or use

of force in the Taiwan area or elsewhere;

3. The two Ambassadors should continue their talks to seek practi­

cal and feasible means for the realization of this common desire.

UNQUOTE

Dulles

578. Memorandum of Conversation, Hill, Robertson, and Members

of Congress

Washington, April 16, 1956

SUBJECT

Proposed Investigation by Dodd Subcommittee of Mistreatment of Americans in

China

PARTICIPANTS

Robert C. Hill, Assistant Secretary, H

Walter S. Robertson, Assistant Secretary, FE

Rep. Thomas J. Dodd (D-­Connecticut)

Rep. Clement J. Zablocki (D-­Wisconsin)

Rep. Lawrence H. Smith (R-­Wisconsin)

Rep. John Jarman (D-­Oklahoma)

Rep. Robert Byrd (D-­West Virginia)

Rep. J. L. Pilcher (D-­Georgia)

Ralph N. Clough, Deputy Director, CA

Mr. Robertson expressed his complete agreement with the objec­

tives of the Subcommittee in desiring to investigate mistreatment of

American citizens in Communist China. It was purely a question of

tactics and timing that he wished to discuss with them. He reviewed

the past negotiations with the Chinese Communists for the release of

Americans, beginning in June 1954 pointing out that 52 ­Americans

had been released as a result. However, 13 Americans remained in

jail in Communist China and we were still engaged in protracted

and tedious negotiations to bring about their release. It was obvi­

ous that the ­Chinese Communists hoped to obtain political conces­

sions in exchange for release of these persons, but we had made no

concessions and were determined not to do so. We saw no other

way  to bring about the release of our citizens than to continue to

negotiate. We believed that an investigation by the Subcommittee at

this time might be counterproductive and therefore hoped that the

­Subcommittee would delay its investigation. Furthermore, we consid­

ered it highly desirable to employ all available material on mistreat­

ment of ­Americans in ­Communist China at the psychological moment

when it would have the greatest effect. We had a carefully prepared

report on this subject, covering 157 cases of Americans who had been

imprisoned as well as other material but we did not intend to release

this now. It should be released as part of a carefully planned campaign

with a clearly defined objective rather than dissipated little by little in

an uncoordinated manner.

by Clough.

Members of the Subcommittee said that their primary concern

was the increasing tendency toward accommodation with Communist

China which they had noted both in the US and abroad. They were

worried that Communist China might be admitted to the UN. They

regarded the proposed Subcommittee investigation as a useful means

of reminding the American people of the true nature of the ­Communist

regime in China. The question was raised as to whether there would

ever be a time when we would not have some American behind the

Iron Curtain for whose release we were negotiating. Members of

the ­Subcommittee emphasized the need for constant repetition of

­Communist China’s misdeeds since people had a tendency to forget.

They did, however, express great respect for Mr. Robertson’s views and

promised to give them most careful consideration. They asked for an

estimate as to when the Americans might be released and the investiga­

tion carried on without any adverse effects.

Mr. Robertson stated emphatically that he knew of no softening

towards the Chinese Communists among responsible officials of this

Government or within Congress. He repeated the statements which

the President had made to Prime Minister Eden. With respect to the

question of timing, he said it was impossible to judge how soon the

­Communists might move on releasing the prisoners.

The members of the Subcommittee expressed their appreciation

for Mr. Robertson’s presentation. They indicated that they all shared

his strong opposition toward any softening of our policy towards

­Communist China. Chairman Dodd said that as soon as Mrs. Church

and Mr. Jackson returned, in the next day or two, the Subcommittee

would meet and decide what action to take concerning the investigation.

Letter No. 29

Geneva, April 18, 1956

Dear Walter:

I returned to Geneva yesterday evening and appreciated receiv­

ing your Letters No. 37 and 38 as well as the guidance for tomorrow’s

meeting. As far as the new draft is concerned I do not say that I was

disappointed as it is largely what I expected and believe it is entirely

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

defensible. I am just very doubtful that agreement can be reached thereon

and made my comments in order that all possible points of view would

receive consideration. I particularly appreciated your spelling out the

rationalization for the draft and it is much help to me in formulating the

arguments in its defense. While I entirely see the Department’s point of

view with regard to the self-­defense clause, I frankly continue to have

some difficulty in convincing myself of its real importance as an issue.

To whatever extent any Chinese Communist statement of renuncia­

tion of force in the Taiwan area or elsewhere has value, the question of

our exercising the right of self-­defense against them does not arise. If

they violate the declaration and attack I do not see how even the most

unfriendly critic could allege that the United States would still be bound

by the declaration and forestalled from exercising its right of individual

and collective self-­defense. However, I agree that in the context of nego­

tiations as they have developed it is difficult to drop the clause, and

I felt that now that we were presenting a new draft it would be our only

opportunity of doing so and the possibility should at least be consid­

ered. Of course the difficulties that we will face if and when agreement

is reached on a renunciation declaration are such that there is much to

be said for stretching things out along the present line as long as possi­

ble. I think that the new draft has merit viewed in this light. Of course

I do not exclude the possibility of the Chinese ­Communists realizing

this and therefore looking for a way to shift their position and getting a

declaration issued, substantially accepting our new draft. However, at

the moment, this does not seem likely.

I have carefully studied the second paragraph of the Department’s

1892 with a view to determining whether there was any way at tomor­

row’s meeting I could usefully further sound out the situation before

deciding whether to present my draft. I have just not been able to think

of any way this could be done except that I plan to try to get him to speak

first, which I expect he will refuse, and I then plan to make an opening

statement which will present the draft. I am entirely sure that he fully

understood my hint at the last meeting with respect to the possibility

of new draft, and if I am coy about bringing it forward it can only be

counterproductive. The only thing I might do would be to restate his

positions in a form designed to pave the way for the introduction of my

draft and wait for his reaction. However, this has the danger of elicit­

ing responses from him which would make it difficult then to introduce

the draft. I have, therefore, decided that if he refuses to speak first (it is

actually my turn to speak first tomorrow) I will try to avoid accepting

any summary rejection on his part by not getting into too much detailed

discussion and urging that he take it home and study it. Anyway, you

will know how things have come out before you receive this letter, but

I wanted you to know my present thinking.

I have interpreted your titling of the draft as “the second United

States revision of Chinese Communists December 1 counterproposal”

as a title that would be used if and when there were a public unilat­

eral release by us of the text. In my opening statement I am therefore,

although I find it somewhat awkward, laying the groundwork for that

terminology. However, in the piece of paper that I am actually handing

him I am sticking to the former form of simply showing the date of

the draft and entitling it as previously, “Agreed Announcement of the

Ambassadors of the United States of America and the People’s ­Republic

of China”, and as he has always laid considerable store upon such nice­

ties, reversing the order of the names from that which appears in your

1892 so that my name appears first.

Thanks for the corrected information from Defense on the list of

missing military personnel. It is certainly a complicated situation when

one gets down to the details and you can be sure that I will be happy

as long as they continue to handle it at Panmunjom. We have located

the “Prisoner Book” and I am sending it to you by air pouch. Sorry for

the delay.

As far as the note from the Chinese Communists to the British

on the NNSC is concerned, I have no special light to shed on it from

this end. It appears to me to be largely an effort to enlist the interest of

­Sweden and Switzerland in reducing the NNSC as an additional fac­

tor in support of the long-­standing Chinese Communist position on a

Korean conference. A renewal of this at this time of course also fits in

well with the whole Communist Bloc peace strategy, to the extent that

they are pursuing that strategy probably inhibits them from taking mil­

itary action against the offshores.

I am hoping that we will shortly get from INS some of the back­

ground data we have asked for on the names given me by Wang, as it

will certainly help me in knowing how best to handle the matter better

in the future here.

I am very pleased at Holdridge’s arrival. I have talked to Frank

Gowen with regard to your thought of their loaning me a man one day

a week to keep the record of the meetings in exchange for Osborn doing

some work for the Consulate. With the GATT meeting here now wind­

ing up, Gowen says that he would be able to carry it out and is agree­

able to such an arrangement. I am, therefore, suggesting that Holdridge

stay through the meeting next week which will give him a good cross

section of the situation here to carry back to Hong Kong with him, and

the arrangement with the Consulate will then go into effect with the

first meeting in May. I very much feel with such an arrangement some

way should be found of sending Helenka back here and I hope that this

can be done. This would enable Miss King to get away for her home

leave and on her way to her next assignment where she is undoubtedly

needed, while at the same time entirely filling my needs for a secretary

at no more cost to the Department than any other arrangement.

Tell Walter to take good care of himself and that I will do my best

to sit on the lid while he takes a rest. Regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

April 19

P.S. Have just returned from meeting which went about as expected.

Expect it may be a fairly rough session next time. If they want to keep

things going they might present a new draft. Will appreciate all ideas

anyone may have.

UAJ

1797. From Johnson.

1. One hour 40 minute meeting this morning. After Wang refused

my invitation to open, I opened with prepared statement making points

contained paragraph 2 Department telegram 1892 and at end present­

ing second revision December 21 counter-­proposal.

2. After 15 minute recess requested by Wang he made “prelimi­

nary” remarks characterizing draft as changed in form but content

same. Did not feel that it represented any new progress. Made three

points:

(A) Their position self-­defense clause should be deleted not

re-­positioned.

(B) Taiwan area reference not in context Foreign Ministers meeting

as per October 27 draft.

(C) Present Taiwan area reference confuses international and

domestic issues to which they are “persistently opposed”. However,

will “study draft as a whole” and comment detail next meeting. In

Distribution.

order avoid freezing positions I refrained from extensive rebuttal and

urged careful study of draft which I felt fully met both points of view.

3. I then made statement on implementation in accordance para­

graph 1 Department telegram 1892. He replied along similar lines. In

meeting today slight reference our failure account for Chinese prison­

ers, and asserting announcement covered all nationals both countries

and not just Chinese students, he gave me no new names. Kanady

medical records being transmitted through Red Cross but records on

Bradshaw not available as she obtained medical care on own outside

of prison. Charged we using alleged insufficiency information on Yuan

Jui’Hsiang as “pretext” to avoid accounting on all 49 his names.

4. Next meeting Thursday April 26.

5. Proceeding Prague tomorrow morning, returning Tuesday.

Gowen

1799. From Johnson.

Comments todays meeting.

Wang’s reactions to our second revision draft about as expected

and probably will forecast line he will take at next meeting.

If at next meeting he flatly rejects our revision would propose,

in addition repeating as necessary arguments already made, stress

his responsibility offer alternative language which would meet our

minimum criteria of: (a) obviating possibility distortion declaration

into renunciation by United States its position re self-­defense and

(b) make explicit renunciation of force applicable Taiwan area as well

as elsewhere.

Would appreciate Department’s comments.

Gowen

1800. From Johnson.

1. After Wang failed agree my suggestion he open meeting,

I opened by reading prepared statement:

A. I have at our recent meetings been attempting obtain your

cooperation in formulating language acceptable to both us to embody

meaningful agreement in renunciation use of force to settle our dis­

putes. I have patiently pointed out in great detail lack any real founda­

tion your stated objections to revisions which I suggested January 12

your draft of December 1. I have also pointed out that if you nevertheless

maintained your objections those revisions, and if your government

genuinely shared desire my government for meaningful declaration

this regard, it now clearly obligation your side make suggestions that

would assist us in finding mutually acceptable language. I been expect­

ing you would offer such suggestions and have repeatedly declared

willingness listen and carefully consider anything helpful you might

­offer this regard. At last meeting I particularly solicited your coop­

eration in finding mutually acceptable language and asked for any

thoughts you had that would help in giving further consideration this

matter, yet you offered no such suggestion simply insisting you had

made your position clear at previous meetings. Because this insistence,

and in spite of difficulties occasioned by your unwillingness cooperate

with me in search for acceptable alternatives, I have carefully restud­

ied your statements our previous meetings concerning revisions which

I suggested January 12 remove ambiguities your December 1 counter­

draft. I have done this in further effort my part see if some way could

not be found resume progress our discussions.

B. In connection my first amendment concerning right self-­defense,

as I often said, I always assumed you considered this as important from

your standpoint as we did from ours.

In fact you have repeatedly declared here and your government

has stated publicly there no objection to object [subject] in view your

governments past assertions that very right.

C. In connection my second amendment making clear declara­

tion considered be applicable by both sides to Taiwan area as well as

elsewhere, you repeatedly agreed gravest our disputes was that with

respect Taiwan area, and have said any declaration intent discuss and

Distribution.

settle our disputes peacefully must cover our dispute there. In fact,

if my recollection correct, you have said failure include that dispute

would be tantamount to requiring your government recognize status

quo there and surrender its sovereign rights.

D. Thus, as I understand your position, your objections to my

January 12 revisions are to neither them as such but to some special

connection which you seem see between them. Apparently you saw

in juxtaposition these two amendments attempt to trick you into say­

ing something which might be interpreted as renunciation your posi­

tion with regard to merits our dispute in Taiwan area and recognition

of status quo. I have repeatedly assured you there was neither such

intention my part nor was language open that interpretation. I have

repeatedly tried make clear my only purpose has been and remains

to obtain agreement on declaration that will make it unmistakably

clear between ourselves and to world that neither us will initiate use

of force in attempt enforce our views, and in that atmosphere will

seek resolution our differences. Therefore, in further effort reach

agreement I have restudied my January 12 revision your December 1

counterproposal.

E. In order completely remove any possible basis for misunder­

standing which apparently gave rise your objections, I have entirely

separated my amendments by placing amendment self-­defense in

preamble of declaration. In order make this point even clearer I have

also included specific statement in preamble to effect entire declaration

made without prejudice pursuit by each side its policies by peaceful

means.

F. Reference Taiwan area is made only at end second paragraph

which otherwise retains exact language your draft December 1. In

order meet your point view I have also dropped two minor language

changes which I had proposed for that paragraph. Draft thus otherwise

conforms exactly language and form your December 1 draft. My sec­

ond revision your December 1 counterproposal thus reads: (I then read

G. Am confident this draft entirely conforms relevant views both

sides, without prejudicing views of either side on merits our disputes.

Would hope prompt agreement can be reached this draft in order we

can proceed these talks in accordance with its terms.

2. Wang requested 15 minute recess study draft.

3. Following recess, Wang said he had just studied draft I gave

him this morning, could only say he disappointed with it. Just as I

had said this morning, we had discussed subject making joint dec­

laration for long time already, he very dissatisfied we so far unable

arrive at agreement for draft proposed declaration. In my statement

this morning I had made remark necessary both sides push forward

discuss difficulties between us with spirit cooperation, but draft sub­

mitted this morning did not seem to him offer any new progress on

subject. As I had stated, hitherto central point of dispute between

us concerned with US claim right of self-­defense in Taiwan area. In

this morning’s draft I had made change in location clause concerning

­so-­called self-­defense right, but as stated in Chinese proverb, although

form changed content still all the same. Therefore, it seemed to him

all my drafts—those of November 10, January 12, and this morning—

were identical in substance.

4. Wang said he then noted reference Taiwan area in new draft not

in context FonMin meeting as contained his Oct 27 draft. Such reference

Taiwan area as I had made this morning’s draft had caused their per­

sistent opposition because such reference would mix up international

disputes with an internal issue. They had been asserting their opposition

such a reference to Taiwan area in same way as they had been opposed

so-­called self-­defense right in our drafts. Furthermore it necessary give

further study drafts wording. Of course, he would give further study this

draft, reserve further comment for next meeting.

5. I said I had just couple small comments on his reference to other

minor changes in draft. I had pointed out in statement there were no

other minor changes and that my previous suggestion changes had

been deleted and I had gone back precisely to his Dec 1 draft. As far as

English text concerned, it otherwise followed exactly English text he

had given Dec 1. Had he noted any changes?

6. Wang said he would give further study to whole thing.

7. I said that as I had pointed out my statement this morning,

I felt this draft did answer objections previously raised, did give us

text upon which we could both agree. It was offered in that spirit and

I hoped would be studied in that spirit. I looked forward to his remarks

next meeting, because I thought if he did study draft in same spirit

as authors he would find it as something meeting position both sides.

Nothing more on that this morning and unless he had more I had

something else I would like to talk about.

8. Wang said he would give further study and make further com­

ment next meeting. However, as he had pointed out this morning, could

not agree with my statement present draft being offered in spirit of

cooperation in discussion, because they had asserted opposition inclu­

sion self-­defense clause from very beginning. They believed self-­defense

clause should be deleted altogether from draft and not repositioned.

Nevertheless would make further comment next meeting. He would

listen anything else I had to say on other matters.

9. I said it now four months since any development whatso­

ever with regard return to US of Americans subject our Sept 10

announcement. There no longer seemed to be even a pretense by their

authorities carry out that agreement. I had many times spoken here

in all seriousness and earnestness of effect this having on public opin­

ion in my country and on my government’s estimate of pledged word

his government. I had pointed out before and wished again point out

adverse effects their failure permit these Americans expeditiously

return is having and effect it will continue have in future discussions

here find solutions to problems between our two countries. Certainly

release of only six individuals in these 7 long months that have passed

since September 10 cannot be interpreted as permitting these people

expeditiously to return to own country. This still continued contrast

very much with situation concerning Chinese in US, who returning

steadily to his country. According our best information, nine Chinese

from US were known to have crossed border into his country March

have returned since our talks began. How many more might have

returned by other routes I had of course no way of knowing. How­

ever, what was undisputable was that Chinese were allowed to return

and were returning whenever they wished to do so. For any those

who had not returned, had been entirely their personal decision. I

hoped in interest our talks here, with their potentialities for future

relations between our two countries his authorities would correct the

bad situation existing in spite our announcement September 10.

10. Wang said situation respecting return nationals each country

directly related to improvement our relations. I had stated that since

talks began 130 Chinese had returned to his country. Bearing in mind

existence some 5,000 Chinese students in US, what proportion would

the 130 Chinese who have returned make to this integral number?

Might point out, however, since talks began number American

nationals in China having returned my country exceeds two-­thirds total

number. From these two proportions it is quite clear as to whether more

Americans or more Chinese have returned to their countries since talks

began. As such, from point of view September 10 agreement between

us situation concerning nationals not satisfactory his side. Had already

called my attention names 49 Chinese in US, however, I had not yet

given accounting for any of them. At last meeting I had remarked infor­

mation he gave me concerning case Yuan Jui-­hsiang not sufficient find

out about him and identify him. I seemed to have found some pretext

by which I was refusing make inquiry and give accounting of all 49

Chinese who have been prevented returning.

They had provided such information as name, profession, and cir­

cumstances obstructions received. No one could ever believe country

as large as US having such huge and extensive investigating setup as

FBI cannot find and identify Mr. Yuan. Therefore, hoped my author­

ities would promptly correct treatment and attitude toward Chinese

in US whose return being prevented, and give clear accounting all

these persons. My authorities must not only keep an eye on American

offenders in China who have been sentenced according to law and

who now serving prison sentences in China, while altogether ignor­

ing fact Chinese in US still being prevented from returning. Such an

attitude this problem entirely not conducive progress our discussions.

My authorities so far had not given slightest accounting ­Chinese in

US prisons.

11. Wang said as regards medical records Mr. Kanady and

Mrs.  Bradshaw, he had told me his authorities would make inquiry

about availability their medical records. Now informed me Chinese

Red Cross had investigated. Medical records Kanady available and will

be forwarded ARC through Chinese Red Cross. However, Mrs. Brad­

shaw had been receiving medical care on own outside prison; therefore,

his authorities did not have medical record.

12. I said he had again spoken this morning of proportion between

total number Chinese students in US and number who have returned

to their country, and related this to proportion of number Americans

in his country who had returned. He had related that to our Sept 10

announcement and stated situation not satisfactory his government.

I had previously pointed out this type proportioning entirely false.

Our agreed announcement did not say that if two-­thirds of Americans

in China returned to US, US then will force two-­thirds of Chinese in

America return his country. It did say all those who desire return will

be permitted do so. It does not say one-­half, two-­thirds, or nine-­tenths

of those who desire return, it says all who desire return. Says not only

they be permitted return, but return expeditiously as of Sept 10 last

year. Test of performance therefore whether in fact in each country all

who desire return permitted do so and no obstruction offered their

return. We both knew that of Americans we talking about before and at

time our agreed announcement, 13 still not returned. They indisput­

ably people who desire return. We also knew prior to and at time issu­

ance our announcement, his interest was with respect Chinese students

in US. We both knew that up to time talks began some of those—very

small number—were forbidden by my government return his country.

Also knew that at time talks began, measures against these students

entirely withdrawn, so that any of them who desire return can. In spite

all statements made here and made publicly by his government, we

both knew that third power arrangements, established at his request,

confirm situation. Thus far in the more than 7 months passed there has

not been brought to our attention a single case in which US has not

fully carried out terms of agreed announcement. No amount of words

or charges can obscure these facts.

13. Wang said references he had made to proportion people return­

ing made only because in my earlier statement I had dwelt on number

returnees. Of course, would not be necessary for us make references

these proportions if Chinese in America were in fact not being obstructed

from returning. However, he had repeatedly noted that Chinese in US

had been subjected all sorts obstructions and this situation not changed

even after our agreed announcement last September. Therefore, these

proportions helped explain and demonstrate performance our respec­

tive sides regarding return our nationals and carrying out of agreement.

Although at beginning our discussions they made references Chinese

students in US, however agreement between us concerned nationals of

both sides, and students only a portion of nationals who were subject to

agreement. Those 49 whose names he had given me were persons who

desire return but who have been unable do so. I had made repeated

references to 13 American offenders serving prison sentences in China

but had never given reply as to how many Chinese actually in prison in

US. He still awaited reply from me this subject.

14. I said I cited number of Chinese known returning his coun­

try from US to show they are steadily returning and as evidence no

obstructions being offered their return. If in fact there were obstructions

offered Chinese living in US, then these people would not steadily be

leaving. As I had pointed out, proportions those returned to those in

either country has no relation whatsoever to carrying out our agree­

ment. Question is one of fact—whether those desiring return are being

obstructed from doing so. He had again said Chinese in US being

subjected to “all sorts” of obstructions. There had not been slightest

evidence here any kind of obstructions, nor had third power ever pre­

sented any evidence of obstructions. There had been no evidence any

obstructions whatsoever of student or anyone else being prevented

from returning. Those were facts not allegations.

15. Wang said they had called my attention cases 49 people who

had not returned and such was precisely evidence of obstructions. If,

however, after I made an investigation I could say poor people were

free to return he would of course welcome such a statement. Would like

remind me agreement calls for all nationals, and not just of nationals

only facts could make a reasonable reply this regard.

16. I said that if he had nothing else I would like to suggest next

Thursday as date our next meeting. Wang agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 39

Washington, April 20, 1956

Dear Alex:

There is not much pass on to you this time. I am enclosing a copy

of Defense’s instruction to the MAC on the missing servicemen. This

instruction gives the Defense analysis of the shortcomings in the

­Communist so-­called accounting of March 1. This was drafted about

three weeks ago in Defense and has just been cleared.

Your prediction as to the likely reaction of Wang to our second

revision of the renunciation of force draft was accurate. I should be sur­

prised if his considered reaction at the next meeting is any different

from his off the cuff response at the meeting yesterday. However he will

be somewhat more on the defensive following this initiative of ours.

You will be able to press him very hard to come up with some revi­

sion of his own which would take into account our minimum require­

ments. We have just received your 1799 and will have some comments

on Monday or Tuesday.

We are about ready to mail copies of the Agreed Announcement

to the individuals named by Wang whose addresses we have been able

to find. We have decided to send out a mere one sentence transmitting

letter. It will be in mimeograph form on State Department letterhead

but without signature. It will be a circular and the names and addresses

will appear only on the envelope. In this way we hope to avoid causing

any particular uneasiness on the part of the recipient. The letters will be

sent by registered mail and the Indian Embassy will be informed. How­

ever, we will not give the addresses to the Indian Embassy. At this stage

we of course want nothing said about this project to anyone. A copy of

the proposed form letter is enclosed along with the printed copy of the

Agreed Announcement which we are using. This is the same printed

form which was placed on Post Office Bulletin Boards all over the coun­

try. You will note it mentions the Indian Embassy in Washington and

gives the address.

We are in rather a bad situation with the COCOM and CHINCOM

countries because of the delay in the formulation of a U.S. position on

the proposed relaxation of the trade controls. We are between the fry­

ing pan and the fire on this because of strong congressional sentiment

against any concessions at this time. The Foreign Aid Bill may be jeop­

ardized if any concessions are made. Yet the British, the ­Japanese and

Informal.

the French feel compelled to move rapidly and are urging an early CG

meeting. I fear the Chinese Communists are well aware of the awk­

ward situation that has developed. They apparently recognize that

they do not need to make any move in the Geneva talks or elsewhere.

So I do not anticipate that you will be troubled with the trade issue in

your talks.

We are doing a brief talking paper on the Geneva talks for the

­Secretary for possible use at this forthcoming NATO meeting. We are

not going very deeply into the subject in the talking paper. We will send

you a copy even though it is pretty cut and dried.

thize with your position on a number two adviser and hope we can

take care of your needs. If you feel strongly that the number two man

must have a knowledge of Chinese, the suggestion of an arrangement

with the CONGEN at Geneva will not work out. For the present

­anyway we can keep Holdridge there.

We were very sorry to hear of Pat’s illness. I hope she is fully recov­

ered now and that better fortune will be yours. Regards and all the best.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosure:

1. Telegram to CINCUNC Tokyo DA 900776

2. Proposed letter to individuals named by Wang with copy of

Agreed Announcement.

1912. For Johnson.

Guidance for April 26 meeting.

1. You should continue to press Wang to accept our latest revision

of renunciation of force declaration. Record our conviction that it meets

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Clough; cleared in draft by Phleger and

Sebald.

every objection raised by Wang which has any plausibility. It fulfills

every essential requirement of the situation for each side. It is cast in

appropriate terms. It represents serious attempt on US part to arrive at

a formulation which would take into account the views of Wang’s side

concerning form as well as substance. You should strike the recurrent

note that we have done our utmost to produce a draft that both sides

can accept unqualifiedly and that Communists should accept it, if they

are really interested in arriving at solution. We feel that the essential

requirements of both sides have been thoroughly aired and that this

formulation is the best solution which can be arrived at.

2. We differ from the line of reasoning advanced in your 1799

only in that we would have you urge the merits of our latest revision

more insistently and put less emphasis on a challenge or an invitation

to Wang to produce a new alternative of his own, if he does not like

ours. While of course must remain prepared to consider any new draft

which Wang might table, we do not wish to give the impression that

we expect him to reject our new draft. Emphasis should be on our

firm conviction that our draft is the best that can be done to meet the

valid points of each side, rather than on expectation that Wang will

now produce revision of his own. We are in better position with Wang

rejecting our reasonable draft, than with US rejecting new Chinese

Communist draft that is unacceptable, but capable of being misunder­

stood and misinterpreted.

3. Theme which you should enunciate repeatedly at this meet­

ing is that any conceivable objection to our draft can only be based on

unwillingness to accept fully principle of non-­resort to force. If Chinese

Communists are genuinely willing to make complete renunciation of

force without mental reservation or purpose of evasion they can raise

no valid objection to this draft. If they have not made this decision then

no formulation will achieve the objective. Indispensable requirement is

that Chinese Communists make unqualified resolve to give up use of

force in pursuit of their objectives.

4. Your statement on detained Americans should follow estab­

lished lines, but we would suggest a heightened note of insistence in

your presentation. You may mention growing sense of outrage in both

Houses of US Congress at continued Chinese Communist maltreat­

ment of American citizens and premeditated and malicious failure of

Chinese Communists to keep their pledge of September 10.

5. Reject emphatically Wang’s allegations that Chinese being

obstructed from leaving US. Steady flow of Chinese to China main­

land and fact that Indian Embassy has not cited single case of Chinese

claiming obstruction is incontrovertible evidence. Wang’s assertions

that Chinese unable communicate with Indian Embassy patently

untrue. Embassy has announced publicly it has received inquiries from

­Chinese and it has paid transportation for number of Chinese return­

ing to mainland China. If Peiping had been informed by individuals in

US that their departure being obstructed this would mean Peiping was

in communication with individuals, directly or indirectly, and could

advise them to communicate with Indians. Absence of complaints con­

firms obvious fact that no obstruction exists, either in communication

facilities or in departure.

6. FYI ONLY. Department mailing by registered letter copies of

Agreed Announcement to all Chinese named by Wang whose addresses

have been ascertained.

Dulles

2617. Your 2301.

Authorization extend US official invitation to Chinese Communist

delegation or accept official invitation from Chinese Communists can

not repeat not be granted. Apart from diplomatic impropriety, such

action would be widely misconstrued with consequences harmful our

interests. No reason why US delegation should be apologetic or evasive

about avoidance host-­guest relationship with Chinese Communists.

This is in accordance with standard protocol practice where recogni­

tion has not been granted. No explanation required other than fact of

absence diplomatic relations.

US delegation will of course encounter Chinese Communists at

functions given by Nepalese Government and other delegations. This

need cause no concern.

Dulles

Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Simmons (Protocol), Allen (NEA), and in SOA.

Letter No. 30

Geneva, April 25, 1956

Dear Walter:

I received your letter No. 39 when I returned yesterday evening and

this morning the guidance for tomorrow’s meeting came in. I greatly

appreciate the many thoughts incorporated into the guidance which are

of great help to me in formulating my presentation which I will have to

play entirely by ear tomorrow. I realized after I had sent my 1799 that

I may well have erroneously given the impression that I did not intend to

vigorously push our draft, as I had not made it clear the last paragraph

referred only to a contingent position. Therefore, I think that the com­

ments in paragraph 2 of your 1912 are very well taken and are actually

entirely in accordance with my own intent.

Thanks very much for the Defense instructions to MAC on the

missing servicemen. I was particularly happy to see that MAC would

be asked to refer their proposed statement to Washington which will

give you a chance to frame it in more effective terms and keep it consist­

ent with what has been done here.

I can well see the difficulty we are in with regard to the COCOM

and CHINCOM position, and entirely agree the Chinese Communists

will probably realize the situation. I have not seen anything recently in

the press on the progress of the Foreign Aid Bill and wonder what the

outlook actually is.

With respect to Holdridge, in my letter No. 29 which you will now

have received, I said that I had been able to work out an arrangement

with Gowen for the loan of a reporting officer from the Consulate ­General

and was therefore willing to release Holdridge. He is planning to leave

here on Friday for Hong Kong. I put the necessity of having a second

officer to keep the record in the essential category, and a knowledge of

Chinese on his part in the desirable category. The arrangement which

I suggested with regard to Stanley not having worked out, I find it hard

to justify keeping Holdridge sitting here from week to week with noth­

ing really substantive to do between meetings and, therefore, acquiesced

to his departure and the arrangement with the Consulate General. It is

not the best arrangement from my standpoint, but I can get along. In this

connection, it seems to me that the Department ought really to be doing

something about training a Chinese interpreter. As you well know, just a

Informal. Printed from a copy that Johnson signed “Alex.”

knowledge of the language, no matter how good, is not enough. I do not

know what we would do if Ekvall were not available, and looking to the

future we certainly cannot depend on his always being available. In any

event, it is anomalous for us as the Department of State to have to depend

on Defense in this regard. Good as he is with the language, I know that

Stanley felt he would not be up to doing the type of interpreting required

in these meetings. However, I should think that he or someone with com­

parable facility in the language could with intensive training become

qualified in this field. Of course, it is not too attractive a field for an FSO

but it seems to me that it is a problem that the ­Department will have to

resolve.

Incidentally, I noted in Prague just before I left that the Czech May

Day slogans which have just come out, this year dropped any mention

of support for Chinese Communist liberation of Formosa. I think that

this would be particularly significant if the same pattern is followed

elsewhere in the Soviet Bloc and suggest that it would be of interest to

have DRF make a check into it.

We have received Part II of the White Paper on prisoners, giving

a summary of the experiences of individual Americans. Although my

comments were not asked for I cannot refrain from saying that it by no

means seems to me to be up to the standard of the White Paper itself.

To me at least, it simply does not make as effective and convincing a

case as the facts justify. My own feeling is that this appendix will be

most effective on supporting the White Paper if it sticks to a plain, cold

recital of facts avoiding color words and simply letting the facts speak

for themselves. I also feel that there is simply too much carelessly and

poorly written English in it to be issued as a public document by the

Department.

Just as a few examples of what I have in mind: the last paragraph

on page 2 under Bersohn, the last sentence beginning at the bottom of

the page seems to me to be open to misinterpretation by non-­Americans

and simply not as effective as quoting some statement of Bersohn’s fol­

lowing his return. On page 7 under Buol, the statement is made that,

“in August 1951 he was removed to a private home and placed in con­

finement alone with a Communist-­provided companion”. In the first

place, as a matter of English, if he had a companion he was not alone.

However, the use of the word “companion” in the sentence without

any explanation does not, it seems to me, make any point. It is only

when one gets to the end of the section that it is stated that his “com­

panion” was subjecting him to propaganda. On page 8 under Cline,

the statement is made that “according to medical reports” he died from

being denied needed medicine. The question immediately arises as to

whose medical reports? If they are independent reports, we certainly

should say so. On page 9 under Dillon, the statement is made “he kept

the document until March 27, 1951 when he was searched . . .” and at the

bottom of the section it states his expulsion from China began March 25,

1951. On page 12 under Ford, it seems to me that the logical place for

the last sentence is up above following the detailing of his torture. On

page 14 under Giffin, the first sentence is a masterpiece of confused

writing. As a detail, it also seems to me that where American-­sounding

names of non-­Americans are mentioned, their nationality should be

specified. Otherwise, the question immediately arises as to why their

accounts are not included in this compilation. On page 17 under Greene,

the statement is made, not even in quotes, “his judge decided that since

he was only a small cog in the American spy wheel  .  .  .”. Standing

the way it does this can certainly be easily distorted and twisted into

an admission by us that he was a “cog in the American spy wheel”. On

page 20 under Kanady, a sentence reads, “after four and a half years

of imprisonment he was deported from China in a state of shocking

physical and mental damage”. This is just poor writing. On page 39

under Rigney, it seems to me that a sentence such as “any visible mani­

festations of religious devotion were promptly suppressed by cellmates

with whom he was undergoing ‘re-­education’”, is entirely lacking in

“punch”. I do not know what the actual facts were but a straightfor­

ward statement such as “when he kneeled to pray he was cuffed and

spat on by his cellmates”, would be much more effective. It seems to

me the next following sentence would be much clearer simply stated

as “although his treatment subsequently improved, at the time of his

release he still weighted only 100 pounds, compared with 180 pounds

at the time he entered prison”. Also, it seems to me to be much more

effective to relate the nine times he “confessed” directly to the account

of the torture he  underwent. For example, to say that “during one

period of interrogation he was denied sleep for 11 successive days and

nights” is not very effective stated in that way and standing by itself. It

would be much more effective to say that he was interrogated without

any respite for 11 days and nights and that each time he collapsed from

fatigue he was beaten into wakefulness until, utterly physically and

mentally broken, he signed a “confession”. It also seems to me absurd

to end the Rigney story with the statement that he became a “model

worker in the production of match boxes”. The whole account, as many

of the other accounts, shifts back and forth between chronological and

subject approach in a very confusing manner. Certainly in reading it

one is not left with any clear picture of exactly what happened and, as

told, the story simply does not have the impact the facts justify. I feel

that this is a common fault of most of the accounts.

I have viewed this from the standpoint of our foreign audiences

in particular who are the ones that need convincing. I feel that for this

purpose the stories can be told much more effectively than they have

been. It seems to me that by far the most effective telling would be

to have someone simply take the facts as they are known to us and

set them down in chronological order in short, simple and factual sen­

tences. I have gratuitiously given my opinion very bluntly and with­

out any knowledge of whose feelings may be involved. However, I am

sure that is what you would want and will treat whatever I have said

accordingly. I urge that you have someone else sit down with the basic

material to see whether something better cannot be produced.

I wonder whether consideration has also been given to the possible

reactions of some of the individuals involved where their experiences

have been obtained from private interviews and have not thus far been

published. I raise the question with respect to the exact content of what

is said with respect to them in this publication as well as with respect to

giving any detailed account of their experiences. I assume this has been

considered, and only mention it to make sure it is not overlooked, as

the Communists would be able to make much of even a single adverse

reaction which became public or a public denial of a fact by an individ­

ual concerned.

With kindest regards.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

1818. From Johnson.

1. One hour 45 minute meeting this morning. Wang opened with a

bare and flat complete rejection April 19 draft. Gave no sign whatever

any willingness compromise language nor of intent offer alternative

formulation.

2. Made following points in presentation:

(A) Requires PRC recognize status quo Taiwan area and GRC treaty;

(B) If peaceful pursuit policy by both sides to be countenanced,

including “US policy occupation Taiwan” what purpose served by

peaceful negotiations?

(C) Mixes international dispute and domestic matter; and

(D) Failure couple Taiwan with FMC.

avoiding any invitation to Wang to produce new alternative. At close of

considerable give and take in reply his statement our draft had not met

their objections I stated their objections appeared to have two aspects.

First was whether draft prejudiced their position and second whether

declaration was to constitute unqualified renunciation of force all our

disputes including dispute Taiwan area. Satisfied my draft fully met all

objections based on first aspect. However, with regard second aspect,

if PRC purpose is to retain ability use threat initiate force Taiwan area

I agreed draft does not meet PRC position and US never would meet

that position. To do so would be complete perversion of whole purpose

of declaration. Wang made no direct reply.

4. I made very strong statement on implementation along lines

para 4 Deptel 1912. Wang replied along usual lines stressing “growing

dissatisfaction Chinese people” with US implementation and during

the exchange, in which I made points contained para 5 ­Deptel 1912

stressing Indian Embassy has not brought our attention single case

obstruction. He challenged me formally to state that “not single Chi­

nese now imprisoned in US”.

5. Agreed Wang’s proposal next meeting Saturday May 5. Departing

for Prague Friday morning.

Gowen

1825. Comments on today’s meeting.

Would characterize Wang’s presentation today as tending more

toward unwillingness under any circumstances (even including agree­

ment our part to FMC) unconditionally renounce force in Taiwan area,

that is, also vis-­a-­vis GRC. However, one statement (para 10 Mytel

1823) could possibly be interpreted as reaffirmation of position toward

which he sometimes in past appeared to be tending, that is, willingness

agree renunciation force specifically applicable Taiwan area if assur­

ances FMC also included. Of course, either position is far removed

from ours.

Although I do not exclude possibility his presenting new draft it

seems unlikely for next meeting. I see no choice for next meeting except

to reiterate our position and sharply attack his making clear that if there

is to be new move it will not come from us. Only if in context of meet­

ing it clearly appeared useful would I imply any invitation to Wang to

produce new alternative.

Dept will note Wang today again carefully used new formula

meeting. Suggest possibility this formula may have been adopted with

­Public Law 4 in mind.

Gowen

1823. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 45th meeting today with prepared statement say­

ing he has carefully studied draft I presented 26th meeting and was

bound state this draft still contained points their side had long declared

categorically unacceptable. Indeed, as he had pointed out at last meet­

ing, this draft did not differ in substance from ones I had submitted on

2. Wang said his side could not but consider that at a time when

our discussions on this subject of announcement had entered eighth

month, my submission of such draft was entirely at variance with my

expression of expectation early agreement at last meeting.

3. Wang said as his side had consistently pointed out, US already

used force and threat of force. Had seized Taiwan and was trying inter­

fere in China’s liberation offshore islands. Under such circumstances,

announcement which embodied our claim so-­called right self-­defense

could only be interpreted as requiring PRC side to recognize status quo

Distribution.

in Taiwan area as well as US treaty with Chiang Kai-­shek clique. Obvi­

ously that was what his side could not accept. Yet my draft still con­

tained clause on so-­called right self-­defense.

4. Wang said, moreover, I had also made references to what

I termed “pursuit by each side of policies by peaceful means”. ­Insofar

as US concerned, US policy towards China has so far been interference

in ­China’s exercise sovereign rights over Taiwan, and in its liberation

offshore islands. Statements I had made in course our discussions only

bore this out. Such policy is inadmissible by whatever means it might

be pursued.

5. Wang said if pursuit such policies by US to be countenanced,

what purpose would then be left for any peaceful negotiations between

China and US?

6. Wang said insofar as China concerned, its policy had been liber­

ation open territory Taiwan and offshore islands. This matter of China’s

internal affairs and admits no interference by any other country, which­

ever means China chooses use.

7. Wang said my draft also retained reference to what I termed

“without resorting use force Taiwan area or elsewhere”. Here again as

their side had long pointed out, announcement which mixes up inter­

national dispute with internal affairs is impermissible and therefore is

something their side could not accept.

8. Wang said particularly serious aspect of matter is that while my

draft makes specific reference Taiwan area, it entirely omits any refer­

ence holding Foreign Ministers conference. This only indicates that US

still intending obtain declaration which would freeze situation Taiwan

area and then to procrastinate and refuse take practical step for solution

dispute there, in order to maintain status quo of US seizure Taiwan and

interference liberation offshore islands.

9. Wang asked, such being case how could it be alleged that my

draft meets points view both sides. As they had categorically stated, if

it desired make specific reference Taiwan area, then same announce­

ment must also provide for holding Sino-­American conference Foreign

­Ministers. Moreover, no specific reference to Foreign Ministers confer­

ence made, there would be no justification for demanding reference to

Taiwan area in such announcement.

10. Wang said any agreed announcement between us must give

assurance both sides. Any agreed announcement putting a restraint on

one side without other side offering any assurance could not be made

basis for reaching agreement.

11. Wang said as he had pointed out, fundamental difference

between respective drafts our two sides was that their drafts embodied

points acceptable both sides and did not contain anything unacceptable

either side, whereas my drafts require their side surrender rights and

accept demands which their side cannot accept. Same comment applies

fully my April 19 draft.

12. Wang said he must state in all seriousness that to reach agree­

ment on matter issuance announcement, such announcement must be

fair and reasonable, on basis equality for both sides. My draft, however,

fell short of this mark.

13. I said in these discussions I thought it important we keep in

sight fundamental involved this matter. As I often said, problem we

face not the issuing announcement for sake of announcement, simply

saying some words that may mean one thing to him another thing to

me, so we can give superficial agreement to world. This was not point.

Whole objective much deeper and more fundamental than that. My

basic suggestion from very beginning our discussions very simply

stated: is that recognizing these differences between us, never [very]

serious difficulties and particularly with respect Taiwan area that

we very simply and straightforwardly say we are not going to go

to war about them. At same time, we would not say anything that

would prejudice views either side with respect these disputes. I had

suggested his government make such statement, and if it did so, my

government would make similar statement reiterating its position. He

had suggested form and content such statement, to which I had very

closely adhered in incorporating views my government with regard

those points which it considers essential to a meaningful statement.

However, question much more fundamental than those just of form

and exact words of statement; question is, is there really agreement

between us on renunciation use of force in settling disputes, including

dispute in Taiwan area. That is, was his government, in accord­ance

accepted standards international conduct, willing renounce force as

instrument national policy?

14. I said if his government had made decision in fact to renounce

force as instrument national policy, there could be no real objection to

text of draft which I gave him April 21. If that decision had not been

made by his government, I could see no formulation of a meaningful

declaration would be acceptable to him. Only if that principle were

accepted without mental reservation or purpose of evasion would

agreement on meaningful agreement for declaration be arrived at

between us.

15. I said he had previously stated that his objections my other

drafts based on connections he saw between self-­defense clause and

mention Taiwan area. Revisions which I suggested April 19 removed

any plausible possibility such argument. I respected his right to hold

whatever views he desired with regard to nature, origin, any other

aspect our dispute in Taiwan area. This draft provided no basis for

alleging it required his side recognize anything it did not want recog­

nize or in any way prejudice his position. What this draft did do was

require his side say unequivocally and clearly it will not use force to

impose its views. Apparently it was that to which he objected, in fact,

rather than to any other aspect of draft. We had done our utmost to

produce draft which both sides could unqualifiedly accept and which

should be accepted if [omission in the original] arriving at solution.

16. I was puzzled by and could hardly believe that he really meant

his statement asking what purpose of peaceful negotiations would be

if each side were free pursue its policies by peaceful means. If what he

appeared be saying was that he saw no prospect of a solution to ques­

tions in Taiwan area unless they be able maintain their threat use force

in that area. There was great difference between that and a renunci­

ation of force that would genuinely make possible real negotiations.

It seemed to me that this strikes to very root of question between us

and represents not the slightest change from announced policy with

respect use of force which his government had long maintained. Fun­

damental question was whether his government was willing without

reservation or purpose of evasion renounce force so that there would

be genuine peaceful negotiations. Central thought behind my origi­

nal proposal had been and remained that genuine peaceful negotia­

tions between us on these complicated and complex problems were

not possible under overhanging threat that one side on one pretext

or another would resort to use of force. Renunciation of force and

peaceful negotiations were not separate and unrelated items. If one

was really determined discuss problem peacefully, one could not at

same time threaten use of force with regard that problem. Unless he

accepted that principle, I could come no conclusion other than that

there was not genuine sharing desire my government for peaceful

solution.

17. I said I never had and did not now ask him abandon his views

with respect our disputes in Taiwan area, but I did ask him accept appli­

cability declaration as a whole to our disputes in Taiwan area. Not just

that portion declaration relating peaceful negotiations but that indis­

pensable concomitant thereto, of renunciation of force. The two went

together and could not be separated. I could not escape conclusion

that in his insistence on linking any mention Taiwan area to Foreign

Ministers meeting he was, in fact, separating those two fundamental

concepts.

18. I said I also could not escape conclusion that objection to self-­

defense clause in its present position was based upon an attempt to

obtain a document which he would interpret as renunciation by US

of its position. I was not asking him recognize in any way US position

with regard to merits of our dispute. I was only asking him accord to

me same respect for our views as I accorded to his. If there were agree­

ment on his part with me on genuinely renouncing force as first essen­

tial preliminary to seeking means of peacefully settling our disputes,

there could be no valid objection to this draft. If there were not such

agreement, difficulties between us were indeed deep and disturbing.

19. Wang said he had given me his views with regard to my draft

of April 19, both at last meeting and this morning. In his statements he

had specifically pointed out reasons why they objected to and could

not accept my draft. Their efforts at trying find agreement on issuance

renunciation of force declaration must be carried out on basis of fair and

reasonable proposal. Their drafts of October 27 and December 1 were

just such drafts and fulfilled principle of reasonableness and fairness.

If US had genuine desire settle and resolve grave disputes between our

two countries, there could be no reason for not accepting these drafts

of their side. He regretted find that so far we not able arrive agreement

on basis their drafts.

20. Wang said he obliged note that new opinion submitted by me

did not change my former position and did not advance our meeting

a step further. This morning I had again made statements to effect that

I respected their views and rights in Taiwan area and would not prej­

udice those views and rights. However my draft of April 19 in its text

precisely prejudiced their lawful views in that respect. He noted in my

statement this morning I had made repeated references to what I said

had been use of force and threat of use of force by his side. Such ref­

erences in fact were made in attempt cover up use of force by US in

Taiwan area and attempt by US use threat of force against PRC. His

side had constantly made clear that FonMins conference was the most

effective means for settling grave disputes between PRC and US in

­Taiwan area, and so if it were desired make specific reference Taiwan

area in agreement, same announcement must make provision for hold­

ing ­FonMins conference.

21. Wang said I had said my draft of April 19 had met their views

and had removed reasons for their objections, but actually this draft,

like all others, retained those features toward which they voiced their

objections. As such, how could I say it had met and removed their

objections? As he had said in his statement this morning, his side trying

to find announcement capable of being accepted by both sides. My side

had repeatedly proposed drafts which their side long ago made clear it

objected to and could not accept. This would not help resolve problems

between us.

22. I said there were two aspects to his objections. One aspect was

whether anything that was said prejudiced his position with respect to

our disputes. The other aspect was whether or not our declaration was

to constitute an unqualified renunciation of force with respect to all our

disputes including our dispute in Taiwan area. My draft of April 19 was

second successive attempt I had made arrive formulation which took

account his views. With regard to aspect prejudicing his position, I was

satisfied it met every essential requirement both sides in this regard.

However, if his purpose in this declaration was retain his ability use

threat of initiating use of force in Taiwan area, I agreed it did not meet

his position and I never could meet his position in that regard. To do so

would be complete perversion of entire purpose this declaration.

23. Wang said I had said I had made so much effort in order meet

their views; however, my draft actually did not make such provisions

as I had said. On contrary, my draft of April 19 still retained those points

to which they objected and which they could not accept. If one could

be credited with making genuine effort achieve a declaration it was his

side which had made such an effort, as manifested in his December

1 draft. To speak about the threat of armed force, he could say actual

problem we now facing [garble] US threat of force against his side and

not his armed forces occupying US territory. Nothing could obscure

this fact.

24. I said if had nothing further I would like speak again about our

September 10 announcement on civilians. I wished tell him very plainly,

very bluntly, that sense of outrage in my country over what I could only

term the premeditated and malicious failure of his government release

remaining Americans as agreed in our announcement of September 10

was growing. His government should know this was particularly true

of all members of both parties of both Houses of our Congress. This

was an urgent and serious situation. I would be doing a disservice if I

minimized or attempted gloss over the growing feeling in my country

with respect to what everyone regarded as a very straightforward case

of failing carry out the pledged word of his government. It was going

on eight months since we made that announcement of ­September 10

and it was over four months since any Americans had been released.

I asked he impress upon his authorities urgent importance of immedi­

ately doing something about this matter.

25. Wang said if we were to speak about dissatisfaction concerning

the civilian question, it was his side which was dissatisfied about the

situation. He had made so many representations concerning the return

of Chinese from the US. But so far had not received any resonable reply

from me. Just how many Chinese were there in prison in US—he had

raised this question many months ago and I had not bothered reply this

simple question as to how many Chinese were in prison in US. Could

I say this attitude my side conformed with September 10 announce­

ment? He had given me names 49 Chinese whose departure being

obstructed in spite of fact these people innocent and had not committed

any crime. However, I had not complied his request make investigation

and give accounting of them. So far I had not given any constructive

reply this question. Chinese people were very dissatisfied with obstruc­

tions received by Chinese nationals in US. Therefore, he hoped I would

impress this feeling of Chinese people on US Government. And see that

these obstructions against Chinese residents in US were corrected.

26. I said facts showed there had not been a single case of any

obstruction and he well aware of that fact. Fact that Indian Embassy

had not called our attention to single case in which obstruction had

been alleged was incontrovertible evidence that cannot be denied.

27. Wang asked did I mean to say that not a single Chinese was

locked up in US prisons?

28. I said there had not been a single case of Chinese desiring return

Wang’s country who had alleged obstruction of any kind. I make no

exceptions. If there were such case it certainly would have been called

to our attention by Indian Embassy.

29. Wang said fact was that 49 Chinese desire return but have not

been able do so. Such was a fact. He would appreciate my making for­

mal statement hereto that there not now single Chinese in prison in US.

30. I said if any of those 49 Chinese really desired return and felt

really being obstructed they certainly would have contacted Indian

Embassy, and if Indian Embassy felt had there been any factual

basis it certainly would have carried out its functions under agreed

announcement.

31. Wang said he could only impress on me, here, great dissatisfac­

tion of Chinese people with regard failure to return these 49 Chinese.

They would not cease raising this matter here as long as these people

had not returned.

32. Wang proposed Saturday May 5 for next meeting. I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 40

Washington, April 30, 1956

Dear Alex:

I went to Charlottesville on Friday to make a speech before the

Committee on Foreign Relations there. I have just returned and have

not yet had much opportunity to digest your reports on the meet­

ing of April 26. There was no meeting on Geneva over the week­

end, either with the Secretary or with Judge Phleger. The Secretary

leaves on Wednesday for the NATO session. I doubt if we will see

him before then. It may not be necessary since we seem to be locked

tight in the present position. There is general agreement that we must

stand firm. Hence, no high-­level pow-­wow seems to be called for at

the moment. We agree that you can only reiterate your position at the

next meeting, emphasizing the firmness of our stance on this position

and picking away at the chinks in Wang’s armour. I believe you very

effectively exploited the point that his objections are all related to the

fact that he envisages a PRC resort to use of offensive force in certain

contingencies.

We have finally received a preliminary acknowledgment from

Immigration to our letter of April 5 requesting a survey of all the

­Chinese in US prisons. A copy of this acknowledgment, dated April 24

is enclosed. You will note that 8 of the prisoners claim American citi­

zenship and another one is a mental patient rather than a convict. This

leaves 42 known Chinese aliens in penitentiaries.

Enclosed are 42 sheets giving the INS reports on each of the names

of Chinese mentioned by Wang as encountering interference with

departure. We have not yet received INS reports on the remaining 7.

I also enclose as of background interest a good example of the kind

of propaganda drive Peiping has been conducting to bring about defec­

tions on Taiwan. Such broadcasts by former officials of the GRC, now

with the Communists, addressed to their ex-­colleagues on Taiwan are

an almost daily occurrence. So far they have had no perceptible effect.

This particular broadcast is interesting in that it expressly links “peace­

ful liberation” of Taiwan with the world-­wide Communist drive for

“relaxation of tensions”. This suggests that the Chinese ­Communists

are well aware of the damage military action in the Taiwan area would

cause to their general political posture. You will note that the broad­

cast speaks not only of the “peaceful liberation” of Taiwan (which the

McConaughy.

­Communists are not presently capable of taking with military force)

but also of Minmen, capture of which might be within their capabilities.

All of this leads to the conclusion that the Chinese Communists are

unlikely to launch any large-­scale offensive in the near future and that

our estimate is probably correct that continued talks with them make

it more difficult for them to resort to military action. I also enclose a

copy of our briefing paper on the Geneva talks, prepared for the NATO

Ministerial Meeting. You will see that this is much less detailed and less

sensitive than what we originally contemplated.

[text not declassified] You were very cooperative to release Hol­

dridge to Hong Kong so promptly. I hope the new arrangement will

work out and that neither you nor Dave will suffer unduly, as a result.

It seems to us that you should be given the best young officer at Geneva

to assist you at the meetings. Your letter No. 29 of April 18 came on the

24th and was read with great interest by Judge Phleger, and Bill Sebald

as well as myself. Walter Robertson will continue on sick leave until

May 14. He got out of bed to give a major speech at Staunton, Virginia,

on April 27 as part of the Woodrow Wilson Centennial Celebration.

Al Westphal, on the staff of the House Committee on Foreign

Affairs, told me last week that the Dodd Subcommittee probably will

not give any further consideration to the question of investigating treat­

ment of Americans in Communist China at least until the end of May.

The Committee Chairman has given instructions that no Subcommittee

work be done until the Committee as a whole has finished work on the

Foreign Aid Bill.

Regards from us all here and congratulations on doing the job pre­

cisely the way that is desired here.

Sincerely yours,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

2. List of 42 Chinese.

4. Nato Briefing Paper, “Geneva Talks”.

1943. For Johnson.

Guidance for May 5 meeting.

1. We concur in view expressed your 1825 that, in absence new

move on part Chinese Communists, you should confine your remarks on

renunciation force to attack on their position and reiteration ours. Heart

of your presentation should be repetition theme which you expressed last

meeting: that if Communists genuinely willing renounce force ­Taiwan

area they cannot validly object to our April 21 draft. If their intention is

to reserve to themselves option of resorting force there, then any form of

words that they accepted purporting to bind them to renounce force in

Taiwan area would be fraud on world.

2. Wang appears interpret phrase “without prejudice to pursuit by

each side of policies by peaceful means” as meaning acquiescence by

Point out to him that our draft does not require Chinese ­Communists

acquiesce in US policies. Neither does it require US acquiesce in or agree

to Communist policies. Purpose of phrase is simply to make clear that

neither side is renouncing anything except prosecution its policies by

armed force. This is action which has been taken by all members UN,

including US, as well as other countries. There is no sound reason why

Chinese Communists should not take similar action.

3. Inform Wang that eighteen more Chinese from US crossed bor­

der into Communist China April 30, making total of at least 148 since

August 1, 1955. FYI This figure includes only those proceeding US to

Hong Kong by ship in direct transit to Communist China. END FYI

This uninterrupted flow Chinese from US to mainland China contrasts

sharply with complete cessation in release Americans since December

last year, despite September 10 pledge that latter would be allowed

expeditiously return. Ask Wang how Chinese Communists expect

world believe they are carrying out Agreed Announcement when facts

so clearly speak otherwise? US intends faithfully continue carrying out

its September 10 pledge, but expects Chinese Communists to do like­

wise. Their failure to do so makes impossible improved atmosphere

they profess to be seeking in these talks.

Hoover

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and in draft by Phleger.

Geneva, May 3, 1956, midnight

1840. From Johnson.

Wang’s interpreter called tonight requesting that next meeting be

postponed until Thursday May 10. I suggested Friday May 11 in view

Swiss holiday May 10 to which he agreed. I agreed his suggestion that

each only announce to press postponement was by mutual agreement

for administrative reasons.

Gowen

Repeated to Paris for the Secretary as telegram 434.

Letter No. 31

Geneva, May 3, 1956

Dear Walter:

A few hours after my return from Prague last night, Ekvall

received a call from Wang’s interpreter asking to postpone the next

meeting. I have sent you a telegram on what I think it means if anything

and I am making a check with Warsaw which I am repeating to you.

Ekvall received the impression from Wang’s interpreter that Wang was

in town, but I am having inquiries made to find out for sure whether

this is the case. He was not on the plane yesterday from Prague and,

therefore, if he has returned from Warsaw he must have done so on

Wednesday. He went up on the same plane as I last Friday. We met

in the airport in Zurich, he having come up the evening before by train

while I had come up on the morning plane from Geneva. He had a very

attractive lady with him whom he introduced as his wife. As always he

was very affable but a lack of a common language inhibits very much

any conversation.

[text not declassified]

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

I have received your letter No. 40 and greatly appreciate the infor­

mation it contained.

I do not want to continue to labor the point, but I cannot help not­

ing that in the enclosed sheets giving the INS reports on the names

given me by Wang there is frequent reference to “requesting permis­

sion to return”. Most of these references appear to be referring to the

period prior to August 1 last year, but in some cases this is not entirely

he “requested permission to return to his home in Hunan (mainland)

China,” and that on March 9, 1956, “Philadelphia advise Service has

no objection to his return”. I have difficulty in reconciling this with the

“Agreed Announcement” and the categorical statements I have been

making here based on the INS assertions to the Department. There is

undoubtedly a reasonable explanation but it would relieve my mind if

I knew what it was. As other somewhat less clear examples see No. 1

[text not declassified]

Regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

1841. From Johnson.

Have no explanation for Wang’s request postpone next meeting.

It appears he probably in Geneva but am attempting confirm. If they

required more time coordinate some new move would seem that he

could have just marked time at May 5 meeting. Therefore am inclined

think reason for postponement is probably extraneous to these talks

and that it does not presage any new move on their part. However can­

not exclude latter possibility. As one possibility suggest that if there

is any factual basis for CHICOM statements mentioned Deptel 1941

Distribution.

they might be planning face us with release of some prisoners accom­

panied by new draft partially meeting our position but with provision

for FMC.

Would appreciate Department’s estimate or any factual info that

might assist me in anticipating possible moves they might make at May

11 meeting.

Gowen

1849. From Johnson.

Wang asked for postponement our May 5 meeting to May 11.

Do you know of any development that would require his presence in

­Warsaw during that period? He traveled to Warsaw April 27 presum­

ably attend May 1 celebration but I have not (repeat not) been able to

determine whether or when he returned Geneva.

Gowen

tribution. Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 1849.

Letter No. 41

Washington, May 7, 1956

Dear Alex:

We were mildly surprised at the postponement of last Saturday’s

meeting. We agree with you that some developments unrelated to

Informal.

the Geneva talks probably prompted the postponement request. The

only development we can think of which might have a relationship is

the Chinese Communist request for a Conference on Korea. Peiping

undoubtedly is closely watching the reaction to its note of April 9. It is

just possible that their tactics in pressing for a high level conference at

Geneva are related to the reaction to their request for the multilateral

conference on Korea. However they could hardly expect to get a reply

from the 16 before the next meeting and I doubt that this is the real

explanation for the delay. Incidentally Bob Murphy met with represent­

atives of the 16 last Friday the 4th. At that time he gave them a copy of

our draft note and asked for the reactions of their Governments. It was

agreed that the British should present a concerted reply on behalf of

the 16. The next meeting of the representatives of the 16 is to take place

on Wednesday the 9th. We hope to have reactions of the Governments

then. There is general agreement that no new conference should be

agreed to in the present circumstances. But there is less certainty about

how the handling of the NNSC problem will come out. We are sending

you a copy of our draft note.

We have a single copy of the William L. White report on the treat­

ment of American POW’s. We are trying to get another copy which we

can send to you. What we have received seems rather fragmentary.

It deals almost exclusively with the contrast in physical treatment of

POW’s by the UN Command and by the Communists. There is little

or no examination of germ warfare confessions brain washing in the

­Communist POW camps or the Communist subversive organization

in the UN POW camps. Nor is there any adequate treatment of the

exchange of prisoners following the Armistice Agreement or the illegal

detention by the Communists of UNC personnel inside China after the

prisoner exchange.

It is our feeling that your instructions for the meeting of last week

which was never held will still be good for the meeting of May 11, bar­

ring unforeseen developments. However we will consider today and

tomorrow whether any slight revision is called for.

There is enclosed a copy of a letter received by [text not declassified]

the well known Chinese foreign trader and expert on tungsten, from

[text not declassified] lives in New York and is now a naturalized Ameri­

can citizen. [text not declassified] wrote the letter from Stockholm where

he was attending a Communist “International Peace Conference”. [text

not declassified] is a leading industrial engineering specialist in alkalies

especially caustic soda. [text not declassified] says he is not a Communist

and he is satisfied that the letter was written under duress. This is a part

of the general Communist campaign to induce the return of nationals,

especially those who have something to contribute to the industrial and

technological development plans.

Of the registered letters which we sent to Chinese mentioned by

Wang, we have return receipts from 23. Four letters have been returned

as undeliverable—addressee unknown. The remaining 6 have not yet

been heard from. (Attached is a breakdown of the registered letters.)

Considerable pressure is being brought to bear on the ­Secretary

at Paris by the British and others for immediate relaxation of the

­CHINCOM controls. Under the recent NSC decision any relaxation is

to be handled on a “exceptions” basis rather than through deletions

from the control lists. The problem still poses a dilemma for us.

The Hua Chiao Jih Pao in Hong Kong recently published a

report that the Bureau of Civil Affairs of the Kwangtung ­Provincial

­Government was requiring families of students in the U.S. “or in

other capitalistic countries” to register. We mentioned this report

to the ­British, who queried Peiping about it and were informed by

O’Neill that he had not heard of my such registration. Although

we have no confirmation of the report and Hong Kong newspapers

are not noted for their reliability, this would be a likely step for the

­Chinese ­Communists to take. It may foreshadow a flood of additional

names from Wang Ping-­nan. A copy of the report is enclosed.

I am writing you a separate letter on the proposed replacement

of Osborn with Comiskey. Although the telegram tells you the whole

story in essence, I will fill out the details as soon as I have a little time.

The pouch is closing now.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

3. Breakdown of registered letters to Chinese in U. S.

Chinese)

5. Report published by the Hua Chiao Jih Pao in Hong Kong.

41. From Osborn.

Warsaw’s 20 to Geneva repeated information Department 797

notes new Polish Foreign Minister reception May 8. Believe this ade­

quately explains postponement. No record here Wangs having arrived

by air past week.

Gowen

­Distribution. Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 1855 and to Warsaw as

telegram 7.

1967. For Johnson.

Guidance for May 11 meeting.

1. Instructions Deptel 1943 intended for last week considered still

valid. You should be governed by them at May 11 meeting.

2. Your 1841. Department has no intelligence which would shed

light on reason for Wang postponement request. Appears likely request

related his Warsaw duties. We doubt the Foreign Office reception May

8 would have required him cancel Geneva meeting May 5 but pres­

ence Chinese Communist Economic Mission in Warsaw headed by

Nan Han-­ch’en may afford explanation. As Chairman Committee

on ­International Trade and member Standing Committee National

­People’s Congress Nan is figure of considerable importance although

not of top hierarchy. If group is actually purchasing complete industrial

installations in Poland as reported its negotiations may assume fairly

high priority.

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger and Hemmendinger (NA).

3. If postponement request related to tactics at Geneva (which con­

sidered unlikely) only known current development which would seem

relevant is pending Chinese Communist request of April 9 for multi­

lateral conference on Korea. It is just conceivable that Peiping’s tactics

in pressing at Geneva for high level conference may be conditioned by

what Peiping can learn of initial reaction of 16 UN nations to Chinese

Communist note of April 9. Meetings of representatives 16 countries

held in Department May 4 and May 9.

For your background, reaction of 16 to conference proposal strongly

negative. This information highly classified at this stage but with so

many countries involved immediate leak to Chinese ­Communists must

be considered as probable. Hence Chinese ­Communist tactics for future

Geneva meetings presumably can be devised in light of this knowledge.

Dulles

Letter No. 32

Geneva, May 10, 1956

Dear Walter:

I arrived down here at noon today by Air Force plane which the

Czechs had permitted to come in and pick me up. I told the Czechs that

only in this way could I attend the Foreign Minister’s National Day

reception last night.

Incidentally, at the reception I met the Brazilian Parliamentary

­Delegation, led by a Miss Vargas, which had just arrived and is begin­

ning a tour of all the Bloc as well as Communist China. They will spend

some time in the United States on their return but will not be com­

ing through Prague. I did the best I could in the hurly-­burly of the big

reception to brief them on Americans in China in the hope that they

might do a little missionary work and at least be prepared for whatever

they hear from the Chinese about it. It seemed to be a quite intelligent

and very sympathetic group on the whole and I would think that it

might be worthwhile for FE to keep in touch with the Brazilian Desk so

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A marginal note by McConaughy next to

the paragraph concerning Colonel Ekvall’s status reads: “Request for extension made by

phone to [illegible in the original] of Defense on 5/27. He promised to check with [illeg­

ible in the original] G–2!”

as to have an opportunity to talk with them when they come through

the United States.

Also at last night’s reception the Prime Minister (Siroky) took

the initiative in asking about my negotiations here. I did a heavy mis­

sionary job on him saying I was discouraged and pessimistic because

of the failure of the Chinese to carry out their promise to release the

­Americans, the increasingly serious adverse effects this was having in

the United States, and my concern over their unwillingness to renounce

force in the Taiwan area. He made no counter argument or defense on

their position, and for whatever it is worth, I believe was somewhat

impressed with the reasonableness of our position. He commented that

it was good that we were at least talking and implied the hope that the

talks would not stop. When I raised the economic negotiations we are

having with the Czechs in Prague he dismissed them as not really too

important or difficult and not at all on the same scale of importance

with our negotiations with the Chinese.

Thanks for your Letter No. 41 as well as for the very interesting

enclosures.

Incidentally, with regard to the report that you mentioned was

in the Hong Kong press on registration of families having students

studying abroad, this report originally appeared in the Ta Kung Pao

under Canton dateline of March 23 giving the full text of the proc­

lamation by the Kwangtung government (see Hong Kong’s China

that you had seen this.

I desire to thank you most sincerely for the arrangement with

regard to Dave remaining here and the family being sent over. I feel that

it is the ideal arrangement from every standpoint and I am most happy

that the Department has been able to work it out. Needless to say, Dave

is also delighted. I know that you will understand that my somewhat

sharp note concerning administrative difficulties in my telegram from

Prague was introduced only with the thought that it would help you in

shaking loose the administrative end.

I hope that you will be equally successful in getting Ekvall’s sta­

tus extended so that we will not be faced with any last minute crisis

concerning him. Incidentally, he went to Paris over the weekend and

saw Gen. Moorman, the Army Attache there, and reports that he is

completely cooperative. He says Moorman fully appreciates the impor­

tance of his assignment here and says that he will not raise any ques­

tion whatever concerning its extension. However, the initiative and

additional orders for the extension of his detail must come from the

­Department of Defense and Moorman can do nothing without authori­

zation from higher authority.

I am afraid it is going to be more of the same old thing at tomor­

row’s meeting but you will, of course, know the story before receiving

this letter which I want to get off in tomorrow’s pouch. Regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Geneva, May 11, 1956, noon

1866. From Johnson.

Following is text new draft handed me by Wang at today’s meeting:

“Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan, on behalf of the Government of the

People’s Republic of China, and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on

behalf of the Government of the United States of America, agree, with­

out prejudice to the principles of mutual respect for territorial integrity

and sovereignty and non-­interference in each other’s internal affairs, to

announce:

“The People’s Republic of China and the United States of ­America

are determined that they should settle disputes between their two

countries in the Taiwan area through peaceful negotiations without

resorting to the threat or use of force against each other;

“The two Ambassadors should continue their talks to seek and to

ascertain within two months practical and feasible means for the reali­

zation of this common desire, including the holding of a Sino-­American

conference of the Foreign Ministers, and to make specific arrangements.”

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

1870. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened this morning’s meeting by presentation draft pre­

viously transmitted Dept together with relatively brief statement which

did nothing to clarify its obvious ambiguities.

2. I avoided any specific comment and asked series of questions

designed to clarify its ambiguities. I specifically asked in what way

draft avoided prejudicing U.S. position; whether second para. inten­

tionally excluded disputes other than those Taiwan area; whether “two

months” in last para. was intended limit validity declaration to that

period; whether last para. as whole meant that FonMin conference was

“only practical and feasible means”; and whether “to make specific

arrangements” referred to “practical and feasible means” or to FonMin

conference.

3. He avoided any direct response my first question, saying that

mutual respect clause was not only “common sense” but—“also” to

be found in UN Charter. In reply to second question he indicated that

limiting to Taiwan area dispute was deliberate because my emphasis

on Taiwan area and since if settlement that most critical dispute could

be effected without war other disputes would present no problem. His

replies to my questions on last para. were completely evasive. However

“very willing hear any ideas or suggestions” I may have.

4. At close of this phase referring to his statements on “procrastina­

tion” and our seeking “freeze” situation in Taiwan area, I pointed out

talks had not made further progress because of their ambiguous position

thus far on renouncing force.

5. I made statement on implementation along lines para. 3 Deptel

1943 to which I replied along usual lines stressing that last December

they had asked for accounting Chinese in U.S. prisons, who, I could not

deny, desired return China, and we had no right inquire concerning

Americans in Chinese prisons until we made such accounting.

6. Next meeting Thursday May 17.

7. Proceeding Prague Saturday returning Geneva Tuesday.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

1871. From Johnson.

Comments on todays meeting.

“Mutual respect” clause in first para their draft is adroit counter

to self-­defense clause. He expects I will counter with reinsertion self-­

defense clause upon which he may propose both clauses be included

or both be omitted. In this connection he may argue droppping self-­

defense clause does not prejudice our position any more than does

dropping “mutual respect” clause prejudice their position.

With respect second para believe they probably open to an addi­

tion of “or elsewhere”, but of course entire para must be read in relation

last para.

Third para is, apart from substance, very loosely drafted. On one

hand appears attempt pick up my previous remarks on not exclud­

ing FMC as a “practical and feasible means” and on other hand to be

commitment to FMC. PRC would, of course, insist on latter interpre­

tation. (They hope we will bargain on “two months” period.) Thus in

essence draft is simple reiteration their position on FMC concerning

­Taiwan area and is further removed from our position than their Dec 1

draft. Incidentally best English translation of Chinese term rendered

as “ascertain” in third para is “determine upon” or “decide upon”.

(Matthews 1181–6393)

Believe that at next meeting I should attack draft from this stand­

point, also pointing out weaknesses suggested by my questions this

morning. Would particularly appreciate Depts suggestions on best tac­

tic and arguments on “mutual respect” clause.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

1875. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 46th today with prepared statement: As he had

specifically pointed out at last meeting, US in draft submitted on

April 19 still required their side give up sovereignty and agree to freez­

ing status quo Taiwan area with intention long procrastination without

opening FonMins conference so as to permit US continue its policy sei­

zure ­Taiwan and interference liberation offshore islands. This was what

his side absolutely could not accept.

2. Wang said however taking into consideration my repeated

request proposed declaration explicitly apply Taiwan area, his side

willing make another effort by offering following amendment. (Here

Wang read text new draft previously transmitted Mytel 1866.)

3. Wang said I would certainly notice his new draft specifically

applied to Taiwan area principle of settling disputes between two

countries by peaceful negotiations without resorting threat or use of

force. He considered this draft had fully accommodated all reasonable

portions my draft.

4. Wang said however he must very frankly point out Sino-­American

dispute Taiwan area must be separated from China’s internal affairs. Any

attempt to interfere China’s internal affairs through ambiguous words

absolutely not to be permitted.

5. Wang said since I had repeatedly indicated at last meeting US

did not harbor any such intent their side therefore considered new draft

should be acceptable both sides.

6. Wang said since proposed declaration now made specifically

applicable Taiwan area in accordance my request, it therefore followed

that seeking and ascertaining (Chinese word had sense of “­determining

upon”­) means for solving tensions in Taiwan area must also be speci­

fied. In order forestall any possible long procrastination talks following

announcement declaration without making concrete arrangements settle

disputes their draft specified we should seek and ascertain practical fea­

sible means for realization this desire including making arrangements

for holding Sino-­American conference ­FonMins within two months.

He believed that if both sides shared sincere desire for settlement two

months should be sufficient.

Distribution.

7. Wang said their draft also provides in preamble announcement

declaration should not be taken as precluding principle mutual respect

territorial integrity sovereignty non-­interference each other’s internal

affairs. This self-­evident.

8. Wang said we now approaching ninth month since starting

discussions second item agenda. If US really desires as repeatedly

stated respect their views without requiring them abandon sover­

eignty or position then they considered both sides should agree new

draft without delay.

9. I replied I would comment subsequently in detail on new draft.

However few questions I would like ask in clarification to assist in

consideration it. First, he had spoken of respect for views each other

concerning nature origin our dispute Taiwan area. I would appreci­

ate any amplification he could give on how he perceived this draft

respected views US.

10. I said next I noticed that second para. as I read English transla­

tion appealed limit entire declaration to dispute between two countries

Taiwan area. Instead being declaration general applicability also having

specific applicability Taiwan area it seemed be now drafted in form that

had applicability only Taiwan area. I would appreciate any amplifica­

tion that regard, was declaration not to have applicability any dispute

between us elsewhere.

11. I said I would also appreciate amplification last para. Without

expressing opinion on substance—he well knew my opinion that regard—

it seemed me language ambiguous. Ambiguous two respects, from my

first cursory reading. With inclusion words “within two months” did

it mean that whole declaration had effectiveness only two months? If

agreement on practical feasible means not arrived at within two months

period, did he consider remainder declaration no longer valid?

12. I said second ambiguous point, it seemed me was phrase con­

cerning holding FonMin conf. It not clear me as this read whether

this saying only practical feasible means realization common desire is

holding conf Fon Mins or whether it meant to say holding of conf Fon

Mins one of practical feasible means to be considered.

13. I said these were questions that immediately struck me on read­

ing draft and I asked them not in sense of making comments on draft.

It seemed me that they questions which clearly arose in interpreting

and considering his draft. As clear and specific answers as he could

give would be of assistance in consideration his draft. It in that sense

I asked them.

14. Wang replied he considered draft submitted this morning quite

clear in text. He had also made explanations various paragraphs this draft

during statement this morning. He had pointed out this morning draft

had taken into consideration and included those portions my opinion

which reasonable. This draft represented another effort their part help our

talks and arrive at agreement.

15. Wang said according to first para this text they would accord

respect to sovereignty, territorial integrity US and would not attempt

impair or interfere in internal affairs US. In same way they expected my

country respect their rights their territorial integrity and also not to try

interfere and [garble—prejudice] their internal affairs.

16. Wang said to them this para matter common sense concern­

ing rights sovereign states. Principles this para also to be found in UN

Charter specifically provided for in Charter.

17. Wang said if two countries could adopt and agree on these

principles stated in first para then he should say we would thereby lay

foundation for improvement relations between two countries. However

such question general in extent.

18. Wang said next we come to second para. This para specifically

dealt with dispute China-­US Taiwan area. Today most critical issue

between China-­US placing them acute oppositon each other is that in

Taiwan area and not any other place.

19. Wang said they believed if Taiwan question could be settled

peacefully between two countries without going war then all other

issues between two countries would be settled same way.

20. Wang said as to practical feasible means for realization common

desire as specified last para., they believed should specify time limit

for seeking these means so that any possible procrastination following

announcement can be prevented. As he said in opening statement if we

shared sincere desire for success discussions following announcement,

would not be any delay or procrastination that regard.

21. Wang said as he repeatedly stated in course talks practical

feasible means they had in mind precisely FonMin conf. between two

countries. He also noted I had never in previous discussions excluded

such conference from consideration. For making specific arrangements

this practical feasible means, two months time certainly sufficient.

22. I replied I still not clear whether it intended that second para

would have any applicability to disputes other than those Taiwan area.

It seemed me as para now read there was implication with respect dis­

putes other than those Taiwan area principle of renunciation force and

settlement by peaceful negotiation might not be applicable.

23. I said I also still not clear as to interpretation applicability of

declaration—­whatever rest of it meant—if at end two months agreement

not been reached. If agreement not reached in two-­month period or if

settlement entirely satisfactory them not reached in FonMins meeting or

this meeting or any other meeting did his declaration say they would

again be free at that time resume threat resort force?

24. I said I also not clear and did not think language clear on whether

declaration was stating it already been determined between us ­FonMins

conf only practical feasible means. For example last part sentence “to

make specific arrangements”—specific arrangements for what? For

­FonMins conf? For seeking and ascertaining means for realization com­

mon desire? Without expressing opinion at moment, it seemed me lan­

guage very ambiguous as to what it actually did mean. If I had difficulty

understanding it, certainly others would have much more difficulty.

25. Wang replied as he saw it my question concerning second para

draft already been answered. As I had previously repeatedly asked

question whether peaceful settlement disputes between two countries

included dispute Taiwan area therefore present draft had precisely

answered my question. In his opening statement he had said I would

notice new draft specifically applied to Taiwan area principle of settling

disputes by peaceful negotiation without resorting threat use force. He

thought this sufficiently clear.

26. Wang said with regard third para on attainment practical fea­

sible means, if we agreed on principle settling disputes Taiwan area

without resort threat use force against each other then it followed

practical feasible means realizing this principle must be sought. If we

failed seek find such practical feasible means as specified declaration

what would be use making declaration at all?

27. Wang said this para clearly says we should seek practical feasible

means and these means included holding Sino-­American FonMins. Text

this para quite clear. As to specific arrangements referred to this para they

meant arrangements for such conference—time, place, how it would be

arranged. This was position their side which they made clear over over

again in course deliberations. That was their understanding of practical

feasible means referred to here.

28. Wang said nevertheless he would also be ready listen me if

I had other better practical feasible means in mind.

29. I replied I just wanted make one more comment on his statement.

He had often in past and again this morning talked of procrastination

and necessity avoiding procrastination and attempt at freezing situation

Taiwan area.

30. I said I just wanted note it US which last October proposed

there be renunciation force specifically applicable Taiwan area as

elsewhere so genuine peaceful negotiations could be undertaken.

It ambiguous attitude Wang’s govt. had thus far taken with respect

really renouncing use force Taiwan area that had prevented undertak­

ing such discussions.

31. I said I would study his draft and comment in detail next meeting.

32. Wang replied he could not agree with remarks I made just

now. It matter fact their side at session October 21 offered concrete

draft proposed declaration on renunciation force, it not US which

took this first initiative. If US had genuinely shared desire their side

make this declaration it would been made long ago, it would been

made last year, instead of carrying discussion over to present. Present

draft another important effort their part to make discussions success

and he did not want see any further delay. They hoped we able adopt

this draft and reach agreement speedily.

33. Wang said however he very willing listen any positive con­

structive remarks had to make next meeting with regard this draft.

34. I said if Wang had nothing further that matter I would like note

18 more Chinese arrived Hong Kong April 30 enroute Wang’s country.

This made total 148 we know of that arrived by ship Hong Kong enroute

his country since August 1 last year. It been almost five months now

since [garble] American been released his country. It hard me see how his

authorities could expect world believe they carrying out commitment Sept

10 last year, regarding Americans when facts so clearly spoke otherwise.

35. I said my govt intends faithfully carry out pledge made our

agreed announcement. At same time we expected his govt do likewise.

It clearly not doing so.

36. I said I had spoken many times effects this having my country.

If his authorities really seeking improve atmosphere surrounding talks

and relations between two countries situation must be corrected.

37. Wang replied I had said number Chinese now returned his

country but these Chinese should been permitted return long ago. Of

then must first all give them such information as actually how many

Chinese now imprisoned by my govt US. He could tell me very frankly

if US refused give accounting Chinese imprisoned US, US had no right

mention question Americans in prison his country.

40. Wang said he had said my govt not satisfied with situation

Americans imprisoned in China. He could tell me his govt, his coun­

try, his people even more dissatisfied with situation his compatriots

imprisoned in US.

41. I asked what Americans we were talking about last ­September if

not about those Americans detained their prisons. We were not talking

about Americans in abstract, we talking about specific Americans and

both us knew it. There was certainly no doubt between us that his authori­

ties were committing selves permit those (repeat those) ­Americans return

expeditiously US. This they had not done.

42. Wang said question we discussed was question return civil­

ians both countries and this dealt with in very clear terms and words

our agreement. Agreement did not speak about particular category

civilians agreement covered all civilians. They expected US implement

agreement accordance its terms.

43. I said I had nothing further and asked if next Thursday 17th

satisfactory. Wang agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 42

Washington, May 11, 1956

Dear Alex:

We went all out to meet your request to keep Dave Osborn. We

took the matter to Mr. Carpenter in order to get it resolved [text not

declassified].

[text not declassified]

We had the new Indian Minister Hareshwar Dayal in. He called on

Mr. Sebald on May 8 for a discussion of the application of the Agreed

Announcement. As you will see from the enclosed memo of conversa­

tion, the Indian Embassy is a little bit fussy on some aspects of the matter.

[text not declassified] informed me in confidence the other day that

the Indian Charge in Peiping had told the [text not declassified] Charge

there that the Indian Embassy here “assisted about 330 Chinese to

return to China”. I do not know where he got the figure. There is no

evidence here that the Indians have been in contact with any such

movement of Chinese. They have undoubtedly assisted a few finan­

cially. They did not volunteer any information on this and we of course

have not pressed them.

Official–­Informal.

We will send you a report on the meeting of the representatives

of the 16 countries which was held on May 9 with Bob Murphy on the

Chinese Communist note. (See Circular 777 May 10) You will recall that

we referred to this in our guidance telegram of May 9, No. 1967.

I have asked Nagoski to check the unfortunate language of the

Immigration people in reference to “applications for permission to

depart”. He tells me that the Immigration Service confirms categori­

cally that Chinese do not need “permission” to return and do not have

to inform the Immigration Service when they leave the United States.

However, some foreigners (and this not confined to Chinese) in the U.S.

apparently do not realize this. They may feel that it is necessary, or at

least the polite thing, to touch base with U.S. I&N.S. before leaving.

Also, some of the prospective Chinese repatriates are under the illusion

that the US I&N.S. can help them with tickets and travel reservations.

Perhaps some of the U.S. I&N.S. field officers have not always made

sufficiently plain to the inquirers that a positive response does not

imply that the inquiry was necessary in the first place or that a negative

answer could have been given. The one case in which the inquiry was

referred from one office to another appears to have been an instance of

pure bureaucratic timidity. We have asked I.&N.S. to reexamine its

­circular instructions to the field offices on this subject to make sure that

it is sufficiently emphasized that Chinese need have no dealings with

the Immigration Offices in their arrangements for departure.

I agree with your observation in your letter No. 30 about the defi­

ciency in the case histories attached to the Lindbeck report. I have

shown Lindbeck your comments and he is working on the matter. We

will have some information on this shortly.

[text not declassified]

I hope there are no unpleasant surprises in the meeting tomorrow.

[text not declassified]

Regards and every good wish,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Copy of Memorandum dated May 9.

2. Copy of Memo of Conversation with Indian Minister

605. Memorandum from Clough to Robertson

Washington, May 14, 1956

SUBJECT

Developments in Geneva Talks Since April 21

There have been only two meetings in Geneva during your

absence, one on April 26 and one on May 11. A meeting was originally

scheduled for May 5, but was postponed at Wang’s request. We don’t

know why he requested the postponement, but suspect it might have

been connected with the presence of a Chinese Communist trade mis­

sion in Warsaw.

minutes). Wang flatly rejected our April 19 draft and showed no

sign of willingness to compromise nor intent to offer an alternative

formulation.

On May 11 Wang opened by presenting a new draft. (Tab A) It cuts

out our self-­defense phrase, replacing it with the phrase “without preju­

dice to the principles of mutual respect for territorial integrity and sover­

eignty and non-­interference in each other’s internal affairs.” It also cuts

out the phrase “or elsewhere” in the second paragraph, thus limiting

renunciation of force to the Taiwan area alone, and makes the pledge not

to use force apply only to the US and the Chinese Communists by adding

the words “against each other.” It also specifies the holding of a foreign

minister’s conference and sets a time limit of two months for making

arrangements for it.

At both meetings Wang demanded an accounting of Chinese

imprisoned in the US.

Attachment: (Tab A)

by Clough.

606. Letter from Osborn to Clough

Geneva, May 14, 1956

Dear Ralph:

Reading Walter’s latest letter, which came this morning, I feel bad

about all the trouble you in CA and FE have had to go to on my account.

Believe me I appreciate it from the bottom of my heart, and if there had

been any alternative I would gladly have taken it. [text not declassified]

If I can take advantage of this extremely informal context, I’d like to

broach an idea or two on the talks, mainly so that if the ideas reflect too

much of a drift away from FE’s, you can write back and tell me they’re all

wet. They are not official suggestions, not endorsed by the Ambassador

(to whom I haven’t shown—but will show—this letter) and don’t even

reflect any hard-­and-­fast opinions on my part.

1. Duration of Talks—We will presumably continue unwilling to

force a break, so that duration is up to CHICOMS. Their position with

respect to continuation of talks will reflect not only their appreciation of

the value of the talks per se, as an instrument for promoting the trend

towards accommodation and hurting the GRC, but also their estimate

of the prospects for a FMC.

2. CHICOM Estimate of FMC Prospects—CHICOMS will presum­

ably not want to force the issue of a FMC before Nehru’s U.S. visit in

July. Question is whether they will want to try to force the issue during

Nehru’s visit, or whether they may not have another crucial date in

mind, the presidential elections in November. They must be aware that

we are not going to volunteer any movement towards a FMC, at least

before November. They might be content to wait out November. On the

other hand, they might try to put the Administration in a pre-­election

dilemma, by threatening hostilities against the offshores unless we

agree to a FMC. Either choice would be very painful, particularly just

before election time, but the CHICOMS might figure that with the GOP

campaign slogan “Peace and Prosperity” the Administration would

choose the FMC as the lesser of two evils.

3. The Worth of a FMC—The thing that bothers me about a FMC, apart

from the general damage that a FMC would do to the ­anti-­communist

forces in the FE, is what would there be to talk about? Paradoxically,

about the safest topic I can think of would be a meaningful renunciation

of force. Still, in Europe especially, one senses how much the U.S. needs

Official–Informal.

some evidence to point to to show it is not being “unreasonable” in its

opposition to Communist China.

4. Our Tactics Vis-­a-­vis New Draft—Wang’s new draft has a lot of

bargaining room built in. We can exploit this for two or three months,

at least. Here, however, is a point: in order to get the most mileage out

of the new draft, it would be a tremendous help to have some idea of

the Department’s thinking on strategy. One approach on the new draft,

designed to get mileage, would be to go through the thing paragraph

by paragraph. The first paragraph alone, for example, would be good

for three or four meetings. However, in planning this kind of approach,

it would be helpful to know more about our objectives. If we are going

to be really adamant on the first paragraph as per our April 19 draft, for

example, we should save discussion of the paragraph until the last, since

once we start insisting on ICSD without “mutual respect” we have put a

term to the mileage we can get out of the new draft. What would enable

us to get the most mileage would be if we had a “minimum position”

draft towards which we could work point by point and paragraph by

paragraph—such a draft would, of course, not be tabled until all possible

mileage had been squeezed out of Wang’s new draft.

5. A “Minimum-­Position” Draft—In the enclosure, I have tried my

hand at such a draft. This does not represent my opinion of what would

be desirable in the way of a declaration if we had carte blanche. It is

merely a sample of the kind of thing that would be a very useful guide

for us in getting mileage out of Wang’s draft.

In drafting the enclosure, I have tried to protect our position on

three points: (a) no sacrifice of self-­defense right; (b) renunciation of

force applicable to Taiwan; and, (c) U.S. control over whether and when

FMC to be held, with implication in any event not until ­Americans

released. The last paragraph in particular is rather treacherous ground,

but in any case, the whole enclosure is purely illustrative and not

intended as a concrete suggestion.

As to whether Wang would “buy” the enclosed, I have my doubts,

but I think it is at least conceivable. He would certainly look darn unrea­

sonable if he turned it down. Whether or not he would buy it, such a

draft would at least help us get mileage out of Wang’s draft.

Hope I haven’t presumed too much on your time. Regards to

Doug, Steve, Joe, Allene, Irene, Elaine. Regards and sincere thanks to

Walter and Mr. Sebald—and Cappy.

Sincerely yours,

David L. Osborn

Enclosure

Draft Agreed Announcement

AGREED ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE ­AMBASSADORS

OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE

­PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf of the Government of the

United States of America, and Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan, on behalf of the

Government of the People’s Republic of China, agree, without prejudice to

the views of either side with respect to the merits of any of their disputes,

[or, alternatively, “to the inherent rights of either party”] to announce:

The United States of America and the People’s Republic of China

are determined that they should settle disputes between their two

countries in the Taiwan area or elsewhere by peaceful means only, and

are determined they will not resort to the threat or use of force;

The two Ambassadors should continue their talks to settle the prac­

tical matters at issue between them and should expeditiously seek such

additional practical and feasible means for the realization of the common

determination expressed above, [including the holding of negotiations at

a higher level] as may be ascertained to be appropriate and necessary.

c. It is not an agreement to renounce force, but an agreement to

settle disputes without using force.

d. It is limited to disputes in Taiwan area.

e. It is limited to renunciation of use of force against each other, and

does not renounce use of force by Communists against GRC.

f. It apparently places two months’ limit on ambassadors talks,

requires holding of Foreign Ministers’ conference, and may limit effect

of announcement to two months.

2. Our analysis is that Communist proposal is by all odds shrewd­

est and most dangerous move to date. In effect it would amount to

our recognition Communist sovereignty and territorial integrity, leave

Communists free to attack GRC whenever they wished with US barred

from use of force to assist defense and would obligate us to agree within

two months to hold Foreign Ministers’ conference.

3. Tactics in handling this proposal should be directed toward

indicating that draft unacceptable and long step backward from their

December 1 draft. You should try and lead back to our April 19, second

revision as basis for discussion, pointing out that it covers all legitimate

requirements of situation, preserving rights of two sides, renouncing

use of force, and providing for discussions to settle outstanding dif­

ferences. Every effort must be made to prevent Wang’s proposal from

being used as basis for discussion.

4. We should be careful that while rejecting Communist proposal

we do so in such a way as not to furnish grounds for break, and your

manner of use of material in first paragraph should be dictated by this

requirement. We think best tactic if possible is to get back to discussion

US April 19 revision and why no grounds exist for Communists refusal

accept.

5. From discussion last meetings it would appear that Wang

has taken position all prisoners both US and Chinese are covered by

Agreed Announcement, but that Communists are not living up to their

agreement because US not releasing Chinese prisoners. Attempt to get

Wang to reiterate this position. FYI We have ascertained that only 42

Chinese aliens in all US prisons, and while we have no final word as

yet, it may be possible in relatively short time to make arrangements for

deportation of Chinese prisoners if release US prisoners can be thereby

obtained or facilitated. END FYI

6. You should again call for release of US prisoners and ­Communist

implementation Agreed Announcement pointing out their failure thus

far has made it difficult to make further progress in talks.

Dulles

Letter No. 33

Geneva, May 16, 1956

Dear Walter:

With reference to my letter No. 32 concerning the visit of the ­Brazilian

Parliamentary Delegation to Communist China, I am not clear as to

exactly what may have happened. However, on the following evening

they denied to Vedeler that they were going to Communist China and

I now assume that this must be the fact. There was no possibility of mis­

understanding between us at the time I had my conversation with them

as several of them with whom I was speaking spoke good English and we

talked about it in some detail. However, you can now I think disregard it.

I have received the instructions for tomorrow’s meeting and will

try to carry them out to the best of my ability. In thinking it through,

I have decided that my best tactic for tomorrow is to avoid specifics

and simply attack his draft as a whole, then try to steer the discussion

to our April 19 draft. I doubt if I am going to be very successful on the

latter point but we will have to see how it works out. I figure that if

I get into specifics, particularly with respect to the self-­defense clause,

I will open the door for him to suggest its inclusion along with their

mutual respect clause and will find myself mired down in an unpro­

ductive morass.

Thanks very much for your letter No. 42. It seems to me that

Sebald’s discussion with Dayal was an excellent idea and should be

very helpful in influencing Indian attitudes.

I am very glad to note the action you have taken with INS on the

“application for permission to depart” problem.

Regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

Geneva, May 17, 1956, noon

1895. From Johnson.

1. Two hour meeting this morning which I opened with prepared

statement making generalized attack on his May 11 draft. I pointed to

complete lack “accommodation” our position and characterized draft

as retrogression from not only our draft of April 19 but also his draft

Dec 1. Closed by urging consideration April 19 draft making points

contained para 3 Deptel 1994.

2. In give and take he repeated points made last meeting and made

concerted effort to draw me into specific discussion particularly on first

para May 11 draft, closing by hope I would have detailed comments

next meeting. In course this discussion Wang in referring to “peaceful

aspirations” PRC stated “will not tolerate present situation (in ­Taiwan

area) for long without applying solution” and if US sincere can it “desire

these talks drag on indefinitely”?

3. During give and take I avoided specific discussion details May 11

draft focusing on their unwillingness renounce FMC Taiwan area and

continually urging April 19 draft as unobjectionable statement if they

accepted this principle. Characterized May 11 draft as nothing more than

their original position FMC on Taiwan area while they preserved option

use force there. Said US never would accept this position.

Urged they reconsider their position by next meeting.

4. Reply my statement again calling for release 13 he said hoped

I would be able give him information on Chinese prisoners in US, “this

was undertaken by US in agreed announcement”.

5. Next meeting Thursday May 24.

6. Proceeding Prague Friday morning, returning Tuesday or

Wednesday.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

1902. From Johnson.

Comments on today’s meeting:

At today’s meeting I deliberately avoided specific comment on

details his draft and did not as such mention either self-­defense or

mutual respect clauses in effort avoid traps May 11 draft and keep issue

focused on major point their unwillingness renounce force in Taiwan

area as set forth our April 19 draft. This served well today and proba­

bly can profitably be continued for another meeting or two. However,

by thus sharpening basic issue between us I may be correspondingly

reducing our freedom of manuever to keep talks going.

However this is also issue upon which public position CHICOMS

is weakest and upon which they will be more reluctant go to public or

break talks. Suggest this aspect would be much clearer if Communists

were not able publicly confuse basic issue with either self-­defense or

mutual respect clauses. Therefore suggest Dept may desire give consid­

eration to method whereby this might be accomplished.

While at today’s meeting Wang permitted himself some extent be

led back to discussion April 19 draft at subsequent meetings he will

probably limit himself to flat rejection that draft.

As additional points Dept will note from full record that today

he went further than in past, sharpening distinction between offshore

islands and Taiwan by specifically mentioning Penghus with Taiwan

and stating we had no international disputes “elsewhere”. Just pos­

sible additional motive for their deletion “elsewhere” might be hope

I would, in arguing for its retention, and other disputes such as Korea,

thus appearing support their proposal for Korea conference.

Wang’s statement para 244 Longtel, that “situation where coun­

try already used force”, carried implication comite preparing use force.

Relevance this statement to context of FMC in which Wang made it not

entirely clear, but in any case carries connotation of threat and as such

may provide useful point to attack next meeting.

Dept will also note he avoided any take it or leave it attitude with

respect May 11 draft and seemed to be inviting amendments. Seemed

particularly desirous getting me into detailed discussion first para,

Limit Distribution.

Longtel).

Believe I was successful today in getting him to go about as far as

he is going to go in linking prisoners and paving way for our depor­

tation Chinese alien prisoners as pressure on them release remaining

Americans.

Gowen

1903. From Johnson.

1. I opened 47th today with prepared statement: QTE I carefully

studied draft you submitted last meeting, in light comments you made

that time. In general, must say struck by discrepancy between your

comments and draft itself.

2. First place, you said last meeting draft fully accommodated rea­

sonable portions my draft. Presume you were speaking of my April 19

revision your draft December 1. As I pointed out in presenting that

revision, had carefully adhered your draft in preparing it. Fact, it very

exactly includes all language your December 1 draft.

3. Must ask just what portions my amendments been, as you say,

“fully” accommodated in new draft? First such portion, so far as been

able discover in English text consists solely of three words “without

prejudice to”. Not by any stretch imagination could anyone call this

accommodation my amendment that paragraph.

4. Second portion my amendments which apparently included in

new draft consists four words “in the Taiwan area”. Shall [return] this

point later, for moment let me say context in which phrase included

new draft vastly departs from sense my amendment December 1 draft.

5. That is all of so-­called “accommodation” my amendments. Can­

not find any other example “accommodation” my revisions or point

view anywhere in new draft. Accordingly, I left with supposition when

you spoke of fully accommodating portions my draft, you really talking

Distribution.

about portions your own draft of Dec 1, claiming credit for accommo­

dation your own point view.

seems you done only slightly less damage to it than to my amendments.

Dec 1 draft, on surface at least, seemed genuine step towards renunci­

ation force, and at time I so interpreted it. My primary concern, when

you submitted that draft, was with certain ambiguities it contained. By

what it failed say, rather than what it said, Dec 1 draft appeared capable

meaning one thing one side another to other side. Did not then occur me

you trying trick me. I did not jump to conclusion ambiguities deliberate.

On contrary, I felt you would welcome suggestions to remove ambigu­

ities; on two successive occasions, made such suggestions. Still seems

me if ambiguities Dec 1 draft not deliberate, and if your government

were genuinely willing join in declaration renouncing force Taiwan area,

can be no valid reasons for your objections my revisions. Still seems me

if your government not willing renounce force Taiwan area as well as

elsewhere, then all its talk about desiring peaceful negotiations idle and

without sincerity of purpose.

7. It now begins appear, in light May 11 draft, that perhaps ambigu­

ities Dec 1 draft were deliberate. In new draft, and particularly in third

paragraph, you deliberately introduced new ambiguities. You have used

language which apparently places arbitrary time limit our efforts here.

Have used language which apparently means your government threat­

ens resort force unless resolution disputes fully meeting its unilateral

position reached within two months. Other hand, paragraph might be

interpreted mean even without waiting two months, two of us should

immediately drop all other business and start preparing FonMins meet­

ing. Simply not clear. What is clear is it represents no slightest concession

from basic position this regard you took at very outset talks under second

agenda item.

8. Respect to Taiwan area reference, situation also very ambigu­

ous. In your statements previous meetings and again last meeting, you

not attempted deny existence other disputes between our countries,

although we both agree dispute in Taiwan area most immediate. Indeed,

last March, when you began insist on Dec 1 draft or Oct 27 draft as only

choices being given us, you appeared take position your Dec 1 draft cov­

ered all our disputes including that in Taiwan area. Last meeting you

again took cognizance existence other disputes, said your government

hoped our other disputes also be settled without resort force.

If that really desire your government, why fear say so? Why have

you, in second para new draft, explicitly excluded any and all disputes

other than that Taiwan area?

9. These are some of reasons, why I feel new draft constitutes ret­

rogression not only from my draft April 19 but even from your own

draft because if we going go forward, then let us do so, beginning with

serious consideration April 19 draft. That draft covers all legitimate

requirements of situation fully preserves rights both sides. Is unambig­

uous renunciation use force in settlement our disputes. It makes provi­

sion for discussions settle outstanding differences.

End quote.

10. Wang (from handwritten notes) said he already made some

explanation most points covered my statement. Last meeting he made

quite clear that he submitted new draft representing another important

effort on Chinese part these talks. Since I had asked how new draft

accommodated my views he would like amplify. They made quite clear

new draft accommodated views US and by this he meant it had accom­

modated all reasonable views US.

11. (Turning to one of several short horizontally typed statements)

Wang said issue between us very plain. It US which first made proposal

two sides make declaration. Their side accepted that proposal and had

repeatedly taken initiative offering draft. Recently after consideration

US views they submitted declaration making principle peaceful settle­

ment disputes between two countries without resort use force specifi­

cally apply Taiwan area.

12. Wang said however as their side often pointed out in circum­

stances where US occupying Taiwan trying interfere liberation offshore

islands it absolutely impossible make China recognize US-­Chiang Kai

Shek treaty or recognize US claim self-­defense Taiwan area or acquiesce

in continued carrying out by US such policy. That why he repeatedly

stated China could and could only accommodate reasonable portions

my views and could not accommodate unreasonable views US. If US

intended include in draft or conceal in declaration unreasonable views,

that impossible. This point should be quite clear between us.

13. Wang said second place regarding specific implication Taiwan

area principle peaceful settlement disputes between two countries

without resort threat use force this so stated because there exists inter­

national dispute between China-­US over Taiwan Penghu islands.

14. Wang said elsewhere do not exist any international disputes in

practical sense term where China as one party confronts US as other

party so he did not see any reason mention “elsewhere”.

15. Wang said next I had referred to time limit in draft and had said

their side trying hike up this time limit to threaten use force. However

fact quite contrary. It their view that given equal sincerity both sides it

entirely possible in two months ascertain practical feasible means and

make specific arrangements settle disputes two sides Taiwan area.

16. Wang said fact confronting us today is that US already applied

force and threat against China seizing Taiwan. China nevertheless still

willing settle this dispute by peaceful negotiations fully demonstrating

peaceful aspirations on part China. However they could not tolerate

present state of employing threat and force against China to continue

long without solution. That why they believe essential set time limit for

seeking ascertaining practical feasible means. If we sincere in desiring

peaceful settlement disputes two countries did we want go on talking

forever?

17. Wang said therefore May 11 draft their side demonstrated sin­

cere desire part China arrive at resolution dispute between us. This

draft as he said included all reasonable portions drafts both sides.

18. Wang said as to April 19 draft he had already stated it main­

tained our old unreasonable position and as he stated very categori­

cally it not acceptable them.

19. I replied he had again said US made proposal for declaration.

Seemed necessary reiterate what I often previously said, US proposal

not for declaration for declaration’s sake. US proposal was for clear

definite renunciation use force to settle disputes including dispute

­Taiwan area.

20. I said this would as US pointed out in its proposal open way

for peaceful discussion settlement differences. Fundamental issue still

seemed be that first fundamental step renouncing use force as instru­

ment national polpcy.

21. I said question was whether any declaration we issued would

in fact constitute such renunciation force. Or whether it would give sur­

face appearance doing so while reserving Wang’s govt option initiating

use force especially Taiwan area any time it desired. Such declaration

would be fraud and could only in future aggravate differences between

us. Other hand declaration clearly unambiguously renouncing use

force could open way genuinely peaceful discussions.

22. I said he had again this morning spoken of requiring them

acquiesce or agree policies US particularly Taiwan area. He long main­

tained my Jan 12 draft required them acquiesce those policies. Order

meet fully his point view this regard, I had submitted April 19 draft

which very specifically by exact terms stated it without prejudice pur­

suit by his side its policies by peaceful means and said same thing so

far US concerned.

23. I said that draft most clearly did not require him acquiesce or

agree policies US. It made very clear they not renouncing anything

except pursuit policies by use force. Did not require them acquiesce US

policies any more than required US acquiesce their policies views. Fully

preserved positions both us that regard.

24. I said had some difficulty following his reasoning on inclusion

all disputes as well as specifically dispute Taiwan area. In past we both

agreed we had other disputes. There other areas where we confronted

each other with conflicting policies. If principle renunciation force

peaceful settlement disputes had validity one area certainly had validity

other areas.

25. I said thus April 19 draft certainly met positions both sides if

there willingness part his government really renounce force.

26. I said that draft also specifically provided in language suggested

by him we continue our efforts discuss settle outstanding differences.

Way get ahead in discussion settlement differences is no longer delay

unambiguously renouncing force then proceed discuss those differ­

ences. That exactly what provided by April 19 draft. He had spoken

of sincerity and desire get ahead with talks. If there real sincere desire

part his government get ahead it could certainly do so by agreeing draft

April 19 then two us immediately proceeding accordance last paragraph

that draft. I most earnestly continued hope we would do this.

27. Wang said he had already stated they could not give consider­

ation April 19 draft which I mentioned in statement. They had dealt this

question many times and had stated why they considered it unaccept­

able because it unreasonable.

28. Wang said first we must make it clear between us as to purpose

issuing declaration. Purpose was respect rights and internal affairs each

other. Purpose such declaration should be settle disputes two countries

peaceful means without use force threat. This purpose in accordance

accepted general principles international relations between countries.

29. Wang said I just stated primary issue between two countries

renunciation use force as instrument national policy. However in

point fact situation we faced today not rpt not one where China seiz­

ing territory any other country. Actual fact was US already used force

pursuit its policy and had seized territory China. If proposed decla­

ration should contain implication freezing present situation Taiwan

area, such declaration could not be described as renunciation force

but on contrary it declaration recogniation and acceptance estab­

lished facts aggression.

30. Wang said China always pursued peaceful foreign policy.

This point fully proven over years in statements China made together

other countries. Fact China now engaged talks with us to work toward

peaceful settlement disputes two countries even more proof this peaceful

foreign policy China. China willing settle disputes with US by peaceful

negotiations instead by use force or going war. Principle this foreign pol­

icy specifically applied Taiwan area. If US shared this peaceful desire of

China they saw no valid reason not accepting principle this paragraph.

31. I said Wang had again made allegation concerning policy my

government which without foundation and entered into merits our dis­

putes Taiwan area.

32. I said in effect Wang impugned good faith my government regard

carrying out terms declaration as it appeared in April 19 draft, what had

appeared in effect be saying was my government would be entering into

declaration without intent carrying out terms last paragraph. I surprised

disappointed Wang would make such implication.

33. I said when we came here last year, situation with respect mat­

ters at issue between two countries particularly Taiwan area embod­

ies grave threat peace. Had my government wanted perpetuate that

situation certainly would not have made its proposal these talks. Had

my government desired perpetuate danger enherent situation Taiwan

area I certainly not have made my proposal October 8 last year.

34. I said if anyone has shown intent perpetuating that situation

it certainly not been US. It US which proposed clear unambiguous

renunciation force Taiwan area just so that situation would not be

perpetuated.

35. I said question between us still seems be whether his govern­

ment desires perpetuate situation where it holds self free initiate use

force that area with consequent dangers peace and difficulties finding

peaceful solutions under such conditions.

36. Wang said in attending these talks they had always held hope

reaching definite results. Since we now discussing declaration we

should try find way out in respect declaration itself. He had many times

explained terms and clauses May 11 draft acceptable both sides.

37. Wang said there three paragraphs his draft. First dealt mainly

with mutual respect rights both sides. How could there by any oppo­

sition this paragraph? This paragraph not spur-of-moment creation

it dealt with fundamental principle on which rest international relations

of states. These principles now being widely applied between states with

different systems. He could not imagine any opposition this paragraph.

Nor could they include this paragraph principles which contrary to that

of May 11 draft.

38. Wang said second paragraph dealt with question we had

discussed very long time. This paragraph they had endeavored par­

ticularly accommodate my requirement by stating we should settle dis­

putes two countries Taiwan area through peaceful negotiations. Was

this not precisely request I had made repeatedly? Outside Taiwan area

was there other dispute between two countries which even graver than

that Taiwan area? Did I say specific reference Taiwan area they made in

May 11 draft did not accommodate US request?

39. Wang said I had alleged May 11 draft constituted retrogression.

Does US desire reference Taiwan area draft May 11 be removed from

paragraph?

40. Wang said third paragraph dealt with practical feasible means

realization desire expressed previous paragraphs for peaceful resolu­

tion disputes two countries. Dealt with question seeking ascertaining

within given time practical feasible means in spirit declaration. Was

this not very reasonable paragraph? Did we intend deliberately drag

on talks without resolving issues?

41. Wang said it in this sense he again expressed hope I would

make further study his draft so we able bring about identity views and

said agreement this basis to enable us get ahead these talks.

42. I said I had explained why I felt this draft was retrogression

rather than advance in talks. It appeared be in substance only reitera­

tion Wang’s position from beginning these talks that there be held For­

eign Ministers meeting respect Taiwan, while at same time reserving

his govt option using force that area. That was position which could not

and never would be accepted my govt. My govt would not negotiate

under threat force. Once force clearly unambiguously been renounced

my govt would negotiate good faith. April 19 draft accomplished that

purpose. I hoped at next meeting Wang could reconsider matter from

this standpoint. I had nothing further on this.

43. Wang said I had stated draft May 11 contained ambiguities and

that they had ulterior intentions or motives in that draft and that there

discrepancy between draft and its meaning. Other hand I also stated

their side from beginning talks had maintained position for holding

FonMins conference for settlement disputes two countries.

44. Wang said situation where country already used force against

another and situation where country preparing use force—these two

quite different matters.

45. Wang said it quite true they always maintained principle set

forth third paragraph May 11. That is we should seek practical feasible

means settlement disputes and this included holding FonMin confer­

ence. Thus draft May 11 and intent and position their side consistent

each other and quite clear. Thus consistent foreign Wang’s country—

actions and words identical and consistent each other. There nothing

hidden between lines these paragraphs. Respect holding FonMin con­

ference he understood from my previous statements I never refused or

rejected this position their side.

46. Wang said he also hoped would be able reconsider draft and do

something at next meeting to get ahead in talks. That all he had on this.

47. I said I had nothing further on that, however, I did want note

it now lacking three days of five months since any Americans released

by his country. If there to be improvement relations, 13 Americans

remaining prison must be released, as undertaken by his government

September 10 announcement.

48. I said I would move [hope?] he would be able do more than been

done in past in impressing his authorities overriding importance this.

I would say no more on this this morning.

49. Wang said he also hoped I would be able give him information

about Chinese imprisoned US so as improve relations between us. They

hoped US Government would give serious attention this question. This

also undertaken by US in our agreement.

50. I asked if next Thursday, May 4 satisfactory. Wang agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 43

Washington, May 21, 1956

Dear Alex:

As we stated in our telegram to you, we consider Wang’s new draft

a retrogression from his December 1 draft and extremely dangerous.

Judge Phleger is of the opinion that the Communists now realize that

they came within an ace of agreeing to a formula that would have tied

their hands. They are now taking care to protect themselves more fully.

It is noteworthy that the Communists worked into the first para­

graph of their new draft two of their five “principles of peaceful

coexistence” which have formed the basis of joint declarations with

India, Burma and other states. Judging from Wang’s efforts at the last

meeting to get you to comment on this paragraph, they are hoping to

demonstrate that we reject these principles and thus harbor the inten­

tion of interfering in their internal affairs and encroaching on their

territorial integrity. This would strengthen their position vis-­a-­vis the

neutralist states. Of course, we cannot accept paragraph one without,

in effect, recognizing the PRC. It was for this reason that we asked you

to try to get back to our April 19 draft as a basis for discussion, rather

than comment in detail on the Communist draft.

It may be significant that the Communists selected two months as

the period during which arrangements for a foreign ministers’ confer­

ence should be completed. Allowing a few weeks to reach agreement

Informal. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy.

on their draft, the two months would carry the meetings through the

completion of a full year and beyond the time of Nehru’s visit here. It

is possible that they are looking toward a break-­off around that time if

no progress is made.

We have been debating whether to ask O’Neill to make new repre­

sentations in Peiping. We had a copy of a despatch from him last Friday

in which he discusses the advisability of such a move. The principal

reason we have hesitated to go ahead is that we believe Clifford and

Phillips both have three-­year sentences which will be up about mid-­

June if the Communists follow their usual procedure of making them

retroactive to the date of arrest. If we should present a strong note to the

Communists via O’Neill just at this time it might cause them to delay

the release of these two so that it wouldn’t appear that the release came

about as a result of “pressure”. We would appreciate having your views

on this.

We have still been unable to reach complete agreement with

the representatives of the sixteen regarding action to be taken on the

NNSC. Some progress has been made. All agree that the conference

on Korea should be rejected, in the absence of any evidence that the

­Communists have changed their attitude. All have now accepted, in

principle, the necessity of unilateral action to remove the NNSC to the

demilitarized zone. Difference of opinion now revolves around the tim­

ing and form of this action. The Commonwealth countries and France

are holding out for an interval between announcing our proposed

action in the MAC and carrying it out. The interval proposed ranges

from six or seven days to five weeks. We have been trying to get agree­

ment on reducing the interval or, better still, eliminating it, as we fear

that we will just be providing the Communists with an opportunity

to make propaganda and work on the neutralists during the interval.

Also, there is the constant danger of incidents in Korea during such a

period. There will probably be another meeting of the sixteen this week

to reach final agreement.

We have now received the second section of the W. L. White report

on Communist treatment of POW’s. There is more to come. If we can

get more copies we will send you one—so far Defense has furnished

only one copy for all interested offices in the Department. Mr. Hoover

asked for an evaluation of the project to date and there is enclosed a

memorandum from Bill Sebald to him giving our views.

We have sent you a copy of a memorandum prepared for

Mr.  ­Robertson reporting on the latest developments in Congress

relating to imprisoned Americans. Interest in this subject appears to

be mounting and it may not be possible much longer to discourage

the interested committees from holding public hearings.

I have just returned from a weeks’ leave, which I took to spend

with my Father in Alabama on the occasion of his birthday. I have not

yet had a chance to bring myself fully abreast of developments since

I left Washington on May 10. The foregoing was drafted entirely by

Ralph Clough, who was in charge of CA while I was away. He kept in

close touch with Robertson, Phleger and Sebald, and participated in a

meeting with the Secretary on May 15. What he has written above has

my full concurrence. The Secretary personally approved the instruc­

tions for the meeting of May 17.

I suppose Helenka Osborn will be in Geneva before this letter

arrives. I trust her arrival will improve matters for you as well as for

Dave.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Memo from Mr. Sebald to Mr. Hoover

3. Despatch from O’Neill

2023. For Johnson.

Guidance for May 24 meeting.

1. We consider best counter to Communist May 11 draft to be

restatement our position. Go back to our original October 8 proposal

and restate reasons why US seeks renunciation force. Again place on

record our purpose to remove threat military force, not to require either

party acquiesce in policies of other. Point out our April 19 revision

Wang’s draft carefully drawn accomplish this purpose and no other.

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Clough; cleared by Phleger and Sebald.

2. While you should avoid being drawn into specific comment on

Communist draft, particularly paragraph 1, you should probe further

into meaning of two-­month limitation paragraph three, along lines you

took May 11. As we understand Communist position they are offering

renunciation force only for period of negotiations. If negotiations fail

within two months achieve solution satisfactory to Communists or

agreement on Foreign Ministers Conference or if Foreign Ministers

Conference fails reach settlement on Communist terms, renunciation

force would lapse. This is not a renunciation force. Renunciation force

is pledge such as that taken by UN members not to use force except in

self-­defense. Pledge has no time limit. Present Communist proposal

appears to be agreement to refrain from using force for limited period

only unless dispute in which they have threatened force is resolved

in their favor.

3. If Wang continues base his argumentation on allegations US

has used force against Taiwan and seized it you should take appro­

priate opportunity repudiate these falsehoods in addition to pointing

out Wang is going beyond question renunciation force into substance

dispute.

4. FYI Department commends your adroit drawing out of Wang

on applicability Agreed Announcement to prisoners. Investigations of

INS indicate high probability responsible Federal and State authorities

agreeable release all Chinese alien prisoners for immediate deportation.

If deportation decided upon, procedure desired which would bring

maximum leverage on Chinese Communists to release imprisoned

Americans and bring us tactical benefits Geneva. We intend avoid any

compromise of principle, but are mindful convicted felons not entitled

same civil rights as law abiding alien residents.

Following courses appear to be available:

A. Deport compulsorily to Mainland China all Chinese alien

criminals who came from there.

B. Inform Chinese alien prisoners individually of Agreed

Announcement and tell them they may apply for parole and immedi­

ate voluntary deportation Mainland China if they wish. If this course

followed, we would have to decide whether Indian Embassy repre­

sentatives would be allowed interview prisoners to verify prisoners’

decision and satisfy themselves it freely arrived at. In order obtain

maximum bargaining and public relations benefit, we would clearly

have to permit ­Indians interview all prisoners, although not desirable

in some respects to allow representatives of Chinese Communist inter­

ests to interview Chinese prisoners who have not expressed any inter­

est in returning to mainland. (It may be that most if not virtually all

would reject voluntary deportation.)

C. Take no action on prisoners except possibly in cases where they

appeal to Indian Embassy of their own volition for return to Communist

China.

D. Refuse to take any action on prisoners in any event on thesis

that Agreed Announcement does not apply to common criminals con­

victed of offenses involving moral turpitude.

If we should take action in regard to these criminals, question

whether to demand reciprocity for our imprisoned nationals would arise.

Should we endeavor to obtain balancing quid pro quo from ­Chinese

Communists for every action taken by us? We could make offer to deport

all Chinese prisoners contingent upon simultaneous deportation of all

imprisoned Americans. Also could equate visits by Indian Embassy

representatives to Chinese prisoners with visits by British Embassy rep­

resentatives to American prisoners. Or we could refuse to descend to

trading tactics, seeking place added moral pressure on Communists by

keeping our action on higher plane independent of Chinese Communist

transgressions.

Your detailed evaluation these courses and any variants which

you may wish comment on, with your recommendations, are invited

in time for formulation your instructions for next meeting. While effect

each proposal on prospects of American prisoners and on future course

of negotiations should be carefully assessed, also bear in mind effect on

our public position in event of break off.

Dulles

1925. From Johnson.

1. Two hour 25 minute meeting this morning. Wang opened

with prepared statement again rejecting April 19 draft and advocat­

ing May 11 draft para by para. Said “mutual respect” clause replaces

“self-­defense clause which embodies ulterior motive” to justify contin­

ued US seizure Taiwan and interference in liberation offshore islands.

­Second para was “more conspicuous” accommodation to our views by

Limit Distribution.

making it specific that peaceful settlement of disputes without threat

of force applies to Taiwan area. With respect to “elsewhere” are there

any “real and not imaginary other disputes which find China and US

facing each other as parties international dispute?” With respect third

para should be acceptable as I had not opposed holding FonMin con­

ference and I had said that US not desirous perpetuate danger in Tai­

wan area. “Must two of us sit here and go on talking without an end?

PRC cannot be left without assurance FonMin meeting if Taiwan area

to be mentioned.”

2. In reply I impliedly characterized their May 11 draft as willing­

ness renounce force for two months; as willingness renounce force only

on condition FonMin meeting; as willingness renounce force only on

condition disputes settled entirely on their terms on failure which they

held selves free renew threat of force. Also referred back his statement

at last meeting on preparations by PRC for use of force characterizing it

as shocking and disturbing and not only no advance from PRC position

prior these talks but even retrogression from position taken by Chou at

Bandung. Concentrating on last para said mention two months there

contained definite implication resort to force if no agreement reached

in that period and this contradictory with profession desire for peaceful

negotiations. Expressed regret he had not this morning or previously

clarified this contradiction.

3. There was then long and diffuse give-­and-­take during which

I characterized fundamental issue as their unwillingness uncondi­

tionally and without time limit renounce force and he characterized

fundamental issue as US use of force in occupation Taiwan. I refuted

latter allegation with strong restatement our position. Also came back

to our April 19 draft as clearest expression renunciation force in form

meeting both points view. He attempted interpret my concentration on

“two months” last para as indicating acceptance other two paras and

repeatedly tried needle me into specifically commenting on first para.

In context inviting me make amendments May 11 draft ­he implied my

continued flat rejection that draft as basis discussion would “force them

consider” making it public.

4. At close meeting I noted Miner’s release five years after he

made original application for exit and nine months after Wang told

me he would be released in two or three months. Nevertheless grati­

fied he finally released and hoped this portended early release other

­Americans still detained. Wang replied entirely defensively simply

saying was not “entirely” PRC fault and made no mention whatever

Chinese in US.

5. Next meeting Thursday May 31.

Gowen

1928. From Johnson.

Re para 4 and following Deptel 2023.

1. Strongly favor course B with Indian Embassy representatives

permitted to interview all prisoners or at least those now electing

return to mainland. Suggest this action be taken without prior demand

on CHICOMS for quid pro quo but subsequently use to maximum

advantage this undermining of their public position on imprisoned

Americans.

2. Fear course A would probably involve US in serious problems

both domestically and with GRC. Might give rise to court actions

and would in end prove to be very difficult if not impossible to carry

through.

3. Course C appears be only continuation our present course of

action.

4. Course D cannot but tend support CHICOM public position

with respect imprisoned Americans.

5. Believe that advantages under course B of permitting Indians

interview all prisoners far outweigh disadvantages. Believe we can

maintain valid distinction between our taking initiative permit Indians

interview prisoners and Indians taking initiative interview free per­

sons who have not asked for their assistance. First it does maximum

forestall possibility CHICOM allegation some American prisoners do

not desire return and not permitting verification by UK. This would be

particularly important if as suggested in Deptel most if not virtually

all Chinese prisoners might reject voluntary deportation. In this event

without advantages Indian verification course B could well be actually

counterproductive. Indian verification would of course also markedly

improve our public position. In this ­connection believe it important

note CHICOMS will respond this move on our part by release addi­

tional Americans only because considerations their public position.

6. Suggest best tactic would be simultaneously inform Wang here

and Indians that all prisoners have at all times been free communicate

with Indian Embassy if they felt agreed announcement applicable to

them and they desired return. We have thus fulfilled our obligations

under agreed announcement. We understand thus far none have in fact

Distribution.

communicated with Indian Embassy. Nevertheless in view Wangs state­

ments we have carried out careful investigation all prisons to identify

Chinese imprisoned. This necessary because no Chinese imprisoned on

political type charges because his race, nationality or political beliefs

but only for common crimes. In order remove any vestige question our

performance under agreed announcement, each of these persons has

not only individually been informed of agreed announcement but has

now specifically been informed that if he desires to do so he may apply

for parole and voluntary deportation to mainland. Prompt action will

be taken upon any such application. Indians will be informed of any

such deportees and if Indians desire arrangements will be made for

them to interview such persons. Arrangements will also be made for

Indians interview prisoners of Chinese nationality who do not apply

for such parole and deportation.

7. Suggest that at same time we inform GRC of action being taken

but do not give action any publicity at this time, treating it as only further

routine step with respect agreed announcement. Also suggest I inform

Wang in straight manner without coupling action with demands respect­

ing imprisoned Americans. CHICOMS will be quick to realize how much

this will undercut their public position and will be quicker to correct that

position by additional releases Americans if presented in this manner

than if coupled with demands or public pressures.

Gowen

1929. From Johnson.

Comments todays meeting.

No particularly noteworthy development or change in todays

meeting except somewhat strengthened renewal of “stalling” theme by

Wang.

Distribution.

His statement para 41 Longtel might contain some implication

(particularly arising from choice exact Chinese words used) that all

Americans would be released on successful completion two months

negotiations mentioned May 11 draft. Felt best tactic today was ignore

threat go to public rather than indicate any concern by taking note of it.

Gowen

1930. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 48th today prepared statement: Their side made

many efforts since beginning talks on issuance declaration. However it

clear US side still bent requiring abandonment China sovereign rights

freezing status quo Taiwan area. This what they could never accept.

My draft April 19 apparently designed induce them acquiesce unrea­

sonable demand. As he repeatedly told me they absolutely could not

accept draft.

2. Wang said their May 11 met common requirements both sides.

Entirely reasonable and represented further important effort their

side make progress. No amount terms used by me such as ambiguous

retrogression could degrade that draft their side.

3. Wang said first para introduces principle mutual respect ter­

ritorial integrity sovereignty non-­interference internal affairs, which

recognized by all peace-­loving states. This replaced self-­defense clause

my draft which embodied ulterior motive justifying continued sei­

zure Taiwan interference, liberation offshore islands. This amendment

undoubtedly puts draft on firmer basis. Would have thought US could

not stand against that amendment for if so we would make people sus­

pect our aim precisely to seek continued seizure Taiwan interference

liberation offshore islands. How could we expect this position accepted

their side?

4. Wang said 2nd para it even more conspicuous their side accom­

modating US views in making principle peaceful settlement disputes

without resort threat use force specifically apply Taiwan area. This specific

Distribution.

provision new draft accommodation my repeated requests. However I

ambiguously raised so-­called question “elsewhere”. He found it hard fol­

low my logic. Perhaps I could suggest some real not imaginary dispute

where China US faced each other as parties international dispute, which

even graver than Taiwan area dispute.

5. Wang said 3rd para specified practical feasible means settlement

disputes two countries Taiwan area should be decided within two

months, and specific arrangements this para should be acceptable both

sides. He had all along understood I never opposed holding FMC for

settlement disputes.

6. Wang said at last meeting I indicated did not desire perpetuate

dangerous situation Taiwan area. If so why oppose time limit? Must

two of us sit here go on talking without end?

7. Wang said at last meeting I also alleged new draft constituted

retrogression from Dec 1 draft. He failed see basis that allegation.

I would certainly recall his remarks 39th meeting. What he said was if

we desired have reference Taiwan must also agree specific reference

FMC. Otherwise their side left without assurance. Reference FMC in

May 11 could not be obscured.

8. Wang said he sure he made thoroughly clear only new draft

reasonable accommodation position both sides. Would hope I could

reach agreement with him on May 11 draft. Now let us stall no longer.

9. I replied as had said in past mtgs fundamental issue now facing

us was whether his government willing renounce use force Taiwan area

as well as elsewhere as first step toward peaceful discussion.

10. I said this did not mean renounce use force for limited period

such as two months, but without time limit. Not to renounce use force

only on condition there be some particular single form negotiations

agreed on such as FMC but rather seek peaceful settlement disputes.

Not renounce use force only on condition disputes invariably settled

entirely on ones own terms, on failure which one held self free renew

threat force. Rather as had all responsible govts, agree abide by processes

and results peaceful settlement. To do so did not require one acquiesce

or agree policies or views of others any more than when others had

done so they had acquiesced or agreed with policies of other party with

which they did not agree.

11. I said I had hoped his govt accepted those principles. Since last

October had been seeking his agreement statement clearly saying noth­

ing more less than this. I been making every effort go far as possibly

could meeting his point view without violating this fundamental uni­

versal principle. I accepted his Dec 1 as basis negotiation and offered

successive suggestions to accomplish purpose.

12. I said it been and will remain my consistent unalterable objec­

tive obtain agreement between us on unconditional renunciation

force unambiguously applicable Taiwan area as well as elsewhere.

Been doing this not from standpoint vague theory but standpoint

stark fact that one party these discussions asserting right use and

even threatening initiate use force that area. Neither his statements

here this morning nor previous statement nor draft May 11 reassured

me this did not continue be case.

13. I said near close last meeting it my recollection that in discuss­

ing Taiwan area he referred what he called preparations his country for

use force. Hoped he would correct me if had drawn wrong inference

from statement. However, if understood his position correctly, his govt

not only asserted in principle it free use force in order obtain solution

meeting unilateral desires but it in fact preparing use force accomplish

this purpose.

14. I said such assertion shocking any context but in context new

draft even more disturbing representing no slightest advance from

position his govt taken prior talks. In fact seemed rather be retrogres­

sion from position his Prime Minister Bandung conference.

15. I said I regretted in his remarks morning he done nothing clar­

ify implication this effect contained even his May 11. It difficult not to

read into last para his May 11 implication threat in insisting therein

two month’s time limit on talks. He seemed be saying that draft that

if within two month’s time limit no agreement completely satisfactory

him reached these talks he free resort force. He seemed be saying if no

resolution our disputes his terms reached in negotiations mentioned

therein he held self free renew threat force. It certainly self-­contradictory

for him say desired peaceful negotiation settlement and at same time

thus maintain threat force.

16. He said question between us therefore whether his govt willing

unambiguously unconditionally renounce force settlement disputes or

whether it still reserving self right threaten use force. Taken in context

his May 11 could not but read into last para that draft particularly time

limit set forth therein meaning that his govt reserving self threat use

force. Most earnestly hope this not case and that he could morning clear

up this point. Did not feel his previous statement done so.

17. Wang said could not agree points I just raised. Stark fact

between China-­US which also fundamental issue between them was

US already used force against China occupied territory Taiwan. That

indisputable fact not imaginary. It solely this issue between two coun­

tries that hindered normal relations.

18. Wang said in dealing this issue there might be various meth­

ods. It their Prime Minister who at Bandung proposed holding

talks China US. There he proposed our two countries sit down hold

negotiations reach peaceful settlement. Today they joined with US in

peaceful discussions. This precisely demonstrated peaceful intentions

their part.

19. Wang said in course talks I incessantly alleged China planning

use force against US. Doing so I disregarded fact US already used force

against China thus using imaginary argument defense my position.

20. Wang said Chinese people would never permit or agree to

action US using force against China occupying its territory. Fact was

today it not question China’s forces occupying territory US. If Chinese

forces occupied US territory US would equally not tolerate such action.

No country would tolerate use force against sovereign state.

21. Wang said peaceful settlement disputes China US specifically

demonstrated in question issuance declaration. It their side which suc­

cessively made offers accommodating joint desires both sides. They

had specified principle mutual respect sovereignty territorial integrity.

They proposed principle peaceful settlement disputes China US spe­

cifically apply Taiwan area. Even more concretely they suggested seek

practical feasible means settlement disputes two countries within defi­

nite time in order not allow long stalling.

22. Wang said if both sides have common desire peaceful settle­

ment should not be difficult reach agreement this basis. Today we

should direct main efforts to try make such declaration thus showing

sincerity. Should not engage in discussion irrelevant questions which

outside text itself. This essential feature their May 11 draft.

23. I replied had continued hope he would not introduce matters

irrelevant immediate issue before us which was declaration renun­

ciation force. I had consistently avoided doing so. As had often said

question this stage not discuss merits disputes. That could come after

we unambiguously and unconditionally agreed we not going war

about them.

24. I said as we both recognized we had different views regarding

nature [garble] disputes particularly Taiwan area. He persistently made

such unfounded statements as that US already used force against them

and US occupying Taiwan. Here and in his drafts he seemed persistent

intention have me accept that point view. It false and world knew it false.

25. I said facts are Taiwan lawfully held by government with

which US long relations and which recognized by majority govern­

ments world. US had solemn treaty arrangements that government

arrangements which registered with UN and which free and open for

all world see.

26. I said however question at present stage not one of reconcil­

ing our points view. Question was whether our difference views be

permitted lead war. US determined should not do so, had continued

hope his government would share that determination. I said he had

often spoken here and his govt often spoken of peaceful negotiations

and desire peaceful settlement. Genuine desire peaceful settlement

not demonstrated by numbers drafts one submitted in negotiation

but demonstrated by whether one really abandons threat use force

settlement desputes. It one thing make statement one desires peaceful

settlement or peaceful negotiations and another thing say one will not

use force settlement disputes. First empty without second.

27. I said he said could not agree with points I raised morning.

Most fundamental point I raised was that in last paragraph his draft

he reserving self ability again threaten use force. If he could not agree

that assertion my part would appreciate his telling me in what respect

I wrong.

28. Wang replied he already stated their fundamental point view

nature origin dispute between two countries. Had repeatedly pointed

out present issue between us was US already used force against his

country and used its forces occupy Chinese territory. I had said this

unfounded allegation. Might he ask whether US forces now Taiwan

dropped from sky or rose from sea?

29. Wang said I had made reference Chiang Kai-­shek clique Taiwan

however I could not use this defend position I holding. In similar case

when during Sino-­Japanese War Japan created puppet regime Wang

Ching-­wei but Japanese could not justify their stand either. These were

facts which could not be distorted in eyes people world.

30. Wang said I had also remarked I did not desire go war set­

tle disputes between two countries. He felt this very reason why we

now meeting here discussing issuance declaration this effect. If both

us willing settle disputes peaceful means without going war or threat

war should demonstrate desire by concrete deeds and rapidly reach

agreement on joint declaration.

31. Wang said I had made repeated references last para their draft.

In light this, might he understand we agreed on first second paras their

draft and only part remaining in question was last para? He would

hope I able enlighten him this respect so we could proceed speedily

with declaration.

32. I replied he had said if we both willing settle disputes without

going war or threat war should demonstrate desire by concrete deeds.

That precisely been my point ever since last October. That precisely

step his government continued avoid taking.

33. I said first fundamental concrete deed was unequivocal

unconditional unambiguous statement we not going war. Other

words, renunciation force. That what his govt continued avoid doing

in May 11 draft.

34. I said had spoken of last para that draft because that where

this intent appeared most glaring. It appeared to be renunciation

force for two month period. That like saying “I will not shoot at you

for two months but if at end two months you not agreed with me

I will shoot you.” Such position I could only describe as grotesque

if presented as renunciation force. It rather made it threat force. As

I had pointed out appeared me in complete contradiction with asser­

tion desire peaceful negotiation settlement. Still hoped he could clear

up contradiction.

35. Wang said if both us had sincerity in adopting May 11 draft

would be important step accelerating settlement disputes two coun­

tries. Would then be able show world talks we been conducting not

idle but had concrete content. Would be able show world two coun­

tries genuinely sincere in desire settle disputes between them peaceful

means.

36. Wang said world would certainly welcome gesture two countries

expressing resolve settle grave disputes between them peaceful means.

World would see our two countries not only expressed desire settle dis­

putes but also adopted concrete steps toward this end. Announcement this

declaration would only have these good effects. Would not raise doubt

in connection other issues. People would welcome time limit, would not

have doubts about it.

37. Wang said we had talked nearly year. Setting time limit in dec­

laration would all more demonstrate to US genuinely sincere desire

settle problem. Only those who willing express desire settle peacefully

disputes but without intention taking concrete step would oppose such

specification. He therefore felt inclusion time limit would only help

resolve problem, would not prevent from doing so.

38. I replied desirable though might be public gesture without real

content could exacerbate rather than assist settlement differences. US

interested in genuine peaceful settlement differences. It exactly because

this I sent here. Exactly because this I proposed as first step we make

clear going settle those differences without war. I still waited for his

govt take that first step. That step and only it could demonstrate world

who genuinely seeking peaceful settlement.

39. I said regretted he continued avoid specific reply questions

I raised—questions regarding time limit on declaration set forth his

May 11.

40. Wang recalled it his country at Bandung last year made pro­

posal peaceful settlement disputes two countries. It his country which

voiced this peaceful intention as early as Bandung last year.

41. Wang said it nearly one year since two us began discussion

peaceful settlement disputes between two sides. This fact demonstrated

their side been amply patient in search for settlement. By this time we

should be able embody efforts toward peaceful settlement in declaration.

Provided there sincere intention for peaceful settlement two month’s

time limit quite sufficient for our endeavors. This would prevent further

delay settlement our practical issues. He felt US equally interested in and

in need of expeditious settlement disputes two countries Taiwan area

and avoidance further stalling.

42. Wang recalled I had told him my side did not desire perpetuate

present situation Taiwan area. Therefore inclusion time limit in inter­

ests both sides.

43. I asked what was effect declaration if at end two months period

agreement not been reached between us. Did he consider self at end

that period again free threaten use force? Or actually to use force?

44. Wang did not feel question I raised was thing to discuss at pres­

ent stage. We now discussing declaration, seeking of practical feasible

means following announcement declaration. What we now discussing

was peaceful settlement disputes two countries. These were things

should now seek. If even prior announcement declaration and even

before seeking practical feasible means we began discuss question I had

raised would be idle and diffuse.

45. Wang said at present we could not predict whether after two

months US still would continue threaten use force against China forces

occupation Taiwan. At this stage he did not intend raise this question.

46. I replied it US that proposed uncondititional unlimited renun­

ciation use force. US not proposed it be qualified by time limit or any

other way. He had spoken of “expeditious” settlement. I thought we

both would recall last Sept we discussing time limits and “expeditious”

in other connection. Still seems our understanding that term vastly

differs.

47. I said US did not desire perpetuate situation Taiwan area

where threat force by one side could plunge two countries and world

into conflict. This precisely been point my proposal and discussion,

that we first make clear we not permit this happen. Once that done

could undertake search for peaceful methods resolving dispute that

area. I  still awaited and had awaited almost nine months genuine

indication his govt willing take that first step. I continued hope not

only for sake negotiations here but for sake two countries and peoples

it would take that step. Hoped it would do so without reservation

purpose evasion, as my govt willing do.

48. Wang said if we had desire peaceful settlement should con­

cretely demonstrate by reaching agreement and making declaration.

I had said my side also had same desire peaceful settlement. If so, why

not get together on common desire and try reach agreement on lan­

guage express this common desire?

49. Wang said would not assist discussions in any way to engage

idle talk or depart from question-­making declaration. Would appreci­

ate my telling him whether had any other opinions on May 11 draft.

50. I said if he willing unequivocally unconditionally renounce

force in settlement dispute and also same time express determination

seek peaceful settlement I not able think any clearer way this could be

done, in form meets both points view than that contained my April 19

revision his December 1.

51. I said for reasons I had set forth did not believe that purpose in

any sense accomplished by May 11 draft. I still believed that draft step

backwards from what I thought we been able accomplish. Would hope

at next meeting he would realize this and we be able take steps marking

progress.

52. I regretted to say I did not feel position he had taken today

enabled us make progress. If he willing unconditionally renounce force

settlement disputes I satisfied progress could be made.

53. Wang said he also, in reference remark I just made, disap­

pointed. My remarks did not seem help in progress on declaration. If

I still clung April 19 draft he could only consider deliberate hindrance

in discussions. He continued hope I would change my stand. He con­

tinued hope I would be able offer constructive opinions basis May 11

draft. By doing so would enable us speedily reach agreement on decla­

ration. Should not stall on this matter. Otherwise they would consider

making draft open to public and letting public judge whether draft rea­

sonable. He hoped we be able rapidly progress this question.

54. I said if he nothing further would like note, although it five

years from time he made original application for exit Wang’s country,

and although it almost nine months since Wang told me here would

be able leave in period two-­three months, Charles Miner arrived Hong

Kong May 19. However, I nevertheless gratified he finally able leave.

Would hope this indicates remaining Americans detained his country

shortly be following.

55. Wang said as he told me soon as unsettled affairs Miner settled

he able leave country, his exit now proved this was so. Miner had set­

tled unsettled affairs and now left country. Time taken in departure not

entirely fault Chinese authorities.

56. I said had nothing more, suggested next Thursday May 31.

Wang agreed.

Gowen

1937. From Johnson.

Unless able make some new move with respect May 1 draft next

meeting believe we should be prepared for possibility CHICOMS may

make public statement. However likelihood their doing this would be

considerably reduced if I am able make proposed statement on ­Chinese

prisoners in US. In event they make statement I would propose imme­

diately make available correspondents here April 19 and May 11 drafts

together with brief statement to effect when Wang informed me at pre­

vious meeting of intention issue public statement I found it difficult

believe they willing expose May 11 draft public scrutiny, as it even

more ambiguous and lacking in elements of unconditional renuncia­

tion of force than their Dec 1 draft. Although Amb. Wang has indicated

he still shares my desire to reach agreement meaningful renunciation

force he has rejected my successsive efforts to make simple revisions

Dec 1 draft that would accomplish this purpose. My April 19 draft

incorporated those revisions in form that took full account both points

of view. Despite Amb Wang’s rejection this further effort my part I shall

continue seek agreement with him on statement that will make genuine

contribution to establishment peace in Far East. Any further comments

will emanate Washington.

Gowen

Distribution.

Letter No. 34

Geneva, May 25, 1956

Dear Walter:

As I told you, I am staying down over this weekend until the next

meeting to get some dental work done, so that I also have an opportu­

nity to write you at a little leisure today.

I have received your Letter No. 43 and entirely agree that the first

two paragraphs of the May 11 draft are very clever and adroit. How­

ever, I think that they are much more vulnerable in the last paragraph

both from the negotiating and public position, particularly as we had

previously accepted their December 1 version of that paragraph. As

I indicated in my 1902, it seems to me we are faced with two broad

courses of action. We can continue to take our previous broad position

that the Communists have in effect agreed to renounce force and that

the problem revolves around the self-­defense clause, or we can take the

position they refuse unconditionally and unambiguously to renounce

force with respect to the Taiwan area. The latter is, of course, the actual

fact and you will note that in the last two meetings I have been concen­

trating heavily upon that aspect. The former course has some obvious

advantages but it is open to a great deal of public confusion over the

actual issue and does not give us as clean and clear a public position

as the latter course. A good example of this is the lead editorial in the

­London Times of May 24 which states that the Chinese Communists are

willing to make a general declaration of renunciation of force, but that

the issue revolves around its application to Formosa with the added

American proviso that Taiwan and its government must have a right to

collective self-­defense. I think that we should regard the whole matter

from the standpoint of the public position we will desire to take when

the matter next becomes public. There is, of course, much to be said

for maintaining the public position that the Chinese Communists have

in effect renounced force and leaving up to them the onus of denying

it. While it leaves us in the disadvantageous position of not being able

to present a clean-­cut and simple issue, it does serve the purpose of

reducing public impression of “tension” in the Taiwan area. These are

just some random thoughts on which I would appreciate the trend of

the Department’s thinking.

While it would be very useful to get back to our April 19 draft as a

basis of discussion, it is easier said than done and I fear I have not thus

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

far been too successful. Nor do I expect to be successful. The only real

way that I can be successful in forestalling their going to the public and

keeping things rolling along here would be to counter their drafts with

drafts of our own or being given some flexibility in impliedly or specifi­

cally discussing changes in their drafts and thus keep the situation fluid

and confused. My flatly rejecting his drafts and he flatly rejecting my

drafts does not give me very much room for manuveuring.

I greatly appreciate being consulted on our proposed action in

regard to Chinese prisoners and yesterday sent off my thoughts in my

1928. I should perhaps have made it clear in there that my thought

with regard to not giving publicity to the matter applies only to the

initial stage and a suitable period to see what response it brings from

the Communists. I also think that we ought to wait and see what the

actual results are in terms of numbers, etc. before giving it any public

buildup. If the results are justified and response from the ­Communists

is not satisfactory, we could then profitably pull out the stops on

publicity.

With regard to the fourth paragraph of your Letter No. 43,

I should think it would be preferable to have O’Neill wait on any note

not only till we see if Clifford and Phillips are released and until we

see what results our action with regard to the Chinese prisoners seems

to be producing. I would hope that at the minimum it would produce

fairly prompt action on the part of the Communists to tell O’Neill

that he can see the remaining American prisoners. If it does not, then

I believe O’Neill should by all means follow up with a full represen­

tation which would point up the disparity between the United States

and ­Communist actions.

[text not declassified]

As I wrote Bill Sebald from Prague, I have for many reasons

accepted an invitation to give the commencement address at the

­Nurnberg Army High School on Thursday, June 14. If you are agree­

able back there I am thinking of skipping the meeting for that week

unless, of course, there are developments which would make this

clearly undesirable. In view of Wang’s previous requests to which

I have agreed, I think that I could do this without any special implica­

tions being read into it by them. I have not decided whether I would

do it by canceling the meeting by telephone as he has done or by put­

ting it to him straight at the previous meeting. Let me know if you

have any thoughts or views on this.

Regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Letter No. 44

Washington, May 25, 1956

Dear Alex:

Walter is away for two days in Omaha and Colorado Springs

where a group of senior Departmental officers are being briefed by the

­Strategic Air Command and the Continental Defense Command on

their current capabilities and problems.

We have the preliminary report on your meeting of yesterday.

Wang’s concentration on the first paragraph of their latest draft and his

implied threat to make it public reinforces the suspicion that the ­Chinese

Communists are seeking to build a strong propaganda position. I have

not yet had a chance to discuss the meeting with anyone. There will prob­

ably be a meeting on Monday to consider tactics for your next meeting.

The behaviour of the Brazilian Parliamentary delegation is very

puzzling. We certainly understood here that they were scheduled to

visit Communist China.

Thank you for calling our attention to the “Ta Kung Pao” procla­

mation on registration of families with students abroad. I do not know

why this was not brought to our attention earlier by Hong Kong or

DRF. We now have a copy of the text of the Peiping proclamation which

I am enclosing. There are also enclosed two memoranda showing how

the drive to gather information on Chinese in this country is devel­

oping. The attempt to utilize the American Red Cross is a particularly

clever move. The Red Cross may wish to make some gesture toward

providing information in order to preserve their relationship with the

Chinese Communist Red Cross which is helpful to our prisoners but it

would be most unfortunate if they began to supply the very names and

addresses which we have refused, for good reasons, to give the Chinese

Communists.

Regarding Bob Ekvall’s situation, Walter called a Mr. Zander, who

is temporarily in Bill Godel’s place, and he agreed to take the matter

up with G–2. We will follow up on this and hope that there will be no

difficulty in obtaining the necessary extension of detail.

There is enclosed a memorandum giving the latest developments

in arranging deportation of Chinese prisoners in this country. We expect

today the final report on this from General Swing. We are awaiting with

interest your suggestions, in response to our last guidance telegram, as

to how the matter can best be handled to gain the greatest advantage.

Informal. Drafted by Clough.

We are agreed that the Chinese Communists are not really interested in

getting these prisoners back and that they will therefore not constitute

a strong bargaining counter. However, we feel it is possible to place the

Chinese Communists in an awkward public position on this issue and

thus create some pressure for them to release Americans.

I have just seen Maggie Higgins’ lengthy article in today’s “New

York Herald Tribune” revealing publicly that the Chinese Communists

have demanded that all Chinese in American jails be let out. I have no

idea who the “high administration source” who revealed this is. Ques­

tions are already coming in from the press. What the results of this will

be on our plans is anybody’s guess.

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Deputy Director for Chinese Affairs

Enclosures:

1. Memorandum re “Chinese Communist Pressure on Chinese in

the US.”

2. Memorandum re “Latest Developments on Deportation of

­Chinese Prisoners”

3. Two memoranda re Chinese Communist Red Cross Inquiries.

4. “Peking Daily” proclamation re registration of families of stu­

dents in US.

6. Article by Marguerite Higgins.

621. Letter from Osborn to Clough

Geneva, May 26, 1956

Dear Ralph:

[text not declassified]

Some more random thoughts that have been batting around here,

but which have not taken a firm enough shape to put any kind of impri­

matur on:

Official–­Informal. Osborn signed the original “Dave.”

Turning the Tables on “Mutual Respect”: We all realize “mutual

respect’’ is a hard one to handle, but some of Wang’s statements have

indicated possible flexibility on his part. Presumably he would like

to work towards a “compromise” in which both ICSD and “mutual

respect” were left in the first paragraph. This would, of course, be no

compromise at all from our standpoint, and I don’t see how we could

ever accept it.

If we are going to proceed on the basis of the May 11 draft, accord­

ingly, one problem is how to make Wang agree to dropping “mutual

respect” in exchange for some briefed-­down, innocuous clause like

“without prejudice to inherent rights of either side”, or etc. A frontal

attack on “mutual respect” would probably not do the trick, as the

Chicoms could make us appear to be opposing virtue (see Para 3 our

1930). I have been toying with a somewhat devious, anything, but fron­

tal, attack designed to alarm Wang about the implications of his own

clause. It rests on a syllogism something like this:

(a) If the “mutual respect” clause is really mutual and reciprocal,

as Wang asserts, then the implication is there that the Chicoms are

acknowledging a legitimate US concern in matters of sovereignty and

territorial integrity related to the Taiwan area. They are also apparently

acknowledging that the US has some “internal affairs” in that area.

(b) If Wang denies this implication, then he is either denying the

applicability of the first ­paragraph to Taiwan, or he is denying its

mutuality.

Although this might be the rationale of our line on this point, we

should not present the line from this angle. Too sophistic. It would be

more alarming (not to say infuriating) to Peiping if we introduced it

something like this:

“Mr Ambassador, one of the unfortunate aspects of your first para

is that, intentionally or not, it gives the impression that matters of sov­

ereignty and territory in the Taiwan area are entirely and exclusively

mutual between us. It gives the impression that only the two of us are

concerned with internal matters in that area.

“It is true that my country, which had a major part in defeating

Japan and thus liberating Taiwan, has a legitimate concern in questions

of sovereignty in that area. It is possible also to speak of such matters as

the control and disposition of American forces in the MAAG on Taiwan

as an internal matter of my country. However, in the first place, my

country is not willing to give the appearance of disregarding the role of

the other great powers allied with the United States in the war against

Japan—among them the Republic of China, the United Kingdom, and

the Soviet Union.

“In the second place, as I have repeatedly emphasized here, I do

not think we should render our present task, of agreeing on a renun­

ciation of force, even more complex and difficult than it already is by

introducing matters of substance relating to the merits of our disputes.

This, it seems to me, your first paragraph indisputably does.”

It seems to me, if this line could be presented with a straight enough

face, it might give Peiping some food for thought. I don’t necessarily

urge this approach, which is devious; but I can’t at the moment think of

a better way of alarming Wang about “mutual respect.”

I am also toying with the possiblity of a new US draft, based on

their December 1 draft, but approaching the amendments from a differ­

ent angle. I’ll send it along in a later letter.

Best to all in CA—

Sincerely,

David L Osborn

622. Letter from Osborn to Clough

Geneva, May 28, 1956

Dear Ralph:

If we are not inclined to talk on the basis of Wang’s May 11 draft,

I think the best way of avoiding it is to submit a new draft. I don’t

think the April 19 revision is adequate for this purpose. It is too close to

our January 12 revision, for one thing, and is not the kind of dramatic

“effort” to reach agreement that would really look good in the record.

For another thing, in point of timing we need something that postdates

their May 11 draft.

A second reason for submitting a new draft (the first being our

possible reluctance to talk on the basis of their May 11 draft) is that

this would keep Peiping off balance with respect to a break-­off, and

possibly even with respect to a resort to the public. They would want to

have the last word—as usual—and might be reluctant to face the public

on the basis of a record showing the United States had made the last

concrete effort to reach agreement. The effectiveness of our new draft

in accomplishing this purpose would, of course, depend on how good

our “effort” would look in the record.

Possible New Draft—December 1 with a Codicil:

We have preserved a position in the talks from which we can con­

sistently say that we have, from the time of its submission, considered

Official–­Informal. Osborn signed the postscript “Dave.”

Wang’s December 1 draft an acceptable form and framework for a dec­

laration renouncing the use of force; but we have, also from the time of

its submission, been concerned about certain ambiguities therein which

make it possible for the December 1 draft to mean one thing to one side

and another to the other side.

Our successive efforts since January 12 have been directed at

removing the ambiguities of the December 1 draft. We could argue that

Wang, by his submission of his May 11 draft, has in effect acknowl­

edged his own concern about the ambiguities of his December 1 draft.

Wang’s May 11 draft (we could argue), in trying to overcome the

ambiguities of his December 1 draft, unfortunately sacrifices too much

of what was good in the December 1 draft. Wang has thrown out the

baby with the bathwater.

What we ought to do is to concentrate on the essential task of turn­

ing the December 1 draft into a meaningful declaration by removing

its ambiguities while preserving this mutually acceptable form and

framework.

How to do this? In regard to what points do both Ambassadors agree

the December 1 draft requires amplification or specification? First, both

Ambassadors seem to be in agreement that it is desirable to make it clear

that the declaration does not prejudice the rights, or the positions and

views of one side or the other. Various ways, none of them completely

satisfactory to both sides, have been suggested. And yet, in answer to

the direct question “should the proposed declaration be interpreted as in

any way prejudicing the rights of either side, or the position of either side

with respect to the merits of this dispute?” both Ambassadors would cer­

tainly say it should not.

Secondly, both Ambassadors have suggested ways in which the

declaration should be related to the Taiwan area. There has been much

discussion on this point, but surely both Ambassadors would agree that

the Taiwan area dispute should be included in the disputes referred to

in the proposed declaration.

Our suggestion in presenting the enclosed draft would be that the

way to agreement on a declaration acceptable to both sides is to take

the acceptable form and framework of the December 1 draft and let it

stand, with the addition of an “Agreed Understanding” (or some other

name for Codicil) on the two points mentioned above.

I would presume that our initial draft “Agreed Understanding”

would contain only the two paragraphs. If Wang insisted on a third

paragraph relating to a FMC, we might be prepared to move towards

something like the bracketed third paragraph of the enclosure.

On the whole, I am inclined to think this approach might be bet­

ter—safer and more under our control, also less defensive—than the

approach outlined in paragraph four of my May 14 letter.

Regards to all. Hope Walter is not too tired from his trip West.

Sincerely,

David L. Osborn

P.S. It looks as though I may at last get some substantive work

to do—writing up some reports, attending some conferences—in the

­Delegation’s Economic Section. Hope so.

DLO

Enclosure

Draft Agreed Announcement With Codicil

AGREED ANNOUNCEMENT

ETC.

Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf of the Government of

the United States of America, and Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan, on

behalf of the Government of the Peoples’ Republic of China, agree to

announce:

The United States of America and the Peoples’ Republic of China

are determined that they should settle disputes between their two

countries through peaceful negotiations without resorting to the threat

or use of force;

The two Ambassadors should continue their talks to seek practical

and feasible means for the realization of this common desire.

AGREED UNDERSTANDING OF THE

TWO AMBASSADORS:

1. Neither this Announcement nor any of its provisions is to be

construed as in any way prejudicing the rights of either side or the posi­

tion of either side with respect to the merits of their disputes;

2. This Announcement applies to all disputes between our two

countries, including that in the Taiwan area.

[3. With reference to the last paragraph of the Announcement,

the two of us shall not only continue to discuss and strive to settle the

practical matters at issue between us, but shall expeditiously consider

and arrange for such other practical and feasible means, including the

holding of negotiations at a higher level, as may be ascertained to be

appropriate and necessary.]

623. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Geneva, May 28, 1956

Dear Walter:

Bob Ekvall has received a letter from Ted Liu who was princi­

pal Chinese interpreter at Panmunjom. He is finishing up his M.A.

degree at Columbia in June and will be looking for a job. At present

he says he is being considered by USIA and the National Security

Agency and has asked Bob for his advice on any other places that he

might look. Bob says that he is absolutely tops as an interpreter as

well as a person.

With reference to my previously expressed thought, that the

Department should be looking toward obtaining a first class Chinese

interpreter, this seems to me like an excellent opportunity. At my sug­

gestion, Bob is therefore writing to him suggesting that he see Ralph

Clough. I am enclosing the Curriculum Vita that he sent to Bob.

I Just received Ralph’s letter enclosing Marguerite Higgins article

on prisoners. This is, of course, most unfortunate and disturbing after

the success we have had in recent months in keeping out of the press.

I have not yet seen the article in the Paris edition of the Herald Tribune

but presume that whether or not it appears there it will certainly fall

into the hands of the Chinese. If I receive any inquiries on it here I plan

to say nothing whatever.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Enc.

Curriculum Vita of Theodore M. Liu

Official–Informal.

Geneva, May 29, 1956

1949. From Johnson.

Would appreciate text White’s remarks re Geneva talks also guid­

ance for us answering possible local inquiries. No inquiries so far but

several correspondents have indicated interest doing round-­up stories

in connection fiftieth meeting and I anticipate question Chinese prison­

ers will be raised.

Gowen

Distribution.

2059. For Johnson.

FYI.

1. Mrs. Robert McCann has received letter tram Chinese ­Communist

Red Cross dated May 7 in answer letter from her dated Feb. 6, stating her

husband sentenced 15 years imprisonment starting from date of his arrest

“owing to violation of Chinese law”. Sympathy extended and statement

made that Court may order an early release “if he behaves well in his

imprisonment”. States decision of authorities alleviate suffering of sep­

aration by granting special permission for families of convicts come to

China and visit them is still in force. Chinese Communist Red Cross offers

“make arrangements” if she would like come to China visit her husband.

2. Lawrence Buol died suddenly in France May 27.

Hoover

Limit Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy.

2066. For Johnson.

1. Your 1928 re optional return to Mainland China of Chinese alien

criminals imprisoned in this country. Department has decided proceed

promptly with course B Deptel 2023. May 28 letter from Justice states

that parole for deportation of all State prisoners can be arranged. Some

Federal cases more difficult where minimum time for parole eligibility

not yet served but release for deportation possible through Presidential

action which we believe obtainable.

2. Plan is for concerted action be taken May 31 by you with Wang

and by Department with Indian Embassy. We will point out that Agreed

Announcement does not require us take any action regarding Chinese

common criminals serving sentences in this country but that we are

nevertheless affording such criminals opportunity of immediate vol­

untary return Mainland China, thus removing any semblance of basis

for Chinese Communist allegation of US non-­compliance with Agreed

Announcement. We have decided permit Indian Embassy representa­

tives to interview all 34 Chinese alien criminals and ascertain for them­

selves which ones desire return Communist China. Decision of each

prisoner must be confirmed by him to responsible American authorities.

Necessary machinery for release and voluntary deportation will be put

into motion in each case only after we are satisfied that prisoner has freely

made decision to return. Appropriate communication quoting Agreed

Announcement and informing prisoners of choice before then and pro­

spective visit of Indian Representative, will be delivered in near future.

3. Department contemplates no repeat no follow-­up approach

by O’Neill in Peiping for time being. We believe chances of favor­

able action by Chinese Communists on American prisoners will be

improved if we refrain from applying pressure for a time. Our action

is in part predicated on assumption that Chinese Communists will

require a face saving procedure for belated compliance with Agreed

Announcement and immediate pressure tactics would not be consist­

ent with this theory.

4. Chinese and British Embassies here will be informed in confi­

dence of our decision morning 31st. No present publicity contemplated

and no decision will be made as to future publicity awaiting further

developments. Your comments on publicity question requested.

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger and by Rountree

(NEA) and Jones (SOA).

Your instructions for next meeting will outline presentation to be

made on this subject to Wang.

Hoover

2067. For Johnson.

Guidance for May 31 meeting.

1. Inform Wang that in order remove any vestige basis for Wang’s

claim that US has not performed under Agreed Announcement

because Chinese prisoners not free leave US each Chinese alien crim­

inal in ­Federal or State penitentiary in US being informed of Agreed

Announcement and is specifically being told that if he desires do so he

may apply for immediate voluntary deportation to mainland. Indian

Embassy being informed that arrangements being made for its repre­

sentatives interview each imprisoned criminal of Chinese nationality to

ascertain to Embassy’s satisfaction whether individual desires release

for immediate return mainland China. US will take prompt action upon

any application by such Chinese criminals for immediate deportation.

2. Inform Wang that while Chinese alien criminals in US prisons

were not included in Agreed Announcement September 10 or in dis­

cussions leading up to that Announcement and none so far as we know

have expressed any wish return to Communist China, nevertheless in

view of Wang’s statements we have carried out careful investigation

in all Federal and State prisons to identify alien Chinese imprisoned

there. Extensive investigation necessary because no Chinese impris­

oned on political type charges or because his race, nationality or politi­

cal beliefs. They are all imprisoned for common crimes such as murder

and narcotic traffic. Names and addresses all Chinese alien criminals

who have been identified will be given Indian Embassy here. You may

inform Wang that Indian Embassy will be informed morning May 31

­Washington time but that no publicity now being given to decision.

3. FYI You may expand your presentation along indicated lines

as you consider appropriate in order obtain maximum tactical and

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger.

psychological impact from it. We hope by this strategy actually to obtain

release imprisoned Americans or else make Chinese Communist public

position in continuing to hold them completely indefensible. Compul­

sion on Chinese Communists to act must at this stage be indirect rather

than in form outright pressure. END FYI

4. We anticipate that this new move on prisoners will and should

occupy major portion meeting. We leave it to your judgment whether

you introduce this item or renunciation force first. On renunciation force

reiterate reasons why Wang’s May 11 draft is a retrograde step and unac­

ceptable. Probe Wang’s motivation in moving away from agreement

instead of toward agreement. Indicate US distaste for threats inherent in

Wang’s position. Repulse allegation US is side that is guilty of stalling tac­

tics. Continue take non-­committal attitude towards possibility ­Chinese

Communist publication Wang’s latest draft, making it clear while we dis­

approve publicity at this stage in accordance with understanding at time

talks were initiated we have nothing to fear from publicity.

5. If Wang should make public statement as suggested your 1937

you should make statement along lines you recite there but make no

mention that further comments will emanate Washington as we may

not wish make further statement here.

Hoover

2068. For Johnson.

Your 1949. Department believes transmittal text May 25 news con­

ference unnecessary. In light Deptels 2066 and 2067 you will understand

why Department prefers you endeavor avoid comment on Chinese

prisoner matter.

Hoover

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy.

1958. From Johnson.

1. Two hour 20 min meeting this morning. Balancing all consider­

ations decided best to open on renunciation which I did, making points

para 4 Deptel 2067, mentioning however that I had information for him

on first item and therefore would make my discussion renunciation brief.

2. Give-­and-­take generally followed previous lines except that

he pressed harder for specific detailed comments and invited textual

amendments. “If two months period not enough time what period

would be enough?” While he avoided explicit threat go public he

renewed stalling charge in context world opinion being disappointed

by failure these talks produce results.

3. I made statement on Chinese prisoners along lines paras one and

two Deptel 2067 except that I did not explicitly inform him no publicity

was being given to decision. In context meeting I felt it probably more

productive leave him guess on this. In any event probably more effec­

tive if they learn this through Indians.

4. Wang had prepared statement obviously based on Higgins arti­

cle and other press reports reflecting instructions to “demand” that we

release all Chinese prisoners and specifically asserting they included

in September 10 announcement. Although my previous presentation

undercut basis for his prepared statement he nevertheless used some

of it, making foregoing points. In reply to his question as to how many,

I said did not have exact figure but was between 30 and 40, to which

he replied this was “quite big number”. I ignored his request for list

of names. He renewed charge on coercing Chinese apply for perma­

nent residence and Taiwan entry permits, adding charge that US born

children Chinese students being denied exit. I immediately and cate­

gorically denied latter charge pointing out that even though American

citizens children were being permitted accompany parents.

5. My statement on Chinese prisoners obviously took him by com­

plete surprise, he had no instructions to cover possibility, and therefore

confined himself to prepared material despite incongruities.

6. At Wang’s suggestion next meeting Friday June 8.

7. Proceeding Prague tomorrow returning Geneva Wednesday

June 6.

Shillock

Limit Distribution.

1964. From Johnson.

1. I opened 49th today with prepared statement:

A. Shall make remarks on second item brief as possible this morning

as have some information give you concerning first item.

B. Do not, however, want to make so brief as to leave you in doubt

as to my position regard our search for agreement on renunciation force

at present stage discussions. My government considers this search task

of fundamental importance, and for its part is determined make every

effort find common ground for agreement on meaningful renunciation

force. My country will continue seek this as essential first step toward

peaceful resolution differences.

C. It because this attitude my government that, when you submitted

last Dec 1, I did not reject it simply because it came from your side. On

contrary, as you will recall, welcomed it as advance over your previous

position. Felt it had possibility being made into acceptable form frame­

work meaningful renunciation force. As told you at time, was concerned

about certain ambiguities your Dec 1 draft. As indicated your Dec 1, your

draft, because these ambiguities appeared capable meaning one thing

one side another to other. As indicated you that time, there was danger

you might be taking draft to mean US abandoning its position respect

merits dispute Taiwan area. As also indicated, I felt relation of draft to

Taiwan area was another point of ambiguity.

D. However, despite these dangers which, as noted at time seemed

inherent your draft, I was most careful in suggesting revisions to avoid

rejecting what was constructive in draft. Limited revisions to what

thought was minimum necessary to remove ambiguities I had pointed

out. You persisted rejecting my amendments, but for five months refused

submit alternative suggestions. April 19, I again suggested certain min­

imum revisions designed meet your stated objections my ­January 12

amendments. Again, most careful preserve intact form and exact lan­

guage your Dec 1 draft, limiting changes to necessary minimum.

E. Finally, on May 11, you came forward with new revision on your

own. You have objected my terming your May 11 draft “retrogression”.

Have not used this term hastily. Really do not see how it possible regard

that draft as other than retrograde step. Let me make this entirely clear.

Distribution.

F. First, consider question in terms of drafts, of concrete docu­

ments. Stated at time, your December 1 draft constituted advance over

previous position. Surely effort both us ought be preserve elements of

advance in draft and concentrate solely on improving it. My successive

efforts followed this principle, in true spirit reciprocity and desire for

progress. Do not believe you can point to any respect in which my

revision April 19 sacrificed any part your Dec 1 draft. Unfortunately,

your draft May 11 does sacrifice much of earlier draft. Revisions which

it suggests either depart completely from spirit reciprocity and mutu­

ality, or limit validity of declaration, or introduce new and extraneous

elements ambiguity. Even excludes those portions of your own Dec

1 draft I had accepted. Rather than moving direction of agreement,

moves away from agreement.

G. Second, consider question in terms of relations between my

country yours, and of situation Taiwan area. Does not set time limit—

and short one, at that—on validity of proposed declaration automat­

ically heighten [not] decrease, dangers of that situation? Does it not

automatically raise question of what your side intends do at end two-­

month period? Your December 1 draft constituted apparent advance

towards basis for agreement on meaningful renunciation force. That

is, I felt and still feel if its ambiguities removed, as was done in my

April 19 draft the Dec 1 draft could lead to removal dangers inherent

in present situation in ­Taiwan area. It could thus open road toward

genuine peaceful discussion and resolution differences. I felt and

still feel this is direction which we should try move. Must insist your

May 11 draft is step in opposite direction. Do not see how anyone

could consider it as other than reversal of course, and hope you will

understand my reluctance join you in backward step.

2. Wang replied (from notes and from prepared statement) he noted

my statement this morning dealt general terms their previous drafts.

Could not agree my assertion terming May 11 draft retrogression. It

presented exactly because their previous draft Dec 1 been submitted for

long time and did not achieve any result in discussions. View that sit­

uation they submitted new draft May 11. May 11 draft common points

been included. In light expressed attitude US last few meetings in dis­

cussion May 11 draft, particularly in light my statement this morning

as well as opposition to time limit in declaration it become quite clear

my intention this discussion is try get declaration freezing status quo

Taiwan area, then resort prolonged procrastination without following

up with FMC in order maintain ability my country continue seizure

Taiwan intervene China’s internal affairs. That position what their side

would under no circumstances agree to.

3. Wang said as been repeatedly pointed out US already used force

threat force in seizing China’s territory Taiwan intervening China’s

liberation offshore islands. That fact which can no way be negated by

resort sophistry.

4. Wang said I had made repeated statements calling for uncondi­

tional renunciation force Taiwan area. If so US should first of all remove

own forces and threat force already used against China Taiwan area.

China upheld peaceful settlement Sino-­American disputes Taiwan

area. However would never remain onlooker allowing US continue

perpetuate seizure Taiwan interference China’s internal affairs.

5. Wang said any declaration renouncing use force China US ­Taiwan

area must not under any circumstance be something freezing status

quo Taiwan area. Must specify means by which Taiwan area dispute

might be resolved. Their draft specified such practical feasible means

should be sought ascertained within two months from announcement

declaration. This proves sincerity their part for peaceful resolution dis­

putes between us.

6. Wang said it now more than eight months since began discus­

sions this second item. As result procrastination part US we still not

able reach agreement. If US even lacked intention reaching agreement

on means settling Sino-­American dispute Taiwan area, to what year

and to what month would I want drag on talks when we came to dis­

cussion substance disputes?

7. Wang said they always held provided there equal sincerity two

months time should be entirely sufficient for two sides agree practical

feasible means solution disputes Taiwan area.

8. I replied he had spoken of supposed US desire freeze status quo

Taiwan area. Seemed me as sometimes said in English shoe on other

foot. What was status quo Taiwan area? Status quo was there dispute

regarding that area involving both us. One side for long in past and still

is threatening use force resolve that dispute to its satisfaction.

9. I asked what was first step to peacefully resolve that dispute?

First step was clearly say force would not be used in attempt solve it.

Next step was peacefully and in that atmosphere discuss disputes. It

eight long months ago I put forward this simple proposition. Might

even say elementary proposition. Proposition designed verly clearly

to change present status quo under which force being threatened and

there danger hostilities long as it continued.

10. I said it not US but rather his country that apparently desired

maintain status quo. It not US that prevented us from coming grips

other substantive problems confronting us. It unwillingness his gov­

ernment thus far accept simple elementary proposition that prevented

us thus far moving on any further these talks. I thought it important we

keep clear on what actual situation was.

11. Wang said I had just now indicated desired present status quo

Taiwan area not be maintained and something must be done about it.

That exactly what they maintained. Status quo Taiwan area abnormal

and false. That why something must be done change that situation.

However, order change that status quo Taiwan area empty words not

sufficient. One must show concrete deeds that direction. It exactly for

this purpose settling disputes two countries Taiwan area we started dis­

cussions here. For eight months we not been able make progress this

subject. This not to their satisfaction.

12. Wang said first step settlement Taiwan area dispute two coun­

tries lay in announcing declaration. However, I had failed give him

any help that direction. In discussing subject making declaration

must concentrate on how make progress in discussion. May 11 draft

designed exactly for purpose advancing talks not producing deadlock

or dragging talks backward.

13. Wang said he had repeatedly explained his draft. It contained

three substantive paras. First para they proposed two countries

accord mutual respect sovereignty territorial integrity each other.

That would be normal fundamental principle on which relations two

countries could be established; he could not imagine any other prin­

ciple departing from this principle on which relations could be estab­

lished. He could not imagine how this principle mutual respect could

be replaced by mutual disdain and hostility.

14. Wang said second para proposed peaceful resolution Taiwan

area dispute two countries. That para reasonable and expressed their

peaceful intentions in that they determined try settle disputes peacefully

without going war.

15. Wang said next about time limit in declaration. This expressed

mutual determination seek means settlement disputes. Fact that no

agreement been achieved eight long months in Sino-­American negoti­

ations had exerted unfavorable influence international opinion. Public

says two us meeting for sake meeting, and do not have desire settle con­

crete problem. On their part they dissatisfied with delay. If we set two

months time limit would help greatly our endeavors for settlement. That

in interests both sides.

16. Wang said in discussion declaration should not and can­

not try depart from these things. Issue could not be settled by mak­

ing empty charges such allegation their draft retrogression. I alleged

their May 11 constituted step backwards. Told me would appreciate if

I could enlighten him in what points their draft made what I termed

retrogression.

17. I said Wang had characterized his May 11 draft, in reference its

second para as expression intention on part two us try settle disputes

peacefully without going war. I inclined agree that characterization his

draft. I felt this pointed up really fundamental difference between us.

Would declaration we discussing be merely pious ambiguous expres­

sion of desire try repeat try settle disputes peacefully without going

war? Or would it be declaration saying we would not go war over dis­

putes but would discuss them and seek settlement only by peaceful

means? It in this regard in particular I must consider his May 11 draft

as retrogression from Dec 1 draft.

18. Wang interjected it seemed we better keep discussion in terms

exact text draft. Their draft in this para said two countries determined

should settle disputes between two countries Taiwan area peaceful

negotiation without resorting threat use force against each other. We

better keep strictly to text draft. What he wanted discuss was exactly

text draft.

19. I told Wang I still felt taken as whole effect of May 11 draft was

as I had said. As I had said this morning taking last para his May 11

in relation whole it even introduced element of threat at end period

mentioned therein. However it explained or rationalized that simply

inherent in language it used. I had pointed out also in that para he had

dropped language on which we previously agreed. I had accepted his

language exactly as expressed in his draft Dec 1 for that last para. By

now dropping language on which agreement already reached certainly

had gone backwards.

20. Wang said we would both recall prior agreement first announce­

ment we both worked earnestly in terms language of announce­

ment. As result our efforts we finally reached agreement precise text

announcement.

21. Wang said he had asked me this morning point out exactly which

places in three paras his draft constituted retrogression. However I had

first mentioned second para. He could hardly follow logic that respect.

I would recall their previous draft Dec 1 in which second para. said

PRC and USA determined should settle disputes two countries through

peaceful negotiation without resorting threat use force. That was state­

ment in general terms regarding settlement disputes two countries. As

they understood public statements made by US Department State we

desired specific mention Taiwan area this para. In meeting I had repeat­

edly advanced point of including Taiwan this para. Their May 11 did

include reference Taiwan area. Therefore it met requirements US. That

why it hard for him understand how such inclusion constituted retro­

gression. He must say he not able follow me this respect. My position

seemed be in their previous drafts they did not have reference Taiwan

area second para and that not satisfactory me. Now in second para they

added reference yet I said this retrogression. Could this be regarded as

demonstation sincerity in talks?

22. Wang said I had next spoken about third paragraph and about

time limit. They maintained time limit essential necessary and useful

both sides. For several meetings in succession I had expressed different

opinions on time limit. I had done so in spite repeated explanations. If

I considered two months insufficient then how much time would be

sufficient? He would like hear my ideas that regard period.

23. I said had just two brief things. First in discussing first agree­

ment last September we did not make progress by dropping from

declaration mid-­way during negotiations, language on which had

already reached agreement. Parenthetically I might note in spite care

I attempted exercise discussing that agreement we came out with

something which did not mean same thing both us. Issues here too

important for that again happen.

24. I said next far as his question concerning time limit did not feel

any time limit could be placed on renunciation force settlement our

disputes. We certainly would not say we agreed not go war each other

two months two years twenty years. It worse say that really than say

nothing at all.

25. Wang said he found me in self-­contradiction with previous

statement this morning. This morning I said did not desire maintain

status quo Taiwan area and desired present situation Taiwan area be

changed. By omitting time limit did I feel present status quo Taiwan

area should be maintained two years twenty years? If one should

view Taiwan problem from that standpoint it would show he not will­

ing have settlement at all. If I thought he mistaken in that he hoped

I would clear it up for him.

26. I thought I had already made position amply clear on that. He

had twisted my clear statement into arguing something I did not say.

However I was satisfied my position clear. Had nothing further on this

this morning. As told him at beginning meeting had information for

him in regard first item which would take little time present and if it

agreeable him would now do so.

27. Wang said although I had said my position clear they still

not clear regarding it. He regretted I had in my statement not helped

progress our discussion on declaration. If there no desire for deliberate

stalling talks and if there genuine desire for reaching agreement would

hope I able at next meeting put forward concrete opinions. Rather than

saying abstract things would hope I able express concrete opinion.

28. He [I] then read prepared statement:

A. Since last December you with increasing frequency brought mat­

ter ­Chinese in prisons my country. At 47th meeting May 17 even asserted

my government had under agreed announcement September 10 under­

taken commitments this regard.

B. While not my purpose again enter controversy this matter, you

well recall from time two years ago when two us undertook discussion

respective nationals in country of other I indicated from my standpoint

this involving question all Americans your country prevented depart­

ing by denial exit permits or imprisonment. So there be no question

concerning exactly what discussing, I gave you list their names. You

indicated interest was in question removal restrictions imposed by

government on departure Chinese students. Your request I gave con­

crete information this regard. Were of course, no Chinese my country in

category corresponding Americans your country imprisoned charges

political nature.

C. These continued be respective concerns and subjects discus­

sion throughout period contact through consulates general here well

as through negotiations from August 1 leading agreed announcement

September 10 which issued this context. Clearly understood between us

and I made abundantly clear insofar my statement that announcement

concerned, it confirmed fact, which I informed you outset our talks

August, as of that time removal completed all restrictions on departure

for your country Chinese my country.

D. That my country fully faithfully carried out with regard Chinese

in US all terms agreed announcement demonstrated beyond doubt not

only by fact Chinese continued freely proceed from US your country

but also by fact in almost nine months since agreed announcement

Indian Embassy has not brought attention my government single case

where even alleged obstruction been offered to departure Chinese who

desire proceed your country.

E. Nevertheless you in recent months raised question Chinese my

country serving prison sentences. Your obvious purpose been falsely

impugn faith performance my country all commitments under agreed

announcement. Despite demonstrable falsity impression you seek cre­

ate, my country’s authorities, view your statements this regard, car­

ried out full careful investigation identify alien Chinese who might be

serving prison terms. This investigation included all federal and state

prisons. Necessary because no Chinese imprisoned my country on

charges political nature or because race, nationality, political beliefs.

He subject to imprisonment for common crimes as murder narcotics

traffic only after prompt, fair public trial before impartial courts where

has same legal safeguards as every other resident my country includ­

ing counsel of own choice. Those convicted under such procedures not

singled out by reasons race nationality, nor records concerning them

maintained that basis.

F. As far as I able determine no alien Chinese in prison my coun­

try has expressed desire return your country. However, in order

remove any vestige basis your claim my government not fully carrying

out agreed announcement, each these prisoners being individually

informed agreed announcement and specifically told if desires do so

may apply for deportation your country. Prompt action will be taken

any such application.

G. In addition, Indian Embassy my country being informed

arrangements being made its representatives interview each such com­

mon criminal so can ascertain to its satisfaction whether not he desires

be released for immediate return your country. Indian Embassy will be

given names and location all such criminals. Indian Embassy today also

being informed these measures.

29. Wang said he could not agree remarks concerning Chinese

nationals US. Nor could he agree my assertion September 10 agreement

did not include Chinese US prisons. He did not deny in beginning our

contact on return civilians they first raised question Chinese students

US. That time, Chinese students had suffered extremely unreasonable

restrictions in US. However during last negotiations on return civilians

beginning last August until we reached agreement on September 10

they never on their part stated that problems Chinese civilians only

restricted Chinese students. Chinese students only portion Chinese

nationals US. Same as in case US lawbreakers in China which included

military personnel as well as civilians other categories.

30. Turning to prepared statement Wang continued he recalled

I made statement during previous discussion to effect I did not know

of any Chinese in prison US. I now formally informed him there were

Chinese prisoners US.

31. Wang said he had also noted statement by spokesman US

Department State to effect Chinese imprisoned US not going to be

released. He must say this very serious question.

32. Wang said since I informed him I had made investigation

­Chinese in US prisons he would appreciate my telling him exact num­

ber such prisoners. Hoped I would be able give him list. These ­Chinese

nationals imprisoned in US. That was fact. Fact was they subjected

unequal treatment in US and being persecuted under various charges.

Wang had right demand US release these people so they could return

native land. They quite dissatisfied since agreement reached on civil­

ians US so far not fully carried out agreement. He had made many

representations concerning Chinese and Chinese students who being

obstructed but, except in case Liu Yung-­ming I not made any account­

ing these people.

33. Wang said US not yet removed requirements coercing Chinese

US apply permanent residence and entry permits Taiwan.

34. Wang said according their information US recently taken

measures deny exit children born Chinese students in US to depart

with parents. That constituted violation agreement on civilians. They

demanded US promptly remove such measures in violation agreement.

35. I said I did not know whether he clearly understood exactly

what I told him. His remarks appeared indicate he did not. I had said

far as I been able determine no Chinese prisoner thus far expressed

desire return his country. I said however that it going be made specifi­

cally clear each them that if he desired do so he could apply deportation

Wang’s country.

36. I said I did not even ask him accept my word on this. Arrange­

ments made Indian Embassy see each these persons determine for

self whether desired be released for immediate return. I had also told

Wang Indian Embassy would be given names and locations each these

persons.

37. I said as far as numbers concerned did not have exact figures

which being given Indian Embassy but understood in neighborhood

30–40 persons who involved.

38. I said purpose this morning not enter controversy over ground

covered many times in past but I found difficult accept his statement

Chinese US who committed murder other common crimes being perse­

cuted because put in prison for it.

39. I said only new thing Wang had mentioned was assertion

children born US to Chinese student parents being denied exit. Could

categorically tell him this not correct. Though such children ­American

citizens they being permitted accompany parents. Because they

­American citizens procedures for departure somewhat different from

case aliens and might in some cases require short period time. However

even though they American citizens they being permitted accompany

parents.

40. Wang said first place he might say number given by me for

Chinese in prison US—I had said 30–40—quite big number. Essential

question re these people was for US Govt release them so could return

their homeland soon as possible. Regarding Chinese that category who

in prison US he hoped I able give him list.

41. Wang said as regards children born to Chinese parents it case

of obstruction departure. I had just now stated they not obstructed,

but same time stated they received different treatment in regard

departure from that accorded parents. That precisely case of obstruc­

tion for it quite apparent if children subject obstruction would also

hinder departure parents. He hoped prompt action would be taken by

US authorities correct that situation.

42. I said had nothing more. Wang proposed next meeting Friday

June 8. I agreed.

Shillock

Geneva, May 31, 1956, midnight

1965. From Johnson.

To carry out tactic outlined para 3 Deptel 2066 believe I should not

take any initiative with respect implementation next meeting. At best

may take several weeks assess effect on them this unexpected move.

Regardless of what action they may ultimately take respective release

of Americans he will probably make some statement at next meeting

attempting redress record from his standpoint to which I would pro­

pose reply as necessary without laboring release Americans aspect.

Would appreciate instructions covering possibility he renews request

I give him here list of prisoners. Would attempt as today avoid issue

but if he presses I may be required indicate some position. On one hand

no requirement under agreed announcement they be given any such

list but on other hand they will of course receive list from Indians and

flat refusal give him same list here tends somewhat adversely reflec­

tion his status here and be inconsistent with my previous position on

all implementation matters being proper subject for discussion here. In

any event if appears useful desire be able state will inform him when

any prisoner departs.

Shillock

Distribution.

730. (CODE ROOM: Please repeat Department’s 2066 to Geneva,

Control 13989, May 29.)

Hoover

McConaughy; cleared in SOA. Also sent to London as telegram 7256 and New Delhi as

telegram 2925.

633. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Geneva, May 31, 1956

Dear Walter:

Thought you would be interested in knowing that the Indian

Consul General here just called me saying that he recalled that I had

asked him to let me know whenever Krishna Menon came through

town and that he was passing through here on Monday, intimating

that he would like to see me but not directly saying so. Of course,

I had never said any such thing to the Consul General and he per­

fectly well knows so, my last statement to him being that I would be

very glad to see Krishna Menon any time he wanted to see me.

I replied that I was very sorry that I was leaving for Prague tomor­

row morning and would not be returning until Wednesday and asked

that he give Mr. Menon my regards.

I suppose that he will, of course, be seeing Wang. I have no idea

what this means, if anything, but wanted to pass it on to you.

I have nothing on today’s meeting except what I have already

transmitted in my telegrams. I was delighted to be able to make the

statement on Chinese prisoners and so thoroughly to throw him into

a spin at today’s meeting. It was fortunate that I had at the very outset

in my statement of renunciation mentioned my desire later to talk

on Item one, because it was quite obvious that he was preparing to

jump in with his “demands” on us to release the Chinese prisoners,

and if he had gotten his statement in first, it would have made it very

difficult for me to make mine. However, it all worked out well and

I think that we have handled the matter so as to obtain the maximum

advantage.

Regards.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

634. Letter from Osborn to Clough

Geneva, June 1, 1956

Dear Ralph:

After talking the last meeting over with Bob Ekvall, I had worked

up a paragraph or two on renunciation for possible inclusion in the

Ambassador’s “comment” telegram. When I showed the draft to the

Ambassador, his reaction was, while agreeing with the analysis, to

doubt the utility of putting it in the telegram. He suggested I send it to

you in a letter, and so I am enclosing it.

I would certainly agree with the Ambassador that the Department

appears to face the possibility of a resort to the public by Wang with

equanimity. It is also true that if in fact the CHICOMS do go to the

public on the basis of the May 11 draft, they will not be in too strong a

position. Even Wang seems to realize this, and that is probably why he

has been making such determined efforts to lure us into making textual

criticisms. His tactic would possibly be to then table a new draft appar­

ently meeting our objections without really doing so. This would put

Peiping in a stronger public position than the May 11 draft alone.

Possibly Wang may have another try or two at getting us to talk

textually. If this fails, Peiping may decide to go to the public anyway.

If Peiping takes the issue to the public solely on the basis of the May 11

draft, the CHICOMS are going to have a hard time convincing peo­

ple this draft represents a really sincere effort to reach agreement on a

meaningful renunciation of force. Accordingly they might stress, rather

than the draft itself, Wang’s repeated offers to consider alternative sug­

gestions, and our “obstinate” refusal to offer any. They might even, as a

minor gambit, play Wang’s trick of “assuming”, since we concentrated

our objections on the time limit clause, that the United States had no

objections to other parts of the draft. This would not fool most intelli­

gent observers, but it might injure feelings on Taiwan.

Alternatively, Peiping might decide that the May 11 draft is com­

pletely unsuitable as a basis for a public position, and Wang might be

instructed to table a new draft, even in the absence of textual comments

from our side. Our failure to take this new draft as the basis for discus­

sion would bring on a threat to go to the public, and this time it would

be genuine.

Official–­Informal. Orborn signed the original “Dave.”

These various possibilities have probably occurred to you in CA,

and are probably being taken account of in planning our strategy in

the talks, insofar as they are worth taking account of at all. This might

be a good place to say again that in writing you these letters I am not

attempting to force the pace of things, request answers to questions, or

urge any particular direction of policy with regard to the talks.

Since we have been relying on the services of one of the ConGen

officers for the note-­taking spot, we have been working up the long tele­

grams on the basis of my shorthand notes, thoroughly cross-­checked

with the long-­hand notes and Bob Ekvall’s notes of what Wang really

said in Chinese, as well as approved by the Ambassador. In dictating

off the telegrams to the secretary I have tried to comply with a recent

instruction from the Department calling attention to excess verbiage in

our previous traffic. I hope I have not been condensing to the detriment

of intelligibility. If so, don’t hesitate to tell me.

Regards to Walter and all in CA.

Sincerely,

David L. Osborn

Enclosure

Draft Comments by Osborn

COMMENTS ON RENUNCIATION FORCE SITUATION

In absence new move from me on renunciation next meeting antic­

ipate Wang will heighten threat resort public, justifying step along

lines para. 15 long telegram (i.e., saying international opinion already

deploring worthlessness these talks, and asserting it CHICOM right

and duty inform public who is responsible for lack progress). Wang’s

original hope may have been elicit my objections his May 21 draft, then

submit another new draft allegedly meeting my objections, with plan

of going to public following my rejection his “second successive effort

reach agreement”. Plausibility this supposition supported by extensive

bargaining room in his May 11 draft and by his determined efforts elicit

my specific comments or suggested amendments.

Accordingly it possible Wang may continue recent tactics one or

two more meetings. However as and if Wang convinced I intend avoid

specific comment text his draft, Peiping may feel self forced go to pub­

lic on basis that draft.

Letter No. 45

Washington, June 1, 1956

Dear Alex:

I plan to wait until Monday the 4th to write the regular weekly let­

ter. That letter should reach you well before the next meeting on June 8.

This is merely a short note to transmit a copy of the ­Aide-­memoire we

delivered to the Indian Embassy yesterday, together with the full list of

Chinese alien prisoners. We have just received your 1965 and we feel

you should have this list in any event. If it should be decided that you

should transmit this list to Wang at the next meeting (and this ques­

tion will probably be decided on Monday), you should have this list in

advance in order to be prepared. It would be difficult and expensive to

transmit this list by cable, and the incidence of garbles would probably

be high. Unless this pouch is delayed you will be all set for whatever

course may be decided upon next week.

Indian Ambassador Mehta seemed highly pleased at our decision.

He told Dudley Withers after he left Mr. Robertson’s office that he felt

this was a constructive move which should lead to some progress. He

seemed to feel definitely optimistic. He obviously thinks it will be up to

the Chinese Communists to make a reciprocating move now. I believe

we have at least the local Indian representatives on our side on the pris­

oner question now, and we have high hopes that they will exert what­

ever influence they may have in the right direction. We will send you

a memorandum of the Robertson-­Mehta conversation on Monday. The

Indians intend to arrange the interviews with the prisoners as soon as

they receive word that we have delivered notifications and copies of

the Agreed Announcement to the prisoners. We hope to get the draft

circular letter to the prisoners cleared today. You will also get a copy

of this.

Minister Tan was quite unhappy when I gave him the news half

an hour before Mehta came in. He feels that both the propriety and

the consistency of our action are questionable. Obviously he feels that

the  position of the GRC as the sole representative and protector of

­Chinese interests in this country is somewhat compromised. He wants

a list of the prisoners, and Mr. Robertson and I both feel that we should

give it to him. However, it has not been done yet. Tan believes the

­Indians will try to bring pressure to bear on the prisoners to elect return

to the mainland. He thought we might have the same sort of tug-­of-­war

Informal. Drafted by McConaughy.

on these criminals which was experienced with the Chinese POW’s in

Korea. He also feels that if and when the news leaks out the effect on

the peace of mind of law-­abiding Chinese residents of the US will be

adverse. He thinks it might be construed by them as the thin edge of a

wedge.

FE/P is worried about the publicity angle. They feel if the news

leaks out or is released by the Chinese Communists we will be at a

serious disadvantage. They wonder if we should not put the news out

first so that we can retain control, insure that a garbled version does not

gain currency, and avoid being placed on the defensive. We are await­

ing your comments on the publicity problem. So far there has been no

leak that we know of.

Congratulations on the way you handled the presentation of our

decision yesterday. You really took Wang by surprise. Wang was caught

off balance most conspicuously and you handled his predicament very

well indeed.

The British Embassy here has informed O’Neill in detail of our

move and our reasoning in showing restraint at this stage. O’Neill will,

of course, make no move until we ask him to. We have invited his sug­

gestions as to the best way to play our cards if we get no prompt, favor­

able reaction from the Chinese Communists.

Congratulations on the fine commendation which the Secretary

wrote you. No commendation could have been more merited in our

view.

Judge Phleger has been away most of this week on two speech-­

making trips. Of course, the Secretary has been away too, taking a short

rest at Duck Island. Bill Sebald left on Tuesday for a six-­weeks tour of

the entire FE area.

Regards and every good wish to you, Dave and Helenka and

­Colonel Ekvall,

Sincerely yours,

Walter P. McConaughy

Director for Chinese Affairs

Enclosure:

Aide-­memoire to Indian Embassy.

1985. From Johnson.

Advise.

Gowen

Letter No. 46

Washington, June 4, 1956

Dear Alex:

There have been no Geneva developments since I wrote you on

Friday except a constant battle to keep down publicity on our prisoner

decision. Judge Phleger has been away until now. I expect that we will

have a Geneva meeting in the course of the day although your instruc­

tions may not go out until tomorrow since the meeting is on Friday this

week.

Unfortunately Kuh of the Chicago Sun Times got hold of almost the

entire story on our prisoners move, either late Thursday or early Friday.

His story appeared in the Chicago Sun Times Friday afternoon, June 1.

It was almost a miracle that the wire services did not pick up the story

immediately and carry it on their tickers. For some reason we did not

get the pressure until Saturday morning. John Hightower of AP got on

to the Chicago Sun Times story at that time and immediately went all

out to elicit something from Mr. Robertson, John ­Lindbeck and myself.

So far he has been staved off, largely by the efforts of Mr. ­Robertson,

who told him frankly that we could not confirm his surmises. Any story

Informal.

he might write would be based on pure conjecture. Such conjecture

would be prejudicial to the interest of the 13 imprisoned Americans.

Mr. Robertson thought he would want to think twice before he would

write an uncorroborated story which might have the effect of wors­

ening the plight of his fellow countrymen who were already in dire

straits. Don Gonzales of UP also got wind of the story yesterday, but

so far has been held off by the use of tactics similar to those employed

with Hightower.

We understand from Hightower that the New York Times

­Washington Bureau and other correspondents are working on the

story. They all sense that a news story is present. But they are loathe

to move until they can get some official confirmation. Kuh’s poor

reputation with many of his colleagues is helping us here, although

his account is so circumstantial that the other correspondents are con­

vinced there must be some fire where there is that much smoke. As

usual we have no idea where the leak occurred, although we suspect

the Indian Embassy may be the source. It is interesting that ­Gonzales

said he understood that 36 names were on the list of ­Chinese crim­

inals. This is a figure which was never given the Indian Embassy.

It is the figure originally received from I & N. S. Two names were

later deleted from this list because they appear to have a claim to

­American citizenship. This would make it seem that Gonzales’ source

was someone who saw the list either in Justice or in State at an early

stage.

Obviously the story is going to come out eventually although we

hope to stave off general circulation of acceptance of the story for a

while longer. It seems to us that official confirmation of the story at

this time would be totally inconsistent with our tactics of giving the

Chinese Communists as much room as possible for a graceful change

in policy on the imprisoned Americans. We will most certainly get

bogged down with an exchange of recriminations with the Chinese

­Communists on the application of the Agreed Announcement, if we

let anything out prematurely. The chances of the 13 would likely

be lost in the heat of the controversy. Although you have given us

some intimation of your general attitude of the publicity question,

we would welcome a more explicit recommendation and analysis.

We have tried our hands at three drafts of a contingency press release

if we are forced into the position of putting out a confirmation. We

do not like any of these drafts. It is an extemely difficult subject to

press succinctly and cogently with the right shades of emphasis

throughout.

There is enclosed a copy of the letter which is being sent to each

prisoner. It has been cleared in the Department and by I & N. S. and

the Bureau of Prisons and we expect to send it out in English and

Chinese today.

I am sorry I won’t be able to get another letter to you before the

next meeting to report on our meeting with Judge Phleger today. Any­

thing real significant will of course be included in our telegrams to you.

Regards and good luck,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosure:

Copy of letter to be sent to Chinese aliens in prison.

2090. For Johnson.

Following is draft text letter we propose sending Chinese prisoners.

Draft not finally approved here but would appreciate your comments. We

are considering having you give Wang copy at June 8 meeting.

QUOTE

There is enclosed a copy of the Agreed Announcement issued at

Geneva on September 10, 1955.

The responsible United States authorities have decided that the

provisions of the Agreed Announcement will be applied to your case.

In the near future, you will be given an opportunity to state formally

whether you elect to continue serving your sentence in the United

States subject to prevailing regulations, or whether you prefer to be dis­

charged expeditiously from prison for the sole purpose of immediate

and direct travel to China. If you apply for parole or commutation of

sentence for this purpose, the American authorities concerned will give

prompt consideration to your application.

You will later be visited to verify that you have been informed of

this opportunity to be deported, and to ascertain whether you elect

to be deported, so that the necessary arrangements can be made. The

Distribution. Drafted by Clough.

warden of the prison where you are confined will notify you in advance

of the arrangements for the visit. UNQUOTE

Dulles

551. Re Deptel 2090 to Geneva.

Suggest Wang not be given copy letter unless he asks for it or it

otherwise appears would be useful in context of meeting.

Suggest first sentence second paragraph reference letter be

deleted. Do not see necessity raising in this letter, particularly if copy

to be given Wang, controversial question of whether and by whose

decision prisoners covered by agreed announcement. It seems to me

omission of sentence would not jeopardize our position which has

been made clear to Wang and avoids thus formally committing our­

selves to carrying out release under agreed announcement rather than

by our own unilateral action.

Johnson

to Geneva for Osborn as telegram 47.

2099. For Johnson.

Following Chinese note dated June 3 transmitted for your confi­

dential background:

Dulles

tribution. Drafted by McConaughy.

2100. For Johnson.

Guidance for June 8 Meeting.

1. You are authorized inform Wang of delivery Indian Embassy

May 31 of US Aide Memoire enclosing list Chinese alien prisoners.

Do not repeat not give document to Wang. While we realize Chinese

­Communists can obtain list from Indians, we wish avoid undesirable

implications of formally turning over to Chinese Communists, in appar­

ent response demand by them, information regarding Chinese nation­

als in US who have not indicated desire proceed Communist China.

2. We hope by our action make it difficult if not virtually ­impossible

for Chinese Communists refuse British access American prisoners held

in Communist China, and release of Americans. All our actions related

this latest tactic are geared to overriding objective of placing maximum

indirect pressure on Chinese Communists.

3. You are authorized your discretion tell Wang that US has

refrained from giving any publicity to its decision give criminals option

of return Communist China. FYI Leaks have not been officially inspired

and are from sources we have not been able to identify. We have care­

fully avoided giving any official confirmation to rumors in this regard.

END FYI.

4. You should not mention prospective letter to Chinese prisoners

(Deptel 2090) at this meeting.

5. Reject as unfounded Wang’s allegation US obstructing departure

children of Chinese going Communist China. On contrary US waives

passport requirement for accompanying American-­born children of

Chinese aliens travelling mainland China. Indian Embassy informed of

this arrangement and has not alleged obstruction any such case.

6. You are authorized your discretion refrain from taking any other

initiative regarding implementation at this meeting or from linking our

action with action expected of Communists on American prisoners.

Use your judgment in answering any statement Wang may make in

reply US proposal.

7. Concerning renunciation of force, no new proposal or argumen­

tation by you contemplated. Adhere to defined position, pointing out

futility of tabling proposals such as Wang’s May 11 draft, which Wang

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger.

well knows is retrograde move which cannot succeed. Urge Wang

reconsider merits our April 19 draft from Chinese Communist point

of view. Call attention lack of any indication willingness on part of

Peiping to recede from its “all or nothing” position and remark on con­

trast this attitude with public posture reasonableness and conciliation

which Chinese Communists apparently endeavoring assume.

8. Department considers it tactically inadvisable for us propose

omission meeting next week. Various unwarranted and possibly hurt­

ful inferences might be read into such request. Accordingly you should

suggest Friday June 15 for next meeting if you can return from your

engagement in Nuremburg by then. Otherwise request nesting for

­Saturday, June 16.

Dulles

741.

1. Department believes your 1080 manifests degree of perturbation

at Chinese prisoner decision which is not warranted by circumstances.

2. Chinese June 3 note of protest will be answered shortly making

essentially same points enumerated below.

3. Indian Embassy will not act on behalf Chinese Communist

regime or as protector interests Chinese prisoners when it interviews

prisoners. It will function in collaboration with US Government merely

to verify facts as to expressed wishes of prisoners regarding return to

Communist China. Indian representative will be accompanied by US

official. Indians will not be allowed to influence decision of prisoners

and will have no repeat no function in regard to prisoners who do not

voluntarily elect travel Communist China.

4. Prisoners by their confinement are protected from Chinese

Communist influence and intimidation. Indian visits will not endanger

them nor do visits constitute any significant extension of Indian role

under Agreed Announcement.

tion. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger and in substance by Dulles. Repeated

Priority to Geneva for Johnson as telegram 2101.

5. Under the normal operation of our Immigration laws, Chinese

criminals have been deported to Communist China before and travel of

criminals to Communist China, if any elect to go there, will not consti­

tute any new departure.

6. Chinese Government has regularly resisted deportation Chinese

to Taiwan. In view GRC lack cooperation with INS this matter, we had

assumed they would not be interested in taking these criminals. How­

ever, GRC is at liberty to receive any of them who may elect to go there,

and prisoners will be given opportunity express this preference.

7. GRC was given complete list of criminals with description of

sentences and addresses prisons where confined. They will of course

be given access to these prisoners. US continues recognize GRC as

sole protector of rights Chinese aliens including criminals. There is no

change in this Government’s China policy, express or implied, actual or

prospective represented in prisoner decision.

8. GRC has regularly been kept informed all significant Geneva

developments. Consultation on Geneva moves has never been prac­

ticed or promised. We cannot undertake consult with GRC on moves

which we are satisfied do not impair its rights and interests. We can see

no reason for such marked concern on part of GRC at action of basically

minor significance to its real interests as voluntary deportation of a few

dozen undesirables. We are not aware any Geneva move which has

prejudiced GRC rights or claims.

9. Contrary to your assumption, Department has not repeat not

given any publicity to prisoner decision. Leaks from unidentified

sources have reached press but Department has carefully refrained

from confirming rumors or lending them any credence directly or indi­

rectly. Chinese Embassy was placed under injunction of secrecy when

it was informed in advance US decision. Public comment attributed

by press to Chinese Foreign Office appears to be in violation of this

injunction.

10. We have obligation leave no stone unturned in our efforts obtain

release our 13 imprisoned nationals. This is only promising remaining

step open to us. We feel these prisoners cannot help ­Chinese Commu­

nist cause regardless whether they elect return or stay in prison. They

are burden to any country which has them. We feel we cannot lose by

confronting Chinese Communists with this act which either will result

in release our maltreated nationals or further expose Chinese Commu­

nist inhumanity and failure to live up to their commitments. This we

are satisfied is being accomplished without any injury to position GRC

as only Chinese Government recognized by US.

Dulles

2102. For Johnson.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy.

2008. From Johnson.

Regret delay in specifically commenting accordance last sentence

have had no publicity at this time with thought discussion on pub­

licity could be deferred until effect action tested. However in view

leaks am inclined favor Department or preferably INS spokesman

responding to press inquiry by confirming Chinese prisoners being

given opportunity deportation mainland China. This merely broader

application deportation policy which has in past been applied indi­

vidual cases. None of criminals affected by this step will be forced

go to Communist China against his will. I do not believe such release

would adversely affect CHICOM action on 13 nor would it prevent its

later exploitation to bring public pressure on CHICOMS if and when

this appears desirable.

Gowen

2104. For Johnson.

1. New York Times June 6 reported Chairman of Communist Party

of Connecticut addressed letter June 5 to Mao Tse-­tung stating “We sin­

cerely believe that release of John Downey and twelve other Americans

will contribute towards better relations between United States and Peo­

ples Republic of China”.

2. Recent letter from Father Wagner to his brother stated “On

March 17 we prisoners were all taken on three thousand mile trip lasting

25 days”. He mentioned visiting Hankow, Peiping, Tientsin, Nanking

and Hangchow and being taken to see factories, hospitals, universities,

farms and temples. This seems to corroborate report in Deptel 1941.

Letter did not indicate which prisoners made trip.

3. Letter from Representative Dodd to Secretary June 5 states Dodd

Subcommittee plans to start within next few days “investigation and

study of facts and circumstances surrounding detention of United States

citizens in Communist China”. He requests list of American businessmen

who have been detained or otherwise prevented from leaving ­Communist

China. Would appreciate your comments on possible effect such inves­

tigation at this time on prospects imprisoned Americans, particularly if

investigation involves public hearings and considerable publicity.

Dulles

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Phleger.

2105. For Johnson.

Your 551. Revised draft proposed letter to prisoners quoted

below. Comment soonest. You will note we have deleted first sentence

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy.

paragraph former draft as you recommended. We have also amended

latter portion same paragraph. Reasons for these changes will be evi­

dent to you from our 2099 and 2101.

QUOTE There is enclosed a copy of the Agreed Announcement

issued at Geneva on September 10, 1955.

In the near future, you will be given an opportunity to state for­

mally whether you elect to continue serving your sentence in the United

States subject to prevailing regulations, or whether you prefer to be dis­

charged expeditiously from prison for the purpose of immediate and

direct deportation to Mainland China. The Government of the United

States also gives you the option of immediate and direct deportation

to Taiwan if the Government of the Republic of China will receive you.

If you apply for parole or commutation of sentence for the purpose of

being deported, the American authorities concerned will give prompt

consideration to your application.

You will later be visited to verify that you have been informed of

this opportunity to be deported, and to ascertain whether you elect to

be deported, so that the necessary arrangements can be made. The war­

den of the prison where you are confined will notify you in advance of

the arrangements for the visit. END QUOTE

Dulles

2009. From Johnson. ReDeptel 2105.

While I understand reasons for revision latter portion second

para will of course reduce effectiveness of action in obtaining release

­Americans when letter inevitably comes to attention CHICOMS through

Indians. Would, therefore, hope some method could be found whereby

position relating Taiwan could be deleted and possibly included sub­

sequent letter or handled orally. While we have made statement to

GRC contained para 6 Deptel 2101, we have made no commitment as

to form in which this would be done and in any event GRC has not yet

Distribution.

withdrawn statement last sentence para 7 Deptel 2099. Until they have

modified or withdrawn that statement, giving prisoner impression he

has option of Taiwan would be misleading.

Gowen

2013. From Johnson.

1. Two and half hour this morning, two hours of which were on

implementation.

2. Wang opened with brief statement on renunciation asking for

“concrete and constructive opinion” on their May 11 draft and then

directly moved to long statement on implementation. Pleased we had

informed Indians no obstruction would be offered to accompanied chil­

dren, and had given Indians list names those imprisoned. Noted we

still had failed give list all Chinese U.S. and although list given Indians

was called “list all known alien Chinese prisoners” covered only 30 or

40 persons. This was far smaller than number imprisoned according

their information. “Cannot agree” to attempt “screening” few selected

­Chinese” so as “cover up obstruction offered return large numbers

Chinese in U.S.” With respect Chinese in prison US should take steps

similarly taken by PRC with regard Americans. First release them from

prison and then refrain from obstructing departure if they desire return.

U.S. also thus far failed account for names given me here, and gave me

list additional five names also Taiwan entry permit question.

3. Throughout subsequent long give and take I focused on fol

weaknesses his position: (a) he in effect objected to us going beyond

terms agreed announcement (b) he objected to measure he had previ­

ously demanded (c) questioning reliability verification by third party

of his choice (d) false implication that had already freed all Ameri­

cans (e) his attempt dictate U.S. should free all alien Chinese prisoners

Limited Distribution.

regardless whether they desire return PRC—this entirely beyond terms

of reference talks.

4. In his replies he generally side-­stepped my attacks attempting

to switch subject by rehashing charges on name lists, Taiwan entry per­

mits, etc. However, when pressed, position he took in essence appeared

to be that out of many Chinese in U.S. prisons, 30 or 40 special cases

had been selected who did not desire return, these would be subject

to sham screening process by Indians and results would be used by

U.S. to cover up continued violation agreed announcement. Also made

determined effort to get me to acknowledge that we had first to “review

cases” as PRC had done before releasing. I, of course, avoided this.

5. Toward end give and take I gave categorical negative replies to

his renewed questions on list of Chinese in U.S., revocation require­

ments temporary visitors desiring prolong stay present evidence abil­

ity enter another country, release all alien Chinese prisoners without

regard their desire proceed PRC, basing these upon being entirely out­

side terms ref our talks and provisions agreed announcement. With

regard name list given me I said that all free return if they desire do so.

6. After repeated and strong attempts by him to cut-­off further

discussion implementation, I made statement on renunciation again

characterizing May 11 draft as intensification threat to use force rather

than renunciation of force, as retrogression from Dec. 1 draft on which

agreement already reached, setting time limit not only implies threat

but places arbitrary time limit on these talks, U.S. does not feel time

limitation should be placed either upon period which country will not

resort to war nor upon period during which peaceful settlement of

disputes will be sought, April 19 draft was attempt to move forward

preserving areas agreement already established, and still desired move

forward if he would cooperate.

7. In reply he made brief statement expressing disappointment

renewing charges U.S. threatening PRC in Taiwan area, PRC “will not

allow problem to last forever without arriving at settlement”, and will

not agree to U.S. attempt to freeze status quo. PRC felt obligation make

public statement.

8. I regretted decision make public statement but willing let world

judge relative merits.

9. I proposed meeting Saturday, June 16 in reply to which he asked

for next meeting Thursday, June 21 “for administrative reasons”.

10. If and when they issue public statement I will have promptly

issued here statement along lines recited Mytel 1937 without men­

tion any further statement from Washington. As their statement also

includes implementation, I would propose not make any mention

thereof my statement here but leave it to Dept make any statement this

regard it would consider necessary or desirable. In general believe we

should, if possible, avoid any statement on implementation at this time.

Gowen

2022. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

1. Believe extreme position Wang took indicates propaganda line

they antticipate having to take if and when matter becomes public

issue. Keeping in mind propaganda defeat they suffered with Korean

POWs they of course see plot on our part demonstrate to world that

Chinese prefer American prisons (or perhaps Taiwan) to Communist

China. (This increases delicacy of how we handle GRC aspects.) If any

considerable number of prisoners elect deportation to mainland this

might alter CHICOM assessment our intentions, and further weaken

Wang’s positon in talks, though publicly they might merely play it up

as evidence “failure” our “plot”. If none or very few elect deportation it

will confirm it in their suspicions.

2. Maximum effect action on release Americans may come if and

when some Chinese deported. In this regard today’s meeting tends con­

firm O’Neill’s observation in last sentence para 4 Deptel 2109. There­

fore important action such cases be expedited much as possible. Best

time vigorously renew attack if they fail release Americans will come

after we have completed action on Chinese prisoners.

3. His statement today indicates they will probably attempt dis­

courage Indians from accepting our offer see prisoners. Doubt if this

and other extreme portions their position will receive any support from

India but it may nevertheless be reluctant interview prisoners in face

CHICOM objections. If question is raised by Indians we simply point

out that it is of course their choice but public record will show we made

offer which refused. Believe our effort should be directed toward keep­

ing any controversy over this centered between CHICOMS and Indians.

4. Line to be taken at next meeting must be somewhat dependent

on what takes place during interval, including content their public

statement but in any event propose carefully analyze or record today’s

meeting and to prepare statement further pointing out absurdity his

position.

to believe they were planning shortly release at least some additional

­prisoners and our action particularly if it results any deportations

mainland, will serve to expedite.

very first [worst] time initiate public hearing on Americans detained

­Communist China and could only jeopardize possible success obtain­

ing release Americans by tactic we now urging. Such hearings could be

useful this regard if after present tactic has been given full trial it has

not been successful.

7. Suggest that soon after Indians have undertaken first visits

O’Neill ask to visit Americans if CHICOMS have not in meanwhile

taken initiative. If Indians refuse offer make visit believe O’Neill should

then make request visit Americans.

Proceeding Prague Saturday morning.

Gowen

2023. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 50th with short handwritten prepared statement:

With view pushing talks forward he had at last meeting patiently,

repeatedly explained reasonableness their May 11. That draft pro­

vided for seeking, ascertaining practical feasible means in 2 months

of announcement declaration thus showing sincerity desire settlement

disputes. It entirely acceptable both sides and he did not feel it neces­

sary again go over ground already covered so many times.

Distribution.

2. Wang said at last meeting he asked me this morning put forward

concrete constructive opinions on their May 11. Hollow expressions or

ulterior designs would never help us settle problems. He now ready

listen my concrete opinions this regard.

3. Turning to typescript statement Wang continued next would

like deal with question under first item agenda. He glad learn US had

indicated to Indian Embassy it would not offer obstruction departure

children born Chinese students accompanying parents.

4. Wang also glad learn US Government given Indian Embassy list

names Chinese imprisoned US. However, would like note their side at

very outset talks had given me list comprising names all Americans

China including prisoners, whereas we thus far failed give them list

Chinese US. My government had long delayed giving accounting this

matter even after Indian Embassy made representations, and it not until

June 1 this year that what we claimed was list all known alien Chinese

prisoners US was handed over. He must express his regret over this.

5. Wang said I had indicated last meeting this list only covered

30–40 persons. This figure by far smaller than number Chinese known

be in prison US. Must also emphatically state thus far US not yet given

complete list all Chinese US. They therefore highly dissatisfied.

6. Wang said they also could [not] agree my unreasonably char­

acterizing Chinese prisoners my country as criminals and Americans

imprisoned his country as political prisoners.

7. Wang said last meeting I indicated my government would per­

mit representatives Indian Embassy interview each Chinese prisoner

determine whether he desired return. Must frankly tell me this move

nothing other than attempt “screen” Chinese prisoners US. Must tell me

could not agree this. Apparently US intended use entirely impermissi­

ble means such as screening few selected cases of Chinese prisoners in

order cover up obstruction offered to return large numbers Chinese.

8. Wang said question return Chinese prisoners my country could

only arise after US undertaken appropriate measures let them out of

prison. As to question whether they desired return, after they released

should be left decide this selves. If my side had real intention abiding

by terms agreed annnouncement, should undertake such measures,

similar what PRC already re Americans, done to settle cases Chinese

prisoners my country, then refrain from obstructing their return, once

they out of prison.

9. Wang said finally he must remind me US thus far failed account

persons named lists he given me past meetings, nor had US removed

such obstructive measures as entry permit Taiwan requirement

designed prevent return Chinese.

10. Wang again urged US give accounting without further delay.

Had here this morning list five Chinese prevented from returning

and requested me look into cases well as all previous cases and give

accounting.

11. I replied did not know whether I understood his statement cor­

rectly regarding prisoners. It my understanding purport his statement

was that under agreed announcement there obligation each side let

each person in prison out of prison regardless reason his being there.

Then once they out prison they free decide whether or not they desire

return respective countries, and this what PRC already done. Without

expressing opinion at moment would appreciate his enlarging on that.

Did he mean all Americans imprisoned his country now been released

and now free decide whether they want return?

12. Wang was sure made self quite clear. Had dealt in his statement

with question I raised. Had said he glad learn my govt had handed

Indian Emb list names Chinese imprisoned my country. Had pointed

out this list only covered portion Chinese residing US. Whereas what

they requested was complete list all Chinese residing my country. My

side long delayed without replying this request.

13. Wang said he had declared even list handed Indian Emb

appeared unsatisfactory because number Chinese known their side be

imprisoned US far exceeded figure given them that list.

14. Wang said they could not agree this move my govt of ask­

ing Indian Emb interview these few Chinese. This move nothing but

“screening” Chinese US prisons. What they asking my govt do was

take necessary measures regard these Chinese in prison so as let them

free again. Once these prisoners been restored freedom US Govt should

not offer further obstructions their return. What they ask of US Govt

similar what his govt already done respect Americans China. Their side

had carried out individual review cases Americans and adopted lenient

policies and released numbers these prisoners in advance fulfillment

sentences. He sure what they had done well known me.

15. I said as understood his position it was that US should release

all Chinese US prisons regardless crime committed and regardless

whether not they desired return. Was that correct?

16. Wang said had made point quite clear opening statement. What

they asked was for my govt review cases Chinese prisoners just as his

govt done in past and for my govt take appropriate measures settle

cases. That what his govt did respect Americans. As to return these

­Chinese prisoners once they out prison it matter for prisoners selves

determine. They asked US not offer obstruction their return.

17. I asked was he objecting to measures outlined to him last meet­

ing to permit these people return.

18. Wang said he could not accept measures my govt in asking

representatives Indian Emb interview these people.

19. I was utterly unable fol him. He was one who first suggested

third party arrangement and suggested Govt India act that capacity in

US. We had gone beyond requirement under agreed announcement.

Sole question under terms reference on which we first met here and also

under agreed announcement was whether any these people desired

return his country. We had gone beyond anything required in agreed

announcement to permit third party suggested by him to determine

its satisfaction whether not any these people did desire return. Never

occurred me he would object third party doing more than required

agreed announcement, particularly light our previous discussions.

20. Wang said no question arose regarding capacity Indian Embassy

represent interests their nationals US on behalf his govt. Now problem

this portion Chinese nationals US was that they had lost freedom. Ques­

tion of return these people depended first place on what measures US

going take that regard. Their side did not advance excessive demands.

They only asked my govt do similarly what his govt already done.

I well knew because of measures undertaken his govt many formerly

imprisoned American criminals had their cases reviewed and settled.

After cases been settled they released in advance and already returned

US. What asked of US Govt exactly same.

21. I utterly failed fol this. What I informed him last time was

that any Chinese in prison who desired return Wang’s country would

promptly be enabled regardless length sentence, or crime committed.

I took it what he now asking was we not do this.

He asking US take measures similar what they already done. Did

he want US permit some Chinese go and continue hold others?

22. Wang said of course their side concerned with interests every

national their country. That why he repeatedly requested US furnish

him complete list Chinese nationals my country. They also asked that if

any Chinese national my country desired return PRC be allowed do so

without obstruction. As to question of return Chinese now prison my

country it essentially matter for US undertake on own initiative meas­

ures to settle their cases. If US Govt does not take initiative settling

cases how can they come out prison and return.

23. I said any prisoner who desires return will promptly be enabled

do so.

24. Wang said that depended measures taken US Govt in review­

ing cases. They would welcome my govt’s adoption such measures.

25. I said essence his position seemed be he objecting our going

beyond terms agreed announcement and what required of US under

agreed announcement. Seemed me ridiculous position and never

occurred me he would adopt such position this matter.

26. Wang could not accept that. Return nationals depended on con­

crete acts. He gave me names more than 50 Chinese including morn­

ing’s list. These people all desired return prevented doing so. As to

prisoners, if my govt not willing settle their cases and only made empty

statement when they desired return they could do so, such statement

completely hollow. If my govt would undertake measures settle cases

restore freedom these people so they able return his country of course

would welcome.

27. I said in other words he was without ref to whether not any

individual desired return attempting dictate my govt steps it should

take re all alien Chinese criminals my country.

28. Wang said these people residing US under control my govt.

If I  only stated we would permit them go home but at same time

would not take actual measures, he not prepared believe it. He asked

me whether my govt prepared remove obstructive measures to return

­Chinese such as entry permit Taiwan requirement, and whether my

govt willing undertake measures settle cases Chinese prisoners.

29. I asked Wang if he prepared believe representatives Indian

Govt as to whether or not any individual imprisoned my country

desired return.

30. Wang complained I had not yet replied his questions.

31. I said there two pertinent facts re carrying out agreed announce­

ment. First was whether not person desired return. Second was whether

not he prevented returning. Both counts facts re US performance spoke

for selves. Facts re Americans PRC also spoke for selves. There never

been any question but that Americans whose name I gave him at outset

talks desired return. There never been any question they not been per­

mitted return expeditiously as promised in agreed announcement, by

whatever name this called or however it rationalized. Far as ­Chinese US

concerned, never been any facts to contradict my categorical statements

they free return. Not single case any specific complaint any specific

obstruction been brought our attention by Indian Embassy.

32. I said Chinese steadily returning freely his country. Accord­

ing best info I had, at least 160 had returned since Aug 1. There not

been any evidence thus far any of criminals desired return. They not

included original discussions here and I did not consider they covered

agreed announcement. Nevertheless we gone beyond its terms. Even

permitting third party suggested by him see them in order determine

whether not they desire return. If did desire prompt action would be

taken permit them do so.

33. I was sure he would realize there no possible basis for objec­

tions he made or his demands on my govt. World would be able read­

ily recognize who—not only in past but future—carried out agreed

announcement and even went beyond provisions. If it his desire my

govt withdraw measures outlined him regarding Chinese prison­

ers going beyond terms agreed announcement, would appreciate his

clearly saying.

34. Wang could not agree my contention imprisoned Chinese not

covered agreed announcement. To engage empty talk without taking

concrete measures not only failed go beyond terms agreed announce­

ment but was actually failure carry out terms.

35. Wang said up to present they not received complete list ­Chinese

residents US and had no means verify whether Chinese in question

desired return. He asked whether US prepared give list. There were

number of persons they knew definitely desired return but because

obstruction my govt not able do so, so far there still 34 persons on list

I handed him previously who not yet returned. In addition there further

53 persons whose names given me previous meetings including morn­

ing’s who they knew definitely desired return but unable do so. They

requested me conduct inquiry this regard and give them accounting.

They awaited concrete act my govt re these people and Wang would

like know if my govt prepared take any.

36. Wang said requirements for Chinese residents US obtain entry

permit Taiwan violation agreement. They had repeatedly requested

withdrawal, but requirement still remained and still prevented Chinese

US exercising right return his country. He would like know whether

US Govt prepared remove this obstruction. As to Chinese prisoners,

prior any measures undertaken settle their cases how could anyone talk

about freedom return his country?

37. Wang said I had just asked whether these people desired return

and whether they prevented. These persons exactly such cases in which

they desired return and prevented. Simply stating that if these persons

desired return they able do so would not actually enable them return.

38. I said he had spoken of verification. Steps I outlined to him

regard prisoners would enable independent verification by third party

as to whether person desired return. If I understood his statement

morning correctly he objecting that verification.

39. Wang said if my intent to carry out so-­called screening these

people, they would strongly object. That action would not be demon­

stration sincerity in settlement question. If my govt had sincerity why

not take concrete steps?

40. I asked what further measures could possibly be taken than, it

they desired go home, permitting them.

41. Wang said that hollow remark. If his govt had adopted such

measures he believed Americans formerly imprisoned China would

still be there. In settling cases Americans his govt did not engage hol­

low talk but took concrete measures. Would like ask whether my govt

prepared take initiative adopt concrete measures re Chinese prisoners.

42. I asked if I understood him rightly then was his govt prepared

promptly free all Americans now prisons?

43. Wang complained I had not yet answered his questions. Before

they answered he did not think it necessary delve further that question.

He still awaited my concrete opinions re second item agenda.

44. I said he and I had had long discussions about whole ques­

tion respective nationals over long period time. I had always done best

understand and respect his point view. Must confess morning I found

it impossible. He raised entire question Chinese imprisoned US many

times recent months. Now I had told him of steps to permit prison­

ers promptly return if desire do so regardless length sentence, serious­

ness crimes. I had with great deal effort and difficulty gone far beyond

anything in discussions leading up agreed announcement. Now he

appeared—not only appeared, did object my having done so. Found

his position utterly inexplicable.

45. Wang said it quite right they always been concerned about

­Chinese imprisoned US and they still concerned. He had stated he glad

learn my govt now given Indian Embassy list persons imprisoned. Had

however pointed out they not satisfied with list because did not tally with

information they had. Essential concern their side was what concrete

measure US going take settle cases prisoners. If US would not undertake

measures settle cases, to say when they desire return could do so would

not settle question. This was all he had on this question morning.

46. I took it that he willing have US determine without verification

by Indians whether these persons desired return or not.

47. Wang said it not question of desire to return it matter for my

govt to settle cases.

48. I said question was whether they desired return. If not it not

proper question for us discuss here.

49. Wang said without settling cases how could one say whether

they desired return or not. Hard for persons in prison express free will.

Question whether they desire return could only arise after cases been

settled.

50. I asked how he reconciled that with at least several cases of

Americans that been released or sentenced his country on understand­

ing they be immediately deported. I referred cases Americans in which

sentence been immediate deportation.

51. Wang did not understand.

52. I explained that as I understood his position all Chinese prison­

ers US should be released from prison then they could express desire

as to whether not they desired return. Question I asking was how he

reconciled this with fact at least many Americans who left his country

did so under circumstances of being sentenced immediate deportation.

53. Wang said had already dealt at length with policies his govt

and ways it settled cases Americans prisoned China. Essential thing

was they given lenient treatment taking into consideration behavior

gravity offenses. Lenient policy his govt shown by fact many Ameri­

can prisoners released advance their sentences. As result lenient policy

large number former American prisoners regained freedom.

54. Wang said they did not ask anything else from us. Only asked

we adopt similar measures to those his govt re American prisoners. If

US did that they would be satisfied.

55. Wang said we had discussed this problem much morning and

I had not yet answered questions he put. Did not think necessary US

stall more morning.

56. I said as I understood his outstanding questions they were:

First whether US prepared give list all tens thousands Chinese US. Next

question as I understood was whether US prepared rescind require­

ment that alien in US on temporary visit who desires extend stay must

present evidence can proceed another country at end stay. That in effect

was question posed by what he called Taiwan entry permit question.

Next question was whether US prepared free all alien Chinese serving

prison terms for crimes.

Was I correct that these were questions?

57. Wang said there also question concerning persons whose names

given me desiring return but unable.

58. I said re first question on list Chinese US we previously dis­

cussed at length. Answer no. Had previously outlined reasons to him.

Re second question on requirements our immigration laws for persons

desiring remain US, answer no. Had no relation whatever to those

desiring return. Did not prevent them now or in future from return­

ing his country unless he chose so make it. As far as names persons

he given me, told him in past and have continued tell him they free

return whenever desire. Far as prisoners concerned, answer no. US not

prepared free alien prisoners if they to remain in US, except in accord­

ance existing US procedures. If they desired return, answer is yes, they

would promptly be able.

59. Wang was dissatisfied with answers I had given. Would not

help in settlement question return nationals. In fact it preventing and

obstructing return Chinese nationals. Therefore not in conformity spirit

agreed announcement. He therefore reserved right further comment

this question next meeting. Re question declaration had already made

self clear last meeting and today and now prepared listen my concrete

opinions.

60. I replied in opening statement he had made two statements

with one which I could not agree and one with which did. First state­

ment with which could not agree was his May 11 acceptable both sides.

Second statement with which agreed was hollow expressions ulterior

designs would not help settle problems we faced. I had at previous

meetings outlined exactly reasons I felt his May 11 even more filled

with hollow expressions than his previous drafts. It not meaningful

renunciation force we been seeking. Draft as whole went against very

purpose renunciation force. What draft did was intensify very threat

we should be trying remove. Changing word here or comma there

not going change that fact. I perfectly ready as always consider any

suggestion that led toward declaration constituting really meaningful

renunciation force. I not ready consider suggestions leading opposite

direction. Found it hard reconcile his May 11th with desire expressed

reach agreement declaration.

61. I said way realize desire for agreement was build on basis

agreement already reached until we achieved something fully satisfac­

tory both. Way to agreement not throw out what already agreed on

substitute language which self raises new questions. Whereas I been

careful in my suggestions to preserve area agreement avoid raising new

controversial questions and endeavored respect principal reciprocity,

could not consider his May 11 did so.

62. I pointed out setting time limit May 11 draft not only carried

clear implication threat his govt intended use force at end two month

period, also appeared place arbitrary time limit efforts two us here find

resolutions problems confronting us. My govt had not did not propose

approach question confronting us this spirit. Did not feel time limita­

tions should be placed either on period country says will not resort

war nor on period peaceful settlement disputes will be sought. His

Dec 1 appeared affirm principle renunciation force peaceful settlement

disputes without initiating it by time limitations. That one of aspects

his Dec 11 welcomed and been careful preserve in each of revisions

I offered.

63. I said did not think we discharged duties here or contributed

to reaching agreement by making threats, deliberately throwing away

agreements already reached. Thought way discharge duty own peo­

ple—his well as mine—and world was work constructively preserving

enlarging area agreement already established. This what I attempted

do in my April 19. This what l still determined do if he would give me

even slightest cooperation.

64. Wang expressed disappointment my statement. Every time he

came meeting hoped achieve rapprochement our positions and suc­

ceed in reaching agreement. He regretted my statement did not lead

rapprochement.

65. Wang said his statement that May 11 draft acceptable both made

on basis assumption both shared desire reach agreement. As he repeat­

edly explained time limit advantageous both sides. Without time limit

would imply deliberate intent drag out talks without settling disputes.

66. Wang said as he had told me many times country which threat­

ened was US which threatening his country. They would not allow

problem between two countries last forever without arriving settlement.

Would not accept anything resulting freezing status quo Taiwan area.

67. Wang said I had again mentioned my April 19. As he had stated

so often it entirely unacceptable. By again mentioning my April  19

I  showed lack respect points view both sides and lack sincerity in

discussions.

68. Wang agreed with my ref to discharging duties toward people

of world. They, including people my country his country did not desire

see talks dragging out without achieving settlement. Therefore felt obli­

gation to make public statement so world people able judge matter.

69. I said he had found my April 19 entirely unacceptable. Did he

find last para that draft now unacceptable?

70. Wang said I would recall his having stated previously if it

desired mention Taiwan area second para must also mention holding

FMC third para as well as time limit.

71. I asked did second para his Dec. 1, then, not apply Taiwan area?

72. Wang said must not take single para, must look at integral draft

as whole.

73. I said if it Wang’s desire make public statement that of course

his choice. Could not but regret such decision. However entirely satis­

fied public readily able judge who been doing maximum preserve area

agreement already reached and expedite reaching understanding on

meaningful declaration and who has dropped areas agreement already

reached and introduced new extraneous controversial elements.

I  thought comparison two drafts would enable public readily judge

who willing unambiguously renounce war settlement differences and

who thus far not.

74. Wang said public would be able judge who desired settle ques­

tions, reach agreement declaration and who offering obstruction.

75. Saying had nothing more I proposed next meeting Saturday

June 16. Wang proposed instead next meeting be Thursday June 21 for

administrative reasons. I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 37

Geneva, June 8, 1956

Dear Walter:

It is after 9: p.m., we have just finished up all the loose ends of

today’s meeting, and I have a 6: a.m. departure tomorrow morning

hence only a very short note.

However I did want to let you know how much I appreciated the

full information in your letters Nos. 45 and 46 as well as the info tele­

grams. They have all been a big help.

I have fully covered my thoughts in my telegrams, but as you

can see I was really taken aback today at the violence and extremes of

Wang’s reaction. However, do not believe we should yet be discour­

aged at the possibility of our tactics having some success. At least we

can now really put them on the spot.

Wouldn’t blame you if you thought I had cooked up the next meet­

ing date with Wang. Only wish I could maneuver him that well.

Am arranging to keep in touch with Dave re reply to their public

statement. He has a full draft which he will immediately release on my

behalf if he considers it fits. If not he will get in touch with both myself

and the Department.

Hope we can shortly have some word on Ekvall whose orders

expire June 30.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

Prague, June 11, 1956, noon

557. 1. On further consideration believe we should in my statement

replying any CHICOM statement say something on implementation if

raised in CHICOM statement.

2. Therefore subject to Department’s views suggest addition fol­

lowing if implementation included CHICOM statement: “All Chinese

in United States continue be entirely free leave United States for any

destination their choice and not (repeat not) single one has been refused

exit. Neither Ambassador Wang nor Indian Embassy has brought to

our attention single fact to contrary. I shall continue seek release 13

Americans still held in CHICOM prisons more than nine months after

commitment permit their expeditious return to United States”.

3. Still believe any specific comment or background information on

Chinese in United States prisons should come only from ­Washington.

However, if question specifically raised in CHICOM statement and

correspondents make inquiry believe Geneva could point out to corre­

spondents use of “all” in foregoing. Because inability Chinese in pris­

ons enter countries other than PRC or possibly GRC believe statement

as worded valid even with respect imprisoned Chinese.

Johnson

Repeated to Geneva for Osborn as telegram 48.

561. For Department’s information following is text my draft state­

ment to be issued at Geneva if and when Chinese Communists issue

public statement.

“As I informed Ambassador Wang when he told me of intention

issue new statement, I am surprised his government is willing expose

its latest proposal public scrutiny. Ambassador Wang’s draft declara­

tion May 11 is even more ambiguous and lacking in elements of genu­

ine renunciation force than was his draft on December 1. It shows not

(repeat not) slightest advance over Chinese Communist attitude of last

year when Department of State was obliged comment, ‘the Commu­

nists so far seem willing to renounce force only if they are first con­

ceded the goals for which they would use force’.

“Although Ambassador Wang has indicated he still shares my desire

reach agreement on meaningful renunciation force, he has rejected my

successive suggestions for simple revisions in his own draft December

1 which would accomplish this purpose. On April 19, I proposed draft

which incorporated those revisions in form which took full account both

points of view.

“Despite Ambassador Wang’s rejection this further effort my part,

I shall continue seek agreement with him on statement that will make

genuine contribution to establishment of secure peace in Far East”.

If necessary will add thereto statement on implementation accord­

ance my telegram 557.

Johnson

Geneva, June 12, 1956, noon

1. Suggest following wording for implementation paragraph: “All

Chinese in United States desiring return PRC continue be entirely free

go. Not single Chinese has encountered any obstruction departure.

­Neither Ambassador Wang nor Indian Embassy brought attention

single fact contrary. Shall continue seek release Americans still held

CHICOM prisons more than nine months after CHICOMS assumed

commitment permit expeditious return United States”.

2. View wide range possible CHICOM lines attack on implemen­

tation well as possible coincidental release some Americans, request

Limit Distribution. Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 2030.

discretion do whichever of following appears appropriate: (1) Issue

statement with or without implementation paragraph; (2) hold up

release statement pending consultation with you and Department.

Gowen

Geneva, June 12, 1956, noon

2033. From Osborn. CHICOMS have just announced press confer­

ence for 3: our time.

Gowen

­Priority. Repeated to Prague as telegram 51.

2039. From Osborn.

1. Statement mild, relatively factual. No (repeat no) mention imple­

mentation. Datelined Foreign Ministry PRC June 12. Presume full text

being carried FBIS. Summary follows:

2. (A) Chinese side, to realize aim relaxing, eliminating tension

Taiwan area, repeatedly demanded FMC. American side persists

in demanding China accept present state “US interference China’s

internal affairs occupation Taiwan and has refused take positive

stand” on FMC.

ity. Repeated Priority to Prague as telegram 52.

(B) Full text April 19 draft cited.

(C) Draft characterized as US demand China accept “US occupa­

tion China’s territory Taiwan by use threat force and intervention in

liberation by China of coastal island”, recognize so-­called right ICSD,

fails mention FMC. This exposes US attempt freeze status quo et cetera.

This is “announcement requiring China acquiesce US aggression. Is of

course what Chinese side cannot accept.”

(D) Chinese side, taking consideration repeated US request

announcement be applicable Taiwan area, submitted May 11 draft

(quoted in full).

(E) Since US already occupying Taiwan, if declaration made

applicable Taiwan area, must also explicitly provide for FMC. There­

fore May 11 draft stipulates that within two months should seek and

ascertain et cetera.

(F) If US sincerely desires peaceful settlement, there no justifica­

tion for further dragging out. People throughout world worried about

“inevitable consequences” prolonged failure talks reach agreement.

“Chinese side therefore deems it necessary make above facts known

world.”

3. Releasing our statement four o’clock today without (repeat

without) mention implementation. Text as transmitted by Prague to

­Department. Delivering copy CHICOM ConGen addressed Wang.

Gowen

389. We have given most careful consideration to suggestion your

2009. After weighing all factors involved we have concluded balance of

advantage lies with inclusion Taiwan reference in letter. Our reasoning

as follows:

1. Our public position would be indefensible both domestically

and with respect to GRC if we did not at some stage give Chinese

Drafted by Clough; cleared by Phleger in substance and by McConaughy. Repeated to

Geneva for Johnson as telegram 2128.

convicts option going Taiwan. If this done prior to Indian visit, either

by letter or orally, Indians almost certain learn of it when interview­

ing prisoners and would inform Communists. If done subsequent to

Indian visit, this would open possibility of prisoner originally opting

for Chinese mainland changing his mind. Effect of this would be far

worse than if ­Indians learned prisoner had been offered free choice of

two destinations in beginning. Since it is unlikely we can keep knowl­

edge of ­Taiwan option from Indians, even if communicated to prisoner

by means other than original letter, we consider best course is to keep

record clear by presenting both choices in that letter.

2. If we were confident Chinese prisoner move would bring about

release of Americans we would be willing run greater risk having our

position misunderstood in US and on Taiwan. Wang’s attitude last

meeting inspires little confidence that this move will succeed. There­

fore omitting Taiwan reference from letter would not only not ensure

Communists remaining ignorant of this option as pointed out above

but even if they did, it now appears they unlikely respond favorably to

Chinese prisoner move.

3. Wang’s adamant opposition to Indian interviewing of prisoners

may make whole question academic. If Indians should refuse conduct

interviews it could do little harm to include Taiwan reference in letter.

Dulles

Geneva, June 13, 1956, noon

53. From Osborn. Sending Wang copies Department’s release num­

ber 315.

Gowen

Repeated to the Department of State as telegram 2041.

659. Letter from Osborn to Clough

Geneva, June 14, 1956

Dear Ralph:

The failure of the Chicom statement to hit implementation may be

a reflection of Peiping’s tactical dilemma. Wang’s line of counterattack

on the prisoner release was planned on the assumption that the pris­

oner move is a US plot to repeat the Korea screening operation. Wang

wouldn’t want to compromise this line by assuming a different position

in public; yet he is aware of the many vulnerabilities of this line, and of

how foolish he would look if our move on prisoners turns out not to be

a plot. Accordingly Peiping may have felt it wiser to say nothing more

on implementation until some initial results of the screening are in.

If no results are in by June 21, we ourselves have a choice to make.

Should we really try to reassure Wang that the operation is “straight”,

or should we let Wang continue to entangle himself in his ridiculous

line of last meeting? So long as we don’t know what the prisoners’

choice is going to be, the last course would be safer as well as easier.

What Wang might do on implementation, if his dilemma is not

resoved by June 21 by the appearance of the initial results of the screen­

ing, is to shift increasing emphasis to the “obstructed” students. We

can of course counter this by our old standbys:—no representations

from Indians, Chinese steadily returning Wang’s country (including

Dr S.D. Liao, who was on Wang’s February 6 list, and who is now back

in China). Might it not so be a good idea to start dropping a few low-­

keyed remarks about Chicom pressures on students’ families in China?

We could do so without violating the confidence of Victor Chou et al,

as we now have the Chinese news reports on the registration of student

families. The Chicoms are vulnerable on this point and it might not hurt

for them to know it.

On renunciation, I have no new thoughts—a lack which no doubt

distresses you—but still feel that it would be in keeping with Wang’s tac­

tics if he were to submit a new draft soon. He likes to keep the initiative,

both in the talks and publicly, and Peiping is probably fully aware, now

that we have publicly confessed our deadlock, that both the initiative

and the public advantage will now accrue to whichever side first makes

a strong and apparently “reasonable” effort to break the deadlock.

Informal. Osborn signed the original “Dave.”

As you know, our estimate here of Wang’s tactics is that he has

been trying so determinedly to elicit our specific objections to his

May 11 draft precisely in order that he may proceed to “meet” them in

a new proposal.

A possibility that occurs to me is that Wang may seize upon the

Department’s press release—faute de mieux—as providing the specific

objections he has been seeking.

If I were Wang, I think I could work up a prepared statement for

next meeting or the one after making the following points:

1. US statement charged PRC side had rejected own draft of

­December 1. This not so. PRC side still willing agree on that draft.

2. US can either accept December 1 draft as is, or it can insist on

amendments. If it insists on amendments, they must not be one-­sided.

If US insists on ICSD, PRC will be entitled to insist on “mutual respect”.

If US insists on Taiwan reference, FMC entitled insist on FMC, prefera­

bly with time limit agreeable both sides, if necessary without time limit.

3. How there can be any objection to words which PRC proposes

to add is not understandable unless US is determined either to violate

principle of “mutual respect” by freezing up status quo while postpon­

ing indefinitely the practical step of a FMC, which necessary to resolve

Taiwan area dispute.

Of course, an alternative to Wang’s making this pitch in a meeting

would be for Peiping to make them in a public statement, but for tacti­

cal reasons it would be more likely for them to be made in the meetings,

before taking the position to the public.

This is, of course, entirely speculative, and we’ll see what actually

happens.

I’m enclosing Wang’s latest list. Did not feel these lists now war­

rant telegraphic handling. If I’m wrong, please tell me.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

David L Osborn

Enclosure

List Presented by Wang

Geneva, June 8, 1956

Mr. [text not declassified]

Mr. [text not declassified] went to the United States in 1948 and

studied medicine at the Pennsylvania University, Philadelphia. He

was already on his way home in September 1951 but was intercepted

at Hawaii by the U.S. Immigration Service and escorted back to the

United States. He is still unable to return.

Mr. [text not declassified]

Mr. [text not declassified] went to the U.S. in 1949 and studied micro­

biology at the University of California. He had planned to return the

next year but his successive applications for departure were turned

down and is still unable to return.

Mr. [text not declassified]

Mr. [text not declassified] went to the U.S. in 1949 and studied civil

engineering at the Purdue University, Indiana, where he received a

master’s degree in 1950. In 1951 Mr. [text not declassified] entered the

Columbia University in New York for post-­graduate study. He is still

being obstructed from having his departure for home.

Mr. [text not declassified] and wife Mrs. [text not declassified]

Mr. and Mrs. [text not declassified] went to the U.S. in 1946 and

1948 respectively. Mr. [text not declassified] was a post-­graduate at the

University of Chicago where he received a doctor’s degree in Physics

in 1952 and is now engaged at an Observatory. Mrs. [text not declassi­

fied] also received a doctor’s degree in ­Mathematics at the University

of Chicago. Their return is being obstructed by the U.S. Immigration

Service and last year the U.S. Government even prevented Mr. [text

not declassified] from attending a gathering of the International

­Astronomical Union in Ireland where he had been invited to present

his thesis.

2183. For Johnson.

Guidance for June 21 meeting.

1. Continue your efforts obtain maximum psychological advantage

from our pending initiative on offer to Chinese prisoners of repatriation

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger.

and on Indian visits to verify this and freedom of choice. You are given

discretion in determining how you will exploit absurd position Wang

took at last meeting in objecting Indian Embassy performance its role,

and in demanding unconditional release of Chinese criminals. Although

we believe it is psychologically too early apply renewed high pressure

to Chinese Communists on implementation, especially in view release

Clifford and Phillips last week, we do not believe we can afford fail

take note ridiculous situation in which Wang has placed himself. It may

be possible to capitalize on it at least to limited extent without forc­

ing Communists into more rigid position on American prisoners. Also

point out 17 additional Chinese from US have returned to mainland

2. FYI Indian Embassy has informed Department by letter today

it will have to await instructions from New Delhi before it can accept

our invitation visit prisoners. This possibly foreshadows Indian refusal

make visits, resulting from Chinese Communist request Indians abstain.

Rejection our invitation would be embarrassing for Ambassador Mehta,

who expressed gratification when we made decision. Department offi­

cer will probably call on prisoners alone, if Indians refuse participate.

This would seem best expedient open to us but from public relations

standpoint it would not be as good as Indian visits.

3. If you consider it advisable, you may inform Wang two of ­Chinese

prisoners named in list which we gave to Indian Embassy (FYI Nos. 15

and 27 on list) have recently been released from prison on expiration

of terms, and that Indian Embassy informed. Coincidental that these

two men were released about same time Clifford and Phillips released.

Endeavor avoid any implication relationship. FYI Five more Chinese

prisoners will become eligible for parole next two months.

4. FYI Chinese Embassy here pressing us hard for permission

its consuls visit Chinese prisoners immediately. We have informed

Embassy we acknowledge its right visit prisoners for legitimate pur­

poses and we will assist if satisfactory reason shown. In light GRC

refusal accept prisoners on release, obvious GRC intention pressure

prisoners not to depart hardly seems sound grounds for visit. Prisoners

already aware from our circular letter June 13 they need not depart for

either destination if they do not want to. END FYI

5. Hold your ground on renunciation question. You may invite

Wang reply in meeting to points made in our press release. We particu­

larly would like have his explanation of reasons why he can not accept

the slight additions to his December 1 draft.

Dulles

2103. From Johnson.

1. I opened 51st today with prepared statement:

A. Before do anything else morning, think we have misunder­

standing clear up. View your surprising statements last meeting, feel

necessary explain once more, as clearly can, action my government

intends take regard alien Chinese prison my country.

B. Let me start with situation any individual Chinese prisoner

before my government decided apply such cases provisions agreed

announcement. Like any other convicted criminal my country, he

serving sentence fairly openly handed down in court of law. Like any

other criminal, he received fair lenient treatment as matter course. Like

any other criminal, he could normally look forward being released, or

paroled, well advance full term sentence; this being accordance stand­

ard practice my country paroling prisoners good behavior. As far as

return your country concerned, any such Chinese prisoner was entirely

free do so, after release. This was situation alien Chinese prisoner my

country before agreed announcement even thought of.

C. About December last year, you began make issue Chinese pris­

oners my country. Without citing specific cases, you alleged my country

violating provisions announcement respect such prisoners. In March,

your government even went far as make implication in public state­

ment. In subsequent meetings you became more and more explicit

asserting Chinese prisoners my country covered by announcement.

D. I recalled your previous meetings reasons why announcement,

light our discussions last August September leading up its issuance,

obviously was not intended apply ordinary criminals serving sentences

my country. However, controversy this question now beside point.

Point is you demanded application announcement Chinese prison­

ers my country. Point is, you were using this demand basis charging

US violation announcement. Order remove any possible basis such

charges, my government decided apply provisions announcement

every alien Chinese prisoner US. My government, that is to say, decided

take measures, firstly, making it possible each such prisoner desiring do

so return his country expeditiously.

Distibution.

E. At last meeting you appeared object my government’s taking

these measures, insisting instead each prisoner be required finish term

prison, and only after finishing term or being paroled, be allowed return

his homeland. As have said, this always been policy my country respect

Chinese—or for that matter any alien prisoners. If words announcement

are have any meaning at all as applied prisoners, they should obviously

mean any prisoner desiring return can do so promptly, without waiting

expiration sentence or completion normal parole procedures.

F. Secondly my government decided take measures accordance

with and even going beyond letter announcement respect third party

arrangement. Order should be no question by anyone but that each

alien Chinese prisoner US had been fully informed his opportunity

choose prompt deportation your country, my government’s authori­

ties not only informed each prisoner individually this opportunity; it

also offered let representatives Indian Embassy interview each prisoner

order confirm his free choice.

G. At last meeting your rejection this proposition particularly

vehement and especially difficult for me understand. Third party

arrangement not only part announcement, but originally suggested

by you. Indian Embassy not only designated in announcement per­

form functions mentioned therein in US but this designation origi­

nally suggested by you.

H. In fact, if didn’t utterly fail comprehend your remarks last meet­

ing, left with conclusion you objecting my government’s application

any or all provisions announcement Chinese prisoners my country. You

object measures designed permit their expeditious return your country;

you object their being assured access third party. In short, you appar­

ently want my government continue treat them exactly as it treated

them even before announcement ever thought of.

I. Find great difficulty reconciling this apparent position with your

previous demands announcement be applied prisoners my country.

Hope you can clear this up for me this morning.

2. Wang noted my remarks on Chinese nationals prison US con­

tained several deliberate distortions well as number outright sophist­

ries. He could not agree these remarks. They had always considered

announcement covered return Chinese students, other Chinese nation­

als, well as Chinese imprisoned US. My claim agreement only covered

part nationals not conformity actual fact.

3. Wang said we had very clear understanding on question how

nationals would exercise right return respective countries. What they

asked was both sides carry out agreement faithfully and not offer any

obstruction. Their side has precisely carried out agreement. It their con­

sistent policy adopt measures on their own in accordance their law in

settling question return American nationals China. Matter fact since

talks began, of 40 American offenders 29 already exercised right return.

As result measures adopted government, majority American prisoners

China already exercised right return.

4. Wang said on their hand they always been concerned with

­Chinese imprisoned my country. They raised question Chinese prison­

ers far back as last December but I for long time gave no accounting.

That was in past cause great dissatisfaction their part. Nevertheless,

Wang had expressed appreciation last meeting on learning of action my

government handing over names Chinese prisoners Indian Embassy.

Although in making remark he pointed out list not complete, and also

stated he could not agree with arbitrary characterization by my side of

American prisoners China as political prisoners while Chinese impris­

oned US common criminals.

5. Wang could only consider as arbitrary my assertion he had

agreed prisoners should not be expeditiously returned but should fin­

ish terms sentences. He strongly rejected this remark.

6. Wang said what they objected to was means adopted my gov­

ernment bring Indian Embassy into screening Chinese prisoners.

­Chinese imprisoned my country had great difficulty expressing free

will while in our jails. Could express free will only after my govern­

ment taken measures on own leading to release from prison. That why

he requested at last meeting my government adopt measures on own

regard Chinese prisoners in order these prisoners may be set free and

after release that no obstruction be placed in way their return. However,

in my opening Wang found no indication my government prepared

take such measures. I had only repeated empty remarks that if some

person desired do so he able return, if we going be satisfied with empty

remarks that either Chinese nationals who not committed offenses, or

Chinese who had committed offenses could return if they desired, and

my government not prepared adopt measures on its own create condi­

tions so these people could actually return he could only consider all

my promises and remarks empty.

7. Wang said it quite true Indian Embassy been entrusted by

Wang’s government take care interests their nationals my country.

Indian Embassy asked my government provide complete list Chinese

nationals my country to enable Embassy check whether those Chinese

desired return. However, my government refused.

Indian Embassy requested my government make public statement

clarifying question Taiwan entry. My government did not comply this

request. Present question is whether US Government will accord every

facility Indian Embassy to expedite performance its functions. How­

ever, they could not agree to Indian Embassy’s being led into damaging

trap.

8. Wang said they still as always concerned over situation Chinese

nationals my country including imprisoned. However, question their

return depended on my government’s adopting measures enabling

them. They could not consider satisfactory my government’s simply

making remarks that somebody could return without adopting meas­

ures on own enable them.

9. Wang said thanks to measures taken his government on its own

majority American nationals their country returned.

What corresponding measures was my government prepared

adopt?

10. I said Wang had spoken of Indian Embassy being led into what

he termed damaging trap. I sure, I didn’t understand what Wang had

in mind. Had tried explain honestly and straightforwardly as could

exactly what we doing. Certainly no trap or trick our part intended

or even possible. Our whole thought in inviting Indian Embassy par­

ticipate in measures was to give them every assurance these measures

being honestly carried out.

11. I said we had confidence integrity good faith Indian Embassy

and its representatives. As he suggested they assume third power role

in US, I had assumed his government also felt same way about them.

12. I asked Wang let me make this simple as could. As pointed out

this morning Chinese alien prison my country, same any other alien or

American for that matter, could always expect lenient considerate treat­

ment and in normal course events could expect release prior expiration

sentence. When he completed sentence could, same any other alien,

leave US for any destination his choice. That perfectly normal situa­

tion Chinese aliens even before announcement. Announcement states

respective nationals desiring return shall be enabled expeditiously do

so. If that to have meaning for prisoners certainly could not leave them

in same situation existing prior its issuance, else what point issuing?

13. I said had explained we now applied our interpretation

announcement alien Chinese prisoners US. We applied plain words

announcement. Under announcement there two factors involved.

First was whether or not person desired return. Second whether not

he able expeditiously. Far as Chinese US concerned who not prison

measures long ago taken permit any all them return who desire. As

I many times explained here they did not have to express desire. Did

not have to apply anyone. All had to do was go. They thus able freely

indicate desire by acts.

14. I said situation prisoners admittedly little different. How could

prisoner definitively express desire? We had had no evidence or indica­

tion any them did desire. However, in order there be no possible doubt

prisoner understood choices freely open him I had explained Wang

measures we taking inform prisoners those choices. Prisoner’s choice

was to look forward early release prior finishing sentence in normal

course events on commutation sentence, parole, time off good behavior.

15. I said as matter fact might incidentally mention since list pris­

oners given Indian Embassy two prisoners mentioned therein already

thus been released normal course events.

16. I continued if on other hand prisoner desired rather return

immediately Wang’s country he also free do so. Choice was did pris­

oner desire await release normal course events or did he desire imme­

diately return Wang’s country? It very simple straightforward choice.

We could independently put choice each prisoner ourselves and act

accordance what he told us. However, to give Wang further assurances

our good faith, we invited Indian Embassy participate in order it could

determine for self wishes of prisoner.

17. I said Wang had spoken of screening. Did not know exactly

what he meant or had in mind this regard. I never thought of it these

terms at all. I thought of it only in terms Indian Embassy being able

satisfy self each prisoner freely made own choice.

18. I said Wang had spoken great difficulty of prisoners express­

ing free will. Frankly didn’t see what difficulty prisoner had very

simple decision. Able state decision presence representative third

power. Thus first question as I pointed out was whether man desired

return. These were measures we had taken determine and confirm

that desire. Had previously told Wang if prisoner did desire return

action would promptly be taken permit him. Further action this mat­

ter awaited reply Indian Embassy our invitation.

19. I said Wang also asserted list prisoners given Indian Embassy

not complete. Did not know on what he based assertion, but could

assure him not correct.

20. Wang was sure had made points quite clear both last meeting

and morning and did not think necessary make further explanations.

As he had said although list handed over by my government incom­

plete they still appreciated that action my government. Would not

agree US inviting Indian Government participate screening Chinese

prisoners. If my government had true desire fully carry out agreement

and assist Indian Embassy performance its functions regarding return

Chinese why was it my government so far refused give complete list

Chinese nationals US so could make check determine whether nation­

als desired return?

21. Wang said it matter common sense nobody liked staying in jail.

It also matter course every person in prison desired early release. If

Chinese prisoners allowed early release and freely return, he would

be only too glad receive that information. However, whether prison­

ers could do so depended on measures adopted my government their

cases. Wang had nothing further this matter morning.

22. I continued be puzzled Wang’s attitude. He continued speak

list all Chinese US being given Indian Embassy so could check their

desire return. Regarding those not prison no such check necessary. All

they had do was return. We gave Indian Embassy list those in prison so

could check on whether they desired return. Yet Wang said did not want

Indian Embassy make such check. Found this impossible understand.

23. Wang said this very simple. Obstructive measures my govern­

ment in past had left feeling of terror in minds Chinese US. They asked

for complete list Chinese nationals simply because many Chinese still

not informed about announcement. That made check necessary and

desirable.

24. I said it certainly strange if any Chinese US felt what Wang

called terror about departing US, that at least one such case not come

to attention Indian Embassy and that Indian Embassy not called it our

attention.

25. I said not only had there not been single such case but ­Chinese

continued freely depart US return his country. Since last information

this point I knew definitely of 17 additional who returned Wang’s

country making total 177 definitely known since August 1 last year. All

this certainly did not indicate any obstruction or so-­called terror part

Chinese my country returning Wang’s country if they desired do so.

According public statements made by Indian Embassy some Chinese

my country had communicated with it concerning various matters. To

best my knowledge none these communications had involved alleged

obstruction.

26. Wang said fact Indian Embassy not yet raised instance obstruc­

tion did not mean actually no obstruction part my government. He had

given me names 55 persons who obstructed. Fifty-­three them not yet

returned. Among 103 persons whose names I gave him previously 28

still not returned. Such were facts.

27. It seemed to me even Wang’s own statements simply substan­

tiated fact Chinese steadily returning. If any them felt obstructed they

entirely free communicate Indian Embassy.

28. Wang said if I had no further remarks this problem he would

like speak on proper question.

29. Wang continued from prepared statement my government’s state­

ment June 12 called for following comments. In statement my government

stated my side had adopted draft proposed by Wang December 1 except for

two revisions and Wang’s side not only rejected own draft but advanced

new conditions. Must be pointed out although in outward appearance we

made only two revisions these two revisions caused qualitative change in

draft. This again proved so far there not been slightest change in stubborn

persistence my side calculated freeze present status quo Taiwan area and

refuse negotiate to improve situation.

30. Wang said second paragraph my April 19 still retained ambig­

uous words about not resorting threat use force Taiwan area elsewhere,

while failing make specific provision on holding Sino-­American con­

ference Foreign Ministers. Apparent aim my side doing so was require

them accept present state my country’s occupation ­Taiwan intervention

liberation by China its coastal islands while indefinitely protracting

talks.

31. Wang said in previous meetings he already made quite clear

position their side was either we agree general statement on peaceful

settlement disputes China-­US without resorting use force or if it desired

mention Taiwan area specifically statement must also provide holding

Sino-­American conference Foreign Ministers. Their May 11 provided

for seeking ascertaining practical feasible means including holding

Sino-­American conference Foreign Ministers within prescribed time

for settlement Sino-­American disputes. It thus took full account views

my side and did so with view reaching agreement acceptable both.

This represented step forward and could not be called retrogression,

however distorted.

32. Wang said addition of phrase “without prejudice pursuit, etc. or

inherent right, etc.” to preamble my April 19 would mean that on Chi­

na’s territory Taiwan well as any other area where US intended carry

out its aggression US could continue its policy aggression and would

have so-­called right self-­defense while doing so. He must seriously state

on China’s territory there no room talk about so-­called American right

self-­defense nor could right self-­defense be permitted in any way jus­

tify policy aggression. Their May 11 set forth principle mutual respect

territorial integrity sovereignty non-­interference internal affairs, which

reasonable and conformity Charter UN. There no possible basis for US

object them. Hence he considered if we desired reach agreement on

announcement US should not try distort May 11.

33. I said he had spoken of what he termed my “stubborn per­

sistence”. Would freely admit it stubborn persistence in attempting

assure our differences not lead war but settled only by peaceful nego­

tiations. Would admit to stubborn persistence in attempting reach

agreement on declaration saying this unambiguously without qual­

ification or time limit. Would admit stubborn persistence in insisting

such declaration clearly apply to what we both agreed was most seri­

ous dispute Taiwan area.

34. I said Wang’s statement morning well as previous statements

made clear he apparently did not consider his Dec 1 applied dispute

Taiwan area. This one of very ambiguities that draft I attempted clear up

in my April 19. If there agreement with me on unambiguous unquali­

fied untime-­limited declaration on renunciation force including Taiwan

area well as elsewhere, would be no grounds for rejecting my April 19. I

regretted he not yet willing accept this simple straightforward proposal

so we could resume progress talks.

35. Wang said on his part already made large progress. Progress

will depend on attitude US Government towards this entire problem.

Wang hoped at next meeting I would be able make remarks furthering

progress.

36. I replied I had nothing more morning. Wang suggested we

meet Thursday 28. I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 38

Geneva, June 20, 1956

Dear Walter:

First, Ekvall has not heard anything concerning extension of his

orders and his time is up on June 30. It is putting him in a difficult posi­

tion with regard to extending the lease on his house, etc.

Next, I received the guidance for tomorrow’s meeting this morn­

ing and appreciate it very much. I plan to open with implementation,

attacking his position at the last meeting but in a fairly low key and see

where it leads. Incidentally, with respect to renunciation I find that the

correspondents here really do not understand what the fuss is all about.

The American correspondents accept what we say on faith but really do

not understand it and the foreign correspondents are more skeptical.

One of the difficulties I find is that by emphasizing the “slightness” of

our April 19 changes to their December 1 draft the question is raised

as to why then their December 1 draft, if not ideal, is nevertheless not

Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The two postscripts are handwritten.

acceptable. They follow our explanations but one can see that they are

not really very convinced.

Yesterday I encountered Wang at the airport in Prague on our way

down, he having come in from Warsaw. I missed seeing him when I first

came in the waiting room as he was sitting in the corner all alone but

he came across the room to speak to me. He made a point of asking me

about the President’s health, expressed gratification that he was getting

along well. Incidentally, as in the past Czech officials made a point of

taking me out to the plane ahead of the other passengers, leaving him

to fend for himself.

In Zurich while waiting to change planes we talked at some length

in English at which he is obviously improving. I commented on the

new horizontal, left to right style of the magazine he was reading which

led us to some discussion of the language simplification program. He

said they planned definitely to reorganize the language using an alpha­

bet of twenty-­seven letters which will be Roman and not Cyrillic. He

volunteered that he had asked to postpone the next meeting because he

wanted to be in Warsaw for the visit of the Indian Vice President and

the opening of a trade fair in Poland in which they had a large exhibit.

He commented that there was also a large exhibit of American books at

the trade fair. He said his wife spends most of her time in Warsaw and

that they have four children. We engaged in a little mutual commiser­

ation on the problems of educating children in the diplomatic service.

The usual afternoon rush at the Zurich airport led him to comment

on the opening of the tourist season in Europe. I told him that it was

expected 550,000 Americans would visit Europe this summer, to which

he commented that was a very fine thing as such visits would lead to

increased understanding of other people. He said that he had difficulty

in getting back to Warsaw between our meetings as on the return trip

there was a six-­hour layover at Prague and the weather was often bad

on the Warsaw-­Prague leg. He was as usual outside the meeting room

very affable and friendly. None of this has any particular significance,

I know, but I thought you would be interested.

Incidentally, while I was gone the UN here called David and said

that their space situation was going to be very tight during the ECOSOC

meetings from July 9 through August 15 and wondered whether Wang

and I had any plans for a vacation. David told them we had not and

that he did not anticipate there would be any recess. There would not

in any event be any recess of such a length although there was always

the possibility of a week’s recess as in the past. They said that in that

event they hoped we might find it possible to avoid meeting during the

week of July 9. David said of course he could make no commitment but

that he had no objection to their saying something to the Chinese if they

wished to do so and they indicated they were going to call the Chinese.

There is, of course, also the problem of our meeting during the week of

July 4. I am planning a major reception in Prague for the Fourth there­

fore would not want to meet here until the 6th or 7th. If we do that we

might well skip the meeting of July 9 and meet next the week of July 16.

I would appreciate any thoughts you may have on this.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P. S. For your info I am submitting an efficiency report from here

on Dave’s work with me. I assume you will do one from your end on

his work in CA.

UAJ

P.P.S. I just saw in the paper the news of Jimmy [illegible in the

original] accident. Such a tragedy. Would appreciate anything you

learn on how they are getting along and where I could write to them.

UAJ

2100. From Johnson.

One hour 55 minute meeting this morning, 1½ hours of which in

implementation. I opened with statement pointing out absurdity his

position last meeting on Chinese prisoners which in effect is demand

we not apply agreed announcement such prisoners. His replies along

same lines last meeting referring to “Indian Embassy being led into

damaging trap” and PRC would “not agree to India participating in

screening prisoners”.

We cut short implementation discussion saying we wanted take

up “proper” question of draft declaration. His mild prepared statement

referred to Department’s June 12 press release. Our so-­called minor

changes their December 1 draft actually brought about “qualitative

change” showing continued US stubborn persistence “freezing present

Limit Distribution.

status quo Taiwan and refusing negotiation” on subject. Apparent

US aim is requiring PRC accept present state US occupation Taiwan

interference liberation off-­shore islands while indefinitely protracting

these talks. PRC position continued be declaration could consist either

of general statement on peaceful settlement disputes without resort­

ing threat use force, or if Taiwan area specifically mentioned FMC for

specific settlement must also be proposed. If US desires agreement on

announcement should not distort their May 11 draft.

I replied admitting to “stubborn persistence” in seeking unambigu­

ous, unqualified, unlimited in time renunciation of force specifically appli­

cable Taiwan area as well as elsewhere and stating their failure accept our

April 19 revisions indicated they unwilling accept this simple straight­

forward proposition. His remarks this morning as well as previously

indicated they did not consider their December 1 draft applicable Taiwan

area. This one of points ambiguity my April 19 draft intended clarify.

Next meeting Thursday June 8. Proceeding Prague Friday morning

returning Geneva Tuesday.

Gowen

Letter No. 47

Washington, June 22, 1956

Dear Alex:

In reply to that portion of your letter of May 28 relating to employ­

ment of Ted Liu as a Chinese interpreter, there has been no definite

decision yet to set up a position for a Chinese interpreter in the State

Department. However, in view of Mr. Liu’s qualifications, PER is look­

ing into possibilities for placing him. Any decision may have to await

approval of the FY 1957 budget, but Ralph Clough will be glad to see

Mr. Liu if he decides to visit Washington.

With reference to the extension of Ekvall’s assignment men­

tioned in your letter No. 37, Defense assured me this morning that

they will see to it that Ekvall’s assignment to you is continued. They

have already set aside the funds and established the allotment and

Informal.

authorization for the new fiscal year, in the budget of the Army Atta­

che at Paris. Defense says that the Army Attache at Paris is squawking

at the long duration of Ekvall’s detail to Geneva. The Paris Attache

apparently was led to believe that he would get more benefit out of

Ekvall’s assignment to Paris (especially as to North African matters)

than has proved possible. I don’t know why the attache at Paris should

be allowed to rock the boat when it was clearly understood last year

that the assignment to Paris was merely a device to get around some

administrative problems, and that Ekvall’s real responsibility was to

you. Defense said it may be necessary to inquire again into the possi­

bility of assigning Ekvall to Berne. In that event they want FE to try to

get the active assistance of EUR in inducing the Swiss Government to

agree to this. I told Defense I felt it would be preferable not to meddle

with the existing arrangement. In any event the continued presence of

Ekvall on your staff is assured and you should not lose any sleep over

the administrative problem.

Enclosed is a copy of our letter to the Indian Embassy of June 18

and the Indian Embassy reply. You will see that the Indians are blowing

very cool all of a sudden. I fear they have received the word from the

Chinese Communists and do not intend to make any protest.

I doubt if we will make any reply to the “Observer” article in the

“Peoples Daily” of June 21 replying to our press release of June 12.

I suppose you have the full text of the “Observer” article. In case you

don’t, a copy is enclosed.

I will be writing you a short letter on substantive matters Monday

morning, which should reach you in time for Thursday’s meeting.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

PS: Krishna Menon had lunch privately at the Indian Embassy

with Sherman Adams on June 19, but did not raise any topic connected

with the Geneva talks or any other Chinese Communist question.

Enclosures:

1. Copy of letter from British Consulate General Peiping re Bishop

Walsh

Letter No. 48

Washington, June 25, 1956

Dear Alex:

We have decided to put some pressure on the Indian ­Ambassador

here to proceed with the prisoner interviews. We are calling him in

some time today. We plan to hand him a letter signed by Mr. Robertson

emphasizing the urgency of the matter in view of the fact that the pris­

oners were informed some time ago that they would shortly receive a

visit. We shall also remind Mehta of the repeatedly expressed Indian

interest in the question of Chinese prisoners in this country, and the

gratification which Mehta expressed on May 31 when he was informed

of our decision. We intend to indicate our belief that the Indians should

proceed with the interviews regardless of any inexplicable shift which

may have occurred in the attitude of the Chinese Communists. We will

let him see that in our view the Indians have an obligation to us and to

their own conscience, and that they should not unquestioningly play

the Chinese Communist game in this matter against their better judg­

ment. We have an added reason for moving rapidly on this, in that we

find that we are on weak grounds in stalling off the GRC on its insistent

request to interview the prisoners. Article VI of the Treaty of ­January 11,

1943 on the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights in China (copy

attached) gives the Chinese this right specifically with no conditions

attached as to the purpose of the visit. The Chinese are really aroused

over this whole question. It has posed some very acute problems for

the new Ambassador Hollington Tong. He has done his best to pla­

cate ­Taipei but he feels that the rise of this issue just at the beginning

of his Mission, has given him a bad start in Washington. In a letter of

June 23 (copy attached) the Chinese indicate that they will take any of

the prisoners who wish to go to Taiwan if no Indian representative, or

representative of another third country is present, when the wishes of

the criminals are ascertained. You will see that there are some possibil­

ities of our getting some good out of the situation even if the Indians

let us down. We will do all we can to exploit the position in any event.

It has occurred to me that if we cannot use the Indians we might have

a representative of the International Red Cross, or the American Red

Cross to accompany our representative when the prisoners are inter­

viewed. The International Red Cross would of course be preferable.

Informal.

We expect to send Ralph Clough to interview all the prisoners as the

Department’s representative.

You will be interested in a short item in Drew Pearson’s column of

June 24:

“Amb. Alex Johnson in Geneva has been instructed to keep

talking to the Chinese Communists for another year if necessary, to

give the Far East crisis a chance to cool off. Johnson has been talking

for almost a year already and he’s now a bit impatient, wondering

how much longer he had to listen to Red insults and demands for

a meeting with Secretary Dulles. Back came a cable from the State

Department last week, telling him to keep talking indefinitely, mak­

ing no concessions.”

While this does not fully reflect your instructions of last week, it

looks to me as if somebody who saw our guidance telegram talked to

Pearson. In any event there is a basic leak somewhere and this sort of

thing is highly mischievous. It is certain to come to the attention of the

Chinese Communists and will probably be given a certain amount of

credence by them.

The British Embassy informed us on Saturday that Fathers Clifford

and Phillips have received orders from their superiors to leave. They

are to take the SS Hamburg from Shanghai to Hong Kong sailing June

29. We are glad that they are leaving.

We have not been able to get anything from General Erskine’s

office this morning on Ekvall’s orders. We believe that local interests of

the Army Attache in Paris are the only stumbling block since he has all

the necessary authorization and the money for Ekvall. It may have been

cleared up already. We gave them a copy of your telegram of June 22.

We shall continue to press the Pentagon on this until it is completely

resolved.

There is no present disposition here for us to take the initiative

on tabling any new formulation of the renunciation of force draft. Any

change which might recommend itself to Wang would necessarily

involve something of a substantive backdown and would imply even

more than it literally conveyed. The disposition here is to stand on the

April 19 draft.

There is nothing new on the Nehru visit. We have done a short

briefing paper on the Geneva talks for the Nehru visit. Copy will be

forwarded.

We are pretty hard pressed with Ralph away on two weeks leave.

He returns on Wednesday. Regards and good wishes.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Copy of letter from Amb. Tong to Mr. Robertson dated June 23,

1956.

2217. For Johnson.

Guidance for June 28 meeting.

1. FYI Indian Ambassador wrote Department June 25 as follows:

QUOTE Under the terms of the Agreed Announcement made at

Geneva on September 10, 1955, this Embassy may make representa­

tions to the United States Government only if requested to do so by

a Chinese who believes that he is encountering obstruction in depar­

ture to the People’s Republic of China. Further, we are competent to

investigate the facts in any such case, only if desired to do so by the

People’s Republic of China. This Embassy has received no authority

from the People’s Republic of China to interview the Chinese pris­

oners named in the list attached to your aide memoire of May 31. I

regret, therefore, that we are unable to act in the manner requested in

your two communications referred to above. I trust you will appreci­

ate the position. UNQUOTE.

You will note Indian Embassy letter carefully avoids any implication

that Embassy will not act if requested do so by a Chinese. ­Department’s

tentative plan, if Indian Embassy will not visit prisons, is to offer each

prisoner opportunity express decision as to whether he desires be

deported to Communist China, or Taiwan or remain in prison and also,

if he wishes to communicate with Indian Embassy. END FYI

2. You should seek exploit Wang’s abrupt reversal of position on

­Chinese prisoners, but avoid giving Wang any clue as to action we

propose take in light of Indian letter. Inquire of Wang how he pro­

poses reconcile his sudden loss of interest in Chinese prisoners with

his former insistence that Agreed Announcement applied to prisoners,

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in substance by Phleger.

that information be supplied concerning them and that they be given

benefit provisions Agreed Announcement. Place on record your con­

clusion that his newly discovered objections to performance of any

Indian Embassy function as to prisoners is totally at variance with his

frequently reiterated previous position, and is inexplicable.

3. Results we seek from prisoner move remain the same: (1) put

maximum psychological pressure on Chinese Communists make good

on their Agreed Announcement and release imprisoned Americans,

and (2) make Chinese Communist position untenable if they refuse to

act. Hence we do not wish to provoke them to a point where reaction

inimical to prospects imprisoned Americans would occur. At same time

we cannot fail expose complete inconsistency of their position on pris­

oners. We note that last meeting Wang continued assert that ­Chinese

prisoners covered by Agreed Announcement.

4. We have nothing new to add on renunciation of force and you

should continue reiterate our position, stressing our attempts arrive at

meaningful declaration by adopting their proposed language with clar­

ifying additions.

5. FYI Would be interested in any reaction by Wang postponement

of Nehru’s scheduled July visit.

space demands make meeting impracticable week of July 9, we would

prefer responsibility for postponement until week of July 16 be shared

with Wang.

Dulles

2219. Verbatim text. For Johnson.

Following reply to Indian Ambassador’s letter June 25 being sent

today:

QUOTE I acknowledge your letter of June 25 stating that your

Government has instructed you that under the Agreed Announcement

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Clough.

of September 10, 1955 the Embassy of India can act only in cases of

Chinese who request it to do so and only if the Chinese Communists so

desire. You further state that since you have no authorization from the

Chinese Communists to visit the Chinese prisoners in this country you

are unable to do so.

While the United States was of the view that the announcement did

not apply to Chinese criminals in U.S. prisons, nevertheless in order not

to furnish any basis for the further refusal of the Chinese ­Communists to

permit Americans in China to return to the United States, it determined

to make the necessary arrangement to permit such Chinese prisoners to

return if they so desired.

The United States decision was made in the light of the insistent

representations of Chinese Communist Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan

at Geneva, that the Agreed Announcement was applicable to Chinese

prisoners and strongly criticizing the U.S. for not permitting them

expeditiously to leave the U.S.

The decision of this Government was also taken in the light of

inquiries from your Embassy as to whether Chinese prisoners had been

informed of the Agreed Announcement, and in the light of informal

requests from your Embassy for a list of Chinese prisoners.

Following a survey by the U.S. Government to identify all pris­

oners of Chinese nationality in U.S. Federal or State prisons and after

advising your Embassy on May 31 of our plans, this Department on

June 13 sent a letter to all the Chinese prisoners informing them that

they would be visited for the purpose of ascertaining whether they

elected to return to China. A copy of this letter was sent you on June 18.

The prisoners now expect a visit pursuant to this statement.

We have assured the prisoners that we will give them free choice

between the courses which have been presented to them. In order for this

choice to be universally accepted as a free one, we believe it is important

that the representatives stipulated in the Agreed Announcement, namely

the Indian Government representative, visit the prisoners. This action

would be in compliance with Section 2A of the Agreed Announcement.

It is earnestly hoped that you will seek on a priority basis a recon­

sideration of the decision of your Government.

I appreciate all that you have done to assist us with this difficult

question. UNQUOTE

Dulles

2129. From Johnson.

1. Two hours 35 minutes meeting this morning, two hours of which

on renunciation. Wang made brief opening statement to effect May 11

draft was major effort meet our point view and if US sincere will give

up attempts obtain PRC agreement freezing status quo Taiwan area.

2. I made long extemporaneous reply point out real problem was lack

willingness PRC take first fundamental step renouncing force including

Taiwan area, contrasting this with US position. Characterized their posi­

tion as asking my government agree to negotiations under very clear and

continued threat their part resort force if necessary. This anachronistic

position would never be accepted by my government or any other self-­

respecting government. Their equating renunciation force with agreeing

to maintenance status quo Taiwan area was doctrine of despair and pes­

simism in effect saying some disputes could not be settled peacefully.

From this led back to urging acceptance April 19 draft.

3. In reply Wang renewed familiar charges US occupation Taiwan

distinction between international and domestic matters, and particu­

larly urging “five principles” first paragraph May 11 draft, PRC will not

agree to anything that will perpetuate situation Taiwan area. Our task is

to push forward peaceful resolution Taiwan area dispute.

4. Renunciation ended on this inconclusive note with no slightest

indication any shift position by Wang and I also avoided any indication

possible change.

5. He obviously not desiring any implementation discussion.

I  made prepared statement along lines paragraph two Deptel 2217.

I introduced subject referring my remark last meeting further action

was awaiting reply Indian Embassy and reply now received to effect

PRC has not agreed to Indian Embassy interviewing prisoners. Made

no other statement regard Indian Embassy letter and avoided any

statement that Indian Embassy had refused act. Wang denied they had

reversed their position and avoided any direct reply retreating to pre­

vious complaints our not furnishing list Chinese US, accounting for

names he had given me, Taiwan entry permits etc., also repeating list

those in prison “not complete”. In rebuttal I stuck to prisoners asking

him direct question whether it their position that if prisoner desired

return he should not be able promptly do so but rather await completion

Limit Distribution.

sentence or normal parole procedures, and whether they willing accept

our word on whether desires return. Noting his statement on full con­

fidence in Indian Embassy I expressed gratification and said my gov­

ernment could take much satisfaction that considering number ­Chinese

in US and long period since issuance agreed announcement Indians

have made no complaint lack full cooperation my government nor had

alleged single case any obstruction. Wang avoided any reply referring

to his previous statement as “fully setting forth their position”.

6. I proposed next meeting July 6 and Wang countered with pro­

posal for Tuesday, July 10 “because of previous engagement” to which

I agreed. Departing Prague Friday morning.

Gowen

2135. From Johnson.

1. Direct discourse report 52nd meeting follows:

2. Wang (prepared statement):

Last meeting you indicated desire make progress talks. Told you

I welcomed indication. However since we began second item agenda

month after another slipped away while thus far not able arrive agree­

ment declaration because your side persists unjustifiable position. That

unsatisfactory situation.

3. May 11 our side represents major effort meet your point view;

therefore entirely acceptable. In spite clear words this draft you insist

without basis asserting it contains ambiguities and constitutes retro­

gression, and you object stipulation time limit. Regret you persisted

such unjustifiable attitude. If sincerity your side make declaration

second item, should give up attempts freeze unjustifiable situation

Taiwan area and intervene internal affairs my country. If desire your

side settle disputes no reason object seeking ascertaining practical

feasible means including Sino-­American FMC within two months dec­

laration. If you mave constructive opinions this regard ready hear.

Distribution.

4. I said: Seems me we still confronted same difference approach

question second item. You still seem regard this from stand point mak­

ing declaration for own sake is primary purpose. If that were purpose

would be easy. We could make all kinds declarations, joint statements,

which one us could interpret one way other. Other way could easily

temporarily give surface appearance agreement. However, I regard

issues problems between us too important handle such manner.

5. I: Been striving reach agreement fundamental proposition.

­Proposition which our view and view host countries world is first step

and fundamental to peaceful settlement disputes. Do not want take

time morning repeat review my point view, but think vital we keep

these fundamentals mind.

6. I: Speaking very frankly would again like have you understand

exactly how we view situation. You profess desire find peaceful solution

problems between us including problems existing Taiwan area. Same

time, before talks began and during talks, you been and your govern­

ment continued enunciate policy using force resolve situation Taiwan

area its satisfaction if other means not result solving to its satisfaction.

Thus, however phrased or whatever words used express it, you asking

my government agree negotiate under clear continued expression threat

your government resort use force if necessary obtain desires. Should

think possible your government appreciate this is condition and situa­

tion neither my nor other self-­respecting government possibly accept in

world today. World I hope progressed beyond that point.

7. I: My government seeks with you as elsewhere peaceful settle­

ment disputes. Impossible in this, well as many other disputes, for frail

human minds look into future determine exactly what means or what

way particular disputes can be settled, not necessary we do so even

not desirable. What necessary or even essential is we determined only

use peaceful means. Once that determination made, may open peaceful

settlement. My proposal October 8, my position since been we take this

first, simple, fundamental step. You purpose still appears be attempt

force US into negotiations under continued threat resort force unless

negotiations entirely your satisfaction.

8. I: Far as attempts make progress resolving situation concerned,

I made most earnest attempts do so. I welcomed your December 1 as it

seemed step towards agreement. Although it quite different from what

I had mind when made original proposals October 8, I was willing

accept it as framework basis for negotiations order make progress. You

yourself characterized that draft general statement principle renuncia­

tion force peaceful settlement disputes between us. That precisely what

I took it be when you submitted. My only quarrel was it too general and

subject misunderstanding. This gave rise two questions. First, was draft

intended make it impossible my side defend self if attacked? ­Second,

was this general statement applicable all disputes two countries includ­

ing Taiwan area?

9. I: January 12 I put forward draft incorporating simple clear

answers these questions. In response my January 12 you denied had

any intention prejudicing position my side. You acknowledged of all

disputes Taiwan area most important. You stated intended principle

peaceful settlement disputes apply also Taiwan area. However rejected

my simple amendments clearly embodying these points. You asked

and again this morning whether it intention my side prejudice posi­

tion your side which you claim inherently peaceful. To cover point

I inserted clear amendment my April 19. Questions I thus asked about

your ­December  1 might be phrased: whether intended prevent my

side defending self if attacked? Did it not apply also Taiwan area? Was

it intended prejudice right either side peaceful pursuit policies? These

perfectly natural questions, directly applicable pertinent this first step

renunciation force. Do not introduce extraneous ambiguous elements.

Have tried be careful preserve area agreement your December 1 indi­

cated already reached. However, if you any suggestions how answers

can be expressed more effectively more acceptably to you I glad hear

them. As previously explained, I not feel they answered by your May 11.

10. I: Have talked some length morning this subject not with

desire engaging polemics, rather see whether some way two of us

with heavy responsibility cannot reach greater measure understand­

ing than we thus far succeeded. Seems me proposition I set forth in

past and again morning so simple normal fundamental it must be

accepted by anyone sincerely desiring peaceful settlement disputes.

Wish you most earnestly consider what I have said because it been

said all sincerity earnest desire see whether cannot reach agreement

clearly unambiguously eliminating danger hostilities our two great

peoples and open broad road genuinely [garble—resolve?] peaceful

resolution differences.

11. Wang said: You spoken some length morning large collection

views subjects you previously stated. Although you stated more than

once you have sincerity in desire resolve problems, however, fail find

any such sincerity from study speech as whole.

12. W: Issue confronting our countries clearly evidently case US

armed occupation territory my country and US threat force against my

country. However, you by sophistry trying turn situation into opposite

and allege my country threaten yours. Issue is US armed occupation my

country’s territory. However you reverse this and claim unreasonable

right self defense as often stated in past.

13. W: In past I repeatedly enunciated position my side on peace­

ful settlement dispute Taiwan area: there exist 2 aspects Taiwan area.

On one hand, international dispute between China US, which we now

discussing and trying find solution. On other hand, problem Taiwan

area essentially internal matter therefore allows no intervention foreign

power. In your statement morning you again tried deliberately distort

this position respect settlement international disputes two countries

Taiwan area and our peaceful intentions.

14. W: You again mentioned morning relations between states. First

para May 11 precisely sets forth normal [garble] principles regulating

and establishing relations between states. However, US armed occupa­

tion our territory Taiwan not only matter Chinese people will not long

tolerate but is a matter no sovereign state can tolerate. You stated will

strive for resolution our disputes Taiwan area peaceful means. How­

ever, fact is your side continues try freeze present status Taiwan area, so

your side can perpetrate occupation Taiwan. You mentioned morning

your proposal October 8 and your April 19. All these proposals fully

supported views I just stated. I cannot consider these indication sincer­

ity resolution by peaceful means our disputes. That reason my repeated

objections these unacceptable propositions. Thus US propositions cannot

help resolve issues.

15. W: Purpose these talks precisely seek peaceful means settlement

our disputes. Not purpose these talks engage empty discussion without

settling any questions. I agree we not discussing making declaration

for sake declaration. But my side cannot agree make declaration which

would do nothing change present unjustified situation Taiwan area, but

would instead perpetuate such situation. Declaration should set forth

common desire settle issues. Declaration should advance peaceful reso­

lution dispute Taiwan area. If both sides have common sincerity desire

find peaceful resolution disputes believe we able make progress. Might

frankly say my country has sincerity and peaceful intent. This intent

demonstrated all drafts we presented. Hope US also same desire and

demonstrate desire by action. In interest both our peoples for us make

speedy progress arrive at agreement.

16. I said: Have just few short remarks. First, you persist in these

talks and drafts in attempting get US accept your interpretation nature

dispute Taiwan area. I carefully tried in draft and remarks avoid dis­

cussion nature origin our disputes in interest making progress. As have

said many times, consider this premature and not germane immediate

task. Only possible make progress, and understood you agree, if we

take very complicated situation existing between two countries step by

step. If we confuse steps can only hopelessly confuse, bog selves down.

I always and still take view first step renunciation use force settle­

ment disputes. You appear still take position that for your government

renounce force respect dispute Taiwan area means your government

agrees status quo and sacrifices position this dispute there.

17. I. However dispute regarded, this seems remarkable doctrine:

doctrine of despair, pessimism. It in effect says some disputes not capa­

ble settlement peaceful means. If other governments in world adopted

this doctrine outlook indeed bleak. However, at least most governments

reject this doctrine. My government rejects doctrine there are disputes

cannot be settled peaceful means. Given goodwill determination find

settlements only peaceful means there no dispute not capable resolu­

tion peaceful means. All I asked and continue ask is you join me saying

this unequivocally regard all disputes including Taiwan area.

18. Wang said: Cannot accept assertion May 11 contains what you

call ambiguities. Don’t think assertion correct. Recall when I proposed

December 1 you asserted draft ambiguous because didn’t insert Taiwan

area. Then in May 11 draft inserted Taiwan area thus making princi­

ple peaceful settlement disputes specifically Taiwan area. You still say

May 11 ambiguous. I can only regard this as deliberate distortion. My

latest and previous drafts, all take account actual situation disputes

two countries. No intent these drafts try resolve by single stroke all dis­

putes. As intention these drafts adoption and agreement on declaration

constitute first step solution disputes.

19. Wang: Abnormal situation Taiwan area urgently calls for set­

tlement. However, our side has not slightest despair or pessimism with

regard settlement. Our side firmly opposed present situation Taiwan

area. However, always had faith this abnormal situation Taiwan area

can of necessity be resolved.

20. Wang: You spoke great length settlement disputes peaceful

means. It exactly policy my government pursue such means in reso­

lution disputes between two countries. My government joined with

others proclaiming well known Five Principles. If these Five Principles

accepted by all countries am sure all disputes can be resolved. May 11

exactly proposition accomplishing basis peaceful settlement disputes

countries. If your government genuinely desires settle international dis­

putes peaceful means has no basis oppose May 11 and no ground object

seeking ascertain practical feasible means settlement disputes includ­

ing convocation FMC repeat FMC within two months announcement

declaration. Decisions set forth my draft are in accord general principle

peaceful resolution international disputes. Provisions set forth feasi­

ble practical. If one side professed desire settlement disputes peaceful

means while refusing take peaceful feasible steps this direction, how

can peaceful resolution be achieved.

21. I said: All want say still find it impossible understand why if

your side really wants reach agreement it rejects areas agreement already

reached and in your May 11 introduces new extraneous elements.

My April 19 preserved all your December 1.

22. Wang said: Although your April 19 retains some of text my

previous draft, in substance your side not in any way changed posi­

tion. That why I said could not accept it.

23. I said: Nothing further that subject, but like take up another

matter. (From prepared statement) Continue be puzzled attitude you

taken regard steps I informed you my government taking concern­

ing alien Chinese prisoners. As informed you last meeting, further

action awaiting reply Indian Embassy to our invitation to determine

which prisoners desire return your country. We now received reply

from Indian Embassy to effect your government has not agreed its

interviewing.

24. I: Find this position your government now taken regard these

persons utterly inexplicable and totally at variance positions you

previously taking.

25. I: First, you previously insisting provisions agreed announce­

ment be applied these common criminals. I have agreed this. As pointed

out last meeting if provisions announcement to have any meaning

respect these persons, it means that, same any other Chinese US, they

can promptly proceed your country if so desire. Therefore, first question

is do they desire return your country? This connection you previously

asking for list such prisoners. Assumed your interest in such list could

only be satisfy self such persons been informed announcement, whether

they desired return your country and if so able do so. Such list has been

given Indian Embassy. You been insisting Indian Embassy be permitted

make check determine whether Chinese my country desire return. In

order further meet point view you expressed this regard, we took ini­

tiative inviting Indian Embassy make such check with regard these pris­

oners though went beyond terms announcement. Just never occurred

me you would subsequently reverse position and object our permitting

Indian Embassy carry out with respect this group persons exactly what

been requesting.

26. I: Can only assume your present objections to performance

Indian Embassy this function with respect these prisoners means you

reversing previous position respect applicability announcement these

persons. If so this of course entirely your choice.

27. Wang said: Our position respect Chinese US including those

in prison always very clear. Cannot accept allegation my side reversed

previous position. Can only regard this allegation as unjustifiable

entirely unsupported. We invited India act as third power taking care

interests our nationals US including question their return. Indian

Embassy requested your government give it complete list all Chinese

US as my government did at very beginning these talks giving you list

all ­Americans my country. Indian Embassy requested these lists facil­

itate performance functions. However, your government so far not

given lists. We requested your government give us information and

make accounting Chinese prisoners your country but never requested

Indian Embassy question them. We do not agree Indian Embassy ques­

tioning these Chinese in prison, because they cannot fully express free

will in prison.

28. Wang: I just cannot understand why if your government gen­

uinely interested carrying out announcement, it not willing take initia­

tive settling cases these imprisoned Chinese when set free not offering

obstruction their return my country. This request my side cannot be

called excessive because only requesting you do same as my coun­

try in cases American prisoners, taking initiative settle cases enabling

return. Just cannot understand why if your government desires carry

out announcement faithfully hasn’t given Indian Embassy complete list

Chinese in US; why has not given any accounting 28 persons in list 103

not yet returned nor for 53 of 55 names given you who not returned,

even list imprisoned Chinese you gave Indian Embassy not complete

therefore unsatisfactory.

29. Wang: Again your government not taken steps remove Taiwan

entry permit requirement well as so-­called permanent resident require­

ment. In past we often made complaints this regard. If your govern­

ment really willing facilitate Indian Embassy help Chinese returning

my country why should it permit continuation situation I spoke of.

Position my government always clear. We have full confidence Indian

Embassy performing functions your country representing interest our

nationals. Always concerned with interests every national US and

desire see they can freely return without obstruction. Hope your gov­

ernment able give satisfactory reply all these questions I raised.

30. I said: Let me ask two questions. First with respect Chinese

in prison. If understand correctly your position is if they desire return

your country it is not your desire they be permitted promptly but rather

they await completion sentences or normal procedures parole good

behavior. That is they in exactly same position as before announcement

issued. Next question is as you not agreeable Indian Embassy inter­

viewing prisoners are you willing accept whatever prisoners may tell

of regarding desire return.

31. I said: Glad note your affirmation full confidence Indian

Embassy carrying out functions. Embassy never any respect indicated

slightest dissatisfaction full cooperation my government consistently

extended it in carrying out functions. Neither has Embassy brought

our attention any case any obstruction whatsoever being offered

departure any Chinese US desiring return. Considering tens thou­

sands Chinese US and length time announcement in effect, think that

truly remarkable record one in which my government can take much

satisfaction.

32. Wang said: Our position with regard Chinese in prison and

reason why object Indian Embassy questioning been given previ­

ously and again morning. Don’t think necessary repeat. Don’t think

claim Indian Embassy has no dissatisfaction in carrying out functions

tells whole story. Indian Embassy asked your government for list all

­Chinese US. Your government so far refused. This not demonstration

willingness offer help Embassy. Calling this situation satisfactory at

variance with fact.

33. I said: Suggest if agreeable Friday July 6. This exceptional in

view July 4 national holiday have to be Prague. Wang said: Previous

engagement Friday suggest Tuesday July 10. I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 39

Geneva, June 28, 1956

Dear Walter:

I am not sending any comment telegram this week as I do not

have much to add to my summary message, and, in any event you

will receive this long before you have to get out the guidance for the

next meeting.

Things went about as expected this morning. I had not intended

to say much on renunciation but listening to his opening statement the

mood seized me and I let myself go. It is the type of act that loses its

usefulness if put on too often, but after arriving there this morning it

seemed to me a good idea. It is also, I feel, much more effective when

I do it obviously extemporaneous rather than reading a prepared state­

ment. I tried again to go as far as I felt I could in holding out the “pot

of gold” if they would behave themselves. It seems to me this is now

and again necessary if I am to do everything possible to assume that

we keep going along the present lines. However, it is hard to find new

ways to say the same old thing. My present feeling is that with care­

ful handling we can expect to be able to plow this same furrow until

November but, depending on what happens then not much beyond

Informal. A handwritten note indicates the letter was received on July 5. The last page of

the letter is missing.

that. It is not too early to consider how we will handle the various con­

tingencies that might be expected at about that time, but I leave that in

your good hands.

There is no question but that we really have them on the ropes

with regard to the prisoners. I am still hoping it will accomplish some­

thing other than giving me some fun in the meetings. However, as

I said previously, I think the greatest pressure on them will come if

and when some prisoners actually leave. Until then they will try to

dismiss it as a stunt on our part. I do hope that some prisoners can be

gotten on their way shortly and then I can really turn on the heat here.

Tell Ralph that I have much confidence in him. It does not affect my

conscience in the slightest to have a few dope peddlers and murder­

ers go back, and I am surprised the GRC is still making such a point

over competing with Peiping for the affections of such persons. If the

Indians continue to turn us down I would not be inclined to try to

bring in the ICRC but believe the ARC has considerable merit. As you

can sense my main interest is in getting some under way as quickly as

that is possible. Incidentally, I thought your reply to the Indian letter

was excellent. It said exactly the right things in the right way. You will

note that in this morning’s meeting I avoided saying that the Indians

had refused to act so as to leave the door open for them to change

their minds but sought to leave an impression that the PRC attitude

was holding up everything. I thought it better not to press him today

beyond the point that I did.

With respect to para 5 of Deptel 2217, I could not think of any way

to obtain a reaction to the postponement of Nehru’s visit. However, if

I happen to run into him again on the plane I may be able to turn the

conversation in that direction and see what reaction I get. I regret that

such conversations are so very limited in their possible scope by the

language problem.

Incidentally his failure in any way to mention the matter this morn­

ing leads me to believe that, as I hoped, the Indians have not passed on

to them the text of our letter to the prisoners.

With respect to the last para of Deptel 2217 I had, of course, intended

that Wang would share the responsibility for any postponement, and

that was the reason for our suggestion that the UN call Wang and sim­

ply say the same thing to him that they had said to us. This would then

have provided a basis for my raising the matter with him. However,

it subsequently developed that the UN did not do so but scrambled

around and decided they could with some difficulty accommodate us

even during the week of July 9. However, they thereafter called Wang

saying that there would be some difficulties in accommodating us

through the ECOSOC session and did he have in mind any vacation

in the talks during July or August. His reply was that he did not. I pass

this on as an added indication of the lack of any present intention to

break off. Thus, my carefully laid plans for a week’s vacation have again

gone astray. Because of the work in Prague and my Nurenberg speech

my plans for the week of June 11 fell through, and this next week I, of

course, have the big July 4 show in Prague. Am expecting about 500 this

year and am giving them a buffet and a dance. Do not misunderstand

that I am complaining, but just letting you know what I have been try­

ing to do in a personal way.

Thanks for the Drew Pearson item which I have not seen here.

I certainly agree that it is not very helpful.

Thanks for taking care of Ekvall’s orders. He has now received them

and is set for another six months. I think Erskine’s office was giving you

a little line on Paris being the block. Everything I know is to the contrary,

but in any event it is cleared up.

I think it significant Menon did not raise the Chicoms with ­Sherman

Adams. I have a general feeling that the Indians have somewhat cooled

on Peiping and are not tooting their horn as vigorously as they once

were. I hope this prisoner business assists in the process.

They have just brought in the FBIS on Chou’s June 28 speech

renewing the offer to negotiate with Taiwan. There was some excite­

ment among the correspondents at the Palais this morning about it but

they did not have the full text and I have of course refused to make any

comment. While it is a repetition of what has been the theme for some

time there is a difference in emphasis and I believe for the first time it

is couched in formal terms. It is a much more adroit piece of work than

their previous statements on the subject and undoubtedly sets the tone

for their future propaganda line. However USIA really ought to be able

to get in some real licks on the last paragraph.

We have experimented in today’s full report of meeting with put­

ting it into direct discourse. Let us know how you like it compared

with former indirect discourse form. Neither of them read too well

after being put into “telegraphese” but we get bawled out by someone

back there (I believe it was the telegraph people) for using unnecessary

words so we are complying. However, with something like this it seems

to me to make very hard reading.

11. For Johnson.

Guidance July 10 meeting.

1. Agreed Announcement.

Recall to Wang our decision to extend Agreed Announcement to

Chinese alien criminals was reached after Wang had dwelt on this ques­

tion for many weeks. Express surprise that PRC now placing obstacles

in way of Indian Government performance its function and register

hope PRC will refrain from further interference. FYI We are still await­

ing Indian reply our second letter June 27 asking reconsideration Indian

refusal visit prisoners. We feel we should allow short additional time for

Indian reply before we proceed with prisoner visits independently of

Indians. Believe it preferable not reveal Wang precise Indian attitude or

our probable course of action in face Indian position. END FYI

2. Renunciation of Force.

Go over usual ground.

3. While you should be prepared meet on July 19 there would be no

objection here to postponement next meeting until July 26 if Wang sug­

gests it. FYI Unlikely there will be any visits to prisoners before week

of July 23. END FYI

Hoover

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in substance by Robertson.

Letter No. 49

Washington, July 6, 1956

Dear Alex:

We all liked the way you handled the June 28 meeting. The extem­

poraneous review of the position on renunciation was fine. You further

exposed the illogic of Wang’s position on the prisoner question while

Informal.

keeping him guessing as to what the Indian Embassy has told us and

how we will proceed with the interviews. While your new format for

your full report of the meeting was quite intelligible, I do not believe

we get the full flavor of the exchanges as well as with the customary

form. Maybe it is just that we are accustomed to the indirect rather than

the direct discourse. But in any case the “telegraphese” destroys some

of the shadings which convey the overtones of the dialogue. Who ever

called you down for excess verbiage should not have done so. We ran

into the same problem here with our guidance telegrams. An employee

of DC/T complained about our failure to economize on words. I took

the matter to Stufflebeam, the Chief of the office, pointing out that the

administrative subordinate should not even see these limit distribu­

tion telegrams much less quibble about the number of words in them.

Stufflebeam agreed fully and stated he would issue orders that in view

of the importance of the talks and the need for conveying exact inflec­

tions, no questions would be raised as to unnecessary words. The same

principle would apply to you. I would suggest that you go back to

the old form and abandon the “telegraphese”. Of course we endeavor

to cut out any completely unnecessary articles and prepositions but

we do not consider ourselves as constricted as in the case of routine

messages.

The Indian Embassy on June 28 acknowledged our letter of June 27

saying they had again referred the matter to Delhi. I suppose there is

a remote chance of some sort of reconsideration but we cannot rely

on it. Our plans are to proceed with the visits ourselves, probably in

company with an American Red Cross representative, after giving the

Indians a reasonable time for reply to our June 27 letter. We have no evi­

dence that any of the prisoners are interested in returning to Mainland

China. A number have already voluntarily indicated that they have no

interest in going to Communist China. There is some possibility that

one or two may apply to go. We recognize that you would be helped if

we could move fairly rapidly on the interviews with the prisoners. We

hope to get going just as soon as we have given the Indians a fair period

of time to reconsider.

Enclosed is a copy of a letter we have received from Purdue

­University regarding another insane Chinese student who is held in an

Indiana State Asylum at Logansport. We are trying to get the facts on this

with the help of the I & N.S. and the Indiana authorities. We are inform­

ing Purdue that of course the student is free to return to Mainland China

if he wants to do so, provided the responsible authorities consider that he

is mentally competent to make a decision, and feel that he can safely be

released from the hospital where he is undergoing treatment. This looks

like the Liu case all over again.

tained much of interest. The indication that Wang expects to carry right

on through the summer is significant. We agree that it is not too early

to start thinking about the various possibilities that may develop in the

Autumn. The disposition here is not to try to develop anything new on

renunciation. You will have to continue using your ingenuity to play

the same theme. There will be a chance to introduce new material on

implementation as we go forward with the prisoner question.

I sympathize with your no-­vacation dilemma. I wonder if some­

thing could not be maneuvered around the Swiss National Holiday

on August 1. It falls on Wednesday but maybe a meeting could be

skipped that week without your taking all the initiative since the usual

­Thursday meeting date is so close to the holiday. Even a vacation of one

week would certainly help.

[text not declassified]

Ralph Clough’s father died suddenly last Sunday. He has been out

all week. Judge Phleger is away for several days, but participated in a

Geneva meeting with WSR and me on Tuesday, just before he left. Bill

Sebald is due back from his grand tour of the entire Far Eastern area on

July 22.

Please ask Helenka to include a carbon copy of your letters in the

future.

Regards and good wishes to all of you,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Carbon copy of letter to Secretary Dulles from A.H. Tichenor re

[text not declassified]

16. For Johnson.

1. Letter from Mackensen to his father dated April 30 indicates he

has been brainwashed to attack our position on implementation and to

elect to remain in Communist China after his term completed. Letter

describes in glowing terms his trip around China with other prisoners.

Says he is receiving QUOTE first-­class treatment UNQUOTE in prison

and is completely satisfied that Chinese side carrying out its part of

Geneva Agreement on return civilians. He declares QUOTE I am some­

what disturbed that Chinese in U.S. aren’t faring so well. Though our

ambassador at Geneva and British Charge d’Affaires in Peking have

had complete reports on Americans in China, so far as I know, so far

there have been no comparable reports from our side on Chinese in

America to Ambassador Wang or to Indian Embassy. It seems to me

if we are to carry on negotiations in good faith, then we must do so

on basis of complete equality and mutual benefit. How else can nego­

tiations be successful? At same time I have read letters from Chinese

who have relatives in America (particularly students), whose where­

abouts and disposition have become a question. Whatever you may

have heard concerning this matter, it is evident that there have been all

kinds of intimidation, restrictions, and other unsavory methods used

against patriotic Chinese in our country—and their families at home

have all suffered because of this. They are innocent victims of unwar­

ranted discrimination. UNQUOTE

Goes on to say his detention completely different from QUOTE

what Chinese in US are facing UNQUOTE. He was detained for QUOTE

open hostility to trends in Chinese domestic affairs and for aiding

those who would turn back the course of Chinese history. UNQUOTE.

Declares he intends to resign from Board of Foreign ­Missions and

request permission to remain and work in China when his term up in

ten months. Full text by letter.

2. Indian Government requested and received our permission

July 7 to inform Chinese Communists text our circular letter to Chinese

prisoners. You should anticipate possible Chinese Communist reaction

tomorrow’s meeting.

Dulles

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Phleger.

Letter No. 50

Washington, July 9, 1956

Dear Alex:

Enclosed is a copy of a disturbing letter from [text not declassified]

to his parents dated April 30. You will see from this that the Chinese

Communists have done a most thorough job on him. It is significant

that they have indoctrinated him with false information on the Geneva

talks and on the status of the Chinese in this country.

It would seem that the Chinese Communists are determined to

prevail on some of our Nationals to “elect” to remain in Communist

China after their terms are completed, as a counter to the lack of ­interest

of most Chinese in this country in returning to Communist China.

[text not declassified] father, [text not declassified] naturally is quite

upset over this letter and wants all publicity avoided, at least for the

present.

We are debating whether you should make any reference to this

letter in the meeting tomorrow. We will probably send a summary of it

by telegram later today. In the meanwhile, we want to get the full text

off to you before the pouch closes a few minutes hence.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Copy of letter from [text not declassified] / dated April 30.

2. Copy of letter from [text not declassified] / dated June 29.

Informal.

Geneva, July 10, 1956, noon

20. From Johnson.

1. One hour fifteen minutes meeting today. I opened with prepared

statement emphasizing mutuality my April 19 draft and charging him

with “haggling and bargaining” over Taiwan area reference by estab­

lishing preconditions for its inclusion. Ended with hope that we could

at least move in direction April 19 draft.

2. He replied with prepared statement along lines Chou En Lai’s

remarks on talks in People’s Congress speech with emphasis on stall­

ing charges. “Any announcement must be capable relaxation and

elimination tension Taiwan area instead of perpetuating status quo

US occupation.” Aim of US has always been secure announcement

advantageous solely to US and failing such attempt indefinitely drag

out these talks. Cannot agree these talks being used as “tool” by one

party, continuation must be advantageous both sides.

3. During give and take I kept coming back to April 19 draft, point­

ing out mutual advantage as first step peaceful resolution and renewing

charge they unwilling make unconditional renunciation force as first step.

4. Wang replied that it did not appear positions two sides likely

come closer together on renunciation declaration, and therefore unless

at next meeting I had new constructive proposal he suggested talks

take up discussion other agenda two item, that is trade embargo.

5. I made no direct reply to his suggestion but pointed out infer­

ence his government was rejecting unconditional renunciation of force

and while I discouraged at their attitude felt issues too important for

despair and still hopeful his government would adopt this generally

acceptable principle international conduct. If it persists in maintaining

its threat initiate force Taiwan area hard be optimistic peaceful settle­

ment our disputes.

6. He attempted avoid any discussion implementation, and I took

initiative making brief statement noting Fathers Clifford and Phillips

permitted leave only after completion full term sentences and making

points para one Deptel 11. Wang closed off subject by general statement

was US rather than PRC interfering with Indian Embassy.

7. He proposed next meeting July 24 but readily accepted my coun­

terproposal for Thursday July 26.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

22. From Johnson.

1. I opened 53rd today with following prepared statement:

A. You and I have disagreed about many things during course our

discussion on renunciation use force. However, there is no question but

that we do agree both your country and mine are dissatisfied with and

concerned about certain aspects of existing situation in Taiwan area.

Although we approach matter from greatly differing premises I believe

we are agreed it would be in our mutual self-­interest peacefully resolve

our disputes.

B. Yet you have rejected, at past meetings, steps I have proposed

to this end. If you accept peaceful resolution our difference as being

something equally desirable for both of us, I cannot understand why

you reject steps necessary realize this principle.

C. I have proposed as first step two of us declare unequivocally

on behalf our governments we are not rpt not going to go to war over

any our disputes. Surely you agree this step essential to truly peaceful

negotiations. What is alternative? To declare we are going to war over

our disputes? Or that we may do so, if our desires are not met within

specific period of time? Could any negotiations be peaceful if held in

shadow such pronouncement?

D. I have proposed that two of us make it clear declaration cannot

be distorted into abandonment by either side its inherent right pursue

its policies by peaceful means. Is it not rpt not to our mutual advantage

have it perfectly clear that declaration is not designed prevent either

our countries from defending itself if attacked?

E. I have also proposed declaration be made expressly applicable

to Taiwan area as well as elsewhere. Again, I find it hard undersand

how this could be regarded as “one sided” provision. Is it not rpt not

desire your country as it is of mine, make possible peaceful resolution

our differences? If your government does share desire my government

in this regard, it is difficult for me understand how it persists in its

attempt to haggle and bargain over Taiwan area reference? Since Tai­

wan area reference clearly to our mutual advantage, how can your gov­

ernment continue establish preconditions for its inclusion?

Distribution.

F. None of proposals I have made are unilateral or designed serve

interests of one side more than other. All them are designed solely make

possible realization of desire my government and people, that differ­

ences our two countries should not lead to war, but should be settled

peacefully. Your government professes share this desire. If it really has

this desire, it should no longer persist in establishing preconditions for

its realization. It should be willing for two of us to reach agreement on

declaration based upon your own draft December 1, with necessary

and reasonable revisions thereof contained my draft April 19. I hope

you have also considered remarks I made in this regard at last meeting

and this morning we can at least move in this direction.

2. Wang replied from prepared statement he had carefully listened

remarks I made this morning but failed detect any new elements. In

statement this morning I had merely repeated old tune of arguments

he had long before repeatedly refuted. I had again referred to April 19

draft. This draft as he had clearly stated in previous meetings, their side

could not (repeat not) accept. He did not (repeat not) consider it would

contribute to progress talks to advance these old arguments even going

so far as to put forward draft which had been rejected.

3. Wang said he would like remind me once again our discussions

on second item now been going on nearly ten months. Out of desire

resolve outstanding issues their side had shown great patience in

talks. Had repeatedly exerted tremendous efforts for making agreed

announcement on renunciation force originally proposed by my side.

Draft which they last put forward May 11 after stating determination

both sides settle disputes Taiwan area through peaceful negotiations

without resorting threat use force against each other added that two

sides should within two months of issuance declaration seek ascertain

practical feasible means including holding FMC between China–­US.

In spite fact this draft obviously took view US into account and there­

fore entirely acceptable my side nevertheless continued under vari­

ous pretexts refuse reach agreement speedily on that draft.

4. Wang said at previous meetings well as last meeting my side

repeatedly made allegation their proposed draft ambiguous and that

their side approached this question from standpoint making decla­

ration for sake declaration. My side even turned facts upside down

asserting their side threatening US in Taiwan area. It simply because

US occupying China’s territory Taiwan by force which created tension

Taiwan area. My side still continued its activities Taiwan area aggravat­

ing existing tension and threatening security his country. Hence, their

side firmly held any announcement renouncing force must be capable

leading relaxation and elimination that tension rather than perpetuat­

ing status quo US occupation Taiwan. This position their side so clear

as to preclude ambiguity.

5. Wang said on other hand aim US these talks always been attempt

secure announcement solely advantageous US so as to enable US main­

tain present state occupation Taiwan while continuing interference his

country’s liberation Taiwan. Failing obtain such announcement US

would then continue drag out talks indefinitely in order obtain same

object of freezing status quo Taiwan area.

6. Wang would like frankly point out their side could not agree

to make announcement which in favor one side alone nor could their

side allow talks be used as tool by one party to achieve unilateral aims.

Their side maintained any joint declaration must be advantageous both

sides. In same way continuance talks possible only under condition it

advantageous both sides.

7. Wang said with reference statement I made this morning, if

US truly desirous reaching agreement on proposed announcement

renouncing force and willing move this direction he would hope I able

seriously consider their May 11 draft and put forth concrete opinion

about it.

8. I replied I completely unable follow his statement this morning

that draft I put forward April 19 solely advantageous my side. As had

said this morning thought we agreed it would be to mutual advantage

both our countries peacefully resolve disputes.

9. I said Wang put forward his December 1 draft presumably

with thought it at least acceptable his own side. To say now that my

April 19 draft which incorporated all his draft of December 1 solely

advantageous my side something I not able follow. April 19 draft sim­

ply stated very clearly unequivocally we not going war over disputes

including those Taiwan area. It also fully incorporated last paragraph

his ­December 1 draft. In other words it clear unequivocal statement of

renunciation force I had always maintained and still did that this was

first task before us. As said this morning only alternative I saw was to

say we were going war settle disputes or we might do so unless desires

met within certain period time.

10. I said certainly if purpose my government not to seek peaceful

settlement or, as he termed it, intent drag out talks I would never have

made proposal last October nor would I have gone to lengths I had in

incorporating his draft in our proposals. I had every hope and expec­

tation based on previous discussions that he would find April 19 draft

acceptable. Never thought he would discard degree agreement that

draft indicated had been reached and, by introducing other elements in

his May 11 draft, really accomplish purpose of dragging out talks and

preventing agreement.

11. I said April 19 draft could not be interpreted by any reason­

able person as in any way sacrificing Wang’s position. I was still disap­

pointed he persisted in seeing purposes and difficulties that simply not

there. Still hopeful he would find that draft acceptable and if he did not

that he would put forward reasonable suggestions to meet both points

view. Could not so consider his May 11 draft.

12. Wang replied in talking about peaceful settlement disputes, fact

their side participated these talks had precisely shown desire for such

settlement. However this purpose could not be fulfilled by mere lip

serv­ice, or mere profession of desire while in actual deeds we continued

pursuing other purposes. Since we began discussions on renunciation

force they had so far not detected any sign of correspondence between

professed desire of US for peaceful settlement and our actual deeds.

Accordingly although US continued speak about peaceful settlement

disputes renunciation force this remained mere lip service and was hard

to believe.

13. Wang said with desire to push forward talks and reach agree­

ment on announcement their side had since beginning talks this ques­

time he put forward draft it was in hope we able reach agreement on

it. However none these drafts been accepted. Therefore when I said

we already had agreement in certain respects, it not correct. Although

each his drafts took into consideration point view my side and capa­

ble reading agreement I persisted in turning down these drafts and

prevented us from reaching agreement. It true my April 19 draft made

some revisions in his previous draft however revisions had actually

caused change of nature of draft and that why it not acceptable them.

14. Wang said remarks I had made this morning showed we would

not be able make further progress in talks advancing talks and mak­

ing announcement. He did not see any indication I would change my

previous views. We had to recognize after prolonged discussion this

question points view both sides been made very clear.

15. Wang said views both sides on making renunciation force dec­

laration not likely come closer. Hence at next meeting unless I came

forth with new constructive proposal, he would suggest talks should

then take up other subject under second item, that is question of trade

embargo.

16. I replied what he was saying, then, in other words was his side

rejected unconditional clear-­cut statement renouncing force.

draft. He himself had said when we discussing his December 1 draft that

it covered dispute Taiwan area as well as elsewhere. If it did not, had no

meaning whatsoever. My April 19 draft simply made this clear, as well

as taking into full account his views with regard location clause on self-­

defense. If he considered it changed nature his December 1 draft that

simply meant his December 1 draft never was renunciation force and

never intended to be.

18. I said my government still sought such renunciation force as

first step. I was discouraged at continued evasion by his government on

one pretext or another of making such renunciation force. Nevertheless

I still hopeful it would adopt this generally accepted principle interna­

tional conduct and thus as I said at last meeting open road for peaceful

resolution differences. If it persisted in refusing do so and persisted in

maintaining its threat initiate use force Taiwan area, it hard be optimistic

over peaceful settlement our disputes. Neither my government nor any

other self-­respecting government could negotiate under such conditions.

I hoped he could reconsider this prior next meeting. Believed issues too

important for two of us despair of reaching understanding.

19. Wang agreed with thesis that once we begin discussing certain

problem we should try settle problem. On question of making announce­

ment, during past ten months their side made repeated effort and fact

that no agreement been reached not (repeat not) their responsibility.

20. Wang said if US actually desired and not (repeat not) merely

giving lip service to renunciation force in settlement disputes should

do so by actual actions. He had always hoped we would put forth new

constructive proposals based on spirit mutual advantage both sides. If

we talk about refusing make announcement, it US which refused join­

ing in making announcement advantage both sides.

21. Wang said he had nothing more on this question this morning.

He proposed we meet next July 24.

22. I indicated I had not (repeat not) agreed to ending meeting

although had nothing more on subject renunciation force this morning.

I simply wanted say I pleased note Fathers Phillips Clifford after com­

pleting prison sentences in full had been permitted leave and arrived

Hong Kong July 7.

23. I said disappointed now his authorities apparently still attempt­

ing interfere and prevent Indian Embassy from carrying out functions

with respect Chinese prisoners US which I had outlined at previous

meetings. Found this difficult understand if he still interested in return

these people.

24. Wang could not (repeat not) accept my statement their side

interfering with Indian Embassy in carrying out functions. If Indian

Embassy had difficulty carrying out functions in US so simply because

US ­Government failed cooperate effectively in carrying outfits functions.

25. Wang said he was not (repeat not) going to say anything more

on this this morning and suggested that the next meeting be held Tues­

day July 24. I indicated I was agreeable to meeting that week but would

prefer Thursday July 26 as Tuesday would be inconvenient. Wang

agreed.

Gowen

23. From Johnson.

1. Comments today’s meeting:

Do not believe Wang’s “suggestion” we turn to trade embargo

presages any early break but is rather renewed attempt bring pressure

on us. Also, their thought may well be that in absence any success this

will demonstrate lack any advantage to them from talks and thus pre­

pare ground if they eventually decide carry out break. They may also

estimate that now is propitious time focus public attention on trade

and will in talks here attempt lay basis for public position which will

accelerate present trends other countries lower restrictions on trade

with them and weaken international position US this question. In view

of current dearth of public interest in renunciation topic, CHICOMS

may also feel further concentration on this would be less productive

of embarrassment to US and GRC than shifting focus to trade, with

attend­ant possibility of exploiting US support of GRC “piracy.” This

was hinted at in Chou’s NPC speech.

2. At next meeting he will undoubtedly query as to whether

I  have any “new constructive proposal” with respect renunciation

and in absence any new draft my part renew “suggestion” move to

trade embargo. Suggest my best tactic at that point would be refer

given him, on interrelation two items but in accordance that statement

express willingness listen to what he has to say. I would avoid any

direct reply at that meeting and restate position on renunciation as

appropriate asking they reconsider their position that regard.

3. Reference June 29 letter from Purdue to Department note Tseng

Kuang Chih’s name was included list Wang gave me February 9 or two

months before he placed under observation. Must expect Wang will

eventually learn of this case from returning students or other means.

If authorities determine Tseng not competent make decision on return

suggest desirability Indians being informed facts.

Gowen

Distribution.

25. From Johnson.

At 53rd meeting Ambassador Wang introduced new adviser, Wang

Ning (Matthews 7037, 4724) who takes place of Wang Pao Liu.

Gowen

Letter No. 40

Geneva, July 11, 1956

Dear Walter:

Thank you very much for your letter of July 6 which I received on

the 9th. Also thanks for the telegram with regard to MacKensen and the

Indians having asked to give the prisoner letter to the Chinese. As you

will have seen I had no reaction from Wang on this probably not having

had time to have reached him. I expect I will get some reaction at the

next meeting. I would very much hope that by the next meeting there

may be some news with regard to the Chinese prisoners so that we will

know where that is going. Also, is it not about time that O’Neill ask to

see the Americans?

I have not much to add to what I have said in my comments tele­

gram. There is one point though that I would like to mention. It is whether

I now, but more particularly in the future, if there is a break, play the

note that they have by their December 1 draft to a large extent renounced

force, or whether I play the note of implicit threat in their position. This

is more important in regard to our public position than the position that

I take in the meetings but the two are, of course, closely related. I could,

for example at yesterday’s meeting, have taken the position that a vir­

tual refusal to further discuss renunciation of force carried with it the

implication of intent to attack in the Taiwan area. However, I refrained

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

from doing so and also deliberately refrained from saying anything with

regard to their position threatening peace in the Far East as I felt that the

latter might carry with it the implication of a threat on our part. From

the standpoint of both the talks here and our public position, it seems to

me that it would be wise to soft-­pedal threat aspects so as not in these

talks or publicly to build-­up any crisis atmosphere even if they were to be

broken off, but rather to emphasize the degree to which they have, partic­

ularly in their December 1 draft, accepted the principle of renunciation of

force, leaving it to them to deny it.

I am driving back to Prague, arriving there tomorrow night.

Because of engagements I had already made and cannot be broken,

I will be remaining there until the next meeting. Therefore, If you have

anything to send me, you can send it there. I will probably come down

on Tuesday, July 24.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

680. Memorandum from Colm to McConaughy

Washington, July 18, 1956

SUBJECT

Comments on Peking Radio regarding the Geneva talks

The following comments were reported on Peking Radio regard­

ing the Geneva talks, in connection with the Anniversary of the Geneva

­Summit Conference. Quoting from, various newspapers, Radio Peking

stated:

“No further gains were made at their (Johnson–­Wang) talks in

Geneva, because the United States lacks sincerity and tries to continue

intensified tension in the Taiwan area”.

“The paper describes Ambassador Johnson’s obstinate persistence

and unreasonable principles at the Sino-­American Ambassadorial talks

as ‘amazing’. This is also a reflection of the U.S. dilemma. It dares not

break off the talks outright, nor does it dare to reach agreement”.

ing. Drafted by Forman and sent through him.

60. For Johnson.

Guidance for July 26 meeting.

1. We believe it is important at the coming meeting to protest the

prolonged failure of Communists to implement the agreed announce­

ment on return of Americans. Point out agreement made more than

10 months ago, return was to be expeditious, and that 90 days had

even been discussed as a limit of time. Point out our full compliance in

letter and spirit with announcement, and our recent action in arrang­

ing for deportation of Chinese in prison, although they not covered

by announcement. Point out that this U.S. decision made in light

­Communist repeated claims that they included so that there could

be no possible basis for Communist continued refusal to release U.S.

prisoners. Point out difficulty in making arrangements for exercise

by prisoners of choice of repatriation and for participation by Indian

Embassy; incomprehensible failure of Indian Embassy to cooperate

due to request by Communist that it do not do so. Point out difficulty

of making progress toward further agreements when those already

made are not lived up to.

2. You should also point out inability understand failure of

­Communists to agree to meaningful renunciation of force, particularly

when U.S. had accepted Communist formulation of December 1 with

only slight additions to make clear its meaning.

3. With respect to topic of trade controls, we must maintain our

fundamental position that there can be no fruitful discussion of this

item under the over-­hanging threat of use of force; that there must be

a meaningful agreed announcement by parties renouncing force before

trade embargoes can be usefully discussed. However it is hoped that

without prejudicing in any way this position, you can lead Wang to

disclose just what he has in mind as to the item of trade embargo and

what changes the Communists propose in existing situation.

4. You may wish point out that unrealistic to think any country

would help to strengthen economically another which threatens to

use force if its demands are not met, by trading with it, where goods

received in that trade could be used to support use of force. All this

should lead back to discussion of necessity for meaningful renunciation

of force in order permit progress in talks.

Distribution. Drafted by Phleger and McConaughy; approved in draft by Dulles.

5. FYI Indian Embassy has not replied our letter of June 27 request­

ing reconsideration its adverse decision on visits to prisoners. Embassy

has intimated we may get reply from Communists at Geneva before it

receives reply from New Delhi. As it is clear Indians will be guided by

Chinese Communist wishes in this matter we are not sanguine of rever­

sal of decision. However will allow few more days for Indian reply

before we arrange for visits to prisoners by American officials, probably

with Red Cross observers.

6. FYI we are asking British Chargé Peiping to renew his request

for permission visit all American prisoners. In view invitation we

have extended to Indians, he is in favorable position press Chinese

­Communists insistently on this issue.

7. One more Chinese criminal Moy Lum No. 11 on list has been

released from prison. Total of 3 released since survey made. You may

inform Wang if you consider it desirable do so.

8. FYI Chinese Ambassador at our request has agreed instruct

­Chinese Consuls in this country to defer their visits to Chinese pris­

oners until we have had opportunity present alternatives to prisoners.

END FYI.

Dulles

Letter No. 51

Washington, July 20, 1956

Dear Alex:

and Phleger have read it. It would not seem necessary to decide finally

at this stage how we will eventually construe the Chinese Communist

position on renunciation of force—whether we would publicly stress

its threatening aspects or its ostensible partial acceptance of the concept

of renunciation of force. We shall be giving some thought to this on a

contingency basis although our assessment is that an early break-­off is

unlikely.

Informal.

2. We have been quite forehanded with your guidance telegram,

No. 60 of July 19th which went off last night. I believe it is the first

time we have dispatched your guidance a full week before the meeting.

The reason is that the Secretary is leaving today for Panama and Judge

Phleger for a week in San Francisco.

3. You will see that we are taking a strong line in refusing to dis­

cuss trade controls in the absence of a renunciation of force. It is sub­

stantially the position you took last November, and the position you

recommended in your comments on the last meeting. We debated for

some time whether we should also state that discussion of trade or any

other practical matter would additionally be contingent on full Chinese

Communist compliance with the agreed announcement. We somewhat

reluctantly decided not to put this in, for tactical reasons. At the same

time you will understand that this second condition, although not to

be expressed by you at this time, still stands. If they should agree to

renounce force, we would then point out that they would have to make

good on their commitment of September 10 before we could go on to

any other practical matter at issue.

4. Enclosed is a translation of a circular letter to Chinese students

in this country, mailed from mainland China. We got this through Intel­

ligence sources.

5. We have heard of one additional Chinese student who has gone

insane. His name is [text not declassified] from the University of Minne­

sota. He has been in the mental ward of the University of Minnesota

Hospital since ­February. The doctors think his condition is attributable

to letters he has received from his family in China. He received letters

through the open mail from his family which praised the Communist

regime and urged him to return. Later he received smuggled letters

which told him the former letters had been written under pressure and

that he should disregard them. Although [text not declassified] is an aero­

engineer, apparently he was never on the list of technically trained Chi­

nese who were temporarily restrained from leaving the U. S. Apparently

he is not the [text not declassified]. We received this report from the FBI.

We have heard nothing from the Minnesota authorities or from [text

not declassified] himself. We intend to take no action unless we receive

something from those quarters.

6. We are enclosing the latest tabulation of information on

­Americans in prison in Communist China. While you may have all this

information it is more accessible in this tabular form.

7. We have just heard from  [text not declassified] that her hus­

band, [text not declassified] has apparently been pretty extensively influ­

enced by the Chinese Communist brainwashing efforts. He has been

taken on a tour of a number of Chinese cities. He wrote his wife a long

letter containing all sorts of panegyrics on the Chinese Communist

accomplishments. She mailed us typed excerpts but apparently left out

important parts, possibly because she is embarrassed at the evidence

that he has broken to some extent under ­Communist pressure. We are

trying to get a complete copy of the letter. We will let you have what is

available in any event.

8. We still have no reply from the Indian Embassy to our appeal

for a reconsideration. The Indian Embassy gave us the amazing infor­

mation the other day that we would probably get the reply from the

Chinese Communists at Geneva before the Indian Embassy here had

anything. That does not sound encouraging, but we are allowing a few

more days before we make plans to proceed independently with the

prisoner interviews. From this Indian reply you should probably expect

a new attack by Wang at the next meeting on our prisoner initiative.

9. The British are about to jump entirely off the reservation on trade

controls. They are exporting 151 “land rovers” (jeeps) to Communist

China in defiance of the multilateral control and consultation procedure.

We fear they will follow up with a number of tractors. Other countries

of course will feel that they are no longer inhibited. The whole system is

in jeopardy and we still have no firm position here on how we will deal

with the crisis. The Communist Chinese are probably aware of the trend

and it may make Wang less insistent on the trade issue at Geneva.

10. We have heard from FE/P that the NBC wants to have a filmed

TV interview with you on the first anniversary of the beginning of the

talks August 1. We have heard nothing from you on this and it may

be a garbled report. In any event we have told FE/P that we think an

interview along the anticipated lines would be a mistake and should

be discouraged. We do not want to play up your success in keeping the

talks going at this time. Judge Phleger in particular feels it would be a

serious mistake.

11. SCA feels that it would be a good idea for Ambassador Lodge

to make a speech on the question of the 450 servicemen. The State

­Department is coming in for a lot of unwarranted criticism from many

Americans who are writing in. A speech might help to clear the atmo­

sphere and FE is not opposed, assuming of course the content is right.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Translation of circular letter to Chinese Students dated May 29,

1956.

2. Copy of Tabulation of Information on Americans in Prison in

Communist China

3. House Resolution of July 18.

4. Washington News Editorial of July 12—“It’s Just Ransom Talk”.

5. Chinese Communist Comments on Geneva Talks, Carried on

Radio Peiping.

70. For Johnson.

Chinese convict Lu Ping Yeou No. 25 on list released from prison

July 20. Four released 30 remain.

Hoover

by Clough.

Washington, July 23, 1956

72. Deptel 60.

British Embassy July 20 transmitted to British Chargé O’Neill

Peiping our request that he renew immediately and insistently to

Chinese Communist authorities request that he be allowed to visit all

American prisoners.

Hoover

McConaughy. Pouched to Hong Kong, London, and Taipei. The time of transmission is

illegible.

71. From Johnson.

Three-­hour five minute meeting this morning mostly on renunci­

ation. While Wang renewed his proposal move to trade and made few

general remarks thereon, he didn’t press hard and discussion revolved

around renunciation along familiar lines. This phase meeting closed on

inconclusive note with Wang stating progress depended on US putting

forward constructive opinion and my characterizing obstacle as lack

willingness PRC give up threat use force Taiwan area.

After I made opening statement on renunciation Wang made fairly

extensive reply ending with proposal move to “discussion concrete meas­

ures lifting trade embargo.” I replied thereto with renewal discussion

Wang made few general remarks on lack justification for embargo which

­“outstanding issue which hinders normal development relations” per­

mitted himself to be led back into discussion renunciation and remainder

phase this meeting kept that subject.

I made long statement on implementation covering points con­

tained para one Deptel 60 tying it back to his previous statements on

necessity talks be advantageous both sides and characterizing results

agreed announcement as one-­sided disadvantage to US. Wang replied

along usual lines, only thing new being reference to “recent move by

US try to send Chinese in US in prison to Taiwan” but without directly

referring to letter to prisoners.

I proposed next meeting Tuesday August 2. Wang countered with

suggestion Thursday August 9 to which I agreed.

Departing Prague Friday morning.

Johnson

Limit Distribution.

75. From Johnson.

1. After Wang refused my invitation to open I opened the meeting

with prepared statement:

A. At our last meeting and several previous meetings you have

been making reference to what you term attempt of US in discussing

question arriving at agreement on renunciation force to take prejudiced

viewpoint and obtain one-­sided advantage. Frankly, when I proposed

last October that two us issue declaration announcing use force, I did so

because of conviction my government it would be advantageous to us

if we could create atmosphere in which our two countries could resolve

their differences without resorting force. I say this quite frankly and

openly, because I feel there is nothing wrong or shameful in my hav­

ing made this proposition. It is my responsibility as representative my

country, seek promote advantage of US. That does not mean I seek pro­

mote disadvantage other countries. I assume you feel same way about

seeking advance interests your country.

B. In making my proposal last October it was not my intent, or

intent my government, seek unfair or one-­sided advantage. It was

not—and is not—my feeling that meaningful renunciation force in set­

tlement our disputes would be adverse to real interests your country.

In fact it my conviction this would be genuinely also to advantage your

country as well. It my belief that resort of force over any our disputes

would in long run injure real interests your country as well as mine.

I am well aware of position your country with respect our dispute in

Taiwan area. I am also well aware of reluctance on part your country’s

authorities abandon what they consider “right” use force if they choose

do so. It is not my purpose to enter into philosophical argument over

abstract question whether such “right” can exist nor to argue concept

rights consistency with what has become a generally accepted princi­

ple modern international conduct. It been my hope your government

would come to realization that just as practical matter of its own self-­

interest, interest of its people, and interest of rest of world, it ought to

accept principle of renunciation force.

C. I continue hope your government will eventually accept this

principle. Matter boils down to this: does your government still

Distribution.

consider it is entitled to use force in respect our dispute Taiwan area?

Does it still reject unqualified renunciation use force?

D. To state question in terms concrete content our discussions over

last half year, was December 1 draft your side really intended as gen­

eral statement of principle fully accepted by your side? If so, how can

your government insist on withholding application of principle from

very area where need for it is greatest? Or how can your government

haggle and bargain over its application to that area, establishing pre­

conditions and setting time limits?

E. If your governments principle which appears be stated in draft

December 1, how can it object to clarification this statement on princi­

ple? Surely it obvious my country could not accept declaration which

prejudiced its right self-­defense. Surely your own government would

not want prejudice its own right this regard. What possible objection

can there be to making this clear in declaration itself.

F. I wish to record my most earnest hope your government will

accept principle of renunciation force without qualification, and it will

be possible for two us, on basis of area of agreement already reached, to

go on to issuance of declaration clearly and unequivocally embodying

that principle.

2. Wang, speaking from prepared statement, said would soon be one

year since began talks. Most urgent, important task talk his achievement

relaxation and eliminations tension Taiwan area, whereby fundamental

adjustment abnormal relations existing between China and U.S. might be

brought about and cause peace in Far East and world may be benefited.

It in this spirit their side been conducting negotiations with our side on

making renunciation force declaration.

3. Continuing from notes taken during my statement Wang said

at outset these discussions their side hoped we be able resolve ques­

tion relaxing and eliminating tension Taiwan area by peaceful means.

However, such peaceful settlement must be in conformity generally

accepted international principles and also in conformity fundamen­

tal interests of sovereign states. Central issue between two countries

which requires resolution is that of Taiwan area dispute. Taiwan is

territory of China. Chinese people can in no circumstances renounce

right sovereignty over Taiwan. Taiwan within framework Chinese

territory therefore Chinese people never permit any foreign country

interfere in this question. Exercise of sovereign rights over Taiwan by

Chinese Government is exactly in conformity with generally accepted

principle international conduct.

4. Wang said I had stated in discussing question dispute Taiwan

area, US would not prejudice right self-­defense that area. He could only

say these remarks aggressive. This US position precisely what their

side consistently, firmly rejected in talks. If one country tried impose

right self-­defense on territory other country, could this be called observ­

ance generally accepted principle international conduct? His govern­

ment always respected rights interests every other country, in return

requested all other countries respect their soverignty rights as well.

5. Wang said I had stated this morning it my responsibility advance

interest US, however, in doing so US must not violate, infringe on rights

his country. Chinese people firmly oppose conduct talks which while

promoting US interest prejudiced interests his country. Discussion on

peaceful settlement disputes between two countries can never and

must not be conducted in manner whereby US advancing own interests

at expense interest of his country.

6. Returning to prepared statement Wang said I had again made

repeated reference to making declaration renounce force. He would

say it precisely because desire his side issue fair, just, equal declaration

with US on renunciation force that in discussions his side repeatedly

made great efforts and more than once offered drafts meeting views

both sides, particularly one proposed May 11. No reason why both

sides could not entirely reach agreement that draft. However, my side

at outset discussions unveiled intent securing declaration of unilateral

advantage US, enabling US maintain status quo seizure Taiwan and

continue intervention Chinese internal affairs by preventing ­Chinese

people from liberating own territory Taiwan. All drafts presented

by US been imbued with this intent. His side absolutely rejects such

attempts. He could only regret intransigence our side over its unjusti­

fied position.

7. Wang said we now had to admit so far failed reach agreement

question making renunciation force declaration instead had met

obstacle. As he said at last meeting he welcomed any move my part

putting forth constructive opinions to advance talks this regard. Oth­

erwise, we should change subject our discussion. He noted in my

remarks this morning I merely played over old tune and failed put

forward any new constructive opinions. He regretted this was case.

8. Wang said they had made clear in talks that holding FMC

between China and US absolutely indispensable to solve question

relaxation and elimination tension Taiwan area. Nonetheless, two of us

as Ambassadors of respective countries should be able go ahead tackle

settle certain outstanding matters which hinder improvement relations

between two countries. He recalled that when his side Sept 14 last year

proposed subject embargo under item two, US indicated readiness dis­

cuss subject in talks, thus agreed include this subject in our agenda.

He therefore proposed we now start discussing concrete measures for

lifting embargo.

9. I replied he had spoken of obstacles met in reaching agreement

on question of renunciation force declaration. He had also referred to

situation in Taiwan area being most urgent and important question con­

fronting us. I thought we should be clear as to exact nature obstacle now

confronting us. While he continued speak of renunciation force decla­

ration, he had continued avoid agreement on statement which would

in fact constitute such declaration. ­Proposition I had put forward here

very simple. I had repeated it many times. It was simply that while we

disagree about many things and particularly about origin, nature, pos­

sible settlement dispute Taiwan area we simply say first we not going

go war about those things. Obstacle we faced and continued face was

unwillingness his government say this in clear unequivocal language.

While he continued speak of renunciation force declaration and we had

discussed various drafts embodying that principle it was clear from our

discussion here, public statement made by his government and drafts

he put forward that while he desired on one hand give appearance

having accepted principle, on other hand he attempted retain freedom

use force. He had in particular attempted retain for his side freedom

use force with regard dispute which we both agreed most urgent and

important facing us. To characterize any such declaration as renuncia­

tion force would be fraud upon world and could only result increased

misunderstanding and increased tension between us. This was obstacle

which continued confront us. No playing with words could resolve this.

This obstacle could be removed only by decision his government. I had

over past months and continue earnestly hope his government would

remove that obstacle. If that obstacle removed words could readily be

found embody principle. I had in past and still continue feel this first

and most urgent task confronting us.

10. I continued from prepared statement:

A. As I told you at meeting November 3 and also subsequently

mentioned, I consider there is an inherent relationship between ques­

tion of renunciation force and what you have termed the trade embargo.

My views this regard have not changed. That is, from my standpoint

discussion of what you term trade embargo cannot be divorced from

continued overhanging threat your government will resort use force in

attempt resolve to its satisfaction dispute in Taiwan area. It unrealistic

to think my country or any country sensible of its own interests would

desire economically to strengthen a country which threatens to resort

hostilities if its demands not met. That is, my country does not consider

there can be any advantage to it in trade, where goods received in that

trade can support use of force against it. This should be self-­evident.

It thus clear there is an inseparable relationship between renunciation

force and subject of trade and that first had an inherent priority over

second.

B. I therefore cannot and do not agree that subject renunciation force

be dropped. It is and will continue be first and fundamental question

in future our relations. I continue seek unconditional and unequivocal

agreement your government to this fundamental principle. However,

as I said on November 3, in interest of expediting our discussions, while

your government continues give consideration to question renuncia­

tion force, I am entirely willing hear any views you desire put forward

with respect to trade.

11. Wang replied both us made respective points view already clear

on question declaration. Repeated effort his side on question making

declaration could not be denied or obscured. He had on three successive

occasions proposed clear-­cut propositions on this question. They could

not be distorted. Three drafts put forward by his side testified to sincerity

his government this respect and world recognized it as such. I had stated

question making declaration is most fundamental task confronting us.

Fact was however as experience in talks showed, US always remained

on same spot without making progress. He considered this very clear.

As far as encountering difficulties in way making declaration, his side

always making efforts overcome difficulties. While US always created

difficulties with result impossible two sides actually make declaration.

12. Wang continued declaration which they been striving make

was one which would resolve unreasonable situation in Taiwan area.

Result such declaration should in no way be maintenance of unreason­

able situation in Taiwan area or freezing that situation. If they should

agree make declaration with US which recognized US occupation their

territory Taiwan, then he wondered why should they be here negotiat­

ing with US.

He might point out that to harbor any such desire was fantastic

and wishful thinking. US Government must realize and be aware this

situation. US Government must face realities of historical develop­

ment. Era in which country can seize territory another country long

past. This action inconsistent with modern concept international

relations. From my remarks and statements it could be concluded it

not sincere in desire overcome difficulties in way making progress.

He could only term continuing of discussions this fashion waste of

time without constructive meaning. That was reason why he must

propose change subject discussions.

13. Wang continued, we must also recognize question of embargo

also one of outstanding issues between two countries which hinder

development of normal relations. He considered proper settlement

question embargo would certainly help improve relations between

two countries. As he told me previously policy of embargo imposed

on his country by US actually didn’t bring any great harm to his coun­

try. However, they opposed this policy embargo because unreasonable

of itself. Similar to that of man who injures his own toes by dropping

stone (cuts off nose to spite face). Policy embargo unbalances normal

international situation and has caused opposition and hostility from

countries of world. Remarks I made this morning in effort justify that

policy embargo could only be termed without justificaton. I had made

charges with regard Chinese making threats of force. He could only

say this is putting shoe on wrong foot. It merely lame argument trying

justify US threat force against China. I could never succeed in making

embargo policy appear reasonable.

14. Wang could not agree to my remarks on what I termed relation

between question embargo and renunciation force. US embargo policy

first most unfriendly and hostile act of US against China. If there really

desire improve relationship between two great powers, this policy

embargo mustn’t be allowed remain. That policy not in interests either

people. That why he proposed we discuss this question. I had also said

we mustn’t abandon subject renunciation force declaration. As he had

repeatedly said this is up to US and depends on whether US willing

put forward constructive opinion this regard. Obstacle now in way

of agreement on renunciation force declaration can only be removed

by giving up one-­sided and unilateral interest and adopting principle

meeting interests both sides.

15. I replied, I had already this morning covered my view obstacle

which confronts us with regard declaration. I thought his last remarks

though again tended point up difference between us. That is, he spoke

of declaration we been discussing as resolving difficulties in dispute

in Taiwan area. That is resolving it on his terms. That is, he continued

first to confuse question origin, nature, possible resolution on situation

Taiwan area with first step of simply saying both of us determined it

would not be cause of war between us. No amount of words or ration­

alization could obscure fact he intended in one way or another to pre­

serve freedom use force in that area. No suggestion for any declaration

and no draft I had ever proposed required him recognize anything in

that or any other area which his government did not want recognize.

US interest has been and remains that of assuring that situation did

not lead to war. Every proposal I made solely had purpose saying this

clearly. This was what he referred to as one-­sided, unilateral interest.

If that be correct I could only conclude his government considered it

to its interest to maintain ability threaten utilities in area. He had spo­

ken of my position having remained same spot with regard principle of

agreeing between us that our differences would not lead to hostilities

and saying so clearly. I still hoped by agreeing with this principle his

government would remove this obstacle to agreement between us and

thus permit us to make real meaningful declaration and open way for

fruitful discussion other subjects he desired raise. This would permit

these talks result genuine mutual advantage both countries. Still hope

they could have that result.

16. Wang agreed there existed difference of principle between two

us on question declaration. However differance was between genu­

ine desire settle our disputes and desire continue armed occupation

­Chinese territory, although this being camouflaged by protestation

peaceful intentions. Chinese Government always expressed readiness

settle disputes with US by peaceful negotiations. His government

always strove aid settlement disputes between two countries by war­

like means. However this did not mean his government would accept

its territory being forcefully divided and grabbed or in any way agree

to its sovereign right being infringed. Next question was under what

condition could disputes between two countries in Taiwan area be

settled. As they saw it, condition was that neither side try advance

own selfish interest at expense others. This condition fundamental

condition which any state must follow. This condition they had fol­

lowed was to be found UN Charter, nothing concealed in this respect

and no one could deny its justification. Therefore, in trying overcome

difficulties we should follow correct principles international relations

instead following selfish interests one side at expense other. This gov­

ernment always desired respect territorial integrity and sovereign

right of US. At same time expected US do same respecting sovereign

rights territorial integrity his country. If we could reach common

understanding this regard, then difference could be readily resolved.

Our talks could only progress in this spirit.

17. I asked if he thought it harming interests his country simply to

say clearly, unequivocally we not going go war over disputes between

us including those Taiwan area. How would that harm his country?

18. Wang replied he had made it clear many times as long as ­Taiwan

under occupation foreign forces, whether there were war or not, inter­

ests his country were always being harmed.

19. I asked if he was therefore maintaining threat use force to

resolve that situation to satisfaction his country?

20. Wang replied this entirely reversing rights and wrongs of situ­

ation. This way saying things entirely unreasonable. The actual threat

existing in Taiwan area at this moment in fact came from US occupation

Taiwan by force. One might ask whether US would cling to occupation

Chinese territory by force.

21. I charged Wang with avoiding question. I had many times given

facts with regard situation there. US not occupying Taiwan. However

my purpose from beginning been try avoid discussion at this stage all

rights and wrongs situation there. I had not attempted force on him

any views with regard situation there and had tried keep them our

discussion this stage. What I had tried do was simply arrive agreement

with him this stage that both of us agree we do not go war over it. That

is all. If his government would adopt same attitude we could very read­

ily reach agreement.

22. Wang challanged my statement US not occupying Taiwan.

Nobody could be deceived by this remark. If US had not used force

occupy ­Taiwan then Taiwan would long ago been rejoined to mother­

land. Any such remark could in no way succeed whitewash and defend

aggression of US. He did not think any arguments or remarks along

this line could contribute to our discussions.

23. I said it did not contribute to our discussions to characterize

the relations between the US and government occupying Taiwan as US

occupation of Taiwan or US aggression. Two of us could very easily get

selves in long acrimonious discussion all these questions. I had tried my

best this stage avoid such unprofitable discussion. I hoped we could get

back to first and fundamental principle of simply saying we not going

go war about it. That was all I had that subject.

24. Wang said he had merely pointed out real facts situation. They

would not put up with incorrect and absurd arguments. He had noth­

ing more say this regard this morning.

25. I said he had often spoken here of these talks as well as specific

subjects we been discussing being benefit both our countries. He had

spoken of necessity their not being one-­sided. I entirely agreed with

that. I wanted point out briefly that as far as first subject we came here

discuss, return civilians, results appear very one-­sided to my country.

After weeks of discussion, he and I arrived at agreement on issuing

agreed announcement September 10 with regard civilians. During that

discussion I had pointed out we had unilaterally and without demand­

ing concessions entirely removed all restrictions which had previously

been imposed on departure any Chinese from my country. I agreed

to arrangements which he proposed with regard third power func­

tions. My government had fully complied with both letter and spirit of

announcement we issued at that time. Chinese continuing depart freely

my country and arriving his country. In more than ten months now

past since issuance that announcement, not single case any obstruction

of Chinese wishing depart from my country has been brought to our

attention.

26. Although not included in original discussions and I did not

consider they covered in agreed announcement, we even gone to

extent making it possible for any Chinese in prison my country to

leave for his country. This done in response to representations this

regard he subsequently made to me here. Its full implementation thus

far been delayed only because inexplicable objections his government

to participation by Indian Embassy in determining whether and

which of these prisoners desire return his country. Thus results agreed

announcement from standpoint his country been very substantial.

25. Regretted results from standpoint my country had been very

meager. When began discussions here I hoped we be able equalize situ­

ation nationals our respective countries by his country taking action to

permit all those Americans who desire return to do so. Our discussions

in regard Americans revolved primarily around those imprisoned his

country. Wang and his government well aware our strong interest in

this group Americans. In fact at time we issued our agreed announce­

ment these were only Americans we knew of who desired to return and

being prevented do so. Two of us had long discussion on the subject

when these persons would be able leave return US. He would recall

I was very insistent on some statement time so no misunderstand­

ing between us. He refused agree any statement of time. He told me

however their cases would be handled very quickly. In effect said they

would be handled much more quickly than in past and ­issuance of

announcement would greatly expedite their release. Although I  was

dissatisfied with lack explicitness his statements in order not prolong

discussions, get ahead. I finally agreed to his suggestion use word

“expeditiously” this connection. I told him my country would interpret

that word mean exactly what it said. Neither my country nor anyone

else could by any stretch imagination consider these people were being

permitted return expeditiously. In fact difficult for me see there had

been any substantial improvement in situation that existed even before

our agreed announcement. In spite use word “expeditious” in agreed

announcement his assurances that release Americans would be mark­

edly expedited in comparison with situation before issuance announce­

ment, I could see little or no change in situation.

26. I did not desire get into complicated question numbers, pro­

portion or that type of thing with him, I simply wanted to point out

China during year since June 1954 as result review their cases. Of

those who remained prison, after ten of whose release he informed me

­September 10, only 8 Americans have been released permitted return

to US in approximately 11 months since we issued that announcement.

I not only considered this performance grossly at variance specific

terms our agreed announcement but also considered results our agreed

announcement to have been very much one-­sided. I had often as ear­

nestly as could spoken to him of relationship this whole question to

improvement our relations. I come here most earnestly seeking that

improvement and I still sought it. I again appealed to him to impress

upon his authorities tremendous importance with which we view this

question.

27. Wang said very dissatisfied with my last statement. Chinese

Government had indeed handled cases American law breakers China

with most lenient policy. Among 40 such American lawbreakers ­serving

sentences his country there remain only 11 prisoners. That is majority

these 40 now returned US as result lenient policy his government. How

could I say this figure not substantial or little. Perhaps I was dissatisfied

with fact they had released too many. Otherwise he could only term

this deliberate reversal facts. US failed faithfully carry out agreement

between two sides. I had stated Chinese in US free make departure.

These merely empty words. As matter fact of 55 persons regarding whose

return I had made representation, 53 still had not returned. Among 103

persons who desired return his country, 28 still failed return. As to these

persons not yet returned his country, I could not say Chinese in US free

depart. In addition, even after issuance agreed announcement, US made

requirement Chinese in US must apply permanent residence US. In addi­

tion to that, requirement by my authorities Chinese in US apply entry

permits Taiwan. All these requirements he could only say very bad—in

violation our agreement.

28. Wang continued they had learned recently there had been

moves by my authorities try send Chinese in our prisons to Taiwan.

As said many times Chinese in our prisons have no freedom at all to

state their will. And recent moves our authorities send Chinese in our

prisons to Taiwan was yet another threat to these persons in prison.

Also these at variance with agreement between us. These are viola­

tions agreement. If US really has interest and desire settle question

civilians between two countries it should honestly observe agreement

instead violating it. He also asked me impress upon US Govt that

­Chinese people and Government extremely dissatisfied with action

US Govt in violation agreement.

29. I replied he had spoken of majority of Americans in their pris­

ons having returned. I simply wanted point out agreed announcement

didn’t cover some or majority Americans their prisons; it covered

all of them. Only release all of them would be compliance with our

announcement not their return six months after agreed announce­

ment, a year or 5 years, but their expeditious return as of date ­issuance

announcement. As far as Chinese in US concerned, even since before

issuance agreed announcement not just one-­third or one-­half or

­majority of those desiring return able return, but any of them who

desire return able return. Best and indisputable test whether or not

this is fact is third power arrangement established to confirm it. Thus

far not a single one has alleged any obstruction. I previously discussed

and would not take time this morning to discuss his persistent refer­

ence to what he termed requiring people to obtain permanent resident

and Taiwan entry permits. However I would be glad discuss that again

in detail any time if he desired.

30. I asked him with regard his statement this morning to let me

simply say as far as Chinese in prison concerned no one going be sent

against his will any place. It was in order assure him this was case that

suggestion made by my government with regard participation Indian

Embassy. As far as freedom persons in prison express will concerned,

he can certainly reach decision as to whether desires remain prison,

subject same commutation of sentence and parole procedures as other

prisoners or whether desires immediately leave prison for another

country. Each man knowing own situation can certainly decide this

for self. I might mention that since I last discussed this with him, two

additional Chinese prisoners had been released under normal parole

procedures.

31. Wang had no more comments to make on this question. His

government failed faithfully carry out announcement it should not at

same time make false charges against other. Unfounded charges would

not in any way help resolve matter.

32. I thought facts very clear.

33. Wang felt facts I have in mind incorrect and everybody aware

of that.

34. I had nothing more and proposed next Thursday if agreeable

to Wang.

35. He proposed making it Thursday August 9 and I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 41

Geneva, July 26, 1956

Dear Walter:

Just a few brief notes. First thanks for your letters 50 and 51. Inci­

dentally in your No. 50 you mentioned some excerpts from a letter of

Bob McCann’s, but they were not enclosed. Very sorry to hear about

Informal. The signature is handwritten.

him, but knowing him would be very reluctant to reach any conclu­

sions on the basis of a letter in which he may have had some particular

purpose in mind. However, I entirely agree that on the basis of this

and Mackensen’s letter they may very well be attempting to prevail on

some Americans to remain as a counter to the reluctance of Chinese to

return.

Incidentally I had heard nothing here about a NBC filmed inter­

view and, of course, would do nothing about it in any event. However,

all of the correspondents here have been pushing me hard for “anni­

versary stories”, and in reply I have been stressing that I simply do

not look at it in that light, it having been just another meeting. I have,

of course, seen them individually and explained there is nothing new,

everything having been very thoroughly covered in the press releases.

They have also pressed me hard for “private and personal” opinions on

the relationship with our elections but I have strictly refused any dis­

cussion of this pointing out that there was no reason to believe that on

the fundamental questions of release of American prisoners or renun­

ciation of force there was or could be any differences of opinion among

Americans. You can thus expect a spate of “birthday stories” from here

which they have all been instructed to write but I wanted to let you

know I have done my best to minimize them. The only thing I have

done is to give AP a list of the remaining 11 taken from the Dept’s. lists

giving their occupation and home towns.

Wang’s performance today together with his proposal for another

two week’s gap to the next meeting confirms me in my belief that they

intend to mark time until November. Depending on how they read our

domestic political situation we must expect some new move on their

part shortly before or very shortly after the election. I do not think that

we should exclude the possibility that they may estimate that if the

“peace” issue figures heavily in the campaign the administration would

be responsive to pressures just before the election that would threaten

hostilities in the offshore islands.

I certainly have no objection to a speech by Lodge on the missing

servicemen issue. I presume it would be in the GA and tied to the still

outstanding UN resolution.

One aspect of my guidance for today’s meeting on which I would

appreciate a little more background amplification is how far I can go

if I think it useful in stating the converse of the proposition that there

can be no fruitful discussion of trade in the absence of a renunciation

of force. You will note that today I carefully kept away from this con­

verse and will try to continue this line. However, if necessary, how it is

suggested that I handle the implied converse, that is, could I hold out

any hope for a “fruitful discussion” of trade in the event of a satisfac­

tory agreement on renunciation of force, and, of course, release of the

prisoners? I hope that by the next meeting we will know what is going

to happen with respect to the Chinese prisoners. You will note that

today I made a really “big speech” on the Americans, which I tried to

make as fervent as I am capable. Incidentally it is only when we get on

the subject of implementation that Wang gets really emotional. It does

not stand out too clearly in the translation but it is obvious he is putting

real personal feeling into this subject. I suppose that whatever personal

convictions he may have on this are fed by the equivocal letters they

probably receive from Chinese in the U.S. who are still sitting on the

fence for personal reasons or to protect their families.

I do not yet know what I will do with this two week’s gap and will

have to wait until I see how things are when I get back to Prague. In

absence of word to the contrary you can assume I am there. If you do

not get distribution on my Prague arrival and departure telegrams you

might check with EE.

Regards to all,

Sincerely,

Alex

76. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting.

Dept will note Wang’s performance today seemed to be a “marking

time” operation, and he did not object to leaving situation with respect

to discussion renunciation and embargo in somewhat vague state.

However believe his tactic may well be attempt build up for eventual

use public position along lines Chou’s Peoples Congress speech, that

is US purpose is indefinite prolongation talks so as avoid discussion of

and maintain status quo Taiwan area, and unless PRC gets something

out of prolongation no point continuing. Therefore while making our

points with respect embargo discussion attempted at today’s meeting

avoid giving him any firm handle which he could grab as flat refusal

even discuss embargo.

Do not now have any recommendations with respect next meeting

other than to follow our tactics at today’s meeting reiterating positions

as appropriate. Position with respect implementation will of course be

somewhat dependent on results O’Neill’s efforts see Americans and

developments with respect Chinese prisoners in US.

Gowen

689. Memorandum from Robertson to Dulles

Washington, July 31, 1956

SUBJECT

Letter of Commendation from President to Ambassador Johnson

There is attached (Tab A), a memorandum from you to the ­President

recommending that he sign the enclosed draft of a letter of commenda­

tion to Ambassador Johnson (Tab B) on the occasion of the anniversary of

the Geneva talks. This letter was prepared in accordance with your oral

request of July 20.

Tab A

Memorandum for the President

Undated

SUBJECT

Letter of Commendation for Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson

On August 1 one year will have passed since Ambassador U.

Alexis Johnson began his talks with the Chinese Communist repre­

sentative at Geneva. This assignment has been particularly trying

not only because of the inherent difficulty of negotiating with the

Drafted by Clough; concurred in by Raymond (L).

Chinese ­Communists but also because ­Ambassador Johnson has con­

tinued to perform his duties as Ambassador to Czechoslovakia. He

has displayed unusual qualities of perseverance and resourcefulness

in the [illegible in the original] of the talks at Geneva and I believe it

would be appropriate if, on the occasion of the anniversary of those

talks, you would send him a letter of commendation.

I recommend that you sign the attached letter of commendation to

Ambassador Johnson.

Enclosure

Draft letter from President Eisenhower to Johnson

Undated

SUGGESTED REPLY

Dear Mr. Johnson:

It has come to my attention that one year ago today you began

the talks with the Chinese Communist representative at Geneva. I

do not want this occasion to pass without commending you for the

good judgment, resourcefulness and patience you have consistently

displayed as the United States representative in this difficult negotia­

tion. It is to your credit that you have been able to carry out this mis­

sion while continuing to perform your regular duties as ­Ambassador

to Czechoslovakia.

Your efforts have undoubtedly accounted in large measure for the

release in the last year of a number of our citizens wrongfully held by

the Chinese Communists. Your efforts have also helped to preserve the

peace in the troubled area of the Taiwan Strait.

You are entitled to take satisfaction in the able performance of an

exacting task.

Sincerely yours,

690. Memorandum of Conversation, Bunker and Robertson

Washington, August 1, 1956

SUBJECT

Visits to Chinese Criminals in American Prisons

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Ellsworth Bunker, President of American Red Cross

Mr. Elsy, American Red Cross

Mr. Robertson, Assistant Secretary, FE

Mr. McConaughy, Director, CA

Mr. Robertson reviewed for Mr. Bunker in some detail the history

of the negotiations with the Chinese Communists at Geneva for the

return of American citizens. He pointed out the breach by the ­Chinese

­Communists of their undertaking of September 10, 1955, to take meas­

ures to enable Americans expeditiously to exercise their right to

return to the U. S. He explained why the American ­Government had

decided at the end of May to extend the provisions of the Agreed

Announcement to Chinese criminals in American prisons, although

such criminals had not been discussed in the negotiations leading up

to the Agreed ­Announcement and in our view were not necessarily

covered by it. Mr.  ­Robertson then described the devious course of

the ­Chinese ­Communist position on ­Chinese criminals in ­American

prisons. He mentioned the abrupt ­Chinese Communist loss of interest

in the prisoners after we announced our intention to give the Chinese

criminals the option of taking advantage of the Agreed ­Announcement.

Mr. ­Robertson explained that the Indian ­Government, as a result of

the reversal of the Chinese ­Communist position on the prisoners, felt

unable to comply with our request that its representatives visit the

Chinese prisoners and ascertain their wishes as to return to Mainland

China or to Taiwan.

Mr. Robertson then explained why it would be desirable for the

American Red Cross to undertake to interview the prisoners. He

stated that the American Red Cross as a respected non-­political orga­

nization with humanitarian objectives would be everywhere recog­

nized as impartial and its word would be accepted. If the Red Cross

interviewed the prisoners and attested to the fact that they had all

been given a free choice between return to the Mainland, return to Tai­

wan, and remaining in prison to complete their sentence, no one could

McConaughy.

say that the prisoners had been coerced or influenced by the Ameri­

can Government in reaching their decision. We had already promised

the prisoners that they would be visited and given an opportunity

to express their choice. We were morally obligated to carry out this

promise.

We hoped that the implementation of the offer to the prisoners

would put moral pressure on the Chinese Communists to belatedly

carry out their commitment to permit the imprisoned Americans to

return to the United States.

Mr. Robertson said that the Department felt it was very much in

the interest of the imprisoned Americans in Communist China that this

undertaking be carried out.

Mr. Bunker expressed sympathetic appreciation of the prob­

lem and said he foresaw no difficulty in Red Cross compliance with

Mr. Robertson’s request. He said that he would want to consult his

Board before he formally agreed. However he did not anticipate any

difficulty and he thought Mr. Robertson could safely assume that the

reply would be favorable. He said that the project was a humanitarian

one and therefore consonant with Red Cross objectives. He consid­

ered the proposed role to be non-­political and therefore not improper

for the Red Cross to undertake.

Mr. Robertson showed Mr. Bunker a list of the names and addresses

of the prisoners.

Mr. Bunker thought that Red Cross regional representatives in var­

ious parts of the United States could make the visits without undue

difficulty.

Mr. Robertson expressed appreciation for the sympathetic recep­

tion given by Mr. Bunker to the proposal. Mr. Robertson said that the

Department would confirm its request by letter on August 2, which

would set forth the proposal in detail.

Mr. Bunker said he would be glad to have such a letter and would

give the matter immediate attention.

A copy of the confirmatory letter to Mr. Bunker of August 2 is

attached.

Attachment

Letter from Robertson to Bunker

Washington, August 2, 1956

Dear Ellsworth:

You will recall that by the terms of the Agreed Announcement

issued at Geneva on September 10 by the American and Chinese

­Communist Ambassadors (Tab A), the Chinese Communists were com­

mitted to take measures to enable American nationals expeditiously

to exercise their right to return to this country. After nearly eleven

months, the Chinese Communists still hold eleven American nationals

in ­Chinese prisons in violation of this commitment.

The Chinese Communists in the course of the Geneva talks, have

offered various pretexts for violation of their pledge. Some time after

the Agreed Announcement was issued, they raised for the first time

the matter of Chinese prisoners who are serving terms in American

penitentiaries. These Chinese criminals were not mentioned by the

Chinese Communists in the course of the negotiations leading up to

the Agreed Announcement. In our view the Agreed Announcement

did not apply to them. However, in view of the belated attempt of the

Chinese ­Communists to cite the imprisonment of these criminals as an

excuse for their non-­performance of their obligations under the Agreed

Announcement, the U.S. Government decided that it would afford the

Chinese criminals an opportunity to avail themselves of the provisions

of the Agreed Announcement if they so desired. A comprehensive

survey was made by the Immigration and Naturalization Service of

the entire prison population, Federal and state, of the United States.

On June 13, the prisoners were informed by a circular letter that they

would be given an opportunity to make a choice between obtaining

a discharge from prison for the purpose of proceeding to mainland

China, or to Taiwan, and remaining in jail until the completion of their

sentences. A copy of the letter to the prisoners is attached as Tab B.

The United States decision was responsive to the strong and

repeated representations of the Chinese Communists. However, the

Chinese Communists have now abruptly informed us at Geneva that

our release offer is a device to embarrass them and is not bona fide. They

allege that the prisoners have been “screened”. They have requested

the Indian Government, which represents the Chinese Communists in

matters pertaining to the Agreed Announcement, not to interview the

prisoners and to have nothing to do with our proposal.

We have told the prisoners that they will be given a free choice

and that they will receive a visit in order that their choice may be ascer­

tained. We are morally committed to implement our offer, regardless of

this non-­cooperation.

With the Indian Embassy unable to discharge this function as

described in our Aide Memoire of May 31 (Tab C), the best choice for

this responsibility appears to be the American Red Cross. The Red Cross,

upon making the visits, could vouch for the fact that the prisoners were

given a free choice and made their decision without coercion or influence

from any official source. No one could effectively challenge the motives,

the veracity or the impartiality of the American Red Cross. The certifica­

tion of the Red Cross that the prisoners had been allowed to make their

own decision would be generally accepted throughout the world.

Accordingly, I confirm the oral request which I made of you

yesterday that the American Red Cross undertake to interview the

30 remaining Chinese prisoners (four of the original 34 have been

released from prison under normal procedures in recent weeks), and

ascertain their wishes. A list of these prisoners and their whereabouts

is enclosed as Tab D. A copy of a letter and form of designation of

choice which we propose to send to the prisoners is enclosed as Tab E.

The letter would be sent before the visits of the Red Cross representa­

tives, and the original of the form would be signed in the presence of

the Red Cross representative and delivered to him.

In the undertaking of this mission you can be assured of every

cooperation from this Department, the Federal Bureau of Prisons,

the State prison officials, the wardens of the various penitentiaries,

and the Immigration and Naturalization Service. It is believed that it

would be desirable to proceed without any avoidable delay, and that

the particulars can best be worked out through consultations between

your officials and Mr. Clough of the Office of Chinese Affairs. His

telephone extension is 3482.

We are deeply grateful for your expressed willingness to give sym­

pathetic consideration to this matter.

Sincerely yours,

Walter S. Robertson

Assistant Secretary

Enclosures:

Tab A—Copy of Agreed Announcement of September 10, 1955.

Tab B—Copy of Letter to Prisoners.

Tab C—Aide Memoire of May 31.

Tab D—List of Prisoners and Tabulation of Prisons Involved.

Tab E—Copy of Proposed Letter and Form to be Sent to Prisoners.

Letter No. 52

Washington, August 3, 1956

Dear Alex:

We hope to get the interviews with the Chinese prisoners under

way soon through the medium of the American Red Cross. Following

the definitive Indian refusal to participate on July 25 (copy of Amb.

Mehta’s letter is enclosed for your files) we got to work on an alterna­

tive procedure. There was general agreement that the American Red

Cross was the best organization to do the job following the Indian

default.

Mr. Robertson had Ellsworth Bunker in on August 1 to put the

proposition to him. Mr. Robertson reviewed the history of our decision

to extend the provisions of the Agreed Announcement to the Chinese

prisoners, the abrupt reversal of the Chinese Communist position on

the Chinese prisoners, and the resultant Indian Embassy inability to

act. He pointed out the obligation which rested on us to follow through

on our initiative and outlined the reasons why he thought the Red

Cross was the logical agency to conduct the interviews.

Mr. Bunker’s reaction was most favorable. He showed a sympa­

thetic understanding of the problem and foresaw no difficulties in Red

Cross assumption of the role. He characterized the function as appro­

priate to the Red Cross in that it had a humanitarian purpose and was

non-­political. He said that he would want to consult his Board as a

matter of procedure but he felt confident that no objections would be

raised. He felt that Mr. Robertson could safely assume that official Red

Cross response would be affirmative.

We confirmed our request to the Red Cross by a letter dated August 2,

a copy of which is enclosed.

I hope we can get the Red Cross under way on the interviews by

the week of August 13. There are quite a few details to be worked out

with the Federal and State officials. Appointments will have to be made

through the Wardens and we will have to look into the problem of

interpreters in the cases of the prisoners who speak no English. Some of

them may speak only Cantonese or Toishan dialect.

Ralph Clough has sent Dave a massive document compiled in

Defense concerning the unaccounted for 450. It is supposed to be a

compilation of all the recently discovered evidence. We are not very

hopeful that it has much that is new or useful to us. But it should be

Informal.

gone through carefully and we believe Dave is the man for this job. We

are still very hard pressed here. We will be interested in getting Dave’s

analysis of the document. Col. Monroe is in Korea where he is sup­

posed to needle our people on the MAC to renewed action on the issue

of the missing military personnel. We are not sanguine that anything

significant will come out of the MAC on this but the further effort needs

to be made.

We have not yet had any reply from the British on our request of

July 20 that O’Neill renew insistently his request to see all the American

prisoners. I intend to ask Arthur de la Mare, the new Counselor of the

British Embassy for Far Eastern matters, to send out a tickler on this to

O’Neill today. We would like to have some news on this for you before

the August 9 meeting.

We have received word from the British that the Foreign Office

in Peiping informed them that Bishop Henry Pinger is to be released

“tomorrow” (presumably August 4) upon expiration of his sentence.

This will reduce the number of American prisoners to 10. But the last

3 to be released have been compelled to serve their full sentences.

Wang cannot claim that they were released “expeditiously” or that the

­so-­called “policy of leniency” has been applied in their cases. In our

next guidance telegram we may suggest that you make an observation

on this at the next meeting. Also we may suggest that you raise the mat­

ter of the violation of the Agreed Announcement in the case of Father

­Clifford. You will recall from Hong Kong telegram that his request for

permission to write O’Neill was refused by the Chinese ­Communists.

The British Charge still has not heard from half of the imprisoned

Americans. It is highly probable that the request of others have also

been denied.

An amusing footnote to the petition of the American ­Communist

Party of the State of Connecticut to Mao Tse-­tung for the release of

Downey and the other imprisoned Americans, is a report we have

received that the National Communist Party headquarters in the U.S.

reprimanded the head of the Connecticut Party organization for his

temerity in forwarding this request to Peiping. Apparently it was con­

sidered a breach of Party discipline.

Tell Dave we are glad to hear that he will remain in the Foreign

Service Class 4 rather than going to the new Class 5. We have just heard

that he is on the list of those who were recommended for promotion by

the last Selection Board, and therefore will be placed in the new Class 4.

I suppose you have seen the Departmental Circular No. 185 which

implements the new Foreign Service Act which the President signed

July 28.

Things are a little bit disrupted with Herman Phleger in London

with the Secretary, and Walter Robertson away on leave until August 20.

The Judge should be back today so the ranks will not be dangerously

thin.

Regards to all,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

124. For Johnson.

Guidance for August 9 meeting.

1. Belated release Bishop Pinger provides good opportunity to

underscore again US view that Chinese Communists have failed to

carry out commitment in Agreed Announcement to release Americans

expeditiously. Nearly one year has passed since Communists made

their pledge and ten Americans remain in jail. No reasonable man

could describe Communist performance as expeditious.

2. Take Communists to task for refusing prisoners permission to

communicate with British Chargé. This is outright violation of Agreed

Announcement. Inform Wang we know Clifford was specifically

refused permission to write O’Neill (Hong Kong’s 108 to Department

repeated Geneva 4) and we presume others also turned down since

half of those still in prison have not written. Contrast this with our

offer to allow Indian Embassy to visit any prisoner whether or not he

has written.

3. FYI In view of recent Communist invitations to American stu­

dents and journalists to visit Communist China (Deptel 123) we con­

sider it timely to remind Communists again how strongly we feel about

their continued detention of our citizens. You should not mention

­Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and Phleger.

invitations in your presentation but allow Communists to draw their

own conclusions. END FYI

4. FYI We have not yet heard from O’Neill regarding request to

visit American prisoners that he was instructed to make. Neither have

we been informed by Red Cross whether they will undertake inter­

views with Chinese prisoners here. Consequently you should defer any

comment on these subjects until next meeting. END FYI

5. Press for Communist acceptance US April 16 renunciation of

force draft using same arguments as last meeting and previously. Avoid

specific comment on embargo question by linking it to renunciation of

force declaration in same manner as last meeting.

Dulles

Washington, August 8, 1956

135. For Johnson.

1. You will note clear implication in Department’s press release

(Deptel 134) that Americans would be allowed travel Communist

China once all America prisoners released. Without making this impli­

cation explicit, you should exploit it in August 9 meeting so that mean­

ing will be clear to Communists and maximum leverage will be exerted

on them to release Americans.

2. FYI American Red Cross has agreed to interview Chinese pris­

oners in US. Communists should not be informed of this at meeting.

Dulles

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Phleger and McConaughy and in sub­

stance by Sebald. The time of transmission is illegible.

129. From Johnson.

1. Two hour twenty minute meeting today. Wang opened with

statement that ten months have been spent on discussion renunciation

of force suggested by US and in spite three PRC drafts submitted US still

“stubbornly clinging unacceptable demands.” While I had indicated

willingness hear PRC views on trade, my statements had indicated

I did not intend to carry on businesslike discussion and settle this mat­

ter. This was “unfair and unequal” and hoped this was not my intent.

Therefore formally proposed we agree discuss question embargo seek

practical settlement.

2. In reply I made long statement reiterating renunciation as first

essential step in seeking peaceful settlement disputes, therefore could

not agree we abandon efforts reach agreement on this subject. Reviewed

history negotiations on this stressing retrogression May 11 draft PRC

attempt confuse with other issues and establish preconditions for

renunciation. Also reasserted inseparable relationship between renun­

ciation and trade but reminded him I had previously agreed inclusion

subject trade our discussions therefore willing to hear his views. Also

reiterated invitation amplify aspects they had in mind in accordance

questions asked my Nov 3 statement as well as reiterated statement

made last meeting that no advantage to US in trade where goods

received can be used support use of force.

3. In reply he agreed renunciation force declaraion “is at the heart

of the disputes between us” as attested by their patience ten months

negotiations on this and three successive drafts. I still failed put forward

any views which eliminate obstacles to agreement and no progress

could be made by repeating old arguments. He then made statement

we should strive step by step to resolve disputes, embargo was against

interest both countries, violated accepted international principles trade,

prejudiced interests other countries and provoked extreme dissatisfac­

tion people other countries, lifting would be first step in improvement

of relations as well as in interest American people, etc., etc. Wanted to

hear my views with regard to first steps for lifting embargo. Should not

entangle with other subjects or establish preconditions.

Limit Distribution.

4. I replied with statement charging they seeking unilateral advan­

tage from talks as demonstrated by their position with respect renunci­

ation and trade and then led directly into implementation pointing out

contrast between advantages resulting agreed announcement to PRC

and US. With respect Americans in prison retrogression not only in rate

of release as compared with situation prior agreed announcement but

PRC pattern now apparently requiring remaining Americans serve full

terms as shown cases Phillips, Clifford and Pinger whereas prior agreed

announcement at least some Americans being released before comple­

tion unjust sentences. Also half remaining Americans have not com­

municated with UK Charge evidence they being prevented obtained

from Phillips and Clifford. Contrasted our offer permit Indians visit all

prisoners, then referred to Dept’s Aug 7 press statement, giving him

copy and particularly calling attention to last sentence.

5. He replied rejecting argument abolishment trade embargo

solely in interest PRC stating even among US authorities “some peo­

ple recognize necessity abolishing.” They were continually receiving

applications from American journalists for permission visit China and

they had now agreed in order correct false stories and let them see

construction of new and industrialized China. Also to refute slanders

about iron curtain or bamboo curtain. Pointing out PRC had approved

applications without asking reciprocity, he wondered if US would

have been able give reciprocity. Charged US was actually iron curtain

country and was absurd for US to attempt exploit their approval these

applications for “blackmail” and demands extraneous preconditons.

World and even American press would blame US. As far as Chinese in

US concerned many who had returned told of efforts by INS persuade

them go to Taiwan or not return and when insisted on returning such

unreasonable time limits imposed as prevent them bringing personal

belongings. This violates spirit agred announcement and at variance

my statements freedom Chinese to depart.

6. I refuted his charges with usual arguments not single case

obstruction brought attention Indian Embassy, etc., and pointed out only

action by his government could remove impediments if they desired

Americans visit PRC. In view their record with respect ­Americans in

China my government would be delinquent its responsibility protec­

tion American citizens if it took any other attitude.

7. He proposed I agreed next meeting Tuesday Aug 21. Departing

Prague Friday morning.

Gowen

134. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

Department will note that at today’s meeting I more fully devel­

oped and turned back on him theme of relative advantage of talks and

results thus far. Propose develop this further at next meeting pointing

up their demands on FMC and trade in effect constitute demand full

satisfaction all their stated desires from talks with no satisfaction US

desires. Believe this best counter to what still appears be his ­tactic of

building up for eventual public use position along lines Chou’s ­People’s

Congress speech as set forth Mytel 76. While doing this, his attitude

at today’s meeting and proposals at this and recent meetings on tim­

ing subsequent meetings also appears indicate they intend continue

“making time” operation for next two months or so. While any new

move their part not likely until after our elections, depending on their

interpretation any pertinent campaign developments, cannot exclude

possibility some move by them shortly before elections.

It was clear he immediately caught implication Dept’s Aug 7 press

statement and can expect propaganda campaign by them along lines

his reply.

Gowen

135. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 55th meeting with prepared statement: Since

opening second item we spent ten months discussing renuncia­

tion force suggested by my side their side already put forward three

Distribution.

reasonable drafts for declaration that regard. Only because my side

stubbornly clinging to demands unacceptable their side that no agree­

ment reached. To prevent these talks from developing into meaningless

stalling situation their side proposed we discuss subject of embargo

raised by their side under second item. At last meeting I had indicated

willingness hear their views on question embargo but remarks I made

then seemed show my side doesn’t intend carry on businesslike dis­

cussion of subject and seek solution. If that is position he could only

regard it as unreasonable. Their side had joined in discussing subject

proposed by my side. If my side refused discuss subject proposed their

side it would indeed turn these talks into unfair unequal negotiation;

he hoped this not intent my side.

2. Wang now specifically suggested we first reach agreement on

following lines: “In order that subject raised by Chinese side under

second item agenda may be handled, both sides of these talks agree

to proceed to subject of embargo and seek practical settlement.” He

would now like to hear my views.

3. I replied assumption he made was apparently that there no lon­

ger any way open to us continue seek agreement on question renun­

ciation force. While true this subject proposed by me, it subject which

felt we both agreed went to very heart of basic disputes between us.

It was suggested by my side as first essential step in seeking peaceful

settlement those disputes. I could not but continue consider it this

light. I therefore could not agree that we abandon efforts reach agree­

ment renunciation force. If his govt were to abandon obstacles it had

placed in way of reaching agreement on renunciation force declaration

I was satisfied we could very readily reach agreement thereon. In our

discussion up to May 11, two of us had been proceeding—very slowly,

it is true—in way which could lead to agreement. He responded to

my proposal of last October with draft that indicated at least partial

acceptance fundamental principles proposal which I had made. This

was in sense step forward, although it was largely canceled out by his

attempt introduce into that draft separate matter Foreign Ministers

conference as precondition for agreement on renunciation force.

4. I said with introduction my draft Nov 10, which expressed very

concretely principle of renunciation force without entangling it with

extraneous topics, our discussions had progressed to new stage. Three

weeks later on Dec 1, he had submitted new draft. Without sacrificing

his views as to desirability eventual meeting Foreign Ministers, had

in his Dec 1 draft at least tacitly accepted idea our immediate task, of

reaching agreement on renunciation force, should not be complicated

by introduction extraneous matters. I had welcomed this draft of his

side, and called it advance over previous position. In my subsequent

successive efforts continue our progress towards meaningful renuncia­

tion force, I had been very careful preserve, in entirety, area agreement

which his Dec 1 draft indicated had been reached between us. As he

knew, my draft April 19 retained not only form but also every single

word of his Dec 1 draft.

5. I continued in contrast to efforts I made to preserve area of

agreement between us, his efforts since May 11 been devoted elim­

inating basis for progress towards meaningful declaration. He had

done this by reverting to position of last October. He had attempted

establish first one precondition and then another for issuance of dec­

laration. I continue hope his govt will reconsider its present position

and change its attitude so we could issue really meaningful declara­

tion renunciation force as first and fundamental step to settlement

disputes between us.

6. I said had agreed to inclusion in our discussion of what he

termed trade embargo. I had no intention of going back on this

agreement. My attitude toward discussion this not based on narrow

procedural consideration but rather on fundamental substantive

relationship of this matter to renunciation force. As I told him on

November 3 and again at last meeting I entirely willing hear any

views he might desire put forward with respect trade. When he did

so I hoped he would amplify exactly what aspects this matter he

had in mind. Last Nov 3 I had asked specific questions this regard to

which he had still made no replies. I did not believe it would serve

any useful purpose to make as he had in past, vague and unfounded

charges against my govt in exercising its unquestioned sovereign

right to control and regulate trade in whatever manner it deems in

best interest of US. Let me say again very bluntly as I had at last

meeting, my country did not consider there could be any advantage

to it in trade where goods received in that trade could be used sup­

port use force against it. It would thus be obvious if discussion trade

matters between us to be fruitful it must be clear that such use would

not be made of goods received in that trade. I had stated our posi­

tion on this very bluntly and very frankly not with intent of giving

any offense or of engaging in fruitless argument, but rather so that

he would clearly understand our position this regard and thereby

contribute to constructive results our discussion. I therefore hoped

he would carefully consider matter of both renunciation and trade

in this light.

7. Wang agreed question issuance renunciation force declaration

at heart disputes between two sides. Their patience in discussion this

topic attested by ten months in which they joined with us in this discus­

sion. His side had thus forwarded three successive drafts for making

such declaration. Thus clear their sincerity in reaching such agreement

couldn’t be questioned. This morning I had stated I didn’t abandon, or

give up subject renunciation force. But I failed put forward any views

which could eliminate obstacles in way of discussion this subject. He

didn’t think it would contribute to progress to reiterate old arguments

which had been put forward in our discussions. Blame of failure reach

agreement after ten months discussion on renunciation force couldn’t

be put on their side.

8. Wang asked in light my statement on subject embargo this morn­

ing, could he take it had no objection to opening discussion on this

subject and that I would agree do so? He recalled statement I made

Nov 3 last year on subject embargo. He recalled he had already made

clear reply to that statement. He said then question embargo is one of

matters at issue between two sides. It purpose these talks to gradually

resolve, step by step all disputes between two countries. He had told

me repeatedly policy embargo in itself unreasonable and hurts both

sides, and violates international principle peaceful trade. That why his

side resolutely opposed policy embargo. They always maintained this

policy embargo should be abolished. Abolition this policy embargo in

accordance interest both our two countries and peoples. Abolition this

policy embargo must not be forcibly entangled with any other ques­

tion or qualified with preconditions in this regard. He therefore would

like hear my views in regard first steps for abolishing eliminating this

embargo.

9. I assumed he did not question sovereign right my govt con­

trol trade in whatever manner it deems best interest my country. Also

assumed he not questioning ability my govt, cting in accordance

lawful processes, to determine what it considers in best interests my

country. Policies my govt adopts with respect trade not capricious or

arbitrary but determined by what it considers best interest my coun­

try. He said this question must not be forcibly entangled with other

questions. I had not attempted establish any forced—but rather very

natural—relationship between that and question renunciation force.

I had carefully and frankly explained again this morning inevitable

relationship between these two matters. I believed what I said was

entirely clear and would not take time repeat it. Nevertheless as I had

said am entirely prepared hear whatever views he desired put for­

ward on subject. I again repeated that when he did so I hoped he

would be specific and particularly that he would clarify exactly what

aspects he had in mind. Several aspects to it as brought out in state­

ment I made Nov 3. It not clear yet which of those various aspects it

his desire discuss.

11. Wang replied deemed it necessary make clear no statements

he ever made carried any intent interfere in internal affairs my

country. If policies pursued by my govt had no relation whatso­

ever his country he’d never raise any matter this regard. His under­

standing trade between countries always naturally advantageous

to two parties or at least this trade must not prejudice interest of

one party. However, policies pursued by US Govt do not fit in

generally accepted principles international trade—rather my coun­

try carrying on policy international blockade and embargo in order

pursue national political objective. Implementation these policies

has prejudiced interests other countries. In fact these policies preju­

dicial to everybody concerned. That reason why he stated this pol­

icy of embargo unreasonable, should therefore be abolished. Matter

of fact this policy already provoked extreme dissatisfaction of peo­

ples every country. That made it all more necessary discuss this

subject. That was reason why this subject one of matters at issue

between two countries. In raising this subject it was their demand

that policy of embargo be lifted. Lifting of embargo would help in

improvement of relations between China and US. Lifting embargo

not only in interests Chinese people but also in interest American

people. He had stated he hoped I’d put forward my concrete views

with regard lifting embargo but my last statement still had not con­

tained reply to statement he had made. He continued hope I’d con­

sider this matter and if I found not able do so this morning, do so

next meeting.

12. I replied he had often spoken of necessity these talks being

mutually advantageous. Negotiations between two countries such as

ours could not be one sided. However seemed to me thus far in these

talks results and efforts of his [garble—side] had been directed toward

solely unilateral advantage. He had presumably raised question of

what he termed “trade embargo” because he considered it advanta­

geous his side. I had explained to him reasons US didn’t consider it

advantageous under present conditions. On other hand renunciation

force something that clearly mutual and advantageous to both of us. If

threat of force could, as I had so often proposed, be removed it could

open door to fruitful discussion of other subjects. Trade policies of my

country were not cause but rather effect of threat force that continues

exists. If that threat could be removed by unequivocal renunciation

force, it would remove one of causes this policy. His govt had it within

its power remove that cause.

13. I continued at outset these discussions I pointed out another

cause seriously affecting our relations was detention of American

citizens in his country. I pointed out at time this also could only be

removed by action his country. This another case in which his side had

sought unilateral advantage. I’d thought last Sept. we’d agreed upon

course action that would be of mutual advantage. Yet things appeared

be going backward as far as any advantage to US concerned. Not only

had Americans been released from his country at what is apparently

rate considerably slower than even before we entered into agreement

but any policy of what he had termed leniency appeared even been

dropped. Pattern now apparently being established persons in prison

being required serve full sentence. I noted that of last three persons

released from prison, all had served full term sentences. I had also been

disturbed note that in spite his statements here and public statements

his govt, one half of persons in prison never communicated with UK

Charge. That this not entirely matter of their choice confirmed by fact

Father Clifford told us he had specifically been refused permission

write UK Charge or to see British ConGen. Father Phillips stated he

specifically told agreed announcement issued Sept 10 not applicable

him. Apart from all other consideratons this stands in strong contrast

to offer of which I had informed him to Indian Embassy to visit any

Chinese in prison in US whether had written or not.

14. I continued whole situation is case in which his govt even yet

had in its power bring about improvement in relations between us.

My govt noted fact his authorities invited certain US newspaper cor­

respondents radio commentators visit his country. My govt welcomed

free exchange information between different countries irrespective of

whatever political or social differences might exist between them.

Impediment to such exchanges between our two countries was one

which had been set up by his country and could only be removed by

his country. Dept State issued public statement in this regard. In order

that he might have exact text, I giving him copy. I particulerly drew

his attention to last sentence that statement.

15. Wang said had always held view we should base our discus­

sion issues between on basis principle mutual benefit. We should not

base discussion on unilateral or one-­sided benefit of one side. Problems

could only be readily resolved if we based our discussion on former

principle. No problem could be considered it we only considered ones

own unilateral benefit. We all talk about the principle and we all agree

with it. However, great contrast between two sides in practical carrying

out this principle.

16. Wang asked permission cite few instances in relationship

between China and US. What US had in fact maintained was to pursue

its own unilateral benefit at expense other side. It was as matter of fact

US which occupying territory China rather than China occupying terri­

tory US. It was US which carrying on economic embargo against China

and not China which carrying on such policy. It quite obvious that what

US doing today was to pursue its unilateral benefit at expense China.

Facts being so how could my govt still cling to policy of own benefit

while prejudicing benefit this country. How could such policy one-­sided

benefit contribute to improvement relationship between two countries.

17. Wang could only term absurd all charges agains his country

which without regard to actual facts. I seemed to him to have said their

side proposed policy embargo be abolished solely because abolition

would be in interest of China alone. He must point out such categoriza­

tion wrong. Original objective of US in imposing such policy embargo

was try create difficulties for China. Objective of US was pursue own

selfish interest. However things had not turned out exactly in accor­

dance reasoning my govt. Reason either side proposed abolition pol­

icy trade embargo was not one which could be explained by saying

this policy had caused tremendous difficulty to his govt. The policy

embargo had actually not created any great amount difficulty to his

country; fact turns out to be new and industrialized China being built

up. This fact already been recognized by the world. Because policy

embargo unreasonable and violates interest all peoples of world includ­

ing ­Americans that they propose its abolition. Fact that even among US

authorities there also some people who recognized necessity abolish­

ing trade embargo proved that this policy damaging to interest of all

concerned. Number of people in US didn’t understand construction of

new and industrialized China. These people deliberately creating false

stories this regard. Now very good opportunty afforded to American

correspondents and newsmen to report on this regard personally.

18. Wang charged US had consistently made propaganda saying

his country iron curtain country or what we have termed bamboo cur­

tain country—and that his country didn’t offer access to people of

other countries to visit it. They had continually been receiving many

requests from American newspapermen to come China report news.

General principle to deal with this matter now being adopted by most

countries that visiting by newspapermen be reciprocal. This principle

which should be followed is that same time American newspaper­

men being admitted to China, ­Chinese newspapermen should also

be admitted to US. Might ask if US such a free country as we term

it, would it have been able admit Chinese newspapermen. His gov­

ernment had not asked such question. His govt had acceded request

newspapermen to visit his country. Might say this particularly lenient

step his govt. would offer opportunity for correspondents of those

American newspapers which in past had constantly slandered his

country to be able visit his country themselves. This visit would also

serve to promote mutual understanding and friendship between peo­

ples these two countries.

19. Wang said now that his govt accepted request various journal­

ists and commentators to visit his country, any attempt offer obstruc­

tio to these newsmen or to raise absolutely unreasonable demand in

this regard he could only consider improper. This would amount to

deliberate obstruction on part my govt against those American cor­

respondents to make personal tour his country and have facts. This

would amount to deliberate attempt on part US Govt to continue

refuse face facts on China. All this would make US by its own volition

what it always calls an iron curtain country. This would show US Govt

deliberately creating futher obstructions rather than removing exist­

ing obstructions between China and US. Action taken by US Govt that

regard would inevitably invite condemnation of all people including

American press. International opinion would have its proper say on

merits this matter—as to which side merits on. Any attempt try seize

this opportunity when Chinese Govt accepting request American cor­

respondents visit China for blackmail or to demand any extraneous

precondition, he could only term extremely absurd.

20. Wang continued far as question return civilians concerned, they

also see that what US Govt said grossly at variance with what actually

carried out. I not yet given any accounting those people whose names

he had given me in course discussion. Number Chinese who recently

returned from US have told of various obstructions related to their return

offered by US Govt. Many these people who returned had expressed

desire return his country but IN and S my country made repeated

attempts force or induce them go Taiwan. IN and S objected to their return

on grounds China what we call Communist country. Some of them given

unreasonable time limit to departure so could not bring along personal

possessions—even clothing. All those actions of my country violate spirit

agreed announcement. This picture grossly at variance either what US

said regard so-­called free departure Chinese from my country.

21. I replied fact remained in spite these vague charges Chinese,

even in accordance his own statement, steadily returning his coun­

try whenever desire do so. Fact remained if any them felt were being

obstructed could communicate with Indian Embassy. Fact remained

Indian Embassy had not called our altention single case such obstruc­

tion. Fact remained from very outset talks I made it clear our interest

was in obtaining release all Americans detained his country. I thought,

my people thought, my govt thought, this had been agreed to by his

authorities in our agreed announcement Sept 10. Fact remained in spite

agreement between us Americans still being detained in his country,

and of those who remained, their situation appeared to be even more

unfavorable than prior issuance agreed announcment; whereas even

before agreed announcement some of them being released prior to full

term sentences that had unjustly been served upon them, now appears

be pattern name those that remain serve full sentence.

22. I thus found it difficult see what advantage there been to my coun­

try in issuance agreed announcement. In view this situation and treatment

accorded these Americans who already in his country it certainly cannot

be expected US Govt would approve more Americans placing themselves

within jurisdiction his authorities. This just plain common sense, and my

govt woould be delinquent of its responsibility toward its citizens if it

took any other attitude. If he desired have ­Americans visit his country it

entirely within power his authorities remove this present impediment to

their doing so; I earnestly hoped they do so.

23. Wang said this explanation and reply regarding question civil­

ians, especially regarding Chinese civilians in US, do not appear satis­

factory to him. He considered my charge [illegible in the original] his

country regarding American civilians in China unreasonable. They did

not accord with fact. He therefore could not accept them. With regard

question American correspondents who request go China, fact was US

Govt did not want them go—is preventing them from doing so. He could

only say this against plain common sense and entirely policy directed

to duping people. Such policy would not bring any good to US Govt.

24. On my indicating I had nothing further, Wang suggested next

meeting Aug 21. I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 42

Geneva, August 9, 1956

Dear Walter:

Thanks very much for getting the Department’s August 7 press

statement to me before the meeting. It was an excellent statement, saying

the right things in the right way and I was able to make good use of it.

However, I don’t think we should believe that it will in fact accelerate the

release of the remaining prisoners. The Chinese Communists full well

knew we would take this position before they approved the applications

and they did so first as a propaganda gesture in an attempt to put us

on the spot, and secondly in the belief that our position will be under­

mined by some of the correspondents going regardless of what we say. It

is going to be very hard for them to go in face of the Department’s state­

ment, but I fear this may not deter some of them. Also they hope to set

up controversy between the Department and the news agencies so that it

will not be an issue between ourselves and the Chinese, but between the

Department and the news agencies. It is a very clever move on their part

and I am surprised they haven’t done so before now. You will note that

in discussing it today I carefully avoided saying anything about our “for­

bidding” correspondents to go or making any flat statements that none

would go. I very much had in mind our discussion with Hermann before

I came over here on the whole legal position in this regard. I suppose if

they do go and get away with it we will be faced with the problem of

some of the relatives of prisoners wanting to go.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The postscript is handwritten.

I haven’t much to add to my comment telegram. The whole thing

has become so abstract and the same things have been said so often that I

find it difficult to keep my grip on it or think of any new way of saying it.

Strange we have not heard anything from O’Neill. Hope we have

something from him as well as the interviews with the Chinese prison­

ers before next meeting. However, with regard to the latter even if some

want to go I do not think it would be wise to say anything to Wang

or the Indians until they have actually left. If we do and any of them

change their minds or there are other slip-­ups it would have been better

to have said nothing.

Thanks for your letter of August 3. Dave is going over the mate­

rial on the missing POWs. Incidentally you should know that between

meetings he is working the Economic Section here and getting some

good experience in ECE sub-­committee meetings, etc. Vreeland, who

the consulate has made available for reporting the meetings is an excel­

lent man and the whole arrangement is now working out very well.

Incidentally could you have someone send us two copies of the

recent Yale University publication on “Chinese Language Reform” on

which there was an article in the August 5 New York Times. We can

make use of one of them and I have in mind using the other to give

Wang if and when a suitable opportunity develops.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. The Geneva contingent send their regards to you Doug, Ralph,

John & Pete for the supplement to the entertainment allowance and

said it will be used as per instructions. A full report will be submitted.

Letter No. 53

Washington, August 13, 1956

Dear Alex:

There has been quite a stir throughout the past week over the

issue of the proposed visits of American correspondents to Communist

­Informal.

China. Peiping timed their decision to authorize visas for the newsmen

pretty shrewdly. The knowledge that entry would be granted by the

Chinese Communists was just enough of a catalyst to set the pot to

boiling very vigorously. As long as there was some doubt whether the

newsmen could actually obtain entry into Communist China, the issue

was more or less academic and pressure was accordingly moderate.

Now it has increased to a point where it can be contained only with

great difficulty.

Linc White in his first round with the newsmen after word was

received that visas were obtainable, put the emphasis almost completely

on non-­recognition as the reason for the non-­validation of passports. This

came under considerable fire since its vulnerability was pretty obvious

in the existing situation. Very influential publishing figures including

­Sulzberger of the New York Times intervened quite actively in favor of

the granting of authorization for the visits. They got in touch with the

White House as well as with the Department.

The Secretary felt that we would have to rely on the issue of the

imprisoned Americans as the reason for holding the line. This was

something tangible that everybody could understand. It is difficult to

refute. Of course it has the drawback that it overlooks the other cogent

reasons which exist or might exist for continuing the policy after the

possible release of the 10 Americans. Also it does not give us a com­

plete basis for excluding visits to North Korea and North Vietnam,

which are included in the passport ban. However it is the basis which

has been selected to stand on. If all the Americans are released and if

there is no new element in the situation, presumably we would have

to authorize visits. And it is doubtful if we could discriminate in favor

of newsmen as a class and against others with strong practical reasons

for visiting Mainland China.

The press reaction, except for David Lawrence’s column has been

quite critical of the Department’s policy. I am enclosing a large batch

of clippings assembled by John Lindbeck. These need not be returned.

As you were informed in the Department’s 135, the American

Red Cross has agreed to undertake the visits to the Chinese con­

victs to ascertain their wishes. The Red Cross showed no hesitation

in undertaking the task and is going about it in a business-­like man­

ner. We decided not to send a Departmental officer along with them.

It would have meant the loss to CA of Ralph Clough for two weeks

or both Ralph and Joe Nagoski for one week and a considerable slice

out of FE’s travel funds. If we had thought that it would improve our

position, we wouldn’t have hesitated to make the sacrifice. However,

we do not think that sending a Departmental officer along would have

the slightest effect on the attitude of either the Chinese Communists

or the Indians, except perhaps to strengthen the Chinese Communist

argument that we were arranging to release a selected fraction of the

large number of Chinese in prison for propaganda purposes. As far as

the public in general is concerned, we are satisfied that the Red Cross

visits will be adequate proof that each individual was given an impar­

tial hearing and a free choice.

A Red Cross representative came in on August 10 to work out the

details. They have named two of their senior men to do the job, one

taking the prisons in the West and the other those in the East. They will

come to Washington on the 15th to be briefed and will begin their visits

on Monday, August 20. We estimate that they will be able to complete

the job within that week. Enclosed is the letter we propose sending to

the prisoners advising them of the impending Red Cross visits.

If all goes as planned, we should know by the meeting following

that of August 21 how many convicts wish to go to Mainland China, go

to Taiwan or stay where they are. We should appreciate your thoughts

on how to get the greatest advantage from the operation from that

point on. We are tentatively thinking of having any who wished to go

to Mainland China write to the Indian Embassy. This would bring the

Indians back into the act; they could hardly refuse to assume respon­

sibility when an individual prisoner had written to them. We would

expect also to shift the cost of deportation to the Chinese Communists,

by having the convict request financial assistance for his return.

We may wish to make the whole story public at some point. It

does not seem likely that public pressure of this sort would cause the

Chinese Communists to shift the position they have so firmly taken—­

apparently in order not to be compelled to let all the Americans go

immediately. However, we have a good case and if we place it before

the world before the Chinese Communists do, it will put them on the

defensive and demonstrate to any reasonable person why the United

States has reason to be distrustful of Chinese Communist promises.

Please give us your views.

for the news and for the comments it contained. We had already sent

out your guidance for the August 9 meeting when your letter arrived.

Before the next meeting, we will consider the question of what you

might be able to imply regarding the trade discussions in the event

of a satisfactory agreement on renunciation of force and the release of

the prisoners.

Certainly nothing new is in prospect on the horizon as grist for

your mill in the next few meetings. It looks as if it will be the same old

wine and it will be difficult to put it in any new bottles.

I am sorry that we still don’t have the complete text of the letter

from Bob McCann. Even the excerpt which I mentioned has been mis­

placed temporarily. We hope to have it for the next pouch.

You may be interested in the language used by “Observer” in the

People’s Daily on August 8 commenting on the Egyptian crisis. In sup­

porting the Egyptian position, “Observer” says: “The time has long

passed when one could settle questions by the threat of force or armed

intervention.” Further on he declares: “No problem can be solved by

the threat of force or armed intervention.” Of course in the Egyptian

crisis as in the case of Taiwan the Chinese Communists hold that the

threat of force is entirely from the outside and that there is no such

threat from themselves with respect to Taiwan or from the ­Egyptians

with respect to the Suez Canal.

Congratulations from us all on the well merited commendation

from the President, a copy of which has come to us. This is indeed a

signal and well deserved honor. I will see to it that a copy of the letter

goes to your personnel file.

Tuesday is an awkward day for your meeting from the Washington

standpoint. We will need to get your guidance off Thursday or Friday.

However it should be easy to shape it up since nothing new is contem­

plated. The Secretary leaves on Wednesday for the Suez Conference

and Mr. Robertson is due back from leave next Monday the 20th.

Regards and all the best from everyone here.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Newspaper clippings

2. Draft of proposed letter to Chinese prisoners.

176. For Johnson.

Guidance for August 21 meeting.

1. Maintain position that you willing listen to Wang’s views on

embargo but that it is unrealistic expect discuss fruitfully this collateral

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger.

problem until principle renunciation of force has been accepted. So long

as Chinese Communists threaten to settle disputes by force threatened

party cannot be expected contribute directly or indirectly through trade

to build-­up of that force. Urge Communists give further consideration

US April 16 revision of Wang draft as acceptable formula for mutually

advantageous renunciation of force in Taiwan area.

2. Reiterate US dissatisfaction with continued detention ten Amer­

icans. Do not volunteer further reference to US refusal of passports to

journalists desiring visit Communist China, as overemphasis probably

self-defeating. However if Wang mentions subject, possibly citing US

editorials in support his view, reaffirm position taken in press release

of August 7. Observe that US Government justified in withholding its

approval of travel its nationals in country where American citizens are

still subjected to deprivation of basic human rights. Point out that US

Government has responsibility for welfare of citizens abroad and when

any are wrongfully detained by foreign government not conforming

accepted international standards serious international problem created.

3. FYI American Red Cross will commence interviewing Chinese

prisoners August 20. Expect know results prior your next meeting. Still

no word from O’Neill on results his approach Peiping.

Hoover

Letter No. 43

Geneva, August 20, 1956

Dear Walter:

I am starting this letter to you Monday evening to deal with some

of the matters raised in your letter of August 13, and will finish it after

the meeting tomorrow.

First, let me say that I was startled and distressed at this week’s

TIME story directly quoting me on the talks, particularly on my alleged

remarks concerning reduction of dangers of war in the Taiwan area.

While from a domestic point of view the story is favorable, and TIME’S

intentions were the best, it is not of any help to the talks. I saw the story

immediately on my arrival here last night and today got hold of the

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

correspondent to whom I talked last week. I told him first that it was my

clear understanding that our conversation was, as in the past, entirely

background, and secondly, I had a very clear recollection that when he

had asked me concerning the effects in the Taiwan area I had refused to

discuss it even for background, saying only that he could speculate on

that as well as I could. When I raised this with him today he admitted,

as confirmed by the PAO here, that when arrangements were made for

him to see me it was understood that it was not an interview but that

during the course of our conversation I had at a couple of points said

“don’t quote me on this” and therefore he assumed that it was alright

to quote me on other points! This is pretty thin and I told him so. With

regard to the alleged remarks concerning Taiwan, he agrees that I did

not say this in our conversation but that I had said something to that

effect some five or six months ago which he had quoted to TIME at

that time and that based on my statements to him that there had been

no substantive change with respect to the negotiations during recent

months TIME had now picked up and used the quote. This is even thin­

ner and I have asked him to let TIME know in very definite terms that

I am very perturbed over it. I am sorry that it happened as I have thus

far been fairly successful in my relations with newsmen here and dis­

like having this mar the record.

I certainly agree that the issue of American correspondents travel­

ling to Communist China has created a real stir. They timed this very

cleverly and the results have probably exceeded their rosiest expecta­

tions. As I indicated in my telegram from Prague, I think the damages

to us and their purposes are already largely accomplished and the issue

of whether newsmen now go or not is now substantially secondary.

I would hope we could find some way of recovering from the situa­

tion, but the only thoughts I had in this regard were contained in my

telegram. I know that it must be terribly difficult to handle, particu­

larly with the Secretary away, and you have my full sympathy. I suspect

that Wang will find it difficult to resist the temptation to throw it at me

tomorrow, and my present inclination is to counter by noting the vir­

tual unanimity of the press on the importance of imprisoned Americans

being released and thus try to get back to implementation. I feel this

might be somewhat more profitable than confining myself to the line

suggested in the guidance for tomorrow’s meeting, although I will of

course also use that as necessary.

With regard to the Chinese in prison, I agree that considering all

the circumstances it is probably better for the Red Cross alone to see

them. I am glad to know that visits are now getting underway. My

thoughts with regard to handling it from thereon are as follows:

If any desire to go to Communist China I doubt the wisdom of hav­

ing them write to the Indian Embassy to obtain passage money. While

I am thoroughly sympathetic with the idea of the Chicoms being made

to pay their way if possible, I am fearful that they would use this in

every way possible to sabotage the program. I can think of several ways

in which they could do this and their imagination is even more fertile

than ours. By in effect making it dependent upon Peiping’s agreement

to furnish passage money, we give them an opening that we can be sure

they will use to the maximum in every way to embarrass us. I therefore

wonder whether it would not be worth the difference in cost to us to

pay the additional expense to transport them to Hong Kong.

With respect to publicity, I think that we should make a public

announcement at the time the men are embarked which would contain:

(a) a few brief sentences on the belated Peiping interest in these men

and their effort to use them as a justification for continuing to hold

Americans (b) the Red Cross interviews (c) the action taken to per­

mit their return, names, and any other such pertinent details. I would

entirely omit any mention of our invitation to the Indians, Chinese

Communist’s refusal to permit the Indians to act, etc. First this would

bog down the whole press release in involved explanations, the inevi­

table necessity of trying to explain the Chicom’s attitude, why we have

gone ahead in spite of that attitude, etc., etc. I would also think that

from the standpoint of both the Indians and Taipei its omission would

be best, and would suggest that before putting out the press release we

call in the Indians and tell them what we are doing. I would think that it

would gain only appreciation from the Indian side. If the Chinese later

desire to come out with an expression of their attitude and attempt to

explain it, let them do so as no rational person will be able to follow

them.

I would say nothing to Wang here until the men are actually

embarked. This would in all probability mean that I would not be able

to say anything to him until after the press release had been issued

although I see no great harm in this. On the other hand I would call in

the Indians shortly before the issuance of the press release, give them

the text, and if not included in the release, the names of the persons

being released.

With regard to the timing of meetings, I have been proceeding on

the assumption that the Department continued to desire that I suggest

no interval longer than a week and leave it up to him to push it beyond

that time if he desires. Therefore, I agreed to a Tuesday meeting this

week rather than push it up longer to Thursday. However, I will bear in

mind that you prefer a Thursday meeting, as do I.

In thinking about the possibility of a break, it has occurred to me

that we have perhaps been oversimplifying the way they may attempt

to bring it about. It seems to me that he might well attempt to take the

attitude that it is no use having further meetings until I have some­

thing “new and constructive” to present and when I do he will be glad

to meet with me at any time I designate. In such an event I would of

course refuse to accept any such condition, point up its ultimatum

aspects, and making a definite proposal for the date of the next meeting

strive to obtain a definite acceptance or rejection from him. However, it

is possible that the situation might become somewhat confused.

August 21

Well, things livened up a bit at today’s meeting and his perform­

ance confirmed my feeling they are continuing to build up their case

along the lines of Chou’s People’s Congress speech. He placed me in

a dilemma which I was able to avoid today and was able to counter­

attack. However, the situation is going to be much more difficult next

meeting and harder for me to maintain the objectives of assuring con­

tinuation of the talks and also carrying out my other instructions with

regard discussion of renunciation of force and trade. I know you will

consider all this in my guidance for the next meeting. Whereas I would

not expect any clean break at the next meeting it is possible that he

might try a gambit along the lines of the first paragraph at the top of

this page, or set the stage to pull it later on. Of course, once I have taken

a flat stand against discussion of trade until renunciation of force is

resolved it would be very difficult for me to recede from it and this can

well start us on the road to an actual or de facto break. On the other

hand I recognize the almost insuperable difficulties of giving me any

basis on which I could discuss trade in a positive sense even contingent

on a satisfactory renunciation of force. You will note I have carefully

avoided thus far even stating the converse of my present instructions,

that is trade discussions might be “fruitful” if renunciation of force was

agreed upon. They could, of course, well exploit just the fact of dis­

cussion of trade even on a contingent basis. I do not know what the

answers can be but hope you will give me the maximum of straws with

which to build my bricks. (I have written this before writing my “com­

ment telegram” just in the way of doing some “thinking out loud” with

you.)

[text not declassified]

All the best to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. I was tremendously surprised and naturally most pleased at

the President’s letter which I received at Prague through EE last Friday.

I have transmitted an acknowledgment through EE which I asked they

show FE before sending on.

167. From Johnson.

One hour fifty minute meeting today. I opened with statement

along lines para one Deptel 176. Wang replied stating “did not deny

declaration force one of central issues” failure reach agreement due US

persistence “unreasonable demands” and “deliberately creating obsta­

cles.” Merely saying should not abandon search for declaration and

“not offering concrete changes” did not contribute progress. Should

not entangle ourselves any longer this regard. Pleased note that I will­

ing listen to his concrete opinions on trade and proposed draft agreed

announcement (text by separate telegram).

In reply I rebutted his statements on responsibility lack progress

renunciation force and reiterated inherent relationship to subject trade

avoiding any direct comment on his proposal. During considerable

give and take he then tried hard tie me down to either flat refusal or

commitment discuss his proposal. I avoided both. From amount con­

ferring his assistants over my replies and other signs, gained definite

impression his intent was to set stage for at least public statement if

I flatly refused, or in event could obtain commitment discuss to pro­

pose so informing press.

During subsequent give and take I picked up his statement that

“reasonable resolution” trade problem “would contribute to resolu­

tion other disputes” as occasion for reviewing quesions US had thus

far presented here, that is, detained Americans, renunciation force, and

missing UNC personnel, asking him whether implication his statement

these problems would be resolved if US agreed with them on trade

matters. He avoided trap. In reply my review concessions we had

made in agreed announcement to obtain resolution problem detained

Americans and our disappointment at results he replied that if US

had  “faithfully abided by announcement situation would be much

more satisfactory.” I of course rejected this. In reply my review conces­

sions we had made on renunciation force he said if US had accepted

principle of mutual respect in May 11 draft agreement could have been

reached. He rejected missing personnel as not in terms of reference.

Agreed his proposal next meeting Thursday Sept 6. Returning Prague

Wednesday morning.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

168. From Johnson. Reference Mytel 167.

Following text draft agreed announcement Wang presented today:

“In order to bring about a gradual improvement of Sino-­American

relations and relaxation of international tension, Ambassador Wang

Ping-­nan, on behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic

of China, and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf of the

Government of the United States of America, agree to announce: The

People’s Republic of China and the United States of America hold

that they should adopt measures respectively on their own initiative

to eliminate the existing barriers which interfere with trade between

their two countries.”

Gowen

Distribution.

172. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

Believe Wang’s tactics today directed toward facing us with

dilemma of whether to refuse any discussion trade and thereby build

up their position on continuation talks along lines Chou’s Peoples

Congress speech, or to agree to discussion, when any agreement our

part discuss trade, however tentative or contingent, would be exploited

by them to accelerate undermining our international position on trade

controls. Can anticipate he will sharpen dilemma and intensify attempt

Distribution.

bring pressure this regard next meeting. If we take position flat refusal

discuss anticipate their action will first be public statement then attempt

bring further pressure on us by proposing recess until US has “some

new and concrete proposal” when they willing meet at US request.

This would also enable them maintain posture of “reasonableness” and

avoid onus of definitive break.

Dept will also note at today’s meeting his renewed invitation sub­

mit new draft on renunciation and my pointing out we had submitted

two successive drafts. Dept will also note I have thus far avoided stat­

ing converse my present instructions on trade, that is any statement

trade discussion could be “fruitful” if renunciation force agreed. While

recognize difficulty authorizing me state converse, if it is possible do

so may enable me develop line that would be useful next meeting. Will

appreciate maximum guidance and suggestions Dept able give me

meet probable situation at next meeting.

Gowen

173. From Johnson.

1. I opened 56th today with following prepared statement:

A. For past few meetings you been attempting get me agree with

you abandon search for meaningful renunciation force and go on to

discussion topic you proposed last September, what you call question

of embargo. You been trying do this, as you say, because you consider

our search for agreement on renunciation force is in one-­sided interest

of US whereas, presumably, you expect discussion trade would be to

advantage your country.

B. I not willing abandon search for agreement on renunciation

force. I cannot agree renunciation force would only benefit my country.

I believe it would serve real interests not only our two peoples, but of

world at large. Nor can I accept your contention it is “one-­sided” on

my part prefer seek agreement on basis your Dec 1 draft, as amplified

Distribution.

clarified by my amendments, other than switiching over to new and

unsatisfactory basis your May 11 draft.

C. Nevertheless, I have not refused exchange views with you on

what you term embargo. On contrary. I have consistently expressed

willingness take note of whatever views you may wish put forward this

regard, while at same time expressing our attitude toward matter. Such

attitude my part is not inconsistent with my position our first immedi­

ate task should be that of reaching agreement on renunciation force. In

fact, believe any rational and dispassionate consideration of matter of

trade would only reinforce point have so often made here: —that trade

problem stands in collateral relation to problem we dealing with in our

discussions renunciaton force. That is, so long as threat and possibility

exist that goods received in trade would be used support hostile action

against forces my country, it not realistic expect my country look with

favor on such trade.

D. Another reason why I should be glad hear your views on topic

trade is that in your remarks so far you given no indication what advan­

tage you expect or demand from discussion that topic. You have talked

in vague general terms of what you call policy international blockade

and embargo, and demanded its abolition. I not aware any blockade

by my country. As for what you term “embargo” you have repeatedly

avoided my questions as to just what aspect or aspects this matter you

had in mind. You have denied your country has experienced any diffi­

culty as result trade policies my country. You have acknowledged prin­

ciple trade should take place only on terms mutual benefit; yet that

precisely purpose trade policies my country. Where trade can or may

have effect supporting use force against one of parties to exchange,

how can it be considered mutually beneficial?

E. So far your remarks on subject trade seem be utterly out of

keeping with your position in introducing topic, when you seemed

have in mind some specific advantage your country. You say what

you call policy embargo should be abolished, not for good your

country, but for good of my counry and other countries. Inasmuch

as measures with regard trade with your country which are in effect

my country and other countries have been effected accordance their

respective sovereign decisions and interests, I find this position yours

hard understand.

F. You also say what you seek in demanding abolition these meas­

ures is general improvement relations between our two countries. As

have often pointed out you here, in addition carrying out our agreed

announcement Sept 10 last year first essential step to improvement rela­

tions between two countries is agreement on meaningful renunciation

force. Only by so doing can we approach peaceful resolution our differ­

ences—whatever their nature—in atmosphere free from overhanging

threat force. Yet practical effect your present insistence on prior dis­

cussion trade is to delay agreement on renunciation force, thus put off,

rather than hasten, improvement relations. Would welcome any con­

crete views you can put forward this morning that will clarify these

points.

2. Speaking from notes, Wang replied he did not deny declara­

tion on renunciation force one of central issues in dispute between

two countries. As matter fact this patient attitude their side was fully

proved by fact they put forward three drafts for such declaration and

joined in discussion this topic for as long as ten months. However fail­

ure so far reach agreement or make progress in discussion this topic

making declaration renouncing use force has been due to persistence

my side in unreasonable demands we put forward and our failure also

been due to fact my side deliberately created obstacles in way reaching

agreement that regard.

3. Wang continued if there genuine desire make meaningful

declaration on renunciation force there no reason why their rea­

sonable proposals should not be accepted. It would not in any way

contribute to progress in discussion of declaration to merely repeat

desire not to abandon efforts on this topic, while at same time there

is failure offer concrete changes. Since we had found difficulty on

question making declaration renunciation force, we should try not

entangle ourselves any longer in this respect, because there are other

problems and disputes between two countries which awaiting solu­

tion. That was why he had been insisting on our discussion of ques­

tion of embargo.

4. Wang said in discussing this problem of embargo their side

already made clear their position on question. He was pleased note

I had expressed willingness discuss this problem with him and had

been willing hear concrete opinion their side would put forward this

respect. (Turning to prepared statement, Wang continued.) He would

now put forward draft agreed announcement to be adopted by two

sides this matter. He proposed two sides adopt and announce this

draft agreed announcement as means of settling disputes between

China and US on trade.

5. Wang read draft agreed announcement on trade (Geneva’s

­telegram 168). Handed me copies.

6. Wang continued he sure if I carefully study draft will find it

entirely fair reasonable advantageous to both sides. Adoption and

announcement of this agreed announcement would not only resolve

one of outstanding problems between our two countries thereby

bringng about gradual improvement Sino-­American relations, but will

certainly contribute to relaxation international tensions. Goes without

saying practical problems will not be resolved by mere adoption this

agreed annoucement; thus following issuance announcement par­

ties expected actually to take measures on own initiative to ensure its

implementaton.

7. I replied was glad note he still agreed with me question mean­

ingful renunciation force central issue between us. However, entirely

unable agree failure thus far reach agreement due what he termed

unreasonable demands my side. I entirely unable agree my side

deliberately created obstacles to our reaching such agreement. In fact

situation very much other way around. I carefully took his draft of

Dec 1 which seemed to offer prospect of agreement and made only

few essential amendments thereto that would make clear it would

cover our most serious disagreement and neither of us sacrificing

inherent right self defense. Twice in succession I had offered sugges­

tions in attempt meet his point view, entirely preserving language

his proposal. This could hardly be characterized as unreasonable or

deliberately creating obstacles. However, his action abandoning even

that portion in which we had already reached agreement, reverting

back to old positions and conditions, even adding new conditions,

had been real obstacle to agreement. Despite time admittedly spent

discussing this, extremely difficult me interpret this as genuine desire

reach agreement. Way reach agreement was preserve areas agreement

already reached and advance from there. This what I had attempted

do and if his side would adopt same attitude I satisfied agreement

could be reached between us. My April 19 draft did this and if we

could proceed from that—which based on his Dec 1 draft—it seemed

to me progress could be resumed.

8. I reiterated with respect his proposal this morning principal bar­

rier improvement relations was continued threat his side initiate use

force to resolve dispute in Taiwan area. All my suggestions with regard

declaration renunciaton force directed toward resolving that problem

on mutually beneficial basis, thus really opening door toward reso­

lution other problems between us. As I pointed out last meeting and

again this morning, question trade relations was effect of that situation,

rather than cause. Would appreciate any thoughts he might have on

how this cause might be removed.

9. Wang replied from proposal he made this morning for agreed

announcement designed remove embargo, their efforts in gradually

improving relations between two countries could be noted. We faced

with great number issues which require resolving one by one. As

regards allegation made by me few moments ago that China threat­

ened use force Taiwan area, could only consider allegation slanderous

without basis. One which used force in Taiwan area not China but US

itself. Their side always maintained removal embargo was one of ways

improving relations between two countries. If we should attempt put

together all issues and entangle them, we would find we not able settle

any one them. Therefore, he considered in discussing question trade

and embargo nobody should impose any precondition. This morning

he would appreciate any views I might have with regard draft agreed

announcement he just put forward.

10. I said thought I had expressed views very clearly. I had not and

would not create artificial entanglement of issues. I thought inherent

relationship between questions renunciation and trade very clear. If

trade between our two countries to be of benefit my country, should be

clear goods received in that trade would not be used support use force.

This inevitably led us back to question renunciation force. Hard to see

how discussion of item trade could be fruitful until question renuncia­

tion force resolved. This not artificial but perfectly natural and logical

relationship. Hoped by next meeting he would have considered matter

from this standpoint. I would welcome any concrete thoughts he had

for its resolution.

11. Wang could not feel satisfied with my remarks this respect.

During long months passed in discussion previous topic renunciation

force US consistently created obstacles preventing us reaching agree­

ment. However I also indicated willing discuss question embargo and

suggested he put forward concrete views on question trade. Now that

he had put forward concrete views and concrete proposals this morn­

ing, I again tried evade positive reply while at same time putting for­

ward preconditions. In view this situation, could he take it I not willing

discuss question embargo and not willing seek practical settlement this

problem? At same time could he take it my side not willing consider

reasonable proposal he put forward this morning. He would appreciate

clarification by me to problems he raised.

12. I denied ever saying not willing consider any proposal he put

forward. I many times offered receive his views on trade. At same time

always pointed out inherent relationship between this and renunciaton

force and asked that he at same time reconsider his positon with regard

renunciation force. In that way I had hoped time could be conserved

and progress resumed. I would make any further comments in this

regard at our next meeting.

13. Wang asked if I meant I would make further comments on pro­

posal he made this morning.

14. I replied was not going to be tied down to what I would say

next meeting or make advance commitments.

15. Wang said thought we must realize we have very important

responsibilities in these talks. Our responsibility is seek by every means

at our disposal, to bring about improvement in relations between China

and US. We must endeavor by every means within our ability to remove

existing obstacles in relations between two countries. This he consid­

ered highly important necessity for both our sides. It precisely based

on this approach to these talks that his side entered talks. All propos­

als he made were made in this spirit. We both recognized that existing

embargo was one of obstacles in relations between our two countries.

If we could succeed in reaching reasonable solution to this dispute

it would certainly contribute to resolution of other disputes. He believed

this approach reasonable and realistic. He had not tried reverse order of

things. In view my willingness consider proposal he made this morning,

he hoped at next meeting I would have carefully studied it and make

concrete reply.

16. I replied he had said removal of what he called embargo

between two countries would contribute to resolution of other disputes

between us. There were three problems between us which my side had

thus far raised. First question was that of Americans detained in his

country at opening these talks and ten of whom still detained in spite

of what I thought was resolution of that problem last September. Other

two as we well know were: question of renunciation force specifically

applicable to Taiwan area; I also previously raised here with him ques­

tion of accounting for military personnel still missing from Korean hos­

tilities. These were questions I had thus far raised in these talks. Could

I interpret his remark, therefore, to imply that if question of embargo

satisfactorily resolved from this standpoint, it would contribute to res­

olution of these problems I had raised.

17. Wang said obliged point out question of what I called miss­

ing Americans which I had just mentioned, not within terms reference

these talks. As regards other questions I raised he might say his side

also not satisfied. For instance, on question of returning civilians if US

had faithfully abided by agreement we reached here last year, he sure

situation would be much more satisfactory than now. Situation equally

true on question making declaration renunciation force. If my side had

accepted his proposal making declaration without prejudice to sover­

eign rights and territorial integrity of parties and without prejudice to

domestic matters of parties—he satisfied we able make progress that

regard. If my side had accepted that principle he satisfied we would

long ago have made declaration. I had repeatedly made allegation of

existence threat force but why had my side not made declaration on

renouncing force on basis principles contained his proposals—that is

without prejudice sovereign rights and territorial integrity and with­

out interfering internal affairs other side. It could thus be seen which

side always ready resolve issues and which side not willing do same.

As pointed out, question embargo is obstacle in relations between two

countries. Also wanted point out if I would only accept proposal he

made this morning he satisfied it would certainly contribute to resolu­

tion other problems as well. Agreement in this regard would certainly

create favorable atmosphere and provide us with favorable basis for

settlement issues between two countries. Could anyone deny this is

what both our two peoples desire?

18. I said when we were discussing agreed announcement on civil­

ians, I completely met his point view on third power arrangements in

US, on removing all barriers to return Chinese students who desired

return his country, on form of announcement he desired make in this

regard, and on his desire make no specific statement of exact time

limit within which Americans permitted return, with understanding

this would resolve first problem I had raised in these talks, return of

Americans. Fact that US completely abided by this agreement incontro­

vertibly sustained by fact third power arrangement even after passage

almost year, has not brought to our attention single case obstruction.

Yet in spite this, it has not resolved problem of return of Americans.

As I previously pointed out we seem to be going backwards in this

regard. With regard announcement on renunciation force, I accepted in

full all language of his Dec 1 draft, making only minimal amendments

required to make it really meaningful with regard to our most serious

dispute. When he said acceptance of proposal with regard trade would

contribute to solution of other problems between us and provide basis

for settlement issues it certainly understandable if I asked what con­

crete content such a statement had.

19. Wang said was sure he had already clearly answered in sev­

eral remarks this morning, questions I asked. Agreement on removal

embargo would demonstrate two of us here really engaged in settling

questions rather than stalling and were really working to get rid of

obstacles rather than creating obstacles in our relations. Success in this

regard would indicate even though we met difficulties on other issues,

yet we have scored progress in this present problem. For both of us

solving problems better than not solving.

20. I had nothing more. Wang asked if I agreeable meeting Thursday

Sept 6. I was.

Gowen

Letter No. 54

Washington, August 31, 1956

Dear Alex:

Your letter of August 20 reached us after Walter McConaughy had

departed August 24 for a week’s leave in Alabama. However copies

have been sent to Messrs. Robertson, Phleger and Sebald. We had a

brief meeting before Walter left to consider developments at the last

meeting. While we recognize the problem created by Wang’s efforts to

push you into a corner on whether or not we will discuss trade, we con­

sider it unlikely that the Chinese Communists will endeavor to bring

about a break or a prolonged suspension of the talks over this issue. It

seems more likely that they will go to the public again in an endeavor to

make propaganda capital out of their proposed agreed announcement

on trade. We are satisfied that we are still in a strong public position so

long as Peiping still holds Americans and refuses to announce the use

of force. We will meet on Sept. 4 after Walter’s return to prepare your

instructions for the next meeting which we hope will give you the kind

of guidance requested.

It is unfortunate that Time Magazine distorted your remarks.

However the story does not appear to have been picked up by any

other news source in the United States nor have we seen it used on

Communist broadcasts.

The Red Cross is still engaged in the process of interviewing pris­

oners. It has taken somewhat longer than they estimated but it seems to

be proceeding smoothly enough. We do not know how the interviews

are resulting because it was arranged for them to report only after all

interviews were completed. However, we know that there is at least

one prisoner who desires to go to Mainland China, as he has written

us direct. However he is one who we thought had claimed American

citizenship and therefore was not included on the original list. The final

decision has not been made here as to whether or not we will bring the

Indian Embassy in on the return of prisoners to Communist China. We

will discuss your views at our next meeting.

The most important recent event in our relations with Communist

China was the shooting down of a patrol plane last week. Enclosed is

a copy of the Note delivered to Peiping by the British at our request

and the Chinese Communist reply. On the basis of the facts we have

­Informal.

been able to gather about the incident, there is little question but that

the plane was shot down by Chinese Communist fighters. However

it appears that the plane may have been off course and over Chinese

Communist territory or territorial waters when attacked. Whether it

was forced there by Communist fighters is unknown. The Secretary has

drafted a public statement giving the facts so far as we know them and

characterizing the attack as unprovoked and unjustified. It will also

state that we will demand reparations. The finishing touches are being

put on the statement in consultation with the Pentagon today and it

will probably be issued before you receive this letter. We will see that

you receive the text of the statement promptly.

The results of O’Neill’s renewed request to visit American pris­

oners were as expected. We shall await a reasonable time to see what

reply the Chinese Communists will make to his approach. We intend to

have him keep pressing Peiping on this point emphasizing the fact that

American prisoners have been prevented from communicating with

him and contrasting this with our offer to permit the Indians to see

Chinese prisoners here even when the latter had not communicated

with the Indian Embassy.

We were glad to have Dave’s letter enclosing his careful study of

the new material on the missing servicemen. Col. Monroe who has

just returned from a trip to Korea is coming over today to discuss the

next move. A recent communication from UNCMAC gives their view

that the matter should not be taken up again in UNCMAC but rather

shifted to Geneva. We do not understand clearly the reasons for this

and hope that Col. Monroe will be able to clarify this.

The Chinese student in the mental institution at Logansport,

Indiana to whom we sent a copy of the Agreed Announcement has

indicated he wishes to communicate with the Indian Embassy. We have

told him he may do so. And we have also informed the Indian Embassy

of the case and our readiness to allow him to go to Mainland China

so that they could not put it to us as a case of an individual claiming

obstruction and thus mar the perfect record to date of having received

no such representation.

The Chinese Communists are engaged in an all out campaign to

have Americans come to Communist China. In addition to the visas

approved for the news men, invitations have been issued to the U.S.

National Students Association, to some of the relatives of American

prisoners and we recently heard from an American missionary that he

had been invited to make a trip to Communist China.

We are trying to get a hold of two copies of the Yale University

publication on Chinese language reform which you requested and will

send them to you as soon as we can get them.

I hope you have a fine vacation and return renewed to the fray

September 7.

Sincerely,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosures:

2. Article by David Lawrence “On Rejecting Reds’ New Lure”

3. FBIS article re comment of Chinese Communist Mission visiting

Jordan.

shooting down of patrol plane.

5. Copy of text of telegram from British Charge in Peiping, Aug. 25,

re shooting down of patrol plane.

248. For Johnson.

Guidance for September 7 meeting.

1. Trade Controls. You should decline discuss Wang’s draft agreed

announcement on trade (your 168), or discuss either CHINCOM mul­

tilateral trade control system or U.S. unilateral total embargo on trade

with Communist China. Base your refusal to discuss on following

grounds: (a) persistent Chinese Communist refusal to renounce force

and continued threat use force which makes it unthinkable on national

security basis for U.S. to contribute through trade to Communist China

industrial and economic build up; and (b) Chinese Communist breach

of Agreed Announcement of September 10 which casts serious doubt

on Chinese Communist good faith in implementation of any commit­

ment Chinese Communist representatives may enter into. In making

this point you should continue leave open question of our attitude in

event prisoners are released and Chinese Communists agree to pending

renunciation of force declaration. We do not wish indicate whether we

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Clough; cleared by Dulles in draft and by

Sebald.

would or would not lower our economic guard as a result of Chinese

Communist assent to renunciation of force principle. Although you will

continue use all your resources keep talks going, you should not be

deterred from explicitly refusing discuss trade by any fear Wang may

use it as a pretext for breaking off or recessing talks. Even if Chinese

Communists have made firm decision suspend talks unless we make

concessions on trade, we do not intend to yield to pressure on trade

issue.

We do not see that you are impaled on horns of any dilemma in

taking this position. So long as Chinese Communists have not given

us satisfaction on renunciation of force and implementation Agreed

Announcement, propaganda position Chinese Communists in resort

to public press, would be vulnerable. We consider our public position

strong and are prepared defend it positively if Chinese Communists

again resort to publicity. Foregoing not intended prevent you from offer­

ing to listen anything further Wang may want to offer on trade question,

so long as you do not participate in trade discussion with him.

2. Renunciation of Force. If it seems necessary in order provide mate­

rial for discussion you may inform Wang we are exploring possibility of

formulating new revision his Dec. 1 draft. We hope be able inform him at

next meeting results our study. FYI, we believe our April 16 revision of

Wang’s draft probably best that can be done. END FYI

3. Return of Nationals. Seize occasion of approaching first anniver­

sary issuance Agreed Announcement to reiterate our protest at continued

imprisonment 10 American citizens in violation long standing Chinese

Communist commitment and obligation to release them expeditiously.

You should take Wang to task with more than ordinary vigor in view

lapse of full year.

4. Give Wang text our press release of August 31 characterizing

Aug. 23 attack on Navy patrol plane in East China Sea as unjustified.

Tell Wang this tragic occurrence demonstrates anew need for genuine

Chinese Communist renunciation of force. So long as present posture

Chinese Communist regime continues, danger of attacks such as this

ever present. State our conviction present Chinese Communist attitude

of hostility makes impossible attainment of stable and secure situation

in Far East.

FYI Your talks should not become forum for discussion merits this

case. It is to be used as illustration of need for renunciation of force

and as demonstration of dangers of unjustifiable destruction of life

and property resulting from trigger-­happy attitude on Communist

side. Parenthetically, markings on all US planes including this Navy

Mercator, of course entirely different from markings on GRC planes

and clearly distinguishable therefrom. END FYI

Dulles

230. From Johnson.

One hour fifty minute meeting this morning. I opened with state­

press release. He replied with statement on renunciation force and trade

reiterating old points and then made fairly extensive prepared statement

on plane incident during which he refused pick up Aug 31 press release,

as “only PRC has right make protest this incident” and handed me copy

Sept 2 PRC press release. In reply I pointed out that in my original state­

ment I said I did not intend enter into discussion plane incident here and

was giving him copy press release as matter of courtesy in order that

his authorities would have full and accurate text. Noted we had already

received through UK copy Sept 2 PRC release but glad take copy he had

handed me. Then made fairly extensive statement on trade and renun­

ciation force making it more explicitly clear than in opening statement

that I was not willing discuss trade until they had accepted principle of

renunciation force and agreement reached on text declaration. In course

this statement emphasized our record flexibility on language renuncia­

tion force statement and willingness to consider and reconsider any lan­

guage that preserved essential principles. Hoped he would be in position

next meeting abandon May 11 draft and seriously negotiate with me on

text which would preserve area of agreement shown our April 19 draft.

Avoided any expressed or implied commitment we would present new

draft. In reply Wang accused me merely repetition old positions and stated

PRC “would have to consider making its position public”. With respect to

plane incident picked-­up copy August 31 press release as “informal doc­

ument for their information only.” I expressed regret they intended again

resort publicity and propaganda and said that if they made statement US

would, of course, have to consider making reply.

I then made strong and extensive statement on implemention in

reply to which he asked whether US willing to release all Chinese in

prison US “so they could return.” I of course immediately reiterated

our position on Chinese prisoners and pointed out PRC bears full

responsibility any delay in return any who might desire do so.

I agreed his suggestion next meeting Thursday Sept 20. Returning

Prague tomorrow, arriving Sunday evening.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

231. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

Although Wang said only they were “considering” public state­

ment assume in accordance previous pattern they will in fact issue one

from Peiping sometime prior to next meeting. Although Osborn will

remain here to handle anything that might develop, am not planning

any reply from here as assume Dept will issue whatever reply consid­

ered desirable.

Although I have now made entirely clear no “discussion” trade

in absence renunciation force and also linked this to implementation

Sept 10 agreement, should anticipate they may attempt exploit my

willingness “listen” to what they have said on trade to give impres­

sion to third countries there has been some substantive discussion this

subject, or at least commitment our part to consider lowering trade

controls in exchange for abandonment their position with respect

Taiwan. Might also anticipate their statement will follow Wang’s line

at today’s meeting in attempting like US renunciation force proposal

with “violation their airspace and territorial waters” by downed

Navy patrol plane and search craft. In this regard Dept will note Wang

anticipated and attempted enter into substantive discussion plane

incident which I avoided by refusing reply his charges except by ref­

erence Dept’s Aug 31 statement.

Dept will also note at today’s meeting he more clearly than ever

in past invited new draft on renunciation force. While we can reach

decision on tactics for next meeting only after seeing their public state­

ment, believe it probably would contribute to our objective if at next

meeting I was able introduce another draft on renunciation that would

give appearance of something new.

Gowen

232. From Johnson.

1. I opened 57th with prepared statement:

A. Hope you have reconsidered remarks made at last few meet­

ings, and particularly at last meeting, on inescapable priority of ques­

tion of agreement by your govt to genuine renunciation force.

B. As pointed out fruitful discussion trade cannot be expected

under conditions in which your govt persistently refuses agreement

and attempts evade clearly renouncing use force in disputes involving

two countries, and in fact even continues openly threaten use force. Just

common prudence dictates my country not contribute to increasing

economic industrial potential of country which maintains such posture

toward my country.

C. Tragic event of night of Aug 22–23 in which lives of number

my countrymen unjustifiably taken again demonstrates need for your

govt genuinely renounce use force. So long as your govt maintains

present attitude this subject danger of attacks such as this will always

be present. Most solemnly must state conviction that continuation of

this attitude of hostility and readiness destroy lives property of others

makes impossible that attainment of stable secure situation in Far East

which my govt continues seek. Cite this merely by way example and

not for purpose of here discussing unhappy incident. However in order

your authorities may have full accurate text, I am giving you copy joint

statement Departments State and Defense of August 31 with regard this

incident. (Pointed copy on table.)

D. Also related to this is question of good faith in carrying out

agreements. All too clear and continued failure your authorities permit

return detained Americans accordance our agreement of year ago can­

not but give rise to increasingly serious doubts this regard.

E. This then is situation which two of us confronted. Question is

what we do resolve it. It clear it cannot be resolved by discussion sub­

sidiary subjects, but only by progress on fundamentals, that is, uncon­

ditional renunciation force as I have proposed and by carrying out in

full our agreement Sept 10 last year.

F. Very much look forward to hearing from you this morning any­

thing that will assist us in making progress on these fundamentals.

Distribution.

2. Wang replied from prepared statement: Two of us had spent long

time on discussion issuance renunciation force declaration. In course this

discussion his side had repeatedly put forward reasonable proposals

for making such declaration. Failure so far, after 11 months, to arrive at

agreement due to persistent demand my side to encroach upon sover­

eign rights his country. If my side desired make progress on this, then

must give up unreasonable demands before we could succeed.

3. Wang continued, was with aim pushing talks forward and mak­

ing talks yield fruitful progress that his side proposed subject removal

embargo. As he consistently had pointed out embargo one of obstacles in

relations between two countries, is unjustifiable in itself, should therefore

be removed. Again, as he observed at last meeting, agreement between

both sides on removal embargo would create favorable atmosphere in

talks and contribute toward resolution other problems. He must how­

ever frankly point out my side must not expect his side accept demands

that encroach on sovereign rights their side in exchange for removal

embargo because this simply could not be accepted.

4. Wang continued, as regards plane incident Aug 23 I had men­

tioned, he must point out this incident another case serious provo­

cation by US military aircraft against his country. Incident involved

US military aircraft making intrusion into territorial air his country.

This established as indisputable fact which US Govt itself could not

but acknowledge in statement. Hostile military aircraft intruding into

territorial air of sovereign state is something no sovereign country

could tolerate and remain idle. Intruded area, as known, is combat

zone and therefore all consequences intrusion by US aircraft must

be responsibility US itself. Following this violation territorial air of

China by said military aircraft, US Naval vessels and aircraft again

Aug 23–24 intruded in force their territorial sea and air in planned

manner. Instead accepting serious protest his govt, my govt had even

made unreasonable demands on his govt—this entirely unjustifiable.

He might put question, suppose military aircraft his coun­

try intruded in territorial air US, what did I think consequences be.

Could US remain idle without taking any action against this aircraft?

In this incident his govt alone had right make protest therefore could

not accept copy this document I handed him this morning. Incident

Aug 23 only one of many incidents of provocative nature on part US

against territory his country.

5. Wang continued, such incidents clearly at variance with objec­

tives renunciation force, subject which I had suggested. They con­

sidered success in making declaration renunciation force must not

remain in words but must be carried out in action. We now confronted

situation in which US side not only failed put forward constructive

proposals for making renunciation force declaration but US also not

stopped continuous provocative acts against this country. This per­

formance US could not contribute improvement relations between

two countries. In order I might clearly understand position his govt

he would hereby give me copy English translation statement made

by his Ministry Foreign Affairs Sept 2. Next he would appreciate my

making comments on reasonable draft he put forward last meeting on

question removal embargo.

6. I replied was not sure he understood me regarding copy statement

I offered him. We had previously received through Office UK Charge

Peiping copy statement issued his Foreign Office Sept 2. However, was

glad accept additional copy he made available this morning. Statement

I had offered him was only copy public statement which had already

been issued. I simply making it available him for information so he

would have full and accurate text. Doing this as matter of courtesy. Of

course if he did not desire accept it, it was his choice entirely. Point of

view US very clearly and carefully set forth in that statement. Had no

intent taking time here recapitulate what already contained that state­

ment. As said, not my purpose enter into discussion here.

7. I continued, with regard present stage negotiation on declara­

tion renunciation force he stated he put forward repeatedly what he

termed reasonable proposals this regard. Could not agree this was case.

As previously pointed out, he had since Dec 1 gone backwards in this

respect. I in turn had consistently attempted preserve area of agreement

we had reached and go forward. I not taken any hard fast attitude on

exactly how such declaration should be expressed. I had been insist­

ent only on principles it should contain if it is to have real meaning.

Even accepted in his draft Dec 1 form and words contained therein. In

attempt fully meet his point view I offered on two successive occasions

amendments to that draft Dec 1 adding only minimum necessary make

it really meaningful. I had made no unreasonable demands on his govt.

My suggestions had been fully reciprocal and had not required his govt

sacrifice or prejudice its views in any way. Had only been insistent dec­

laration be really meaningful and there be full understanding between

us as to its meaning. That is, it not be empty words devoid of real con­

tent and understanding between us. Have considered in past and will­

ing reconsider in future question of how principles can be expressed

in form acceptable to both sides. I did not have closed mind on subject

but consider way to make progress was move ahead from points of

agreement already reached and not try establish new conditions and

revert to old positons as he had done in May 11 draft. Had kept hoping

he would approach matter with same attitude.

8. I said my position regard discussion trade at this stage not

based upon any arbitrary attempt establish relationship between

this item and renunciation force but only on inescapable substantive

relationship between these two things. My views on this fully set

forth. As previously said, I fully prepared listen his views on trade

while he considering question renunciation force. Once his govt had

accepted principle renunciation force, and agreement reached on

­declaration that regard, then could be discussion of item regard trade

he proposed. However, did not think useful or productive for me

comment on proposal he had made until that time.

9. I said would hope he would be able abandon position taken

May 11 draft and that preserving area agreement shown my April 19

(note: 19) draft we could really get ahead on question making decla­

ration renunciation force. If he not position do so this morning, hoped

he would at next meeting so we could sit down and really accomplish

something this regard.

10. Wang replied, had fully set forth this morning position his

side on question making renunciation force, that is, if we were to make

progress on this, my side must either accept their proposal or produce

some new proposal acceptable to both sides. However, I had just now

made mere repetition my position and he did not think this resetting

forth old positions would help us in this discussion. He must point

out however it was simply stalling tactics my side and insistence my

side on unjustifiable demands that caused failure reach agreement on

this so far.

11. Wang said it was in view this that his side proposed we dis­

cuss question removing embargo. I had again said willing listen views

his side on question removing embargo and would be willing take

under consideration that question. Yet his side already made concrete

proposal this regard and I had again evaded definite reply. I had even

­further put forward unjustifiable precondition to this discussion. As

said this morning, any attempt my part make his side accept unrea­

sonable demands in exchange for removal embargo will prove illusion

and will prove be something cannot accept at all. His side strongly and

continuously opposed any such attempt. Attitude adopted my side on

question embargo could not but compel his side consider making pub­

lic its position on question embargo.

12. Wang said with regard Aug 23 plane incident and statement my

govt I mentioned this morning, he already made clear protest his govt

this incident. Since I had explained it not my purpose discuss matter

here and since I stated this statement only informal document for infor­

mation, he would be ready accept this document.

13. Wang picked document off table.

14. I said thought we ought be clear as to what had prevented

agreement thus far on renunciation force declaration. There were two

things. One has been unwillingness his govt make it clear such decla­

ration covers what we both agree is most serious dispute between us:

that is Taiwan area. Second has been his insistence my govt abandon

right self defense. World readily able judge which these positions rea­

sonable, which unreasonable. World also be able readily judge whether

reasonable that this fundamental question of whether there is to be

resort to force in these disputes be resolved before there is discussion

of such matters as trade. Regretted his decision again resort to public

statements and propaganda with regard these talks. However perfectly

willing if he desired that our respective positions be made public. If

his govt did make public statement, of course my govt must consider

matter of making reply thereto.

15. I said thought world also able judge whether our agreement

of almost exactly one year ago been carried out by his side. Impossible

me understand what his authorities think they gaining by avoiding

carrying out that agreement. That was first question in terms of ref­

erence for these talks. Over year later still outstanding question. Ten

Americans still remained in prisons his country in spite of clear com­

mitment they be permitted expeditiously return. As I had pointed out

they had even gone backwards as far as people and govt my country

could see. Apparently policy now was require prisoners serve full term

their sentences no matter how unreasonable or unjustified sentence

might have been. From standpoint my govt there seems be no advan­

tage—in fact disadvantage from this agreement. I must most strongly

emphasize our dissatisfaction, disappointment this agreement not

being carried out and this source friction between our two countries

not being removed as I proposed at very outset these talks.

16. Wang said could not agree with remarks I just made. Purpose

these talks try seek solution of issues between two countries. Not purpose

make propaganda. He did not want leave questions under discussion for

long without attaining results. He did not want let world be deprived of

information on what had taken place in these talks. Sure public opinion

in position judge which side reasonable and which not.

17. Wang noted as to question civilians, that most of persons whose

names he had given me had not returned and no accounting been

made. Moreover unreasonable requirement with regard Taiwan entry

permits, requirement Chinese in US apply for permanent residence not

been removed. He sure public opinion also able make fair judgment

on this matter. World would readily and clearly see that since talks

began greater part of Americans in China had returned to their country

as result lenient policy his govt. These facts could not be disputed by

anyone.

18. I replied our announcement of September 10 did not say greater

part Americans in his country be able return within year after announce­

ment—announcement said all would be able return expeditiously.

19. Wang said our agreement did not say all Americans in prison

who committed crimes would be able return promptly disregarding

Chinese law.

20. I said it did not say some Americans, it did not say except those

in prison, it said all Americans would be able return.

21. Wang said but this agreement did not specify precise time. Or

was my govt in position release all forty odd Chinese in prisons my

country.

22. I said had told him previously, any who desired return would

be able promptly return, whether in prison or not.

23. Wang asked if we in position release all those people from

prison and let them decide whether or not they wish return his country.

24. I said did not get his point. Did he mean they should all be

released, whether they wanted return or not? Our agreed announce­

ment covered people who desired return.

25. Wang asked how could person in US prison express free will

as to whether he desires return to his country. That was what he not

ready believe. Even people out of prison in US had all sorts worries and

apprehension on question returning. How could one expect people in

prison decide freely?

26. I replied person in prison could certainly decide whether

desires remain serve out term accordance normal processes justice or

whether desires immediate return his country. That not hard decision

make. I had set forth plan to enable them to assure themselves pris­

oners had freely made decision. It just had never occurred to me he

could or would object to procedures we set forth. They went far beyond

anything we required do under agreed announcement. It was attitude

his govt that had prevented Indian Embassy from acting in accordance

with procedures we set forth. Therefore any delay is solely and abso­

lutely responsibility his govt.

27. Wang replied this serious remark not credible. Must try

judge matter on merits actual facts instead on basis imagination. US

authorities repeatedly tried prevent Chinese students return his coun­

try by telling them not return to what we call Communist China and

by attempting influence them proceed Taiwan. If such acts could be

applied people out of prisons one could readily imagine what would be

done to people in prison. Chinese in prison could express desire return

own country. But ability actually do so another question. These people

have to take into account whether by expressing will return their coun­

try it would intensify punishment. Problem is whether US would carry

out faithfully agreement permit Chinese in US return without applying

pressure or offering obstacles to their doing so. He noted that I had

taken no step to submit list all Chinese in US which he had repeatedly

requested. Such being case, side which extremely dissatisfied with out­

come agreement precisely his side.

28. I said no obligation under agreed announcement submit any

list Chinese in US. Obligation was permit Chinese in US who desire do

so return his country. Let us keep to facts. Agency established for assur­

ing whether or not this case had not among tens of thousands Chinese

in US yet brought to our attention any single case alleged obstruction.

This was fact which no amount vague statements, vague charges could

controvert. Was also fact Chinese steadily returning his country. I knew

of nine who had definitely done so since I last mentioned this subject.

This made total 190 I definitely knew of since last Aug 1.

29. Wang said even this 190 did not represent all who desired return.

He had given me names 50-­odd persons, 52 of whom had not returned.

I had stated no allegation been made to US as to obstruction return, but

this did not mean there been no difficulties encountered by Chinese. He

had repeatedly spoken on this situation. He had nothing further.

30. Wang proposed next meeting Thursday, Sept 20 and I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 44

Geneva, September 7, 1956

Dear Walter:

I have little to add to my “comment” telegram today. I felt satisfied

that the meeting went as well as it did and particularly appreciated

the very complete and clear guidance for today’s meeting. You will

see that I made full use of it. I especially appreciated its explicitness in

instructing me not to be deterred in refusing to discuss trade by fear

they would use it as a pretext to break off or recess the talks. It gave me

just the guidance I was looking for on this subject. I hope you under­

stand that my recent emphasis on the possibility of a break or recess

has not been motivated by any change in my feeling they are probably

not going to make any major new move until around election time, but

simply a desire to anticipate and be prepared for the worst while hop­

ing for the best.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

I felt it a little difficult to carry out the instructions with regard to

giving him the copy of the press release on the plane incident and the

comments with regard thereto and at the same time not letting these

talks become a forum for the discussion of the merits. You will see that

I tried to carry this out by weaving it in with renunciation in my open­

ing statement rather than giving it any character of a separate item or

waiting for him to initiate discussion of it. Incidentally I have been

somewhat surprised at their willingness to fall in with the UK channel

on this. Is this not unprecedented on a matter of this kind? Incidentally

I also thought the Department’s August 31 statement was a real mas­

terpiece of balance and objectivity. It was a very refreshing change from

the way similar cases have sometimes been handled in the past. It was

also very refreshing not to have Defense and every Lieutenant in the

Navy leaking views and news, and not to have Drew Pearson announc­

ing the plane was on a dangerous and secret mission.

As I mentioned in my comment telegram Dave is staying here

to be on hand if and when they come out with their public statement

rather than going up to Prague with me as we had previously planned.

If there is sufficient time after their statement before the next meeting

he and Helenka may drive up themselves.

Thank Ralph very much for his letter of August 31 and all its news.

I had three nice days in the sun down at Santa Margarita. The first time

I have really been warm this summer. I know that is not a complaint

you can make in Washington.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

711. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Prague, September 12, 1956

Dear Walter:

I have just received a telegram from Geneva saying that Senator

Mansfield wants to see me in Geneva on September 20 or 21. I have

Official–­Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

replied that I will, of course, be glad to see him, suggesting the 20th in

order that I can return here the morning of the 21st.

I have not followed his views recently, and have only noted in The

New York Times his open telegram to the Secretary suggesting that I take

up the plane incident in Geneva. However, I presume he will be satis­

fied the way it was handled through the U.K.

The only purpose of this letter is if there are any special cautions

or advice the Department feels I should have before talking with him,

I would appreciate having a telegram sent me at Geneva.

As a responsible member of the Foreign Relations Committee

I assume that he is fairly well briefed on our policy and that I can talk

with him quite freely.

Incidentally, during Senator Long’s recent visit here he did not

raise and there was no discussion whatever of my Geneva talks.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

Ambassador

Letter No. 55

Washington, September 13, 1956

Dear Alex:

The American Red Cross gave us on September 12 their report on

the interviews with the Chinese prisoners. They did a very thorough

job. They carried out their instructions precisely, presenting the three

choices very fairly and explaining the matter fully and impartially. We

can say with confidence that no pressure of any sort was exerted on

the prisoners, and that they were afforded an opportunity to make up

their own minds on the basis of full and exact information, without any

interference. Three prisoners elected to go to mainland China, two to

Taiwan, and nineteen preferred to remain in prison to serve out their

sentences. The remainder had already been released under normal

prison regulations. We are having the reports on each of the 24 cases

reproduced for transmittal by pouch to you either today or Monday.

Informal.

We have not yet decided whether we will bring the Indian Embassy

into the picture as to the three who wish to go to Mainland China. We

are leaning in that direction mainly because we want to do everything

possible to influence Peiping to give O’Neill more scope in his efforts

to help our imprisoned nationals. At least we want to put them as

much on the defensive as possible if they refuse to give O’Neill any

better access. We also would like to present the Communists with the

bill for the transportation of these people. Indian participation would

make that possible. On the other hand Indian participation might slow

up the procedure, when we are impatient to move the three out of here

as fast as possible. No final decision has been made yet. But we already

are working with the Immigration and Naturalization Service and

the Bureau of Prisons on the preliminary steps looking in the parole

of the three individuals for shipment out of the country. Immigration

and Naturalization Service does not care whether they are deported or

leave voluntarily with Indian assistance.

The GRC is committed in writing to take any prisoners who choose

Taiwan so long as the Indians are not allowed to interview the prison­

ers. We intend to hold them to this commitment. We had Dr. Tan in yes­

terday and gave him the results of the interviews. We are sending you

by pouch a copy of our telegram to Taipei reporting on the interview

and explaining why we prefer that the GRC not insist on visiting the

prisoners. Tan did not raise the matter yesterday and we are hopeful

that they will not rock the boat. We have had a good and complete

survey and any interference with the prisoners at this stage by the GRC

representatives could only be harmful.

Enclosed are various press releases on the U.S. Navy plane inci­

dent of August 23, including our note of protest of September 8 which

the British delivered in Peiping September 11; an announcement on

the reported finding by the Chinese Communists of the body of a

second member of the crew, Jack Curtis; and U.S. Navy statement of

September 13 announcing the discontinuance of search operations and

the planned shipment of the two bodies recovered by the Communists

from Shanghai to Japan on September 22.

We are also enclosing a report by Col. Monroe on his recent visit to

the MAC concerning the accounting for the missing servicemen.

We are having a meeting this afternoon to discuss the guidance for

your meeting of September 20. The main topic will be the question of

whether we will propose any changes in the draft on renunciation of

force.

Mr. Phleger was away on leave for a while and since his return has

been pretty much tied up because of the Suez crisis. We expect him at

the session this afternoon.

For your background things are looking a little better on the trade

controls question. By agreeing to give a little ground on the China list,

we have brought the Japanese more or less into line. We have had high

level meetings with the British, French, Germans and Italians at which

we have presented quite strongly our case for preserving a substantial

China differential, with some concessions on our part. We are hoping

that with Japanese support, combined with the pressures we are put­

ting on these countries, we can hold the line at least for the near future.

A CG meeting is contemplated for December.

Everybody here likes the way you handled the last meeting.

While we naturally do not invite any resort to publicity by the Chinese

Communists, we are prepared to meet it and do not fear it.

Keep up the good work. Regards from us all to Dave, Helenka and

Col. Ekvall as well as well as to you.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

ENCLOSURES:

1. Interviews by Red Cross Representatives

2. Press Release No. 480

3. Note to British protesting shooting down of Navy plane.

4. Report from Col. Monroe

D. Kelly

6. Letter to Cong. Lane

7. Navy Statement of Sept. 13.

Enclosure

U.S. Navy Statement

Undated

Navy Release

The Commander, U.S. 7th Fleet advises Adm. Stuart Ingersoll was

directed today to discontinue the search operations for possible sur­

vivors of the Naval P4M Marcator shot down over international waters

off the Chu Shan Archipelago on the night of 22–23 August. A constant

search by ship and aircraft of the Seventh Fleet Patrol day and night since

August 23 has exhausted all possibilities for rescue of any survivors. The

bodies of Albert Perry Mattin, USN and Lt. Commander James Pansford,

USN, were recovered by ship research group in the same area in which

floating wreckage of the plane was located. The Chinese Communists

have announced the recovery of William Frederick Haskins, USN and

Jack Albert Curtis, USN. They further reported that the bodies of Haskins

and Curtis were delivered by them to British Consul General, Shanghai

on September 12. It is expected that the bodies will be returned to United

States authorities in Yokahama, Japan via the S.S. Ouwerkatt leaving

Shanghai about 22 September. Next of kin of those recovered have been

previously notified by the Navy Department.

300. For Johnson.

Following is excerpt relating to Taiwan from Liu Shao-­chi speech

September 15 Chinese Communist Party Congress:

QUOTE Furthermore in order to defend our country we must

continue to strengthen our national defense, we must continue to

strengthen our national defense army—the glorious Chinese people’s

liberation army. Our armed forces must strive to raise their fighting

capacity to a higher level, guard our frontiers and coast lines vigilantly

and defend our territorial integrity.

Our territory Taiwan is still under the occupation of the US impe­

rialists. This is a most serious threat to the security of our country. The

liberation of Taiwan is purely China’s internal affair. We are willing

to bring Taiwan back to the embrace of the motherland through the

peaceful means of negotiation and avoid the use of force. If force has

to be used it would only be when all possibilities for peaceful negoti­

ation have been exhausted or when peaceful negotiations have failed.

Whatever means we adopt we are convinced that we will win the ulti­

mate victory in the just cause of liberating Taiwan. END QUOTE

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by Clough.

301. For Johnson.

Guidance for September 20 meeting.

1. Renunciation of force. Again show how our April 19 revision

introduces minimum changes Communist December 1 draft which pro­

vided reasonable starting point for negotiation although not in itself suf­

ficiently explicit constitute acceptable formulation renunciation of force

declaration. These changes were essential to demonstrate to world both

sides sincerely willing renounce use of force Taiwan area and pursue

objectives by peaceful means only. Characterize Communist May 11 draft

as step backward. (FYI After thorough consideration possible reformula­

tion our April 19 revision, we are satisfied our objectives best served by

holding to present draft. We consider it strong position on which defend

ourselves publicly against Communist propaganda effort. We do not

repeat not contemplate any revision. END FYI)

Refer to passage from Liu Shao-­chi speech before 8th Party

Congress September 15 regarding Communist intention take Taiwan

Observe that apparent PRC determination bring Taiwan under

Communist domination by any means necessary including use of

force would seem to indicate further attempts to arrive at meaning­

ful renunciation of force may be foredoomed to failure. Surmise that

PRC high policy reflected in Liu’s speech may afford explanation

Wang’s persistent refusal to agree to effective renunciation of force

formula through more than 9 months fruitless discussion this sub­

ject at Geneva. Invite Wang to explain and interpret Liu statement in

light professed Chinese Communist willingness make comprehensive

renunciation of force.

(FYI While there is nothing new in Liu statement on Taiwan we

think his high position as Chairman Standing Committee National

Peoples Congress and as spokesman for Central Committee of Party

and importance of 8th Party Congress before which he spoke justify

this special attention. We wish speech used to draw out Wang more

fully re Chinese Communist determination use force to extend their

sway to Taiwan, if they cannot obtain this objective by less costly

means. END FYI)

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared by Sebald. Repeated to

London Priority as telegram Tosec 2.

2. Trade controls. Refuse to discuss trade controls, framing your

argument in same terms used last meeting.

3. U.S. Navy Plane. Subject need not be introduced this meeting.

However if Wang brings up take same line as last meeting and con­

tinue avoid being drawn into discussion merits of case. (FYI Chinese

Communists have not yet replied our protest. END FYI)

4. Implementation. In pressing for early release remaining

Americans emphasize futility continuing hold these persons hostage as

means bringing about improvement of relations. FYI We are proceed­

ing deport promptly to China mainland three Chinese convicts who

chose to go there. We are not bringing Indian Embassy into process

since Agreed Announcement provides for their intervention only if

Chinese wishing to go to mainland encounters obstruction, as we have

told them they will be allowed leave and are expediting their depar­

ture. We do not propose to inform Wang or to make public announce­

ment regarding Chinese convicts until latter have left US unless we are

obliged to do so by Communist propaganda on subject or leak to press

in US. END FYI

Dulles

279. From Johnson.

Wang (who was on same plane yesterday from Prague) called

this morning asking next meeting be postponed to Saturday Sept 22.

I implied that because previous engagements greatly preferred Friday,

Sept 21. He replied Friday “impossible” for him whereupon I agreed to

Saturday, Sept 22.

Do not know what this may presage but manner in which he has

handled definitely indicates significant move being planned by Peiping

of which he probably only informed after arrival here yesterday.

With reference third sub-­paragraph beginning “observe that appar­

ent” paragraph one Deptel 301, presume Dept recognizes that this will

give Wang opportunity say that although our reasons differ we now

Limit Distribution. Repeated to London for Secretary Dulles as telegram 21.

apparently agree his repeated contention further discussion renuncia­

tion force declaration fruitless. Together with our refusal discuss trade

this could give them better basis from which to move toward recess or

termination talks if this their desire.

Gowen

295. From Johnson.

Am making no press comment on CHICOM statement (my tele­

gram 293). If Department issues reply would appreciate prompt trans­

mittal here.

At tomorrow’s meeting plan ignore CHICOM’s statement unless

raised by him and proceed along lines Deptel 301.

Popper

Limit Distribution.

320. For Johnson.

Chinese Communist statement issued Peiping and Geneva

September 21 contains nothing new. It does not alter line to be taken

your September 22 presentation which should continue be guided by

­Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Robertson in substance and Sebald in draft.

Deptel 301. We are considering issuing brief reply Communist state­

ment probably on September 24 which will stress unreasonableness

Communist demand we discuss relaxation trade restrictions at time

when they continue threaten use force against Taiwan and fail to carry

out last year’s Agreed Announcement.

We recognize that tone adopted in portion of guidance referred

to third paragraph your 279 is somewhat harder than heretofore.

However, we do not believe Communist decision to break or not to

break will be significantly affected by relatively minor alterations in

phraseology used by you in discussions. We feel harder line necessary

this stage of talks to emphasize our opposition to their continued insist­

ence on right to use force to achieve their aims.

Line adopted by speakers at Chinese Communist 8th Party

Congress and September 21 statement itself do not suggest Peiping

moving toward break-­off in talks.

Hoover

297. From Johnson.

Two hour and five minute meeting this morning. I opened with

statement along lines para one Deptel 301. While reaffirming same

line on means liberation Taiwan China’s internal affair his replies were

largely pro forma. He did not respond to my subsequent goading him

on subject and I obtained nothing new with respect renunciation. He

repeated any further moves renunciation must come from US.

After making brief reference to trade he introduced draft

announcement on “mutual contacts and cultural exchange” attempt­

ing take strong offensive throughout remainder meeting this subject,

citing US “obstruction” Porgy and Bess, Peiping Opera, journalists,

Peiping Whitman attendance.

I cited their treatment Americans including officials from

time Communist takeover mainland, failure implement agreed

Limit Distribution.

announcement, and kept coming back to renunciation force and policy

hostility threat use force as block to improvement our relations which

must be removed before any attempt made deal other problems.

Next meeting Oct. 4. Returning Prague Sunday morning.

Cooper

301. From Johnson.

Following text draft announcement Wang presented today’s

meeting:

“In order promote mutual understanding between peoples China

and U.S., in order resume traditional friendship between peoples China

and U.S., Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan, on behalf Government People’s

Republic of China, and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf

Government of U.S. of America, agree announce: People’s Republic of

China and U.S. of America will adopt measures respectively on their

own initiative to eliminate existing barriers interfering with freedom

of mutual contacts and cultural exchange between peoples of their two

countries.”

Popper

Limit Distribution.

302. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

Wang’s proposal on what he orally termed “human contacts” and

cultural exchange today continues their pattern of attempting to build up

public record of “sweet reasonableness” in talks being frustrated along

lines Chou’s People’s Congress speech. Can presume they will in due

course follow same pattern as with trade proposal, that is, make pub­

lic release after we have refused discuss. However anticipate they may

somewhat step up pace possibly making release following next meet­

ing if they succeed in obtaining from me what they consider sufficiently

clear-­cut refusal discuss.

While refusing discuss believe it gives useful opportunity more

fully develop theme I started at today’s meeting on previous treatment

of Americans leading up to pressure release those still imprisoned.

Department will note I also linked it to renunciation. Would appre­

ciate guidance for next meeting on degree to which I should expressly

or impliedly link travel of Americans to mainland only to release those

imprisoned as implied my original instructions and Department’s August

7 press release.

Popper

303. From Johnson.

1. I opened 58th with prepared statement:

A. At last meeting I said looking forward to your reversing back­

ward trend in talks on central subject renunciation force exemplified

Distribution.

by your May 11 draft and to moving ahead from area agreement and

broad concession to your point view exemplified my April 19 draft. As

I many times pointed out that draft accepted your December 1 draft

as reasonable starting point for negotiation and introduced only min­

imum revisions essential to demonstrate to world both our countries

sincerely willing renounce use force Taiwan area and pursue objectives

by peaceful means only.

B. On basis your explanations here I had taken this be intent your

December 1 draft and that your concern with respect my January 12

draft arose from fear it was intent U.S. trick your government into aban­

doning position respect merits dispute that area. It in order remove all

possible basis for such claim I successively offered my revision April

19. Have continuously and carefully reviewed that draft in light your

stated objections during these meetings but still feel if your side gen­

uinely sincerely willing renounce use force in that as well as our other

disputes there can be no valid objection that draft.

C. If your side not willing in fact renounce use force it of course

obvious no form of words can be devised that will meet your objections

as I not willing be party to perpetrating upon world fraud of form of

words that attempts give appearance having renounced force while in

fact failing do so.

D. This connection I been concerned note during last few days

high government and party officials your country are reiterating threat

resort war if necessary to achieve objective of bringing Taiwan under

its domination. I particularly noted even such authoritative spokesman

as Liu Shao-­chi in speech September 15, as reported by your radio, reit­

erates intention use any means necessary, including force, to achieve

objectives this area. This deeply disturbing and if continues be policy

your government, of course cannot be reconciled with professions of

desire use only peaceful means settle disputes. I find that policy par­

ticularly hard reconcile with explanations of intent of your December 1

draft. However, it again explains persistent rejection through months of

discussion here of all formulae that my side has proposed to make clear

that use of force being renounced. Continuation of such indefensible

policy would of course mean further attempts arrive at agreement on

meaningful renunciation force may be foredoomed failure. However,

I reluctant arrive at such pessimistic conclusion for peace of Far East

and world.

E. I welcomed your statements here on sharing my desire arrive

at agreement on meaningful renunciation force and steps such as your

December 1 draft that appeared be in that direction. However, cannot

reconcile this with statements such as that of Liu September 15 that

appear only reiteration of old position of threatening force. Would be

glad hear anything you able say this morning that would explain this

apparent contradiction.

2. Wang replied after listening my statement on question renun­

ciation force he could find nothing new. With regard April 19 draft

which I had again referred to in statement, it already repeatedly been

rejected by their side. They could not agree to unreasonable demand

contained in April 19 draft. That precisely because they could not agree

to any division their territory by foreign state or forces, and could not

agree any intervention by any foreign power in their internal affairs.

He presumed that if in his position I would also adopt same attitude

this regard.

3. Wang said he very surprised to hear my references to state­

ments of leading members his government with regard liberation

Taiwan. As they had consistently announced in past it entirely matter

China’s internal affair as to means by which she liberated Taiwan.

They would never allow any other people interfere as to by what

means China achieved liberation Taiwan as they had all along made

clear it entirely within framework China’s internal affairs as to what

means she used in liberating Taiwan and they had also made clear

existing tension in Taiwan area was international issue between China

and America. These were two entirely separate matters and there was

substantive difference between them, as had consistently been made

clear by them in past, and therefore confusion of two matters not

permissible.

4. Wang pointed out as he had already in past, that my side had

on one hand persisted in demanding an infringement of his country’s

sovereignty insofar as question renunciation force concerned and this

been cause failure reach agreement. On other hand my side had evaded

discussion question lifting embargo so no result been achieved regard

their proposal on lifting embargo. In spite this their side still will­

ing seek appropriate amelioration insofar as existing practical issues

between two countries concerned.

5. Continuing from prepared statement Wang said, it belief his

side that removal now of artificial barriers hindering human contacts

and cultural exchanges would contribute to removal barriers and

relaxation tensions, and was thus fully in accord desires two people.

They considered that desire American journalists come to China for

news coverage and desires Chinese and American theatrical compa­

nies was practical feasible and justified. He therefore proposed two of

us make agreed announcement this respect. His specific proposal was

as follows (here he read text draft announcement telegraphed sepa­

rately). He was sure text made it quite clear announcement entirely

reasonable. He was ready to listen to anything I had to say with regard

this proposal. He handed me text.

6. I replied was disappointed he had not this morning been in posi­

tion contribute anything that would enable us move forward on what

I thought we both agreed was central issue—renunciation force. Use of

such words as “internal affairs”, “liberation” and other such terms did

not change facts of situation Taiwan area. I had not asked him accept

my interpretation those facts but nevertheless they did exist.

7. I said facts were Taiwan lawfully administered by government

with which US and majority countries world had long maintained dip­

lomatic relations. It administered by government which member UN.

It administered by government with which US had defensive treaty

arrangements. A treaty which registered with UN. These were all facts

which must be recognized in situation there. However, I had not asked

him here and we had not asked him in any our drafts accept our inter­

pretation those facts.

8. I said Wang’s government had long threatened use force to bring

Taiwan under its control. He in effect seemed to have been saying and

continued say if they could not do this by negotiations they intended

use force. Fact that could not be overlooked was that use force to bring

Taiwan under their control would involve solemn international treaty

obligations of US.

9. I continued this was factual situation with which we confronted.

In order make certain this did not lead to hostilities between us I had

made my proposal last October that both of us without in any way

prejudicing views on merits situation simply say we would not use

force. This had been and must remain central issue. US had offered

state this principle in unconditional and clear form. His government

still unwilling do so. Until this resolved too difficult to see how other

problems existing between us could be resolved. If this central issue

resolved, other issues should be capable resolution. From beginning

these discussions on second part our terms reference, I had striven

to do utmost to resolve central issue. However, It difficult to see how

could be resolved as long as his government threatened go war about

it if it not otherwise able gain objectives.

10. I still earnestly hoped his government would see that its inter­

ests and interests peace could only be served by clearly and unequivo­

cally saying it would not go war about this issue. For his government

to state this in no way prejudiced its position with regard merits whole

matter. I had never said that they do so and nothing I had said here

nor any draft I had presented could be so interpreted. To attempt so to

interpret it misrepresented situation and was attempt to obscure real

responsibility for our not having reached agreement this subject.

11. I said as preliminary comment on proposal he had made this

morning I first wanted to note did not see how it could be divorced

from continued threat of hostilities. US had consistently throughout

its history welcomed free exchange information and peoples regard­

less any social and political differences. At time his government took

control mainland China there were hundreds Americans including

officials in those areas. Policies his government adopted at that time

with respect those persons rendered continued presence there intoler­

able. They were subjected to indignities, expelled from Wang’s coun­

try, ­subjected to imprisonment, and in general their position rendered

impossible. Ten Americans still remained in prison.

12. I said it could be said these all matters of past. It was with hope

they truly could be made matters of past that my government proposed

as first item business between us its resolution, by permitting Americans

who there and who not been able return, to do so. I had thought and my

government had thought and my people had thought this issue, imped­

iment to exchanges between our two people was resolved over year ago.

Here year later it still not resolved. I had pointed out over year ago it

could only be resolved by Wang’s government. In interests our relations

and suggestions he had made I hoped his government would no ­longer

delay in removing this impediment, just as I hoped his government

would no longer delay in unequivocally renouncing use forrce.

13. Wang could only regard my statement on question Taiwan

as sheer sophistry. No matter how I presented this question could

not make people of Taiwan into American subjects nor could I make

Taiwan American territory. Had there been no American invasion

of Taiwan there would have been no pressing situation in Taiwan.

US aggression on Taiwan not only violated spirit UN Charter but

also violated solemn international pledges entered into by US with

respect Taiwan. Present armed occupation Taiwan by US was indis­

putable fact and was act which all people of world opposed. US treaty

with Chiang Kai-­shek was not worth single cent, was unlawful, and

Chinese people never recognized it. Present situation was that no res­

olution Sino-­American dispute Taiwan area could be achieved solely

on basis US interests.

15. Wang said present obstacle in way our making renunciation

force declaration caused unreasonable demand which US persistently

clung to. Failure reach agreement this respect not their responsibility at

all. Efforts promote progress on this must be forthcoming from US and

not from their side. Our deliberation here should be directed at seeking

all sorts of formulae for improvement relations between two countries.

We must strive bring about gradual resolution existing disputes between

us and he thought this purpose could be served by no other attitude.

To condition resolution all other questions on resolution one particular

question meant there no desire or intention resolve issues at all.

16. Wang said since we had now met roadblock in one of main issues

we should without delay try find outlet as far as other issues concerned.

In this sense their proposal on lifting embargo was step towards better­

ment relations. He very much regretted we had as yet made no prog­

ress on that. In order that talks might not waste time meaninglessly he

had again this morning put forward proposal on mutual contacts and

cultural exchange between two cuntries.

17. Wang said it their consistent conviction that uninterrupted

human contacts and cultural exchanges would contribute to better

understanding between peoples and to relaxation international ten­

sions. His government not only maintained this conviction but had

actually carried out policy along these lines. In 1955 his country had

received more than 4,000 visitors from some 66 countries of world.

This represented increase of 60 percent over previous year. Number of

visitors expected to double this year. Most foreign visitors who had

come to their country during past year had come from countries which

had as yet no diplomatic relations with his government. It their belief

that presence or absence diplomatic relations should not be obstacle to

human contacts with peoples these countries. Many people had prej­

udices and doubts before contact made but after such contacts such

prejudices and doubts in most cases been eliminated or reduced.

18. Wang said his people entertained friendly feelings towards

people US. People our two countries had traditional friendship. It

consistent policy his country protect all foreign nationals—including

Americans—residing in his country who abided by laws. There were

still number American nationals who desired remain his country to

carry on normal livelihood and work. They had never felt any preju­

dice or mistreatment on part of Chinese Government. However, any

law-­breaking foreign nationals, no matter what country they came

from, would be dealt with in accordance Chinese law. This was normal

practice any sovereign state.

19. Wang acknowledged at present relationship between China-­US

subject to interruption and broken. Nevertheless, any dispute between

two countries should be settled peacefully. However, such disputes as

exist between China US should not be made pretext for hindering free

contacts and cultural exchanges between two peoples. Artificial barri­

ers would not contribute any ordinary improvement relations between

two countries. To put up artificial barriers was against interests both

peoples and against desires. Today it up to US to remove artificial

barriers in contacts of people. It US which now adopting extremely

unfriendly policy towards Chinese people. This policy of US was in

complete contrast to policy of China towards American people.

20. Wang said present situation was that US occupying portion

Chinese territory and not China occupying part US territory. Present

situation was US carrying on policy embargo against China and not

China carrying on policy embargo against US. It US which putting

up artificial barriers preventing mutual contacts and not Chinese

Government which doing so. They would look forward to removal by

US of such barriers so that peoples our two countries could contact each

other freely and benefit from such contacts by learning from each other,

and thus finally promote relations between two countries.

21. I just wanted to say it difficult to persuade me or my govern­

ment that experiences of hundreds Americans who had lived under

jurisdiction his government were brought about by friendly feelings on

part his government toward US or Americans or to persuade US these

respectable Americans who never encountered difficulty elsewhere

were criminals.

22. I said with regard resolving disputes between us it US that

proposed as first step we make it clear there would be no hostilities

between us. It US which proposed it be made unconditionally clear

this covered most serious dispute between us. It his government that

still refused this simple basic proposition. It his government which still

threatened use force. These were facts that could not be obscured and

which readily understandable by all.

23. Wang denied that they had in course these negotiations rejected

any reasonable proposals I had made. They did not judge proposals on

their appearance but on substance and content. They could not accept

proposal such as I had made that seemed say what is mine is mine

and what is yours is mine. Any such proposal could not be considered

by his side. He hoped my side would give favorable consideration to

proposal he had made this morning for removing barriers to mutual

contact and cultural exchange—as well as to lifting of embargo—and

he looked forward to any result of such consideration. At time when

peoples of different countries were exchanging more and more visits

for US arbitrarily to set up artificial barriers to such exchange simply

not reasonable. They regretted that up to now peoples of China and US

could not have normal uninterrupted exchanges.

24. Wang recalled some time ago commemorative conference held

in Peking in honor American poet Whitman and they had extended

invitation to number outstanding representatives American literature

and arts but regrettably these persons had been denied passports to

come China take part that conference. Despite opposition American

Government against visits of American journalists to China there still

great number journalists who desired come their country and who

making every effort break through barriers. Wang recalled that Peking

Opera Company had already signed contract with American theatri­

cal company for exchange visits but due US Government intervention

contract could not be realized. During performance Chinese acrobatical

troupe here in Switzerland acrobatic company received inquiries from

US and requests for tickets so that American tourists who came here

might have opportunity seeing their performance. All this indicated

fervent desire among people for cultural exchange. As Wang knew

we here had seen performances Peking Opera and acrobatic troupe.

Could any of US gentlemen say these performances contained any

political propaganda? They were sorry they had not had opportunity

see American theater but were sure they would look forward to seeing

American theater. This showed that feeling and desire of two people

were same.

25. Wang understood Lt. Col. Ekvall very much interested in stud­

ies of Chinese national minorities and had actually written some works

in that respect. They would welcome Lt. Col. Ekvall sometime visiting

their country so he could continue work and achieve desires. Or could

there be any harm done to US if Lt. Col. Ekvall were to come to China

and complete work? As Wang had said such exchanges were in interest

both countries and they would hope US would give favorable consid­

eration their proposal this respect.

26. I said if Wang’s country really interested in improving relations

I could not too strongly stress that it fundamental it abandon its policy

of hostility and threats of force involving US and agree our differences

would be settled only by peaceful means, and demonstrate its willing­

ness carry out first agreement we reached. I and my government con­

tinued hope this could come quickly.

27. Wang hoped I would be in position give favorable consider­

ation to proposal they had made at next meeting.

28. Wang said he had nothing further and suggested next meeting

be held Thursday, October 4. I agreed.

Popper

Letter No. 45

Geneva, September 22, 1956

Dear Walter:

Well the 58th meeting is over. There is not much to add to what

I have said in my telegrams. Their exchange proposal is obviously

designed to produce something having more public appeal than trade.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

Based on the reaction to the correspondents’ question they probably

estimate it will even obtain considerable response in the U.S. I, there­

fore, look to their releasing it as quickly as they can complete the basis

for doing so.

We have been speculating on what they might next try along this

line. It has occurred to us that one possibility would be a proposal from

them for a technical arrangement, understanding, or something else of

this nature to avoid such incidents as the shooting down of the Naval

patrol plane. This has many possible ramifications which would lend

themselves to exploitation by them if we refused to consider it.

Wang’s tone at today’s meeting was that of injured innocence, trying

to make it as hard as he could for me to take a tough line. You will see that

he did not even mention Chinese in the U.S.

I suppose our telegrams crossed with regard to their press release

yesterday, but I was happy to see we were in entire agreement. I was

under considerable pressure to say something here on it, but decided not

to do so as it did not contain anything new that required immediate cor­

rection, they fairly accurately representing the fact that we had refused to

discuss trade. Also, I had previously told you I was not going to put out

anything here. Although I had said this on the assumption I would be in

Prague when the release was made, I feared I might cross wires with the

Department. I also thought it was such a dud of a statement that it would

only serve to build it up if I did say anything.

However, I still feel they are building toward a major move around

election time, and that a continuation of the present trend will at least

result in their terminating or suspending the talks shortly after the elec­

tions as a means of attempting to bring increased pressure on us.

Thanks very much for the full information on the prisoner inter­

views contained in your letter of Sept. 13. I thoroughly agree that the

Red Cross seems to have done an excellent job and I have all the material

necessary to exploit and defend the results.

I suppose it will be some time until we know the results of the

efforts to send reading material to the remaining prisoners but will be

interested in hearing when we know.

I thoroughly agree with para 8 of Col. Monroe’s interesting mem­

orandum on his talks with the MAC. As far as practical results are con­

cerned we cannot expect to obtain anything more here than what I have

already obtained, that is, renewal of discussion in the MAC. It seems to

me the most promising line of action is the suggestion that a sub-­group

of the MAC fully armed with every available fact on every individual

undertake a straight-­forward case by case approach to each individual.

I have sent you the memo of my conversation with Senator

Mansfield. As you will see nothing unusual or difficult developed.

As I feel confident there will not be any move on their part before

the next meeting I am suggesting that Dave and Helenka make their

trip to Prague during the interval, and they will probably do so.

[text not declassified]

Regards to all,

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

723. Memorandum from McConaughy to Robertson

Washington, October 1, 1956

SUBJECT

Adverse Effects of Geneva Talks

REFERENCE

Your Oral Request of September 27

1. The talks create doubts throughout Asia concerning the stead­

fastness of American opposition to Communist China. They encour­

age the belief that the United States is seeking to negotiate privately a

“deal” with Peiping which would leave in the lurch our Asian friends

who have been following our lead on China policy. The secrecy and

the long duration of the talks lend color to this suspicion. This plays

into the hands of all of those throughout Asia who advocate policies

of closer relationships for their countries with Communist China.

(See Tab A for documentation).

2. The talks are no longer an effective means of bringing about the

release of our imprisoned citizens. They may now have the opposite

effect. If the Chinese Communists consider the talks of value to them

(which they evidently do) they may continue to hold some Americans

hostage to ensure that the talks continue. They may estimate that if all

Americans were freed we would have attained our objective and imme­

diately terminate the talks.

Clough and McConaughy. Attachment 3 is printed as Document 486.

3. It is damaging to American prestige, particularly in Asia, for the

U.S. to go on talking with a regime which is brazenly violating the only

commitment they have made to us in the course of the talks. It would be

more in keeping with our national dignity and would be readily under­

stood throughout the world if we were to refuse to talk any longer with

a regime which has shown its contempt for us by flouting its word. The

tactical advantages we have obtained at Geneva could be preserved by

the right type of break-­off statement, which would emphasize that we

would welcome at any time a bona fide Chinese Communist renuncia­

tion of force declaration.

4. The talks are not a conclusive factor in preventing a Chinese

Communist attack on Taiwan or the offshore islands since the initiation of

the Communist “smiles” campaign. The major deterrent is the presence

of powerful American armed forces. The second important deterrent is

the Chinese Communist desire to maintain a peaceful posture before the

world. These two factors would continue to operate, even though the

talks were terminated.

5. The talks are regarded with great antipathy and misgivings in

Taiwan. We have made unusual efforts to reassure the GRC, without

any success in allaying their apprehensions. Nothing would give a

greater boost to morale on Taiwan than for the U.S. to break off the

talks. As they see it, we have given the Communists a chance to under­

mine the whole anti-­Communist position in Asia by merely releasing

ten American citizens and signing an Announcement which would in

fact be worthless.

6. The Chinese Communists are eager to establish a posture of

desiring relations of every kind with the United States. Our policy is

to deal with them only when we must. Under these circumstances, the

Communists have the initiative in the talks, being in a position to make

(and to publicize at the opportune moment for them) proposal after

proposal of a seemingly praiseworthy character, such as those on trade

and free travel and cultural exchanges which we must reject. This keeps

us on the defensive and gives the Communists a great advantage.

Attachment: Tab A.

2. Memorandum from Mr. McConaughy to Mr. Robertson, Feb. 9,

1956.

6. Letter from Ambassador Rankin to Mr. McConaughy, Aug. 3,

1956.

Letter No. 56

Washington, October 1, 1956

Dear Alex:

We agree with you that the Agreed Announcement on increased

human contacts which Wang proposed last meeting is designed for

early public exploitation. You handled it very well and we will prob­

ably adopt a somewhat similar approach should we be called upon to

make a public statement.

We were glad that you resisted the pressure to comment at Geneva

on the last Chinese Communist press release. Your comment as you say

would only serve to build up their statement.

While it is impossible to be certain in these matters, we consider

it unlikely that the Communists are moving toward a break off or sus­

pension of the talks. Ever since the beginning of the year they have

periodically accused us of stalling and intimated that they might break

off the talks. However they are still talking. We think, given the present

world situation and the Chinese Communist “peaceful” posture, that it

would not be easy for Peiping to terminate the talks.

We have succeeded in setting up a procedure for sending reading

material to the remaining prisoners. MATS will carry the packages free

of charge to Hong Kong where they will be forwarded by the Army

Liaison Officer to Downey and Fecteau and by the Consulate to the

others.

We have made preliminary inquiries about shifting Helenka to a

daily contractual basis. There seems to be no insuperable obstacle to

this so we are getting the paper work started today.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Official–­Informal. Drafted by Clough.

374. For Johnson.

Guidance for October 4 meeting:

1. In connection with Communist proposal that there be

announcement on cultural exchange US position is that there can be

no such exchange while US citizens held in Communist jails and in

violation Agreed Announcement. Point out how inconsistent with

cultural relations is the refusal of Communists to make meaningful

renunciation of force.

2. Refer to exchange of public statements on trade restrictions and

read Department’s September 24 statement into record.

3. If Wang should attempt open discussion on trade repeat reasons

why we must decline to discuss.

4. FYI Results of last exchange of public statements confirm our

view that US in strong position and should continue rest its case with­

out any modification whatever on refusal Chinese Communists either

renounce force or release Americans. Your argumentation on these

points has been sound and effective. END FYI

Dulles

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Phleger and Clough; cleared by Phleger, Sebald, Robert­

son and McConaughy.

359. From Johnson.

Two hour ten minute meeting this morning. Wang opened with long

prepared statement “reviewing ground” at beginning fifteenth month

Limit Distribution.

going over familiar ground renewing charge US attempting obtain PRC

abandonment territory and sovereignty and as result US intransigence

“talks have become deadlocked,” “US purposefully procrastinating

meetings.” It is up to US stop using force and threat of force against PRC.

Charge of September 24 statement PRC holding Americans political hos­

tages is “slander.” PRC list of 55, 52 Chinese not yet returned, and of

US list of 103, 26 not yet returned. US still holding Chinese in prison

and should “adopt measures on own initiative in same manner as PRC

enable them exercise right to return.” US using charges on civilians as

pretext to cover up procrastination in meetings. In order break deadlock

PRC had made embargo and cultural exchange proposals. Failure make

progress on main issue renunciation should not stop effort make prog­

ress on minor issues. In view President Eisenhower’s Geneva proposal

on cultural exchange and contacts, no reason for US refuse PRC proposal

this field.

I made long extemporaneous statement in reply incorporat­

ing first three paras Deptel 374 (as I had previously sent him copy

September 24 statement and he referred to it in opening statement,

I did not read out full text at meeting but wove in substantive lan­

guage at appropriate points). Charged them with procrastinating on

renunciation pointing out that whenever agreement seemed near

they retreated to pleas of internal affairs sovereignty, etc. Made

long charge on mistreatment Americans in China including num­

bers of those imprisoned, numbers those who died, etc., leading up

to charge that PRC is one who had cut off cultural and human con­

tacts, and coming back to fundamental importance implementation

September 10 announcement. During course this statement I made it

entirely clear no discussion trade or cultural exchange until renunci­

ation force and release of Americans achieved.

In reply Wang charged me with trying to “poison” our negotiations

and during course rebuttal referred to three groups Americans in China:

those who continue reside freely; those who opposed Chinese people;

and those “dropped from air carrying poison, pistols and bombs.” Did

I expect them treat latter as distinguished guests? Cited long list alleged

US wrongs against “Chinese people” bombings, occupation territory

etc., etc., and for first time in talks mentioned UN membership, alleg­

ing US pressure on others deny PRC legitimate rights in international

affairs including representation UN. PRC attempting by every means

improve relations. If US intends use talks poison relations “what is good

of continuing such talks.” PRC efforts shown by successive draft pro­

posals. With respect cultural relations Americans are protesting against

own government’s denial permission journalists visit China and appears

American Government has lost confidence in own people as well as sys­

tem. PRC made cultural exchange proposal “in friendly spirit.” Failure

US Govt favorable consideration this proposal would require PRC con­

sider giving publicity thereto.

Meeting closed with my renewing charge PRC procrastinating on

accepting simple and fundamental renunciation force proposal as well

as on carrying out agreement on release Americans. I refuted his lack

confidence charge and while regretting their threat again go to public,

expressed confidence world could judge.

Next meeting Thursday, October 18. Departing Prague tomorrow

morning.

Gowen

362. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

Wang took expected line which fits in with previous pattern and

reaffirms my belief they are attempting put selves in position carry out

break or indefinite recess within next few meetings.

His statement on public release cultural exchange proposal

was somewhat more tentative than previous similar statements but

nevertheless consider odds are they will make release before next

meeting. Statement will probably follow lines his opening statment

this morning and can especially be expected will attempt capital­

ize on Geneva summit conference exchange proposals. If statement

issued plan make no comment here unless it contains new and gross

misstatements fact which require immediate correction and I am in

Geneva at time.

Gowen

Distribution.

363. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 59th with prepared statement saying as talks

entered fifteenth month would not be without purpose to review

ground covered since last August so as to obtain better appreciation

position where we found selves at moment. When discussions first

item ended in agreement and talks shifted to second item, my side

introduced renunciation force subject for discussion. In interest making

progress and with desire reach practical feasible agreement this, their

side successively made important efforts in form three drafts, whereas

my side all along been holding on unjustifiable position of interfering

in internal affairs and encroaching on sovereignty of China.

2. Wang continued after my original proposal been turned down

my subsequent amendments had invariably retained same essence.

As per Chinese saying, water in pot might be renewed but pot

remained same. US was fond of saying it did not require their side

abandon its position, yet in practice my side invariably demanded

they abandon territorial integrity and sovereignty while holding on

to our own unreasonable position. My side also very fond of saying

we accepted December 1 draft with only what we called minimum

changes, yet so-­called minimum changes always turned out to be

maximum changes in substance of their proposals.

3. Wang said as result intransigence my side in its demands inter­

fering China’s internal affairs, encroaching sovereignty his country, our

talks had come to deadlock. Just where blame for failure thus far reach

agreement should lie quite clear. However, my side repeatedly been

trying within and without conference to distort true picture events,

in attempt shirk responsibility. He particularly referred to statement

issued by my government charging their side with continuing refuse

renounce force Taiwan area. It might well be asked, after all, who was

using force against whom in Taiwan area? Obviously there did not

exist at present any situation in which China found using force against

American territory. It entirely matter of China’s internal affairs as to

by what means China would liberate own sovereign territory. Crux of

whole matter was rather for US Government stop interference China’s

internal affairs and renounce use force in Taiwan area. Could not be

anything other than this.

Distribution.

4. Wang said September 24 statement of US once again distorted

facts by slandering their side with charge of holding Americans as

political hostages. Ten Americans still held were persons lawfully sen­

tenced for breaking China’s laws. Insofar as law-­abiding Americans his

country concerned, they always free choose whether to return or reside

China. Subsequent to agreement September 10, Wang’s government

had taken further measures of leniency in granting release of greater

part Americans. Could thus be seen it his government which been

faithfully carrying out agreement. In contrast, my government still

failed fully carry out agreement. US still failed give them complete list

Chinese US. Of 55 persons whose names he had given me, 52 still not

returned, and my side still failed account them. Of 103 persons on list I

gave him, 26 still not returned and we still failed give accounting them.

US still held many Chinese in prison. However their side not making

charge we holding them as political hostages. Their side only requested

US on own initiative adopt measures similar to what they had done

to enable these persons exercise right return. Distortions and slander

freely resorted to by my side on question civilians were no more than

attempt to cover up procrastination of talks without intent of seeking

solution of problems. However, facts could not be so easily covered up.

5. Wang continued as result intransigence my side in unreason­

able position, talks had come to prolonged deadlock. So that no possi­

ble means for solution of controversial issues between China-­America

would slip through fingers, their side had introduced practical feasible

proposal for removing embargo. As Wang had said, if we could reach

agreement this problem it would not only resolve that issue but would

also exert favorable influence on settlement other issues. Thus far, how­

ever, US had not shown willingness give earnest consideration this fair

and reasonable proposal. Position my side on this was untenable.

6. Wang said my side had on one hand continued persist in demand

encroaching on sovereignty and interfering internal affairs China, so

that both sides could not arrive at agreement on renunciation force, yet

on other hand my side had made agreement on this prerequisite for

discussion of embargo. Thus my side had once more blocked way to

progress in talks.

In spite this attitude my side continued hold in these talks, which

did not in any way contribute to progress, nevertheless, their side still,

inspired by spirit of desire for progress, made yet another proposal

to promote human contacts and cultural exchange between two peo­

ples. Far as his country concerned it consistent policy his government

encourage and promote friendly exchanges between people his coun­

try and other countries of world. That because they believed peaceful

coexistence and cultural exchanges between people of world would

contribute to their mutual understanding and remove doubts.

7. Wang said they had not changed their policy because US

Government consistently carrying on policy of hostility against Wang’s

country. On contrary they considered there did exist long history friend­

ship and contact between Chinese and American peoples. Earlier they

had taken initiative in adopting measures facilitate American journalists

making news coverage in China. Proposal they had made would serve

to ­re-­establish contact, for whose rupture their side bore no responsi­

bility. It their belief that both Chinese and American people cherished

strong desire this regard. It also their understanding that during con­

ference heads state held here last year President Eisenhower made pro­

posals for exchange of ideas and contact between peoples. In its official

statements my government had also on many occasions declared itself

in support this idea. It could therefore be assumed there would be no

difficulty in reaching agreement on such matter, where we found such

identity between views two governments.

8. Wang continued we now found selves in fifteenth month our

negotiations. If we still fail achieve something at this juncture, we

greatly disappoint people of world and of own countries. It seemed to

him if we really desired make progress in solving problems we should

conduct earnest negotiations; for to introduce prerequisites would not

produce any results. He continued hope that this morning I would be

able give favorable views on proposals their side had made for lifting

embargo and for cultural exchange respectively.

9. I replied his view of negotiation still appears be all take and no

give. I regretted this appears still be case as hard see how progress can

be achieved under those circumstances. I agreed it important we be

clear in minds why we at stage we are after fourteen months discus­

sion. There were two simple straightforward, reasonable and mutually

advantageous objectives which have been sought by my government

at this stage. First these was that of release American citizens held in

his country. Whose responsibility was it that after fourteen months

this objective still not achieved; it certainly not responsibility my gov­

ernment. Who had failed release these people in spite our clear agree­

ment on subject. It his government which after 14 months continued

hold these people; I had pointed out at very outset these talks great

importance this subject as far as future our relations concerned. He

freely entered into agreement with me which clearly covered, and

I had thought disposed of, this question. Failure carry out this agree­

ment could not be excused by retreating into plea this involved inter­

national matters and domestic afffairs. Every international agreement

to greater or lesser extent involved sovereign and internal affairs. If

after entering into such agreement government should plead that

it could not perform them because involved sovereign and internal

affairs, international agreement would have little meaning. In fact

international relations would deteriorate into chaos. This first agree­

ment between us had tremendous importance and potentialities for

future our relations. I had entered into it with much hope and opti­

mism. Failure carry it out had sorely tried that hope and optimism

as well as patience. I did not understand how he could term our

pointing out clear fact of failure carry out this agreement as distortion

and slander. Procrastination entirely part his authorities. They were

ones that have it in their power stop their procrastination in carrying

out this agreement. Did no good try confuse and obscure this issue

by talking about lists Chinese in US. Both of us knew perfectly well

under terms agreed announcement no obligation on part US to furnish

any list Chinese in US. Both of us knew perfectly well such lists have

no relation to ability Chinese in US return his country if desire do so.

There only one question: are they able return if desire do so? Both of

us knew perfectly well not been single case any obstruction to their

return alleged through mechanism established that purpose.

10. I continued other immediate objective sought by my government

was renunciation force which would specifically apply to most serious

dispute between us. That objective also not been achieved. Whenever

appeared we close to achieving it his side had retreated into pleas of

domestic affairs, internal affairs, sovereignty, other such terms. Use of

such terms did not obscure fact that his governnment still refused make

clear-­cut unqualified renunciation force. Here again procrastination

entirely on his side. I had tried throughout discussion of this to point out

first and immediate question not whether this internal affair or interna­

tional affair or any other kind affair or otherwise to get into merits of this

whole complicated issue.

11. I continued overwhelmingly most important and first aspect

of it was whether we going to permit our differences—and certainly

there are differences—to plunge our two peoples into cataclysm of war.

This transcendental issue and cannot be concealed by distorting pro­

posals I made by making them appear say things did not say or by

making other proposals which avoid issue. He simply could not get

around fact my proposals been simple and straightforward. Without

prejudicing his position in any way—in fact I had specifically said so

in my proposals—we simply make it clear that renunciation force did

specifically apply to Taiwan, he simply could not get around fact it his

side which continues threaten use force that area if could not otherwise

attain ends. He could not get around fact it his side which thus far pro­

crastinated and refused renounce use threat force that area.

12. I continued had hope he would give up insistence we digress

from this fundamental issue to subordinate matters. Until this fun­

damental issue resolved, hard see how subordinate matters could be

resolved. In treating patient one deals with source and cause of dis­

ease rather than with symptoms. As had pointed out to him here and

as pointed out in Department’s statement September 24 to which he

referred, it hardly reasonable expect US discuss relaxation its trade

restrictions when trade that would result from such relaxation would

strengthen regime which refuses renounce use force against US. As that

release also pointed out and I pointed out to him previously here, my

government also not prepared enter into such discussions at time when

American citizens continue be held as political hostages despite pledge

of September 10 last year to permit them expeditiously exercise their

right return. That release uses term political hostages and I used term

here advisedly. I done this because his statements here. As well as public

statement his government made it all too clear it holds these people in

hope extracting further political concessions from my government. This

is type trading which I have and will continue refuse enter into. I find it

hard understand why his authorities also appear now believe my gov­

ernment could consider entering into any understanding with respect

cultural exchanges as long as these circumstances continue. A coun­

try does not enter into such relationships while its citizens continue be

unjustly imprisoned in violation of solemn commitments that they will

be released. Also while I entirely agree cultural relations between peoples

are important, desirable and can do much remove misunderstanding, it

hardly consistent to propose such relations with people while maintain­

ing clear threat use armed force against same people.

13. I continued Wang had spoken again this morning of long his­

tory cultural exchange and contact between our two peoples. He had

also spoken of strong desire cherished by both our people in this regard.

Cutting off this contact was entirely at initiative his government and

his government must bear entire responsibility for it. Because of strong

desire American people maintain this contact, hundreds of Americans

remained in territory which was brought under their control. These

were Americans who had long and distinguished history of high-­

minded unselfish cultural relations with Chinese people. They were

Americans who desired maintain these contacts. They were Americans

who could have contributed much to understanding between our

two peoples. What was history of this effort, this individual effort,

on part these Americans? Organized demonstrations were fomented

against them; everything possible done to foment hostility of popula­

tion towards them. Money was extorted from them. Chinese who had

any contact with them were placed in jeopardy. They were expelled

from country. Above all, out of this small group of people we know of

at least 155 who were arrested by his authorities. Stories of efforts by his

authorities to extort confessions of all sorts fantastic crimes from them

haven’t done much to encourage American Government or people to

attempt reestablish cultural contacts between us. It not done much to

encourage us to know that in addition those who were broken in body

and mind when they finally left his country, at least five died while in

prison or immediately following release from prison. This record not

pretty nor pleasant, regretted necessity bringing it up here. However

memories of those of us who associated with problem, memories of

friends and relatives these people still very fresh.

14. I continued as said at last meeting, had hoped this could all be

made matter of past. Had hoped bitterness in our hearts could disap­

pear. Had hoped this entire problem could be liquidated. Had hope this

could be done by release those that remained in prison so we could look

forward to fresh start. Had hoped this with all my heart both personally

and officially. My government had hoped for this same thing. I found it

inexplicable that his authorities not appreciated importance this. Perhaps

I in some way been deficient in not being able sufficiently clearly explain

this to him. If so I regretted it but assured him it not been through any

lack trying. If his authorities really desirous improving relations between

two countries and really desirous obtaining peaceful settlement other

outstanding problems, they continue have it in power do so. I assured

him my government continued hope they will do so.

15. Wang replied it with regret disappointment he listened my

remarks this morning as didn’t find anything contribute advance

these talks, but rather contrary. In these remarks I had made many

unreasonable charges against Chinese people which he could not

accept. If we discussed problem deterioration Sino-­American rela­

tions, we inevitably arrived at conclusion it Americans done much

wrong to Chinese people and not Chinese who wronged American

people. If anyone to make accusation with regard relations between

China America it evidently China which in right position make such

accusation, instead of American Government.

16. Wang continued fact was American aircraft and bombers throw­

ing bombs on Chinese territory killing Chinese people. No one could

ever charge Chinese aircraft sent to American territory carrying out

such inhuman destructive mission. Fact was American ground, sea and

air forces occupied part Chinese territory. Could I ever charge Chinese

forces ever occupied at any time American territory. It US which unrea­

sonably carried out detention of Chinese by public government orders

and American Government which persecuted and imprisoned Chinese

in US and as result this persecution many victims suffered mental

breakdown. I could not charge Chinese Government published decree

to detain Americans resident in China. It US which carried out policy

embargo against China not vice versa. It US which tried by every means

to deprive China of legitimate rights in international affairs, including

efforts on part US try deprive China of legitimate representation in UN.

And in doing so US has pressured other countries to follow lead. These

aggressive and unfriendly records of US against China not only roused

indignation all serious-­minded people his country but also aroused all

serious-­minded people of world to oppose such policy.

17. Wang continued China never adopted any blanket policy

against American citizens in China. There still many American citi­

zens who continue after long years residence to reside in his country

freely. These people so far have not indicated any desire return US.

There another group Americans who opposed Chinese people. There

yet another group Americans who sent by American Government and

purposely air dropped into Chinese territory. Such people did not come

to China out of any high-­minded idea, but went to China with poison,

pistols and bombs. Could anyone expect Chinese Government treat

these people as distinguished guests. Despite these unfriendly activi­

ties consistently carried out by US, in spite this record, their side had

been patiently sitting here and had continued to desire negotiate with

America.

18. Wang continued I had remarked that they only wanted take not

give. They simply wanted take those things which originally belonged

them. What gift did we expect of them? In present circumstances

America already occupying Chinese territory Taiwan. Did US expect

China give more territory? Present difficulty is US merely thought of

own interest without considering interest of others. This case of pur­

suing only ones selfish interest. In that manner how could problems

between us be solved. We sitting here engaging in discussion and our

objective should be resolve issues. If we could not now resolve big

issues, we could still resolve small issues. This would still help a lot

and it better to solve these small issues than not solve any at all. As we

sitting here in negotiations we should seek means for improving rela­

tions instead poisoning them. If one has intention poisoning relations

between two countries instead of trying solve outstanding issues, then

what is good of continuing these talks? Record of these talks clearly

showed they consistently working to resolve issues between us. Their

record evidenced by successive drafts introduced on agreement mak­

ing renunciation force declaration as well as by proposals they made

designed remove embargo against China and designed promote human

contacts cultural exchanges between two countries.

19. Wang continued American press always been fond of making

charges against China alleging it not free country and existence iron

or bamboo curtain and alleging his government did not offer freedom

of travel for foreigners. Present fact is Americans desire visit China.

American people interested in China. Deeds and words of American

Government are quite inconsistent. Proposals Chinese Government

introduced on question contacts persons and cultural exchange capa­

ble of satisfying desire of American people. Present action of US

Government runs counter to such desire of American people. This evi­

denced by fact American people not making protest against Chinese

Government but rather against American Government on question

contacts of people and cultural exchange. Policy pursued by American

Government on question of contacts of peoples and cultural exchange

can show whether this government has any confidence in own system.

Refusal on part US Government to proposal of cultural exchange and

contact of peoples shows American Government has lost confidence

in own people as well as its own system. It out of friendly spirit his

side proposed contact of people and cultural exchange. Refusal of US

Government to give favorable consideration this proposal would make

them consider it necessary make public their proposal so public could

judge.

20. I replied as he had once well said here, these negotiations

not football game. They could not be judged, neither would world

judge them on basis of number balls tossed out on field. Could only

be judged, and world would judge on basis substantive positions

each side had taken. It US which proposed unconditionally we make

it clear our differences be settled only by peaceful means. No amount

proposals or words could obscure fact his side still rejects that sim­

ple proposition. No amount proposals or words could obscure fact

his side still procrastinated in accepting that fundamental principle.

No amount words can obscure fact his government still failing carry

out its undertaking permit Americans return. I regretted that instead

facing up to resolving these basic matters his government intended

again resort to forum public statements. However I continued be

entirely willing let world judge issues. I entirely willing let world

judge whether it and American people had faith in our system which

had endured for almost two centuries and brought to our people and

world standards of material and spiritual well-­being and freedom

unparalleled in world’s history.

21. Wang said he had presented his views this morning and had

no more to add. He sure people able judge who trying solve issues and

who obstructing.

22. I had no more and suggested Thursday, October 18 for next

meeting. He agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 46

Geneva, October 4, 1956

Dear Walter:

I have little to add to my telegram on today’s meeting. As you will

see I still think they are working toward a position which they esti­

mate will enable them to bring about at least an indefinite recess, most

likely sometime after the elections and before the new year. I may well

be wrong and you all may well be right, but I do not think it can be

assumed because they have continued talking up to now they will con­

tinue to do so indefinitely. During past months I have been able to do a

certain amount of stringing them along and dangling a certain amount

of “pie in the sky”, but I have now largely run out of that as I have

never been in a position where I could say if you do so and so we will

do so and so. I full well realize the reasons it has never been possible to

enable me to take any such positions, but I know also that you realize

the extremely narrow limits in which this has required I operate. As

I did full well realize this at my last meeting I threw renunciation in the

cultural exchange package and strengthened it today. My only point is

that with the material now at hand, I do not feel confident that I will

be able to keep things going much longer. Perhaps I feel low this after­

noon after the verbal exercise of this morning and perhaps I am unduly

pessimistic.

I had planned to make only a short speech this morning but he

threw up so many balls I felt I had to field, that it turned out to be rather

long. I could well have fielded some more but I thought I caught the

most important ones.

At the moment I haven’t got the slightest notion of what to say at

the next meeting. However, I hope that by then the three prisoners will

be on their way so I can make a little mileage out of that.

Regards to all,

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

Letter No. 57

Washington, October 12, 1956

Dear Alex:

The principal event since your last meeting has been the Chinese

Communist last-­moment refusal to allow Addis, the British Counselor

from Peiping, to see Father McCarthy in Ward Road Jail in Shanghai

on October 5, after all arrangements had been made and after Addis

arrived at the prison. Addis was met with the bland statement from

the officials that McCarthy had changed his mind and did not want to

see Addis. The officials added that they could not force McCarthy to

have the interview. Addis was naturally taken aback, but did what

he could by way of remonstrance. The British are of course as aware

as we are that McCarthy did not voluntarily change his mind. The

Communist claim was either an outright lie, or else they had broken

McCarthy. We suspect that they want to demonstrate to the British

that they are wasting their time in trying to see the prisoners. The

Communist decision may have been made after they allowed Father

McCarthy’s letter to O’Neill to be delivered. We are enclosing a copy

of the full text of this letter, which shows that Father McCarthy was

alert and resolute when he wrote the letter. We have it from other

sources that he probably is the most resourceful and durable of the

remaining Shanghai prisoners, which makes it all the more unlikely

that he would have voluntarily given up the fight. Since this rep­

resents a callous and completely indefensible hardening of the

Chinese Communist position, Mr. Robertson believes that we should

attack Wang very vigorously on it at the October 18 meeting. You will

get full instructions on it in your guidance telegram. The British are

awaiting guidance from us on how they should react in Peiping. We

will counsel a strong reaction there too although our main reliance

will be on you at Geneva.

2. [text not declassified] a Chinese mental case at Logansport, Indiana

still demands to return to the Communist mainland but according to

the foreign student adviser appears to be incompetent to take the ini­

tiative to get in touch with the Indian Embassy. Consequently we are

considering asking the Immigration Service to deport him. The longer

he remains the more chance there is that the Chinese Communists will

exploit the case in their propaganda.

Informal.

3. One of the two Chinese convicts at the U.S. Health Service

Hospital at Lexington, Kentucky, who opted for return to the China

Mainland has now informed the parole officer that he has changed his

mind. He claims that since he was formerly in the Nationalist Army

he will be persecuted by the Communists should he go back. We are

asking that commutation of sentence proceedings in his case be halted.

Fortunately we had not told the Indians or the Chinese Communists of

the results of our survey so that if this development can be kept confi­

dential no harm will have been done.

4. Missing U.S. Military Personnel

We have thought a good deal about how we should renew our

pressure on the Communists to account for our missing military per­

sonnel. This is a subject which the relatives of the missing persons keep

very much alive here and numerous letters are written each month

by the Department of State, the Department of Defense and USUN in

New York in response to pleas from these relatives. Our official replies

contain the assurance that the United States Government is leaving no

stone unturned to try to obtain the facts from the Communists. We feel

very keenly the need to take some action. However, we share the views

expressed both by you and by General Guard, the Senior U.S. repre­

sentative on UNCMAC, that we are unlikely to obtain any satisfactory

accounting from the Communists either in Panmunjom or Geneva.

After weighing the pros and cons, we wonder if it would not be

preferable for you to reopen the subject at Geneva. Enclosure A contains a

summary of our reasons. These were originally prepared for inclusion in

a memorandum recommending reintroduction of this subject at Geneva,

but we wanted first to get your reaction. A further reason for selecting the

Geneva forum, which, for obvious reasons, is mentioned neither in the

enclosure nor in Col. Monroe’s memorandum on his talks with the U.S.

element of the MAC, is Col. Monroe’s feeling that the personnel pres­

ently assigned to UNCMAC or those who might be assigned there in the

future, have neither the experience nor the specialized skill required to

negotiate effectively on this subject with the Communists.

Our tentative thinking is that you might introduce this item again,

using as your springboard the statement by the Communist spokes­

man in the MAC that they had no responsibility for individuals held

outside Korea. You could then proceed on a case by case basis to seek

information from Wang. Presumably he would, at least in the begin­

ning, refuse to discuss this issue and try to shift the responsibility back

to the MAC. This would not be so easy for him to accomplish this time,

in view of the statement made by the Communist spokesman in that

body. Even if we fail to obtain any information from the Communists,

we might at least succeed in throwing them off balance for a time,

particularly if we should decide to exploit the issue publicly.

We should like to have your candid views as to the advantages and

disadvantages of reintroducing this subject at this time, and also your

estimate of the kind of support you would require from Defense should

you undertake this task. Defense’s capabilities to supply the kind of

information you would want is, of course, limited. The enclosed copy

of a memorandum from General Erskine to the Secretary of Defense

indicates what Defense is undertaking to do to supply some of the defi­

ciencies pointed out in Dave’s letter of August 23.

5. Our feeling here based more on our appraisal of the general

attitude of the Chinese Communists than the tactical situation in the

Geneva talks is that the Communists are probably not moving toward

a recess or break-­off of the talks at least not until after the elections

and the opening of the UNGA. It appears to us they have more to gain

by holding on than by breaking off. The latter move seems contrary to

their general posture in international affairs. We are concerned at the

adverse effects that the continuation of these talks are reported to be

having in some parts of the Far East. We are considering asking key

posts for up to date reports on this matter.

6. You will be interested in the latest Chinese Communist gambits

in the cultural field. A number of American publishers have received

orders for American newspapers and magazines. The official Chinese

Communist book and periodical agency the Gnozi Shudian has sent

letters to a large number of American publishers requesting the con­

tribution or sale at discount of large selections of scientific and techni­

cal books for a proposed exhibit in Peiping early in 1957. The Chinese

Communists have also announced on the China Mainland that a wide

range of American publications including Time and Life can now be sub­

scribed to. Teaching of English is being introduced in the middle schools

to the extent that teachers are available.

7. By way of general comment, don’t expect any new tack to be

authorized here on either of the two big issues. The emphatic conclu­

sion here is that our position is unassailable on both questions and that

any attempt to look for new wording on renunciation otherwise show

any “give” would only weaken our position, both from a tactical stand­

point and from the standpoint of our public position when the eventual

public showdown comes. We are somewhat more skeptical than you

apparently are as to the likelihood of a Chinese Communist suspension

of the talks or other major move within the next few weeks. The Chinese

Communists are exploiting the talks in various ways, as we have seen in

connection with the 8th Party Congress, and in their talks with visiting

delegations, such as the Malayan Chinese, and the Indonesian delegation

headed by Sukarno. Their present tactics seem to envisage a continuation

of the talks and further misrepresentation and exploitation of the fact that

the talks are private and are continuing. We are making a new study in

FE of the whole question of the influence of the talks on Asian attitudes

toward Communist China and toward our China policy. As a sidelight

on the above, you will want to know that Mr. Robertson thinks that it is

preferable for you to refrain from indicating any regret or disappoint­

ment at Chinese Communist publication, or threatened publication, of

statements on the talks. Naturally, you will not encourage publicity by

them, but we do not now like the connotations of deploring publicity or

indicating that we fear it or find it distasteful.

FE/EX working on your request that Helenka be placed on a daily con­

tractual basis.

Regards and the best to each of you,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Copy of letter from Father McCarthy to Charge at Peiping, dated

Sept. 1, 1956.

2. Memorandum on Missing Personnel

3. Gist of a telegram from Foreign Office commenting on O’Neill’s

telegram of Oct. 8.

4. Memo from General Erskine to Secretary of Defense dated Oct. 8

P.S. Apologies for the overlap between 5 and 7. You know how

rushed we are. I had Ralph work with me on this, and we crossed our

signals a bit.

440. For Johnson.

Guidance for October 18 meeting.

1. Major portion your presentation should be devoted to attacking

Communist failure carry out pledge made in Agreed Announcement.

Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy and Clough; cleared by Dulles, Phleger, and Sebald.

Lead off with McCarthy case as typical example of Communist dis­

regard of pledged word. First point out McCarthy and other nine

Americans should have been released long ago if clear language of

Agreed Announcement had any meaning. Now one of nine belatedly

permitted write British Charge stating he is unjustly prevented from

leaving and requesting representations his behalf. When Charge

endeavored investigate case as provided in Agreed Announcement his

representative prevented from seeing McCarthy, after Communists had

authorized interview and made appointment. Statement by prison offi­

cial that McCarthy did not wish interview is not credible. Note written

evidence that McCarthy wanted interview and ask why prison official

refused permit Charge’s representative verify McCarthy’s wishes.

In course of your presentation also press Communists for reply

which they promised some time ago to British Charge’s letter August 23

requesting permission visit all American prisoners. Communists have

no valid reason refuse this. In connection with Chou En-­lai’s statement

to British Charge December 9 that Communists could not permit visits

all Americans because US would not permit Indians visit Chinese pris­

oners this country, point out US has offered permit Indians interview

any Chinese prisoner this country, which Indians declined to do upon

instructions from Peiping.

State that US Government has been extremely patient in face of

inexplicable refusal Communists carry out their commitment release all

Americans. U.S. Government seriously concerned at this latest attempt

to evade obligations of Agreed Announcement, and is considering

making public statement.

FYI We believe Communists can be put on defensive both in Geneva

meetings and publicly by using McCarthy case to dramatize Communist

violation public pledges. Their plea for closer cultural contacts with the

US can be made to look ridiculous in light of their behavior in McCarthy

case. We are requesting British Charge to (1)  make representations

requesting immediate release McCarthy on basis his letter stating he

being unjustly prevented from leaving; (2) write McCarthy explaining

circumstances last attempted interview and offering arrange another

interview; (3) write Communist Foreign Office asking reply to his let­

ter of August 23 requesting permission interview all jailed Americans.

END FYI

2. Reject attempts to draw you into discussion of Communist

cultural exchange or trade proposals, stressing resentment American

government and people at continued detention American citizens

and inability rely on public commitments made by Communists.

Communist refusal agree to meaningful renunciation of force should

also be cited. FYI In view Wang’s statement last meeting we agree it

would be consistent Chinese Communist previous practice for them to

issue statement on cultural exchange shortly before October 18 meet­

ing. In this event we concur course proposed last sentence your 362.

Department prepared make reply if deemed desirable. END FYI

3. In any discussion of renunciation of force hold to established

position.

Dulles

443. For Johnson.

Latest Chinese Communist statement on Geneva talks seems to

have fallen flat. Not carried so far by any newspaper or wire service

seen here. We plan ignore statement if press continues to do so.

Dulles

by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger and Sebald.

Letter No. 47

Geneva, October 17, 1956

Dear Walter:

1. I am starting this on Wednesday and will finish it tomorrow after

the meeting.

2. I certainly have no objection to again bringing up the POW ques­

tion here, but as Monroe said after his trip to Korea, I think the decision

revolves around whether we believe there is any chance whatever of

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

obtaining any more information and, if not, whether we then intend

to use the issue further publicly to indict the Chicoms. If it is solely

the latter I believe Geneva to be the best forum. I do not agree with the

statement in the draft memo enclosed with your letter (No. 56) that

Geneva offers a slightly better chance than Panmunjon for obtaining

an accounting for at least a few of the 450. I can build up a good public

record on the subject here and can probably embarrass Wang to a certain

degree, but he is never going to give me any accounting for individuals

here, and we should not raise the subject here on the assumption that

there is any possibility he will do so. He has frequently and strongly

taken the position that the lists he gave me at the outset of the talks

accounted for all Americans in China and it cannot be expected he will

reverse that position.

3. As a minor point with respect to numbered para (2) of the draft

memo, I did in fact allude to the POW question at our 56th meeting

(para 16 mytel 173) and drew a response from him on it.

4. With regard to the less likelihood of their countering with our

failure to account for communist prisoners if the subject is raised here,

you will recall that when I first raised the suject here he fortunately

countered only with the 14,000 sent to Taiwan which was not hard to

handle, but he may now be better prepared to counter with others and

I will have to be prepared immediately to reply if he does so. Of course,

by raising the subject here we will probably avoid the more difficult

subject of the Koreans released by Rhee.

5. In this connection it is my recollection that their list may be

wholly or primarily based on the lists of notification of capture that

we transmitted through the ICRC. It is also my recollection that a large

discrepancy in these lists arose from the fact that a capture form would

be made out at the time the man was taken with a copy to the ICRC. On

arrival at Kojedo the man’s tag would be missing and another would

be made out with another copy to the ICRC. Because of the language

problem, difficulties of transliteration, and sometimes through the

POW giving a different name, the name would not appear as identi­

cal with the first report. Thus ICRC would receive and transmit to the

Communists two names covering the capture of only one man. I do not

recall whether this appears anywhere in the records, but I know it was

explained to me when I made my “POW trip” to Korea with General

Hull.

6. Also pertinent to all of this was an exchange of numbers of per­

sons held in the early days of the armistice negotiations. My memory

on this is dim but I believe we gave the Communists some definite

numbers on those we held.

7. I do not recall what the circumstances are and when the commu­

nist list of missing personnel mentioned in the last sentence of the first

para of the draft memo was presented or of what it consisted. My only

point is that before terming it “in large part fictitious” I would want

to be sure that it is not in fact based upon names originating with the

UNC.

8. My memory on our exchanges of lists of names of POWs with

the Communists is also very hazy. Not that it is likely to come in any

detail here, but to avoid possible mistakes I would appreciate a short

summary of the facts in this regard. I have a feeling we gave them some

list early in the armistice negotiations, and that they gave us one but

I am just not sure whether this is correct or of what they consisted.

Were there also not lists given the NNRC which were passed on to the

Communists? I do not want anyone to go to any great trouble on this

but perhaps there is a pertinent summary already made up. Perhaps

HD would have it available or could readily make it up.

9. Whether the subject is raised here or Panmunjon it will be

important that the information with respect to individuals reflect the

“accounting” set forth in CINCUNC’s message of March 2, 1956. That

is, in our best documented cases of their at one time being alive in

Communist hands, the March accounting attempted to dispose of them

by saying they had “escaped”. Thus in these “escaped” cases the issue is

no longer whether they were at one time alive in Communist hands, by

saying they “escaped” they have admitted this, but rather being able to

demonstrate that such an accounting is false. This is very well set forth

in detail in the memo enclosed with Dave’s letter of August 23. My rea­

son for mentioning it is that while the Memo to the Service Secretaries

enclosed with your letter encloses what I presume is the substance of

Dave’s memo, the attached “Suggestions” do not appear to take account

of this important point of which I would have to take account before

again raising individual cases here. For our purposes here I would not

need any large number of cases, a half dozen or so would probably

serve my purposes, although, of course, the more I have in my pocket

the better. My suggestion would be to have Ralph and Col. Monroe

pick out a few of the most promising cases and exhaustively run them

down with the services rather than spreading the effort too thin.

10. My 362 did not imply that I had changed my estimate that they

are most likely to make a major move shortly after the elections and the

opening of the UNGA. With two weeks between meetings, the “next

few meetings” mentioned in my 362 brings us up to that point. What I

have been and continue to say is that they are very obviously putting

themsleves in a position to carry out such a move at about that time.

Whether they do so, of course, remains to be seen. I simply want to

be sure that the Department understands and is prepared for the con­

tingency and does not desire to take any further action to forestall it.

Incidentally, while our position through the Suez crisis has been very

consistent with the position on renunciation of force I have taken here,

the statements of the French and British have certainly not given too

much support to the “universally accepted” nature of the principle.

11. I was very interested in your account of the Chinese Communist

initiative in the publications field. Do our Treasury regulations oper­

ate so as to prevent any such shipments? (I have subsequently seen

the CA notice which I am glad to note is encouraging the licensing for

non-technical publications.)

12. I had been deploring publicity under my previous instructions

but had also tried to make it clear we did not fear it. I entirely agree

with Walter’s views and will act accordingly in the future.

13. The guidance for tomorrow has just come in. It is very com­

plete and I certainly agree we are on a strong wicket in the disgraceful

McCarthy affair. I just can’t understand why they have done it.

Thursday

14. Back from the meeting and have just sent off my summary to

you. I do not think there can longer be much doubt as to the course of

action they have laid out for themselves. The only question now is the

timing—that is will they carry out their move at the next meeting just

before the elections and the UNGA or will they wait until the follow­

ing meeting just after the elections and the UNGA. In any event, there

will in all probability be a public statement following the next meeting,

which will make the threat to break, with the break carried out at the

following meeting. One can never dismiss the possibility of a bland

reversal but I just do not think it is likely as they have now gone almost

out to the end of this limb. I hope that the Secretary will have time care­

fully to consider the situation and that my guidance will be as explicit

as possible.

15. I deliberately did not try further today to develop the threat

implicit in the last sentence of his prepared statement, leaving that for

next time when I will want to make a very carefully considered and

comprehensive statement in reply to his of today. I would hope that

my guidance will also cover whether it is desired I try to steer things in

the direction of an indefinite recess or a clean break, if the next meeting

goes in that direction.

16. I should think it would be nice to get out our statement on

implementation before the next meeting. I think it would place us in a

much better position to meet their next move. (Incidentally, I hope you

will get it to us here well before release time so that we know what has

been said and I can get a copy over to Wang at approximately its release

time.) I should also think that at our next meeting I should be prepared

to say something on the missing POWs without getting into any details.

17. I am enclosing for comment a draft break statement which

I would plan to issue immediately following any meeting at which a

break would occur. It might, of course, be necessary somewhat to mod­

ify it to meet the exact situation but I would plan to stick fairly close to

its general line. As this would ostensibly be an extemporaneous state­

ment as I left the meeting room it must be short and simple.

18. In the quite likely event he does not break at our next meeting

but very shortly thereafter and issues a statement along the lines of his

prepared statement today I would propose to promptly comment along

changes as the circumstances require.

Regards to all,

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. Just an afterthought. If they are planning something timed to

our elections I might throw them off step and somewhat spike their

guns by asking for a postponement of the next meeting to Monday

November 5. I am in a good position to ask for it as I have never cashed

in on the times I have agreed to his requests for postponement. I would,

of course, do it at the last minute, that is on Wednesday or Thursday

before the meeting and all I would have to do is send him word that it

was “impossible” for me to meet until Nov. 5.

UAJ

Enclosure

DRAFT STATEMENT

I regret to announce that at today’s meeting Ambassador Wang

refused to agree to any date for our next meeting. (or refused to meet

further with me).

In effect, he refuses to meet further unless the U.S. capitulates to

their demand for a Foreign Ministers conference under the continued

threat that the Chinese Communists will resort to force if they cannot

otherwise achieve their ambitions in the Taiwan area. Ambassador

Wang has also demanded that the U.S. remove its existing controls over

trade and travel between the U.S. and China.

I have told Ambassador Wang that I hope he will reconsider this

peremptory attitude and for my part I stand ready again to meet at

any time to resume with him in a genuine negotiating spirit search

for agreement on an unconditional declaration which would remove

the existing threat of the Chinese Communists to resort to force in the

Taiwan area and agree that our differences will be settled by peaceful

means only.

The U.S. continues to expect the Chinese Communists to carry out

their commitment of September 10, 1955 and promptly to release the

10 unfortunate Americans still held in their prisons in violation of that

agreement.

I have informed Ambassador Wang that any communications can

be transmitted through our respective consular offices here in Geneva.

Geneva, October 18, 1956, noon

415. From Johnson.

Two hour twenty minute meeting this morning. I opened with

statement along lines para one Deptel 440 except that only stated prison

authorities refused permit UK Charge representative see McCarthy, not

mentioning prison official allegation McCarthy did not wish interview.

(My thought was if Wang briefed on subject and made this statement

would use it as point for counterattack. However during discussion it

was obvious he not briefed on any details McCarthy case). He made

no response my notification we were considering public statement and

after extemporaneous rebuttal my opening statement along familiar

lines, made prepared statement opening with sentence “talks have now

come to stage where no progress can be made”. Reviewed negotiations

along familiar lines and then alleged US has revealed “it deliberately

blocking progress in Ambassadorial talks and is fearful of any improve­

ment in Sino-­American relations”. PRC has exerted “greatest efforts”

which have not been rewarded and considers such “futile situation

should not continue any longer”. PRC therefore formally proposes the

holding of a Foreign Ministers conference “to discuss the questions of

relaxing and eliminating tensions Taiwan area, as well as questions

mutual renunciation force by China and US, lifting embargo, peoples

contacts and cultural exchange, etc.” “What is at stake is the future of

Sino-­American relations and indeed peace of Far East and world”.

Limit Distribution.

In reply I reviewed history their bad faith implementing first

agreement and their refusal abandon use force Taiwan area as showing

futility discussion at any other level. If they desired resolve these prob­

lems could be done between us as Ambassadors, if they did not desire

resolve them changing level would make no difference. US would not

negotiate under threat of force.

During subsequent give and take he did not attempt force any more

specific reply, obviously content let matter rest here until next meet­

ing, and subsequent discussion centered around implementation with

my continuing come back to McCarthy case, PRC refusal permit third

party arrangement operate absence representations Indian Embassy

etc. Wang consistently took refuge in Taiwan entry permit charge.

Next meeting Friday, November 2. Returning Prague tomorrow.

Gowen

416. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

Wang clearly plotted their future course at today’s meeting and

barring unforeseen reversal only question is timing. Believe most likely

course is release shortly after next meeting of public statement along

lines his today’s prepared statement. In this event or in event break next

meeting propose immediately issue here public statement accordance

draft being transmitted by letter.

Propose at next meeting make careful review our position noting

implied threat last sentence his today’s prepared statement and also

again making mention missing POW issue. While will not go into

details latter issue this meeting will appreciate most recent statistical

summary that situation. Suggest release our implementation statement

before next meeting.

Gowen

Distribution.

417. From Johnson.

1. I opened 60th with prepared statement:

A. During recent meetings, and in your govt’s current series bi-­

weekly press statements recurrent theme has been attempt create false

impression responsibility for our failure make further progress these

talks and specifically failure thus far reach agreement on fundamen­

tal question renunciation force rests with my side. Emphasis your side

places on these unsupported allegations demonstrates uneasy aware­

ness of glaring weakness its position. That is, in final analysis, it comes

down to question of comparative good faith of two sides in carrying

out presently existing or proposed agreements. Fortunately, people of

world who being called upon form opinion on this subject have entirely

concrete set facts by which they can judge this matter for selves. World

well knows of commitment your side made Sept 10 1955, respect return

Americans. World well knows in spite of that clear commitment ten

Americans still languish in your prisons. Let us take as example the

case just one these Americans, Fr. McCarthy.

B. On June 15 1953, Fr. McCarthy’s long devotion to Chinese peo­

ple and desire promote understanding between our two peoples was

rewarded by sudden arrest. Without respect for legal norms of any social

or political system he was kept in prison for month after month year after

year without trial, without charges being proferred, without opportunity

obtain defense counsel, without opportunity defend himself, without

opportunity have his guilt or innocence determined by impartial tribunal.

Finally on Sept 18 1955 Fr. McCarthy is shown by your authorities copy

of agreed announcement which you and I issued here eight days previ­

ously. As would any reasonable man, Fr. McCarthy believed this solemn

commitment applied him as well as all other imprisoned Americans. He

could only have anticipated his expeditious release return to his country

accordance with that announcement.

C. However, what happens? Instead of promised release, on

October 22 1955 he finally given so-­called trial and sentenced spend

more years in prison.

D. In meanwhile Fr. McCarthy receives letter from UK Charge

written and delivered within context of announcement and trans­

mitting copy thereof to him. Again he must have dared hope. On

Distribution.

December 10 1955 he is permitted send letter to UK Charge properly

pointing out he was being prevented from returning to US. UK Charge,

again in absolute conformity with agreed announcement made rep­

resentations to your govt on behalf Fr. McCarthy. What is result? In

utter disregard of freely entered into commitment and provisions of

announcement your govt curtly asserted it was entirely matter its

sovereignty as to how it treated imprisoned Americans and refused

act on UK Charge’s representations. Thus in this one example there

is laid out extraordinarily complete record of not only failure your

authorities release Americans accordance with their commitment Sept

10 but even permit operation of third party arrangement which was

established by that announcement.

E. However, even this is not end of record in this case. On Sept 1

this year Fr. McCarthy permitted again write UK Charge request­

ing interview with him, again within context announcement. Your

authorities agreed permit interview and time was set for it. Acting in

good faith representative UK Charge makes long journey to Shanghai,

presents himself at prison at appointed time. Then, prison authorities

refuse permit representative UK Charge even see Fr. McCarthy. He

refused even meager privilege of interview. He refused very explicit

authority set forth in announcement investigate facts in any such case.

There cannot be any clearer evidence of deliberate refusal carry out

every substantive provision of announcement.

F. It should not even have been necessary for Fr. McCarthy write

asking for interview, for UK Charge should long ago have been enabled

by your authorities see all Americans who continue be held in prison.

As long ago as last December your Prime Minister told UK Charge

that he was not permitted visit American prisoners on grounds that

Indian Embassy in US not permitted visit Chinese prisoners my coun­

try. Although this matter had not been raised during our discussion

you here, and Indian Embassy in US was informed, that its representa­

tives could interview any Chinese prisoner in US whether in federal or

state institutions. It solely because of inexplicable objections your govt

that this was not done. On Aug 23 this year UK Charge again formally

requested permission visit all American prisoners. Although there no

longer even slightest basis for your authorities refuse this modest rea­

sonable request, your govt has not even yet replied his letter.

G. My govt has been extremely patient in face this inexplicable

continued refusal of your authorities carry out its clear commitment

release all Americans. It is also seriously concerned at attempt of your

authorities, as exemplified in case Fr. McCarthy, evade their obliga­

tions under announcement with respect third party functions. These

undisputable facts with regard public agreement between us and my

govt is considering making public statement with regard to these facts.

H. It is in light of these facts as well as continued unwillingness

of your govt enter into meaningful renunciation force that world will

judge which side is willing carry out its public commitments, which

side is willing unconditionally renounce recourse to use of force in

settling our disputes, and thus, which side is truly demonstrating its

good faith in attempting improve relations between us.

2. Wang replied, in my statement I referred to issue civilians as

well as renunciation force declaration. He could only say I had only

repeated old arguments in this respect and in doing so reversed facts.

In discussing question civilians had never made any clear accounting

in cases 52 people of 55 names he had given me and also failed give

accounting with regard 26 persons whose cases brought up previously

and whose names I had given him. I had not referred to any improve­

ment in ability Chinese in US return their fatherland. I had not spoken

of any action taken by my authorities eliminate obstruction offered

Chinese returning their country. Thus it was their side which actually

dissatisfied with present situation on civilians. Despite repeated rep­

resentation of their side, situation had not yet improved. I had made

reference to American nationals in China but not able state any case

of ordinary American resident in China hindered or prevented from

leaving. This fully proved it precisely Chinese side which carrying out

agreement between us. Policy his govt any aliens residing his country

without respect nationality, who are friendly to people and abide by

their law, will be treated with even more friendliness and protected.

To treat foreign friends as criminals is not practice of China and will

never occur China. Such is only practice of American authorities with

respect innocent Chinese residents in America. However, any aliens

residing China who dared go against Chinese law would certainly be

punished according to law.

3. Wang continued, with regard concrete example I had given

this morning regard case Fr. McCarthy, if he had not engaged in intel­

ligence activities against China and had not carried out subversive

activities against China Govt, he would never been punished by law.

Fr. McCarthy had himself made confession regard these criminal

activities. In case any foreign nationals engaged in subversive activi­

ties against Chinese Govt, could anyone expect Chinese stand idly by

without doing anything against him. Supposing such case occured in

US, he presumed my govt would also take similar measures against

him. This is only natural.

4. Wang continued from prepared statement, at today’s meet­

ing he would like point out talks have now come to stage where no

progress can be made. This could not but greatly disappoint them. At

last meeting my side used entirely unjustified pretext and once again

rejected last proposal mutual contact and cultural relations between

peoples. This could not but lead one to conclusion present talks at

­Ambassadorial level could not solve other practical matters at issue

between China and US as stipulated in agenda. At very beginning our

discussions on second point agenda my side deliberately and without

any reason ­haggled procrastinated first point agenda. Then so-­called

renunciation force item introduced. However throughout full year

negotiations on  this, my side persisted in unjustifiable position

encroaching sovereignty interfering internal affairs. My side never

tried conceal this intention encroach sovereignty and interference

internal affairs under renunciation force proposition. In this respect

my remarks at last meeting on relations between international agree­

ment and sovereign and internal affairs were startling. According my

logic it seems any country which happens have dealing with US must

accept encroachment sovereignty and interference internal affairs.

Entirely contrary this attitude of my side, their side adopted spirit con­

ciliation with view resolving ­Sino-­American disputes and made three

successive reasonable proposals this respect. It only due persistence

my side in unreasonable demands, we thus far have not succeeded

and talks developed into deadlock. Evidently until my side abandons

attempt encroachment sovereignty and interference internal affairs

no progress could be expected this question. In spite all this, his side

had continued make important efforts with view breaking deadlock.

Their side had introduced two proposals for lifting embargo and peo­

ples contact and cultural relations. In making these proposals their

side believed agreement these matters which easily resolved would

not only dispose these two outstanding questions Sino-­American

relations, but also definitely facilitate improvement atmosphere these

talks, thus contributing to solution other controversial issues. However

my side had rejected both these reasonable propositions. It should be

pointed out my side even refused ­conduct discussion these proposals.

In addition to making acceptance of our terms on renunciation force

issue, precondition also introduced pretext of handful Americans who

offended law in China and ­serving sentences in China. These pretexts

all been refuted long ago—we ourselves well aware such pretexts

untenable. Everybody knows pretexts my side could in no sense jus­

tify obstruction lifting embargo and development personal contacts

and cultural exchange.

5. Wang continued, in taking such position my side only reveals

self as deliberately blocking any progress in Ambassadorial talks and

fearful any improvement Sino-­American relations. Talks between

us at Ambassadorial level had taken such long time, during which

so many trials made. Despite fact their side had made such efforts,

these efforts not rewarded as deserved. They consider now such futile

situation should not continue any longer. They consider it is time

Foreign Ministers our countries meet for direct talks. Hence he now for­

mally proposed Foreign Ministers conference between China and US be

held to discuss question relaxing and eliminating tension Taiwan area

as well as questions mutual renunciation force by China and America,

lifting embargo, personal contact and cultural exchange, etc. In making

this proposal their side was fully conscious duty to people. What is at

stake is future Sino-­American relations and indeed peace in Far East

and world. Therefore it his earnest hope my govt would give careful

consideration to this proposal.

6. I replied when my govt made proposal for these talks he would

well recall that it put as first item in terms reference question return

civilians. His govt agreed here this was first item on agenda. His govt

well aware what we referring to when used term return civilians. There

had been various indirect exchanges between our govts on subject and

in 1954 he and I here directly discussed matter. Had been discussion of

subject here between our respective Consulates and when he and I first

met here August last year, I had given him list of people with whom

we concerned in discussion of subject. These were people who denied

exit permits from his country and people in prison. Our discussions

here prior issuance announcement Sept 10 last year, so far as Americans

concerned, centered entirely around these people. Sept 6 last year he

informed me cases those refused exit permits had been resolved and

they being given such permits. Thus when we made announcement

Sept 10 only cases remaining were those in prison. He would well recall

our long discussions this subject and would well recall history of each

of words appearing in that announcement, particularly word “expedi­

tiously.” Quite clear intent my govt this subject from very beginning

not issuance some vague public statement which resolved nothing, but

in resolution problem itself.

7. I continued, we given that problem to resolve and was on very

clear understanding my part issuance of that statement would resolve

problem that I had agreed to its issuance. I willing agree to wording

therein, which not as explicit as would have liked to see, in deference

to his views and on understanding it covered problem we given to

resolve. I still considered that agreement did cover problem. As said

at time we reached that agreement, however, agreement as such did

not resolve problem, only carrying out agreement could resolve prob­

lem. This was first agreement reached between us. Its prompt faithful

execution could have had great potentialities for future our relations. I

and my govt had most earnestly hoped it would be promptly faithfully

carried out. During past months here I had over and over again pointed

out if not being carried out. This morning I pointed out fact regard just

one case in which not carried out, not only respect commitment release

person involved but also with what we might term more minor matter

of third party functions. Thus this not matter of any pretext involv­

ing any few American citizens, important though each them were. It

transcended even their importance. It matter good faith carrying out

agreement he and I, as Ambassadors representing our two govts,

had solemnly entered into. If not good faith carrying out agreements

reached between us as Ambassadors, it certainly futile consider nego­

tiations at another level. Thus, progress blocked not by refusal my side

engage in discussions other agreements, progress blocked by failure

his side carry out agreement already reached. Progress measured not

by number paper agreements we pour out to press of world but by

what we actually do in solving problems. I been trying my best urge,

in every way I capable, on his govt that it make progress in resolving

this first problem between us. His govt, and only his govt, had it in its

power permit us make progress this regard. Entirely choice his govt as

to whether or not progress would be made.

8. I continued, we next both agreed most urgent problem facing

us was that existing Taiwan area. I thought we both accepted obvi­

ous fact situation very complex and did not lend itself to any ready

and easy solution. We disagreed very strongly about origins, causes,

possible solutions and other aspects that situation. However, that

did not mean we had to go to war about it. We could both agree only

peaceful methods be used in pursuing our policies, and resolving that

problem. That had been my proposition and very simple proposition

from very beginning. On other hand from very beginning it had been

their position they free use force and threat force in attempt resolve that

situation. Making such charges as an attempt being made interfere in

internal affiars, sovereignty, other such matters did not obscure fact he

had not yet accepted simple proposition I had made that force would

not be used resolve that situation.

9. I continued, when his govt reached decision it willing say would

not employ force in that area or any other areas in which we found

policies in conflict, agreement on renunciation force readily possible

between us. If it had not reached that decision and willing state it in sim­

ple straightforward terms, no amount discussion this or any other level

could hope reach agreement that subject. I had made it clear my govt

not willing enter into any statement, particularly following our experi­

ence on statement first item agenda, which means one thing to one side

and other thing to other side and gives appearance to world agreement

renunciaton force has been reached when such agreement does not in

fact exist. My govt and no self-­respecting govt willing negotiate under

threat force. That threat use force in Taiwan still publicly being stated

by high officials his govt. When that threat removed we could discuss

ways and means whereby other existing problems between us could be

resolved. I had continued hope he would enter into agreement with me

which would renounce threat force, thus open up way settlement other

problems. US was one who made this proposal—expressed willingness

unconditionally renounce use threat force in settlement that dispute.

I still hoped his govt could perceive that acceptance that simple and

straightforward proposition as well as carrying out first agreement

between us was in its own interest as well as in interest peace in Far

East and world. If there was good faith this was something entirely

capable resolution between us here. If not good faith certainly could not

be resolved at other level discussion.

10. Wang replied he not going make more comments on course our

talks here as record of more than year past has fully proved tremendous

efforts put in these talks by their side. He recalled occasion on which

I  had indicated talks on this Ambassadorial level capable resolving

issues between our two countries. At that time he had said disagreed

with that view but added if US genuinely desirous do so, of course

he glad go along. I had stated that for our talks to go ahead depends

on resolution practical problems, to this he readily agreed. However

record of past year demonstrated US Govt not produced authority for

settling issues and had not shown willingness do so.

11. Wang continued, had just made statement covering ques­

tion return civilians as well as what I called existence threat use force

Taiwan. Both these questions demonstrated fundamentally erroneous

approach my side to these questions. We must recognize principle of

mutual benefit must be observed in any negotiations to resolve contro­

versial issues. In my statement I had repeatedly said I expected his govt

do thus and so. This approach to talks entirely reveals standpoint my

side; that is my side only takes account of own interests. On question

return civilians, if US not willing take any action or make gestures to

improve situaton of Chinese in US desiring return China and if US only

made charges against his govt, how could such approach facilitate our

resolving the question. With reference cases Chinese residents in US

who long expressed desire return homeland and not able do so, can

this situation indicate good faith on part US to carry out agreement?

US authorities been trying coerce Chinese residents who desire return

his country to apply for so-­called Taiwan entry permits or even cause

them proceed Taiwan itself and US authorities trying coerce Chinese

obtain permanent residence US. Could all these cases be described as

record American good faith. If we were to talk about good faith ques­

tion involved US alone.

12. Wang continued, next, on question existence threat force

Taiwan. Is it not situation US posing threat force against China? How

can anyone say that in Taiwan it China posing threat force against US?

Was it not fact precisely China which first proposed China and US

should enter into negotiations settle controversial issues Taiwan area.

Was it not fact Chinese made untiring efforts these talks and repeatedly

put forth proposals with view improving relations between two coun­

tries? Was it not fact US repeatedly refused any improvement in rela­

tions between two countries? To sum up facts very clear. Problem facing

us not for China do thus and so but problem was for US to improve

negotiations and contribute to solution of problems. They on their part

always desired and always made efforts overcome difficulties so that

problems might be resolved. They had made many efforts this direc­

tion. Now that in these talks whole series of question and even some

minor ones had not been resolved, spite all their efforts, was it not time

consider holding FMC rpt FMC to resolve all these questions? Could

it be that US Govt determined continue present situation these talks

without settling any issues and on other hand refused to raise level of

negotiations? They hoped that in interest improved relations between

China and US and in interest peace, US will not take that course of

action. Hoped US Govt would give careful and favorable consideration

to proposal he had made this morning concerning holding FMC.

13. I replied, he had spoken of mutual benefit in negotiations.

I  certainly agreed. We entered into this agreement on civilians on

understanding it was to be of mutual benefit. Fortunately there was

way of undisputable demonstrating to whose benefit it had operated.

There were facts with regard to it that did not rest on unsupported

assertions. Facts were that under third party arrangement with which

we agreed, my govt had not received single allegation any obstruc­

tion offered to any of tens thousands Chinese in my country. Facts

were as I cited this morning that in addition to Americans covered

by agreement still remaining in prison his govt had rejected repre­

sentation of third party made in accordance with that agreement and

had prevented third party from operating even limited way set forth

that agreement. I’d hope at our next meeting he would be in position

assure me this situation been corrected.

14. Wang replied, also wanted point out fact many Chinese impris­

oned in America. They had not seen any initiative taken by US improve

their situation. As he had mentioned previously Chinese in US still sub­

ject to many unreasonable restrictions. Hoped US would improve lot.

He meant such restrictions as so-­called Taiwan entry permit.

15. I replied, no Chinese in US ever forced go Taiwan against his

will. No Chinese who desired return his country had in any way been

obstructed doing so. Only action of his govt prevented third party from

determining in impartial manner desires of Chinese who imprisoned

for common crimes. Might mention that since last informed him, to

our knowledge, 222 Chinese have returned his country since Aug 1 last

year. Chinese continue freely depart for his country at any time they

desire.

16. Wang said would be very happy to take my word regarding

Chinese in US, but even happier see facts actually so.

17. I said fortunately he had Indian Embassy there which could

assure him of facts.

18. Wang said but Indian Embassy not informed them US has

already rescinded so-­called requirement forcing Chinese obtain Taiwan

entry permit. Very much hoped such proof could be given them.

19. I said that not issue, issue is does any Chinese in US feel he

being obstructed from returning? Established third party arrangement

to take care of that. Had Indian Embassy informed him of even single

case Chinese who alleged he being obstructed? I had assured him we

been and continue willing take action immediately any case brought

our attention by Indian Embassy. This sharply contrasted with attitude

taken by his govt with respect representations already made to his govt

by UK Charge. Hardly any mutual benefit or reciprocity in situation

from US standpoint.

20. Wang said fact Indian Embassy has not made representation

did not mean cases do not exist. Past experience of Chinese in US still

haunting them. Unless US Govt going to take positive effect measures

to improve their situation, such influence could not be easily removed.

21. I said certainly did not seem prevent Chinese departing US

whenever desire. US had and would continue faithfully carry out

agreement into which we entered, in spite fact his authorities not only

not carried out agreement in broad aspects but even in details. I knew

of no way in which we could better show our good faith.

22. Wang could only say these remarks sounded very nice but

coercion such as requirement secure Taiwan entry permit still existed.

He hoped I would give careful consideration to proposal he made this

morning.

23. Neither of us having any more to say, I asked if Nov 1 agree­

able. He suggested Friday, Nov 2. I agreed.

Gowen

189. In order obtain maximum coverage and assist relations with

press in Geneva suggest that press officer Geneva be authorized make

simultaneous release proposed press statement on CHICOM imple­

mentation agreed announcement.

Johnson

Distribution. Repeated to Geneva for Osborn as telegram 9.

137. Eyes only Johnson.

1. You should inform Wang on October 31 that for administrative

reasons you request postponement next meeting from November 2 to

Thursday, November 8.

2. In view your assessment that Chinese Communists may move

toward suspension or termination of talks next meeting Osborn should

urgently update historical review of talks and forward to Department,

if possible prior next meeting, as it might be required on short notice.

Also have Osborn prepare condensed summary of talks suitable for

publishing in three or four pages Current Foreign Relations.

Dulles

Drafted by McConaughy; cleared in substance by Phleger and Dulles and by Sebald.

739. Letter from Osborn to McConaughy

Geneva, October 25, 1956

Dear Walter:

From your note on the slip transmitting Fr. McCarthy’s latest let­

ter, I got the impression there may have been some misunderstanding

back there about the nature of the proposed statement mentioned in the

Ambassador’s last comment telegram. As will have been made clear by

the Ambassador’s letter No. 47, this statement is proposed for release

only in case Wang breaks or comes close to it, and was not intended as

a recommended draft of the statement on implementation. I hope no

delay has been occasioned in the release of the Department’s statement.

As to why the Chinese Communists allowed the McCarthy incident

to happen, it seems only to make sense (and even then not good sense)

if it is remembered that the Chicoms have their own interpretation of the

Agreed Announcement, which differs from ours—or from any rational

man’s. In the light of their distorted interpretation, the McCarthy corre­

spondence documents, not a case of infraction of the Announcement, but

a case of fulfillment of its terms. They maintain that the Announcement

applies to imprisoned Americans, so far as the right to contact the UK

Charge is concerned; however, they say the Americans’ right of expedi­

tious return can only be exercised after their cases have been “settled”.

Accordingly, the Chicoms maintain that there can be no question of

“obstruction” until after settlement of a case. Further, they insist that nei­

ther the Announcement nor the third power arrangement has any rela­

tion to the sentences or the treatment of imprisoned Americans.

Another element in the picture is the fact that Wang was so obvi­

ously not briefed on the details of the McCarthy incident. If the whole

thing had been carefully planned, Wang would surely have been briefed.

Accordingly it seems reasonable to suppose the incident reflects neither

a calculated maneuver nor a significant change of policy. It probably

occurred as an unforeseen development in the carrying out of existing

policies.

I would guess at a sequence of events something like this:

1. The Chicoms allowed McCarthy to send his September 1 letter

because they did not want to have McCarthy, after his eventual release,

charging them with having denied him this elementary right under the

Agreed Announcement, a right which they have acknowledged, even

under their strained interpretation of the Announcement.

­Informal.

2. The Chicoms permitted McCarthy to request an interview with

the UK Charge, and they O.K.’d the UK arrangements for the interview,

because they wanted to provide an illustration of Chicom compliance

with the Agreed Announcement—as they interpret it.

3. In the meantime, spunky, outspoken Fr. McCarthy precipi­

tates the contradicitions inherent in the Chicom interpretation of the

Announcement by telling his jailers what he plans to say to Addis. He

makes it clear he is going to tell Addis just how unjust his imprisonment

has been, and is going to ask that the UK Charge make representations,

not merely asking for his, McCarthy’s release, but also setting forth in full

detail the injustice of the “obstruction” that has been offered in his case.

The jailers pass these remarks on to Peiping and request instructions.

4. Peiping cannot accept McCarthy’s right to request this kind of

representation without by implication acknowledging: (a) that imprison­

ment constitutes obstruction, and (b) that the justice/injustice of charges,

treatment of prisoners, etc., are legitimate subjects of concern under the

Agreed Announcement. Therefore Peiping advises the Shanghai jail­

ers that McCarthy has no right to ask for the kind of representations he

wants. When this word is given to McCarthy, he takes everybody com­

pletely by surprise with his refusal to see Addis.

5. Given the above background, and the Chicom inerpretation of

the Agreed Announcement, their decision to let McCarthy’s October

6 letter pass is not surprising. They realize how suspicious this affair

has looked to Addis and will look to the world; they welcome this

confirmation that McCarthy had indeed refused to see Addis. To the

Chicoms, in the light of their interpretation of the Announcement,

McCarthy’s October 6 letter illustrates, not their infraction of the terms

of the Announcement, but their consistency in abiding by these terms,

as they have been construed in Peiping.

All this is mere guesswork, of course, but it seems to me the most

probable explanation of what has happened. The one encouraging

thing about the affair, to my mind, is that Peiping still feels constrained

to maintain the pretense of compliance with the Announcement, and

there is thus still some hope for further releases in the not-­too-­distant

future.

Please excuse the hasty drafting, necessitated by the fact our

weekly pouch is closing in about half an hour.

Hope to see you all one of these days. Regards to all, from the both

of us

Sincerely,

David L. Osborn

P.S. I appreciated the September monthly notes very much. Hope

to receive October’s also. Thanks, Irene and Doug.

Letter No. 48

Geneva, October 31, 1956

Dear Walter:

Just a very brief note late tonight in the hope that I will have a reply

from Wang early tomorrow morning on the postponement of the meet­

ing. (I have just drafted a telegram letting you know the status as of

tonight.) I felt November 15 was as far as I could safely shoot for and it

is evident that even this date has thrown them into something of a spin

as I still have no reply. I take it that it is not the intent of the Department

that I build this up into too big an issue, and, if he doesn’t agree will

have to play it by ear.

I had thought of trying to handle the whole matter of postpone­

ment from Prague, but as I was very anxious to go over the summary

and history of the talks decided that I must come down here to do that

if they were to be gotten off to you in this week’s pouch which leaves

tomorrow. I was and still am confident nothing dramatic is imminent

there.

We have had to work very hurriedly on these today in the expec­

tation I will be able to leave for Prague early tomorrow, and to connect

with tomorrow’s pouch. It was physically impossible to recopy all of

the White Paper in its revised form in time for tomorrow’s pouch. I am

therefore enclosing with this letter only the major revisions with an

indication as to where they are inserted and the full revised copy will

be sent in Sunday’s pouch.

I think that with a few minor changes it would be possible to use

the article we have done for Current Foreign Relations as a substitute

for the original summary section of the White Paper. Of course, this

somewhat depends on the audience to whom we are primarily direct­

ing the White Paper. You will note that in our Foreign Relations article

we have struck the note that in spite of their failures, the talks did

accomplish something and it was therefore a good idea to hold them.

This may be very good for some audiences but it inevitably tends to

give the Chinese Communists something on the credit side of their

ledger. One could make the approach that the talks were a complete

failure because of Chinese Communist intransigence, but it seems to

me this tends to impugn the wisdom of holding them. I have tried to

preserve a balance between extremes here, but undoubtedly Walter

and the Secretary will want carefully to consider particularly the note

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

struck in the opening paragraphs. In any event I know all of you back

there will also have many suggestions for improvements. I think it

would be well for you to have someone not too familiar with the talks

to read the White Paper draft to test reactions. I realize that time may

well not permit, but if possible I would appreciate an opportunity to

comment on any major substantive changes. I will have a copy with

me in Prague.

Thursday morning.

No word yet this morning. In order to give credence to necessity

my being in Prague tomorrow am leaving this morning. Am returning

by car as in any event would be impossible obtain plane until tomor­

row morning.

Regards to all,

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Encl.

Major revisions of draft White Paper on Talks.

451. From Johnson.

Without giving Wang any indication whether I am in Geneva passed

message to him early afternoon today (Oct 31) through interpreter that

not rpt not possible for meet as scheduled Nov 2 as necessary be present

post at that time and suggest next meeting Nov 15 “according customary

schedule.” Although I have determined he subsequently arrived Geneva

late afternoon plane as of late tonight still have no reply. Assume this

indicates he has felt it necessary consult Peiping.

Gowen

Distribution.

453. From Johnson.

No repeat no reply yet from Wang. Am departing for Prague this

morning. Have aranged to keep in touch en route with Osborn who

will keep Department informed of developments.

Drafts requested papers going forward today’s pouch.

Gowen

Distribution.

456. From Osborn.

Wang agreed next meeting November 15. Usual announcement

press, postponement “for administrative reasons”.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

Letter No. 58

Washington, November 9, 1956

Dear Alex:

The world shaking events in Hungary and Egypt hare indeed

crowded out our Geneva operation. It is just as well that we were able

to take a back seat at this time.

You handled the postponement of last week’s meeting precisely

right. We agree that a two week postponement was all that could

justifiably be requested in the circumstances. The confluence of the

crises in Eastern Europe and Suez with the preoccupations of the pre-­

election week undoubtedly made the reasons for postponement quite

understandable.

EUR is no doubt less uneasy about your leaving your post for the

next meeting. They were quite apprehensive last week, but your assess­

ment that no early eruption in Czechoslovakia should be anticipated,

should remove any strong objection to your absence from Prague next

week. However, EUR from a longer range standpoint is not happy with

the double duty arrangement.

There has been no meeting yet on your instructions for the next

session. With the Secretary in the hospital and with Herman Phleger

deeply engrossed in the two major crises, the meeting will be largely

a FE proposition. I do not anticipate anything new. We will consider

the pros and cons of taking up the missing military personnel issue at

Geneva again at the next meeting, but I would not be surprised if we

postponed it for at least one more meeting.

The British still have no reply from the Chinese Communists,

either to the Father McCarthy representation or to the general request

of last August for permission to visit all American prisoners. Relations

between the British Mission in Peiping and the Chinese Communist

Foreign Office are more strained than they have been since the Korean

Armistice, with the Egyptian crises added to the Hong Kong border

violation incident and the nasty attitude the Chinese Communists have

taken on the Hong Kong riots.

In reading over your letter of September 22, requesting a change

in the method of payment for Helenka Osborn, we find your request

somewhat ambiguous [text not declassified]. We would appreciate your

Informal.

clarifying your proposal in your next letter and we will do the best we

can to satisfy your needs.

We are enclosing a copy of a document spelling out Chinese

Communist adherence to certain provisions of the Geneva Conventions

of 1949.

Walter Robertson is to leave Washington November 22 for Wellington,

where he will head the U.S. Delegation at the Colombo Plan Meeting

December 4–8. After that, he will visit Djakarta, Manila, Hong Kong

and Tokyo from Dec. 11 to Dec. 18, arriving back in Washington about

December 20. Mrs. Robertson and Howard Jones will accompany him.

November 5 respectively. You and Dave indeed did a good job on

the summary and history of the talks. It is good to have this on hand,

whether Wang makes any major move at the next meeting or not.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Clipping from FBIS–­Nov. 6, “NPC Committee Approves Geneva

Accords”.

2. Clipping from FBIS–­Nov. 7, “CPR Ratifies Four Geneva

Conventions”.

531. For Johnson.

Guidance for November 15 meeting.

1. Press further your attack of last meeting on Communist failure

carry out Agreed Announcement. Using McCarthy case as illustra­

tion, point out how Communists have not only failed carry out basic

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared in draft by Phleger and

Sebald.

commitment release Americans expeditiously, but are balking at sup­

plementary provisions of Agreed Announcement extending rights to

third power. FYI We consider McCarthy case represents major weak­

ness in Communist position which you should exploit to maximum.

O’Neill could not get appointment with Peiping Vice Minister Foreign

Affairs and therefore embodied in letter delivered last week points

made our Aide Memoire October 22, with exception last sentence num­

bered subparagraph 2 which he is holding for later use. You need not

restrict your presentation to points made by O’Neill and may include

latter point also if you consider desirable. We have withheld for time

being public statement on McCarthy case because developments in

Egypt and Eastern Europe would cause such statement receive little

attention from world press. END FYI

2. If Wang should press you on question Chinese prisoners in US,

you may inform him of Red Cross survey and fact that James Lew,

only Chinese convict choosing go to Communist China, sailed October

29. Do not mention unless Wang presses. FYI We do not contemplate

public statement on prisoner survey until issue of 2 prisoners desiring

deportation to Taiwan (Deptel 407 to Taipei repeated Geneva 529) is

resolved, unless developments should make earlier statement desir­

able. END FYI

3. Reject Communist demand for Foreign Ministers Conference in

same manner as last meeting, emphasizing Communist responsibility

for failure make progress present talks. Hold to previous positions on

renunciation of force, trade and cultural exchange.

4. Reserve missing military personnel item for presentation later

meeting.

5. Contingency statement transmitted with your letter October 17

has been revised in Department. It is being telegraphed separately for

your use in event Wang refuses meet again. Separate statement would

be issued here.

Hoover

Washington, November 13, 1956

532. Verbatin text. For Johnson.

Re Deptel 531, Paragraph 5, following is approved text for your

use if Wang should suspend talks.

QUOTE At today’s meeting Ambassador Wang advised me that

the Chinese Communists were suspending further ambassadorial

meetings.

In effect, he refused to meet further unless the US capitulates to

the Communist demand for a Foreign Ministers conference. At the

same time Wang made clear that the Communists would not agree to

renounce the use of force in the Taiwan area. He also demanded that

the U.S. remove its existing controls over trade and travel between the

US and China.

I have told Ambassador Wang that for my part I stand ready to

meet with him in an attempt to reach agreement on an unconditional

declaration which would remove the existing threat of the Chinese

Communists to resort to force in the Taiwan area and would assure that

our differences will be settled by peaceful means only.

I am certain my government will not accept the unilateral breakoff

of these talks as a pretext for the continued violation by the Chinese

Communists of the terms of the agreed announcement of September 10,

1955. As a result of this violation ten unfortunate Americans are still

held in Chinese Communist prisons.

I have informed Ambassador Wang that any communications can

be transmitted through our respective consular offices here in Geneva

END QUOTE

Hoover

Limit Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Phleger in substance and by

Sebald and Henderson in draft. The time of transmission is illegible.

508. From Johnson.

One hour fifty-­five minute meeting today. I made opening state­

ment pointing out progress thwarted by PRC unwillingness agree dis­

putes would be settled by peaceful means only and PRC failure carry out

agreed announcement, leading into McCarthy case including Charge

UK has not even been permitted carry out clearly specified function

investigation facts, and noting no reply UK Charge’s August 23 letter

requesting interview other prisoners.

Wang replied with somewhat perfunctory restatement their posi­

tion last meeting on futility talks, deadlock and necessity for FMC then

shifting over to implementation. Additional example US obstruction was

FBI investigation into Chinese students’ correspondence with families

which “fresh threat against those wishing to return and violation agreed

announcement”. On McCarthy stated his sentence expires June 1957,

familiar restatement question right return does not arise prior to release,

UK permitted interview accordance prison regulations but McCarthy

refused. Referring US proposal Indians interview prisoners in US said

this only “screening in disguise” and list prisoners given Indians imcom­

plete. “If US wants UK Charge be able contact US prisoners on own ititia­

tive US should give Indians list of all Chinese in US concerning all those

in prison and agree Indian Embassy can contact Chinese in US on own

initiative in unrestricted manner”. Nevertheless if UK Charge receives

request from US prisoner in PRC interview will be permitted if it takes

place conformity regulations. During course subsequent discussion also

referred “Walter Robertson’s aide memoire” June 1 to Indian Embassy

stating Chinese prisoners in US not covered by agreed announcement.

Thus US position has been self-­contradictory.

There was extended give and take on implementation during

which I vigorously attacked all aspects their position on Americans

in prison. He was clearly on defensive. During course his defense he

charged not single Chinese prisoner had returned from US. During

course reply I stated “was now in position assure him that not single

alien Chinese desiring return remains in US prisons”. He rejected this

as fact but did not press me for details and I not amplify.

At close meeting when he made pro forma statement hoping US

Government would have something say next meeting on FMC proposal,

Limit Distribution.

I said had already made our position clear and when he replied they

“didn’t feel it was satisfactory” I sharply retorted that I not satisfied with

responses his government and would like to see some efforts their part

carry out agreement already reached. Also added that in view retrogres­

sion situation Americans in China “it would have been better if we had

never made agreement”. Meeting ended on this sharp note. I proposed

next meeting Thursday, November 29 but agreed his proposal Friday,

November 30. Departing Prague tomorrow.

Gowen

514. From Johnson.

Comments today’s meeting:

Whatever reason may be Wang’s performance today’s meeting

was clearly marking time operation. Although I pressed him hard

and sharply on implementation, particularly at end of meeting, his

responses were defensive and relatively mild. While considerably less

emphasis than last meeting on break aspects there was no shift his sub­

stantive position and they continue in position of having laid ground

for break at time their choosing.

From observation papers from which he talked, etc., had impression

that portion his opening statement on McCarthy and implementation

was made up from draft public statement they had prepared for rebuttal

of public statement they anticipated from us on subject.

I utilized point last sentence sub-­para 2 October 22 aide mem­

oire to British on theory that whatever technical aspects under agreed

announcement previous British requests O’Neill’s letter last week

constituted formal request investigate facts which CHICOMS have

not yet granted.

Gowen

Distribution.

515. From Johnson.

1. I opened 61st meeting with prepared statement:

A. “At last meeting I again pointed out as clearly as know how

progress in resolving our disputes continues be thwarted by unwilling­

ness your government agree to fundamental proposition disputes will

be settled by peaceful means only, as well as by failure your govern­

ment carry out simple terms of first agreement between us.

B. Particularly reiterated my hope situation with regard implemen­

tation of that first agreement would be corrected so basis of confidence

could be established. Am enormously disappointed during period

since last meeting not even single step been taken in that direction.

C. At last meeting I particularly spoke of case Fr. McCarthy which

exemplified not only failure your authorities carry out their basic com­

mitment expeditiously release Americans but their failure honor even

supplementary provisions of agreement September 10 last year which

extended very specific rights to third parties designated therein.

D. In spite of renewed representations of UK Charge with respect

Fr. McCarthy, he has not only not yet been released but UK Charge

has not even been permitted carry out his clearly specified function

of investigating facts in case. Neither has UK Charge been given even

reply to his letter of almost three months ago renewing request inter­

view other Americans still imprisoned, nor have any those persons

been released return US.

E. If your government is sincerely desirous contribute to peace

in Far East and world, it would remove its threat resort to force settle

disputes. If your government sincerely desirous have improved rela­

tions, it would take prompt steps correct its record of performance with

respect this first agreement.”

2. Wang said I had just made reference to failure talks achieve prog­

ress so far; to this he agreed. However he could not agree to what I said

was cause of lack progress our talks. Present state of affairs our talks very

unsatisfactory so far as his side concerned; they disappointed with atti­

tude adopted by my side which does not contribute progress. It could not

but create doubts in their minds as to whether US still has sincere desire

arrive any agreement on this second item agenda. In course of previous

Distribution.

discussion although their side on three occasions put forward reason­

able proposals for making renunciation force declaration, yet as result

my side’s insistence unreasonable demands, no progress made and talks

come to deadlock. I would clearly recall that to break deadlock, his side

then turned to matters which they supposed would yield more easily to

solution and made two proposals for raising embargo and promoting

peoples contacts and cultural exchanges. Again my side didn’t enter gen­

uine discussion these subjects. In these circumstances how could anyone

feel there were still hopes for progress in talks. That why they said at 60th

meeting it high time respective Foreign Ministers met in direct conversa­

tions. It their firm conviction only by holding FMC can any progress be

made on subjects relaxation elimination tensions in Taiwan area, mutual

renunciation force between China and US, lifting embargo, promoting

peoples contacts and cultural exchanges and so forth. Unless my side

promptly abandoned unreasonable demands and changed its attitude in

discussions which lack sense earnestness, he saw no prospects for prog­

ress at present level discussions and it futile continue our discussions at

this level. In complexity present international situation both Chinese and

American people ­earnestly wish improvement relations between two

countries. They again asked that my government seriously and carefully

consider proposal his side put forward for holding FMC. In this connec­

tion he regretted note I not yet given reply in statement this morning.

I had spoken about peaceful desire; such peaceful desire should only be

demonstrated in concrete reply from US Govt on this proposal of his side.

3. Wang continued with respect improvement relations he could

only point out this also depends on efforts both sides. On ques­

tion civilians they also not satisfied with attitude adopted by US

Government this regard. In previous meetings he had repeatedly

pointed to obstructive measures taken by US Govt. with regard return

Chinese nationals. He had pointed out such measures taken by US

were in violation our agreement. So far he not seen any moves taken

by US Govt. to correct this unsatisfactory situation. Moreover, their

information indicated US FBI been making investigation into Chinese

student correspondence with families. Obvious attempt obstruct

freedom communications, prevent them returning and fresh threat

against those wishing return.

This is instance further violation agreement. He asked that US Govt.

promptly stop this threatening action which violates our agreement.

4. Wang continued, regarding case McCarthy which I made

repeated reference, he wished make following statement: McCarthy

against Chinese law. Sentence takes effect from day taken into custody

and will expire June 1957. Prior expiration sentence or before Chinese

authorities decide grant him expeditious release, there does not arise

question his return. Any demand his immediate release goes beyond

scope of agreement and unacceptable any self-­respecting country.

5. Wang continued as regards question third party interviewing pris­

oners, my side asked representative British Charge be permitted interview

Americans in China on own initiative while US would prevent represen­

tative Indian Embassy do same respect Chinese imprisoned in US. In ask­

ing representative Indian Embassy interview imprisoned Chinese it aim

my side merely carry out screening in disguise. Their side long ago made

clear would not agree to this. Besides, list given Indian Embassy by my

side only lists part of Chinese imprisoned and did not cover all Chinese in

prison in US, not to speak of all Chinese in US. If US wanted British Charge

on his own initiative be able contact American prisoners in China then US

should in first place furnish Indian Embassy a list Chinese in US, includ­

ing all those in prison. My side should also agree Indian Embassy on own

initiative may contact Chinese in US in unrestricted manner. Nevertheless

if British Charge received personal request from American prisoner to this

effect, and Charge requested interview, China had always granted such

interview provided took place in accordance relevant prison regulations.

6. Wang continued, in this connection allegation I made last meet­

ing their prison authorities refused permit representative British Charge

visit Fr. McCarthy in accordance with previous arrangements was not

in accordance with facts. Fact was McCarthy not willing comply with

prison regulations governing such interviews and had voluntarily

withdrawn request interview. Fact was McCarthy on that day refused

interview. In proof this there is his signed statement. Yet I had alleged

prison authorities refused McCarthy permission have interview. This

obviously deliberate distortion fact. He considered it necessary clarify

this point this morning.

7. I replied I thought statements he just made about prisoners, partic­

ularly regard Fr. McCarthy exemplify and illustrate better than anything

I know apparent continued unwillingness his authorities even carry out

agreements we already reached. It well illustrated what I had said in past

about fact, if there no desire on part his government resolve issues and

[illegible in the original] out agreements which we might reach at this

level it certainly futile consider negotiations any other level. As pointed

out last meeting and many times previously he perfectly well realized

and his government perfectly well realized what Americans we talking

about when we were suggested these talks take up as their first matter

of business, the return of civilians, he and his govt perfectly well knew

that at time we entered into agreement regard civilians these were only

Americans that were subject of discussion. What he now appeared saying

was all our discussion and plain words our agreement with regard these

Americans utterly without any meaning or substance. It utterly beyond

my comprehension how he could seriously make this assertion at this

time. Certainly no misunderstanding between us at time we were discuss­

ing this as to what we meant by words “obstruction” and “expeditious”

and to whom they applied with regard Americans in China. If relations

between us to be improved and international agreements have meaning,

must be carried out in good faith by parties thereto. Attitude his govt

taken regarding these prisoners after we entered into our agreement and

attitude of his govt, as exemplified by his statement this morning, were

at grossest variance with not only our understanding but the plain words

of agreement. Not only does agreement specifically and clearly cover all

Americans desiring return but he would well recall when we discuss­

ing this, question differentiating in some way between those in prison

and those not was discussed and specifically eliminated from agreement.

Not question of placing demands which as he termed it “unacceptable

any self-­respecting country,” it question whether self-­respecting country

would carry out solemn commitments into which it entered. Agreement

said any American who felt being obstructed—did not say any Americans

not in prison—any American who felt being obstructed from returning

might communicate with UK Charge.

8. I continued, agreement said his govt would receive representations

from UK Charge in any such case. Agreement said if desired by US Govt

UK Charge might also investigate facts in any such case. Fr. McCarthy

rightly and properly felt he was being obstructed and he invoked, strictly

in accordance with agreement, the assistance of UK Charge. No action

taken by his govt in response to representation made by UK Charge. UK

Charge, still strictly in accordance with agreement, attempted to inves­

tigate facts in Fr. McCarthy’s case. Fr. McCarthy expected he would do

so and Charge expected be able do so. Both certainly had every rea­

son expect this could be carried out because it clearly embodied in our

agreement. As Fr. McCarthy said in letter to UK Charge he certainly

didnt ask to see him to carry on any social chat. He desired talk about

his case in order that UK Charge could investigate facts. Fr. McCarthy

was informed he would not be permitted in any way to discuss his case

with UK Charge. Fr. McCarthy properly felt under those circumstances

interview was pointless. This action by Wang’s authorities clearly in vio­

lation of our agreement, and entirely frustrated whole purpose of our

agreement. As I said I and my govt consider this whole act with regard

to Fr. McCarthy not only in violation basic principles our agreement

that all—and I repeat all—Americans who desire to do so be permitted

return but also in grossest violation subsidiary provision of agreement

concerning function of third party. As he had properly said improvement

relations between us required efforts of both sides. Attitude which his

govt adopting with regard prisoners did not indicate any effort—in fact

quite contrary—to resolve this problem. It indicated willingness entirely

to disregard and ignore solemn commitments.

9. Wang replied with regard first agenda item performance his govt

always conformed with agreement that item. Regarding case McCarthy

already clearly stated if his request in conformity with prescribed regu­

lations, all his requests would have been granted. As result lenient pol­

icy his govt handling cases Americans great majority those imprisoned

for offenses against Chinese law been deported. By contrast, with regard

Chinese imprisoned US prisons, his side so far had not seen any move by

US Govt with regard them. Up to now not single person of those impris­

oned US had returned China, when I was referring Americans in China

it seemed never aware still many Chinese in prison in US. Statements

my side with regard imprisoned persons full of self-­contradiction. For

instance, in statement issued Dec 17 1955 Dept of State alleged in our

agreement no distinction made between those in prison and those out

of prison. But Asst Sec State Walter Robertson in aide memoire to Indian

Embassy stated Chinese prisoners in US not covered by agreement.

This self-­contradictory statement. Can we be allowed give such unequal

interpretation to agreement reached between us? He therefore advised

me take note fact many Chinese in US obstructed and prevented from

returning. US claims self be free country. What kind of free country is it if

Chinese students correspondence with families being interfered with. If

freedom of Chinese students to communicate with families being inter­

fered with what else could one expect of freedom for Chinese to return

from US.

10. Wang continued, question improving relations between two

countries closely connected with how we proceed in these present

talks. Since present state affairs these talks not satisfactory, question

confronting us was how make these talks move forward and make

progress. In order move these talks forward his side taken initiative in

making whole series efforts this direction. Then at very end they put

forward proposal for holding FMC our two countries. If US also shares

desire improve relations and also shares desire solve issues by peaceful

means, should take effective steps move talks forward. It their hope US

would proceed this direction.

11. I replied he had raised question how we move talks forward.

We move these talks forward if we resolve problems called upon to deal

with. After more than fifteen months we have not resolved very first

problem called upon to deal with. Why had we not resolved it? Because

his govt had not taken action necessary to resolve it, even though it had

committed self do so. He referred to efforts our respective govts resolve

problems. Aide memoire June 1 of Dept of State to Indian Embassy he

referred to was most excellent example of efforts my govt resolve prob­

lems. Memo correctly pointed out Chinese alien common criminals in US

prisons not subject our discussion leading up to our agreed announce­

ment and we did not consider them included therein. Nevertheless, in

view his representations here on that subject, we proposed take action on

this question and that aide memoire very specifically set forth that “all

Chinese alien criminals now serving sentences in federal or state peniten­

tiaries in US are free to apply at once for parole or commutation sentence

for purpose immediate voluntary return to” Wang’s country. In spite his

govt’s inexplicable attitude toward proposal made in that aide memoire

I was in position inform him that there not now in any of US prisons any

alien Chinese who desire return to his country.

12. I continued, with respect Fr. McCarthy Wang had said if request

were in accordance with prescribed regulations they would be granted.

I utterly rejected concept that request must be in accordance with what­

ever regulations prison authorities might set forth when those regula­

tions in conflict with clear provisions international commitment entered

into by Wang’s govt. Only test is whether they in accordance provisions

our agreed announcement. Requests of McCarthy and UK Charge have

been in strict accordance with that agreement. Rejection those requests

by Wang’s authorities in violation that announcement. I rejected con­

cept release what he called “great majority” those Americans in his

prisons was fulfillment terms agreed announcement. Detention any

American who desired return was violation that announcement.

13. Wang replied, statement he made this morning had given very

clear explanation this regard. He could not accept my allegation that

his side violated agreement and considered it distortion of fact. During

period in which serving prison term, American prisoners cannot claim

right to return. This exactly in conformity with our agreement and not

in violation of our agreement. It precisely Chinese side which taken

effective measures in accordance with policy leniency. I repeatedly

made arbitrary allegations Chinese Govt not carrying out agreement

but it precisely as result Chinese Govt carrying out policy leniency

that greater part American prisoners been able to exercise their right

return. On US side so far not single Chinese imprisoned in US prison

has returned. Under circumstances in which Chinese imprisoned in US

not regained freedom, he rejected statement not single one among them

desires return.

14. I replied I didnt see how on one hand he made statement that,

fact that what he called “great majority” of prisoners in his country had

returned showed his authorities had carried out the agreement, and

on other hand he said they had no rights under agreement. Agreement

did not speak of “great majority” of prisoners. Agreement spoke of all

Americans who desired return.

15. Wang replied fact great majority American prisoners returned to

US means Chinese Govt taken measures on own initiative in accordance

with lenient policy and enabled them return. Chinese Govt not sus­

pended such a policy with regard American prisoners. However, before

Chinese Govt adopted these measures, any demand for immediate

release any prisoners whose sentences not yet expired went beyond our

agreement. Nor had my govt agreed to any immediate release Chinese

prisoners my country. He therefore advised me that in speaking about

question of civilians, I should pay more attention to improving situation

Chinese prisoners my country. Moreover, he hoped I’d give constructive

consideration to proposal he made at last meeting and again this morn­

ing with regard holding FMC to break present deadlock.

16. I asked was it on his assertion that all our discussions leading

up to our agreed announcement, and agreed anouncement itself have

no meaning with regard to Americans we were discussing.

17. Wang did not think this proper way posing such question.

Chinese Govt either would not agree enter agreement at all or once it

entered agreement it always carried it out faithfully. In the same spirit

his side always carried out agreement we reached previously. It exactly

Chinese side which extremely dissatisfied with violation and breach of

our agreement. He had nothing more say today.

18. I had nothing either.

19. Wang repeated had nothing except hoped I be able at next

meeting express opinion with regard proposal he had made.

20. I thought I had expressed it very clearly this morning.

21. Wang did not think it was satisfactory.

22. I did not think responses of his govt were satisfactory.

23. Wang said his side had made repeated efforts this regard. Of

course if I had something better offer, should put it forward.

24. I said would like see some efforts carry out agreement we made.

As I had said before, we seem to have gone backward in that regard. It

would be better if we had never made that agreement.

25. Wang said had nothing more.

26. I proposed next meeting Nov 29. Wang preferred Friday,

Nov 30, and I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 49

Geneva, November 15, 1956

Dear Walter:

I do not have much more to say this time, I still feel that I was right

about their intentions as of the end of the last meeting but they have post­

poned action for reasons about which we can only speculate. Certainly

the dramatic events elsewhere have had their influence but it is hard

to say what the influence may have been on them. Perhaps their reac­

tion was much the same as ours with respect to our public statement

on implementation, i.e. they felt so much was going on elsewhere that

a public statement from them threatening a break or a break would not

attract much attention or constitute much pressure on us. I do not even

exclude the Secretary’s illness as a possible additional factor.

I will plan to come down by air on November 28 for our next

meeting, returning immediately on December 1, without any further

notification to the Department unless there is some major change for

the worse in the general situation or that in Czechoslovakia, in which

case I will of course check by telegraph. Please tell EUR so that they

understand. I sent a message this last time so there would be no mis­

understanding and I am mentioning it now in view of what I thought

was a somewhat odd reply. You can assure EUR that I do not come to

Geneva for a “visit” but to do some work.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. Tell Walter I hope he has a good trip. Am so glad Mrs. Robert­

son can go with him. UAJ

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The postscript is handwritten.

Letter No. 59

Washington, November 23, 1956

Dear Alex:

We were pleased at the forceful manner in which you presented

the case for Father McCarthy at the last meeting. Wang was very much

on the defensive and his defense was weak. We have now received

reports of O’Neill’s last interview with the Chinese Communists which

show that in Peiping also they are holding very firmly to a logically

untenable position. Copies of these reports are enclosed.

Mr. Robertson left yesterday on a four weeks’ trip to the New

Zealand meeting of the Colombo powers and to several posts in the

Far East. We will probably hold a meeting tomorrow to consider what

line you should take at the next meeting. My present thinking is that

we should continue to press them hard on the McCarthy case and

implementation generally. I will try to get off a longer letter to you on

Monday outlining more fully our views.

The Chinese Communists now appear to have worked themselves

into the awkward position of having to either come up with a new gam­

bit, suspend the talks or remain on the defensive.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

Copies of Texts of 3 telegrams from British Charge.

Informal. Drafted by Clough.

581. Verbatim text. For Johnson. Re Deptel 532

Your comments desired on following draft statement for issuance

by Department should Communists break off talks. QUOTE Chinese

Communist Ambassador Wang Ping-­nan informed US Ambassador

U. Alexis Johnson on (blank) he would not meet with him again until

US agreed meeting at Foreign Minister level. Ambassador Johnson told

Ambassador Wang although US willing continue discussion of fun­

damental matters at issue, meeting at Foreign Minister level neither

appropriate nor acceptable under present circumstances.

US in July 1955 agreed participate in Geneva talks in hope might

bring about release American citizens imprisoned Communist China

and open way to solution other matters at issue. At first appeared prog­

ress could be made.

September 10, 1955 Communists issued following agreed statement:

INNERQUOTE The People’s Republic of China recognizes Americans in

People’s Republic of China who desire return to US entitled to do so and

declares it adopted and will further adopt appropriate measures so they

can expeditiously exercise their right to return. END INNERQUOTE At

time statement issued still nineteen Americans in prison or under house

arrest in Communist China. Soon clear Communists not intend carry out

unqualified commitment and today more than fourteen months later still

ten Americans in Communist jails.

To justify failure fulfill their pledge Peiping resorted accusations

that US preventing Chinese from leaving. Such accusations completely

unfounded. Since beginning Geneva talks no Chinese prevented leav­

ing US. Indian Embassy which was designated assist any Chinese who

wished to leave has not brought to attention of Government single case

of Chinese who claims he is being prevented from leaving.

In addition seeking release imprisoned American citizens US pro­

posed both US and Communist China agree to renounce use of force

particularly Taiwan area, except in self defense. Ambassador Johnson

pointed out progress in discussions could not be expected in face of

continuing Communist threats to take Taiwan by military force. Once

threat of force been removed other matters might be discussed. This

proposal failed when Chinese Communists insisted Taiwan problem

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy, Henderson, and Phleger in

substance.

was domestic matter they entitled settle by any means they chose,

including force.

In recent months Chinese Communists introduced proposals

aimed promoting trade and INNERQUOTE cultural contacts END

INNERQUOTE between US and mainland China. Ambassador Johnson

pointed out US restrictions in these fields resulted from Chinese

Communists’ acts and threats of military aggression and mistreatment

Americans. US sought assurance through Geneva talks such behavior

would not continue. Until meaningful assurances in these respects been

received US could not consider modifying these safeguards.

US dedicated to peaceful solution of differences. It is prepared

resume discussions at ambassadorial level directed toward issuance by

both sides meaningful declaration on renunciation of force and thereaf­

ter other practical matters at issue. UNQUOTE

Hoover

Letter No. 60

Washington, November 26, 1956

Dear Alex:

We are considering whether to release a public statement on the

McCarthy case. We are also weighing the pros and cons of a pub­

lic statement on the results of our offer of parole and deportation to

Chinese convicts in U.S. prisons. The press attention to the Middle East

and Hungary has abated sufficiently for us to be able to command a

reasonable amount of press space for these matters if we decide that

from other standpoints the time is ripe. The GRC has agreed to take

the two prisoners who elected to go to Taiwan so there is no longer a

problem on that score. If we decide to make a statement this week, it

would probably come out on Thursday. We would, of course, give you

the text in advance.

the prevailing circumstances we consider that Wang is unlikely to sus­

pend the talks at the next meeting. However, we have a contingency

Informal. Drafted by McConaughy.

statement ready for use if a suspension does occur. With Chou’s good­

will trip through parts of Southeast Asia and the Middle East in full

swing, with Nehru’s visit to the President in prospect, and with the

Chinese Communists’ public agitation over the Egyptian issue taper­

ing off somewhat, an abrupt move of a defiant nature at this moment

would not seem to be in the cards, notwithstanding the fact that they

have lost the UN membership battle for this session of the GA.

We have delivered your message to EUR. There was considerable

apprehension at absences of any of our chiefs of mission in curtain

countries following the political criticism of Jacobs and Wailles for not

being at their post when the trouble started, but this is less evident now.

I agree with you that the EUR telegram authorizing your “visit” to

Geneva was peculiarly worded. We did not see the text before it went

out or we would have objected. They simply told us that they were

okaying your travel to Geneva.

I was at the American Assembly at Harriman, New York, November

15 through November 18. The final Report was pretty favorable to our

basic far Eastern policy, although there was criticism of our policy on

travel of newsmen. You get so many reports of the harm which the talks

are doing to us in the Far East, I’m glad I can tell you that the fact of the

talks made it much easier for me to defend our China policy before the

Conference. They are all for “flexibility and a reasonable conciliatory

and moderate approach.” They felt that the Geneva talks are a definite

manifestation of such an attitude. I believe we would have been criti­

cized for a negative and rigid posture toward the Chinese Communist

problem, had we not had the Geneva conversations to point to. I will

send you a copy of the revised Final Report as soon as I receive it. You

no doubt have seen the references to the speech of Ernie Gross on the

night of November 17 in which he rather minimized the Geneva talks

as being “behind the barn” in character and as not being at a sufficiently

high level.

I am enclosing a copy of an extremely confidential report made

by [text not declassified] his recent trip to Communist China. I apologize

that we have to send you a rather messy copy, but it is the only one we

have. It is particularly sensitive and we had to get a special dispensa­

tion to send it to you.

Walter Robertson got away on Thanksgiving Day. I am enclosing a

copy of his itinerary in case you would like to write him before he gets

back on December 22nd.

I leave on Wednesday to make a speech in Mr. Robertson’s stead

at the Naval War College on November 29 on “The Power Struggle in

the Far East.” I’ll have something to say about the talks in the course of

that speech.

Sabe Chase has just reported for temporary duty with us until he

retires next March. It is good to have him here.

Regards and good wishes to all of you,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Copy of report by [text not declassified]

2. Copy of Mr. Robertson’s itinerary

587. For Johnson.

Guidance for November 30 meeting.

1. Continue press for Chinese Communist fulfillment their commit­

ments in McCarthy case and those of other Americans. US Government

rejects Chinese Communist contention that imprisoned Americans, the

very persons on whose behalf we negotiated Agreed Announcement,

can be excluded by Chinese Communists from provisions Agreed

Announcement, which they are bound to observe. Neither can US

Government accept Chinese Communist refusal permit British Charge

exercise investigative functions prescribed under Agreed Announcement.

Continued Chinese Communist violation of their pledged word can only

force conclusion that their word cannot be relied on. (FYI In your pre­

sentation draw freely on exchange November 15 between British Charge

and Peiping Foreign Office. Department has decided not repeat not issue

press release on McCarthy case prior next meeting but you should ham­

mer away on this flagrant case. END FYI)

2. You may refer as necessary to US action regarding Chinese

prisoners in US. James Lew arrived Hongkong November 19 and pre­

sumably entered mainland along with group granted direct transit

through Hongkong. (FYI GRC has agreed take two convicts opting for

Taiwan and preparations their deportation under way. It would appear

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared by Phleger in draft.

preferable make no mention these two as they might only becloud

issue. We do not contemplate public statement at present on our offer

to Chinese prisoners but will reply factually should press raise ques­

tion. END FYI)

3. Hold to same positions on foreign ministers’ meeting, renuncia­

tion of force, trade and cultural exchange.

4. Reserve missing military personnel for later meeting.

Hoover

562. From Johnson.

ReDeptel 581 consider draft statement excellent and have no sub­

stantive changes to suggest.

As minor points offer following suggestions for alternative language:

(1) Substitute “unless” for “until” in first sentence so as conform

text Deptel 532,

(2) Substitution following for second sentence:

“Ambassador Johnson told Ambassador Wang US ready and will­

ing settle practical and fundamental matters at issue in Ambassadorial

talks which had been accepted as appropriate forum by both sides;

under present circumstances, of manifest unwillingness Chinese

Communists to settle issues, meeting at Foreign Ministers level neither

appropriate or acceptable”. While I see no objection to Department’s

language foregoing revision conforms somewhat closer and amplifies

rationale I have used in meetings.

(3) Deletion of “claims he” last sentence fourth paragraph. This

might be somewhat safer way of making same point until we see what

public comment Indians may make to show they have been active in

performance agreed announcement functions.

Gowen

Distribution.

570. From Johnson.

Three hour fifteen minute meeting this morning. Following

brief opening statement by Wang restating their position on fact and

causes deadlock in talks and necessity FMC, entire remainder meet­

ing devoted implementation. During course meeting I made points

para one Deptel 587 and informed him arrival James Lew stressing he

deported even though had served only small part his sentence and was

not rpt not eligible for parole or release under normal regulations. Also

informed him of ARC interviews of prisoners but did not mention those

opting for Taiwan and this question did not arise. When he responded

with usual charge prisoners could not make free choice and US should

“on its own initiative” follow PRC procedure and release prisoners after

which they could choose where they desire go I countered by pointing

out PRC had followed deportation procedure in releases Americans at

time of and immediately following agreed announcement. Throughout

long give and take I continuously came back to all aspects McCarthy

case as prime illustration their failure carry out agreed announcement.

Wang retreated entirely behind repetition previous charges re Chinese

in US in obvious attempt close off discussion and meeting with last

word. This I refused accept and during last hour and half repeatedly

refuted each his charges and turned discussion repeatedly back to

Americans particularly McCarthy until he finally desisted from repeat­

ing his charges.

Next meeting Thursday, December 13. Departing Prague tomor­

row morning.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

571. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 62nd meeting with prepared statement. My side

has continued take procrastinating attitude on second item agenda

culminating deadlock our talks. Ever since began second item his

side been following spirit of resolving issues improving relations and

repeatedly made constructive proposals this direction. His side made

great efforts clear away difficulties resolve issues. By adoption his pro­

posals for renunciation force in relations between China and US as

well as for holding FMC, our two countries could have resolved out­

standing issues and tensions in Far East would have been relaxed and

Sino-American relations improved. However, my side apparently did

not share desire. My side simply sticking to unreasonable demands for

encroaching their sovereignty and interfering internal affairs—­thus

contributing nothing to resolution problems.

2. Wang continued under such circumstances his side again taken

initiative in making proposal for lifting embargo and another for pro­

moting mutual contacts and cultural exchange between Chinese and

American people in expectation that resolving these two points might

enable us make progress other issues as well. However, my attitude

toward these proposals had been equally disappointing. My side had

even gone so far as refuse negotiate, giving no consideration what­

soever to those proposals. Meanwhile my side continued intolerable

acts provocation to increase tension Taiwan area. Such performance in

dragging out talks on one hand and creating tensions other was not

expression sincerity talks. It was their hope I would change this futile,

harmful performance and get down to earnest negotiation so two us

could discharge mission. He’d be glad hear any constructive views

I might have push forward our talks.

3. I replied he had spoken of settling our problems here. He had

spoken of constructive views or attitudes on settling our problems.

This exactly point I been trying make here during recent months.

I  tried point out way settle problems was do something about them

rather than just issue forms of words which appeared do something

about them but in fact do nothing. Our governments both agreed

and terms reference these talks clearly set forth that first problem we

were to deal with was return civilians. As had pointed out at time we

Distribution.

issued our statement, statement itself solved nothing—­only action his

govt could solve matters insofar as Americans concerned. However

his govt continued procrastinate and stall in settlement that matter.

It entirely impossible for me understand what it hopes gain thereby.

4. Turning to prepared statement I continued:

A. Since last meeting, I received additional information with

regard continued effort your govt procrastinate in carrying out

announcement Sept 10 last year, and distort very clear meaning that

announcement. On Nov 14, your authorities in Peking rejected rep­

resentations made by UK Charge in case McCarthy, alleging that

Charge’s representations exceeded scope his functions under agreed

announcement. Your authorities even refused permit UK Charge

investigate facts in McCarthy’s case.

B. For over year, your authorities have been steadily and systemat­

ically depriving that announcement of its meaning, so not shred of its

original substance left with respect Americans.

C. At time that announcement issued, it covered, so far as

Americans in China concerned, definite group 19 persons in prison.

Our announcement contained very explicit provisions affecting these

19 persons. Their right return was recognized. Measures were to be

taken by your authorities permitting them expeditiously exercise this

right. If any of Americans felt his departure being prevented, he could

communicate with UK Charge. UK Charge was to be able make repre­

sentations on behalf any such person. Charge was also to be enabled

investigate facts in any such case.

D. Now, after more than year, it impossible point to single pro­

vision our announcement which has not been systematically cyni­

cally violated by your authorities. Even limited ability of Americans

communicate with UK Charge has been deprived of any meaning by

prohibition any mention of facts with regard their cases. This would

appear indicate even your authorities realize facts in these cases could

not justify continued failure release these persons in accordance with

commitment announcement.

E. While your authorities have been thus constricting scope

of agreement, with eventual result its significance has been all but

destroyed, my government has not only been faithfully carrying out

every one of its provisions, it has even enlarged its scope beyond what

was originally agreed upon. My government offered deport immedi­

ately your country any alien Chinese prisoner my country wishing go

there. To assure you our good faith my government was prepared allow

representatives of third party your choice to be present when prison­

ers stated their preferences. You rejected this offer, making it clear you

preferred my government join your authorities in restricting, rather

than enlarging, scope of agreed announcement. This, my government

of course could not and would not do. Since decision had been taken

to extend provisions of agreed announcement to such prisoners, my

government on own intitiative took measures allow those wishing do

so expeditiously exercise their right return. Prisoners were interviewed

individually by representatives of American Red Cross in order entirely

impartially determine their wishes. In keeping with your desires, no

representative of Indian Embassy,—nor of any third country—­was

present these interviews.

F. I can now inform you, on October 29, as result these measures, a

Chinese prisoner desiring return your country, Mr. James Lew, departed

from my country. I understand he arrived Hong Kong November 19,

and has now presumably crossed into your country. I might mention

Mr. Lew was permitted proceed your country even though he had

served only about one and one half years of 7 to 20 years sentence for

manslaughter and would not for many years have even become eligible

for our very lenient parole procedures or reduction sentence for good

behavior.

As for balance of Chinese prisoners my country, they have freely

and formally indicated to impartial representative ARC they have no

desire return your country and are thus clearly outside terms reference

our talks.

G. Have given you this information not in order demand your

authorities enlarge, as my government has done, scope of announce­

ment. My government asks no more than plain terms of our agreement

be implemented, with respect to very Americans about whom you and

I were talking when announcement was issued. My government is

clearly entitled expect 10 remaining Americans will be allowed without

further delay return their country.

H. I mention this matter in some detail this morning because think

it important we be clear as to which side really been resolving issues

between us. I mention it because of great importance fulfilling under­

standings and commitments already arrived at and great importance

knowing whether pledged words have any value. This had importance

which transcends even importance of these individual Americans and

this issue. Importance relates to whole range of relations between our

two countries. Basis of mutual confidence absolutely essential if there is

to be possibility of negotiating resolution of our other disputes.

5. I continued, performance his government thus far with respect

first agreement between us had not established that basis confidence.

I had at each meeting here and continue to express my hope that his

authorities would establish that basis of confidence by carrying out that

agreement. This is not anything which any form of words or proposal

from my side could possibly resolve. Neither could any form words or

proposals from my side resolve problem of decision by his authorities

that our other disputes be solved by peaceful means only, either these

problems could be resolved by changing level of these meetings. They

could be resolved when his authorities reached decision to resolve

them. When that done we could here go on to discussion other matters

between us. I had hoped, still hope his government would take action

essential enable us do so. I regretted that in his statement this morning

I did not see any indication they had taken decision do so.

6. Wang replied after listening statement I just made he equally

regretted no indication in statement any constructive views make

progress these talks. I had spoken of establishing mutual confidence

between us and also said settlement problems could only be resolved

by taking action rather than putting forward empty words. In course

talks his side repeatedly made proposals which could have helped us

make progress. Yet my side refused take under consideration. How

could we expect progress. If only one of two sides had desire make

progress by taking action in these talks it very hard make any progress.

For long time they had not seen any indication of intent on part US

take effective steps make progress these talks. My side not only failed

offer effective steps push these talks forward but at same time my side

not willing consider acceptance their proposals which could have actu­

ally made progress our talks. Under such circumstances how could one

expect any resolution of problems and how could mutual confidence be

established this manner.

7. Wang continued insofar as problem return civilians it rather

his side which felt dissatisfied. They had always extended welcome

all Chinese nationals returning their country. However number per­

sons who actually returned very much at variance with number those

whose return they desired. These talks now in sixteenth month yet my

side still, without justification refused furnish list all Chinese residing

my country. My side still refused give any account 52 Chinese whose

names he had given me with request accounting be made nor given any

explanation of failure return 26 of 103 who my side long ago informed

him desired return and whose return been obstructed. Even after con­

clusion solemn agreement my side seen fit pressure Chinese nationals

secure Taiwan entry permit or apply for permanent residence US. In

addition my authorities continue use all sort impossible methods try

keep their nationals from returning homeland. Besides shocking case

he brought up last meeting is how FBI, in attempt obstruct return, fla­

grantly interfering freedom Chinese nationals’ correspondence, my

immigration authorities also used pressure and threats in violation

agreement and attempt convince departing Chinese proceed Taiwan

or not leave US. Most Chinese who returned recently had had such

experience, indicating such illegal practices being used systematically.

Instead correcting this violation agreement my side resorting entangle­

ment issue by making false charges that his country failed carry out

agreement. My side dared not face up to fact his govt long since carry­

ing out agreement by enabling all Americans desiring do so return my

country. My side cannot deny his side in accordance agreement takes

measures on own initiative and been handling cases in lenient spirit

even enabled greater part American prisoners return. At opening

these talks this group Americans numbered 40, including 13 airmen

(sic.). Now remained only 10 serving sentences in China. Now my side

gone so far demand immediate release these persons prior expiration

sentences and before justice authorities taken measures own initiative

commute sentences. He couldnt but consider this flagrant case inter­

ference in internal affairs his country. Insofar case Charles McCarthy

concerned already made comment at great length last meeting and

not going make further comment today. Contrary lenient policy his

country toward American prisoners, my side illegally carried out

screening of imprisoned Chinese in attempt accomplish design retain­

ing these persons. They would never recognize this illegal screening

persons. They formally demand US carry out agreement by supplying

list Chinese, by removing obstructions their departure and by stop­

ping all acts which volate agreement. Improvement relations between

us and progress our talks required concerted effort both sides. The

demand only one side unilaterally to make progress will not help in

the actual progress of our talks.

8. I replied he had spoken of false charges here. We had very good

method in our announcement of determining who in fact making false

charges. We had very good method determining who in fact carrying

out announcement. It method he himself suggested. It is third party

which had specific functions in each our countries under announce­

ment. I did not know how it could be better demonstrated that my govt

had carried out agreement than by fact it had not yet received from third

party single representation alleging it had interfered with departure

any Chinese from my country who desired return. This should demon­

strate what I wanted emphasize is fact: my country had not slightest

interest attempting keep in my country any Chinese who desires return

his country. That should be, I thought, self-­evident. We had no need

for or desire have unwilling residents our country. Every Chinese my

country who desired return continued free be able do so at time his

choice. That they continued do so shown by fact that insofar our infor­

mation extends 250 have done so since beginning our talks. Question

not whether number who returned was, as he phrased it, number

whose return they desired; question was whether those who wanted

return able do so. This, in view his representations here even extended

to prisoners who common criminals. Extended without regard gravity

crimes, length sentences or eligibility for leniency. I had been making no

demand on him here except that his govt equally carry out commitment

it undertaken. That it had not done so shown by fact there 10 Americans

who undeniably desire return, not yet able do so. That it not even carried

out subsidiary portions agreement proven by fact it even refused accept

representations from third party with regard case clearly coming within

terms announcement. It had refused permit third party even inves­

tigate facts case when request been made strictly in accordance terms

announcement. These not vague, unsupported allegations my part, they

undeniable facts. They acts involving third party under our agreement.

No amount rationalization could dispose of these facts.

9. Wang replied had already made clear opinion on question civil­

ians this morning. Nothing more add to those observations. Also made

clear repeatedly his specific request on improvement status Chinese

nationals in US, improvement their ability without obstruction return

their country. He desired see this situation would in fact be improved.

As he had repeatedly made clear in these talks, any additional demands

going beyond scope agreement, insofar as Americans in China con­

cerned, would not be accepted by his side. They had already taken

measures enable greater part Americans in China exercise right return.

As regards remaining 10 prisoners serving sentences he had never said

China would cease applying to them lenient policy. If these persons

show good behavior, they would continue, as they had repeatedly

stated, to take lenient measures.

10. I replied it not question good behavior, not question lenient

policy as he termed it. Not question of greater part of Americans being

able return who desire do so. It question of whether first agreement

between us was to be carried out and all of them be able do so. I had

made no demands on him beyond scope agreement. My demands were

that agreement be carried out. Thus far it had not been. He spoke of

lenient policy. As I had previously pointed out, very hard even a part

agreement, see that is being carried out. Policy now appeared be these

people required serve full term their sentences. Contrasted sharply

with action taken my authorities. As I pointed out this morning a

Chinese prisoner in my country desiring return his country had been

permitted do so entirely without regard normal policies parole and

leniency. Permitted do so without regard his behavior or any time off

good behavior. When impartially determined he desired return, he was

permitted immediately—­let me say expeditiously—­do so.

11. Wang replied his govt had in past and would in future adopt

lenient policy toward American prisoners. In view crimes and offenses

committed by these individuals in China, not question of taking cou­

ple years off their sentences. Facts already demonstrated how exten­

sive had been application lenient policy to Americans. To demand

his govt disregard provisions of its law in dealing with Americans

was interference with sovereign rights his country and would never

achieve desired end. If all the Americans who committed offenses in

China be able return within prescribed time then, not necessary make

that ­agreement. As matter of fact my govt actually kept greater num­

ber Chinese in our prisons. They had repeatedly stated and expressed

strong opposition to screening these Chinese. There was significant dis­

crepancy between my statement this morning and at last meeting. At

last meeting I made statement not single Chinese indicated desire return

his country. This morning I told him one these Chinese had desired do

so. This conspicuous case self-contradiction. He repeatedly advised my

govt adopt measures on own initiative just as his govt had in handling

Chinese in my country. I had been making demands immediate release

Americans serving sentences his country. If he were to follow my logic

(he not speaking of immediate release all those imprisoned Chinese)

he’d like to know whether my govt could agree allow all these impris­

oned Chinese get out of prison and be in position to express will. As he

had repeatedly pointed out in past, it essential in handling return civil­

ians to adopt measures facilitate and enable persons to in fact return.

Nothing in series actions taken my govt had been in direction resolving

this problem. In such circumstances how could one speak of faithfully

implementing our agreement.

12. I replied, first wanted clear up apparent misunderstanding.

He quoted me as saying at last meeting not single Chinese in prison

had indicated desire return his country. I did not recall making that

statement—­did not believe I had. What I recalled saying was that there

not then any single Chinese in our prisons who did desire return, that

statement entirely accurate and consistent with statement I had made

this morning because as had stated this morning Mr. Lew departed

from US October 29.

13. I continued frankly not able follow his line reasoning. On one

hand he said my asking him release all American prisoners and per­

mitting them return in accordance with agreement was interfering in

internal affairs. On other hand he asked me to release all Chinese in

prisons US and once released permit them make decision as to whether

desired return. I not asking him release Americans from his prisons to

remain his country. I was asking him to make it possible for all of them

who undoubtedly wished return to do so. I might point out even his

own practice did not conform to what he desire I do. He had informed

me of at least eight or nine cases since talks began—­some at time issu­

ance agreement and some subsequent that—­of Americans who being

deported from his country. They not being released as free persons into

his country to decide what they wanted do, they being deported. I had

not objected this procedure. His authorities could naturally carry it out

any way they desired. Two important elements are simply whether

they desire return and whether able do so. In cases where his authori­

ties carried out deportations these elements present. Not objecting, but

simply pointing out inconsistency with what he now seemed be saying

with regard Chinese prisoners in US. Accepting his contention that they

covered by agreement these two elements again arise. Did they desire

return and were they able do so. In absence of his concurrence pro­

cedure we first suggested to determine their desires, we had adopted

most incontrovertibly unprejudiced method we could find. That was

agency of American Red Cross. That agency interviewed each prisoner

to determine his desire. When that determined, prisoners who had

expressed desire return his country enabled immediately and promptly

do so.

14. Wang replied on question return civilians, I had spoken of

two elements: whether persons desired return and whether able do

so. Problem we now handling concerned transaction between two

­countries and should therefore follow usual international practice.

Greater part Americans in China including those imprisoned for

offenses had been handled by his govt in accordance with measures

taken his govt. As far as Chinese imprisoned my country concerned,

they had ­repeatedly pointed out fact imprisoned persons not in posi­

tion indicate free will. That why he raised question with me as to

whether my authorities could release them out of prison and when

once released determine whether desired return my country. If US not

in position do so, then easy understand why his govt could not act

according to what I had demanded here.

15. I replied, had not asked him to release Americans in prison to

remain in China and then decide whether or not they desire go. As had

pointed out in past that had not even been his own practice in many

these cases. Except where persons had served full term sentences, and

therefore there no choice but release them, they appeared to have fol­

lowed practice deportation. As had told him that is entirely accept­

able to me and I did not believe it contrary to terms agreement. In fact

I anticipated that he would probably carry out his obligations under

agreement in that manner. However, this entirely matter for decision

by his authorities. I had never attempted dictate manner in which they

should carry out their obligations. Only asked international obligation

assumed by his authorities be carried out.

16. Wang replied what I had spoken about exactly what his coun­

try doing now. As to what methods and ways employed, whether

they be deported or whether be given early release, entirely matter

decison by justice authorities his country. As had repeatedly stated

here, if prisoners concerned showed good behavior, it would certainly

help justice authorities take action to reach such decison.

17. I replied yet he asked justice authorities my country uncondi­

tionally release all Chinese prisoners my country, then let them decide

if they desire return.

18. Wang replied they had not made such a demand on my govt.

Only demanded it adopt measures on its own initiative. Wished stress

imprisoned Chinese my country did not have ability espress will while

in prison. To try to state by any means that any Chinese in our prisons

return or not could not be considered true.

18. I asked did he mean a man in prison could not decide whether

he prefered to serve sentence in accordance with regulations of which

aware, or desired immediatly proceed his country—­that is did he mean

a man could not make a decision between those two things.

19. Wang replied as result years my govt’s outrageous anti-China

propaganda campaign and persecution Chinese my country, tremen­

dous pressure and threats exerted these persons with regard desire

return motherland. As result all this, (psychology of Chinese prison­

ers no longer normal and would believe if only mention desire return

motherland, sentences might be doubled and in cases when people

committed minor offense,) might be taken as major offenses and heavier

sentences given. Under such circumstances difficult express wish and

difficult make decision.

20. I said seemed to me pressure would all be in other direction.

Certainly for prisoner who had long sentence ahead of him to be given

choice between serving that sentence and being given immediate

release return to his country, pressure would be all for seeking release.

I was confident any Chinese in US perfectly aware of what been funda­

mental principle of our system justice from very beginning our country.

Far from being worried about his sentence being doubled or increased,

he would know perfectly well that utterly impossible under our sys­

tem. First, it always been fundamental principle our justice, no man

could be tried twice for same crime. That is if tried and found inno­

cent he could not be tried again. If tried and found guilty and sentence

imposed he could not be tried again and another sentence imposed. If

tried and found guilty and appealed sentence to hgher court, higher

court could under no circumstances increase sentence. It could either

decrease sentence or reaffirm sentence—­or declare him innocent. These

absolutely fundamental principles of our system justice which well

known anyone livng our country. I thus satisfied no prisoners could

possibly have fear he mentioned. In any event I thought case Mr. Lew

who has just returned his country ample proof this. Again ask him by

whatever method he chose, permit Americans in his country expedi­

tiously be permitted return my country. In other words simply ask that

clear words agreement be carried out.

21. Wang said didnt want engage debate on legal procedure my

country. Simply wanted point out no lack cases innocent Chinese

nationals and Chinese students my country who subjected arrest and

imprisonment my govt. For a person simply to desire return own

country had even been made sort of crime. Even those persons who

already embarked on ships bound home and even those already Hong

Kong had been subjected all sorts systematic obstruction. Such was

treatment given by my agencies to persons who not even committed

offenses my country. We could imagine what state of mind persons

actually imprisoned my country are in. That reason he had pointed out

persons imprisoned my country not able express free will.

22. I made two points. No Chinese imprisoned my country except

for committing common crimes; survey of all Chinese prisoners my

­country showed they there for only two offenses—­one was murder or

manslaughter, other narcotics violation. Secondly, it truly remarkable

that if any substance their allegations of obstruction, at least one case not

called our attention by very agency established for that purpose. This fact

taken with fact Chinese had steadily been returning his country showed

lack substance such allegations.

23. Wang said already pointed out many examples how Chinese

in America who desired return been obstructed. On other hand fact

many Chinese students in America who desired return his country not

able do so proved fact obstruction. Had expressed hope and continued

hope this situation so far as Chinese in America concerned would be

improved.

24. I asked did McCarthy desire return? Answer was he does. Did

he feel he being obstructed? Answer was he does. He had said to des­

ignated third party that he did. Had third party made representation to

his country on case? Answer was he had. Had his govt refused accept

those representations in accordance obligations under agreement?

Answer was it had. Had third party attempted investigate facts of case?

It had; his govt refused permit it do so. There had been most explicit

violation of every single aspect of letter our agreed announcement.

25. Wang could not accept this way of presenting problem. He

could put matter this way. Asked whether Charles McCarthy com­

mitted offenses in China? Answer was yes. Asked if persons who

committed offenses should be arrested? Answer was they should.

Had Charles McCarthy been tried? Answer was yes. Had he ­himself

admitted his offense? Yes he had. When would he be able get release

from prison? There were two answers—­one was as soon as sentence

expired he would be released. Other was if Chinese justice authori­

ties considered he had shown good behavior and was eligible to be

granted earlier release under their legal procedures—­then he would

be granted release accordingly. Did agreement between us ­stipulate

Charles McCarthy would be released before expiration his sen­

tence? No such stipulation in agreement. Had Chinese Govt acted

in conform­ity with agreement in case Charles McCarthy? Answer is

Chinese Govt has.

26. I asked what meaning did agreement have with regard

Mr.  McCarthy? How was his situation any different from what was

before we reached agreement.

27. Wang said difference lay in fact time not come in which his case

might be resolved according to that agreement.

28. I just could not follow. It seemed to me he in exactly same

position was before we reached that agreement according to Wang’s

statement.

29. Wang said blame not on Chinese Govt but on prisoner him­

self. Blame on prisoner who came China to oppose Chinese people and

Govt under cloak missionary work.

30. I did not get point. Agreement did not say it did not apply to

those whom Chinese Govt alleges came to China to oppose Chinese

people and Govt under cloak missionary work, agreement said it

would apply all Americans.

31. Wang said all Americans to whom agreement applied and

should be able return under that agreement had already returned.

Agreement did not provide all prisoners be able return within pre­

scribed time. Agreement provided that all persons who desired do so

should be allowed return their country; however, in my country great

number Chinese who desired do so had not been able return. They had

not only been unable return country but even their correspondence

with families been subject interference by FBI my country. This interfer­

ence violates fundamental principle of democratic state. This violated

fundamental freedom of persons. This exactly violation and breach

our agreement. It to be hoped my govt would speedily correct all these

actions which in violation agreement all these obstructive activities.

32. I said Wang’s last statement came down to two points. One

that agreement applied only to those Americans to whom his govt

chose apply it. Other point seemed be they had not applied it to other

Americans remaining in their prisons because of what they alleged to

be obstruction to Chinese in America desiring return. With regard first

point, agreement did not state would be applied to those to whom his

government chose apply it. Said applied all Americans. With regard

second point, mechanism which Wang himself suggested to deter­

mine whether agreement carried out had as far as the US concerned

not offered any evidence or even allegation of obstruction. As far as

Americans in his country concerned same mechanism had alleged

obstruction and had made representation on it which his govt refused

accept.

33. Wang did not agree to explanation offered by me. There was dif­

ference between obstruction and law breaking. We could not make alle­

gation Chinese Govt obstructed people who broke Chinese law. This not

question his govt offering obstructions to those Americans but question

those Americans breaking their law. It these Americans who to blame for

breaking Chinese law. People who committed offenses must be punished

in accordance with law. On other hand he had pointed out many cases

and examples obstruction to return of Chinese in America. Absence of

representation to my govt did not mean obstructions did not exist.

34. I said seemed awfully good proof to me.

35. Wang replied if all obstructions had been removed then they

could say this proof. Was my govt prepared remove requirement for

Chinese nationals get Taiwan entry permit. This was long-­standing

question he had raised for long time and still unresolved. Was it alleged

that my govt never made such requirement on Chinese nationals US.

36. I thought a little late to go over all the ground I had previously

so carefully gone over with him in regard that matter. I had pointed

out to him in any event requirements our immigration laws concern­

ing applications by people who there on temporary status to show

they able proceed another destination at end their temporary stay had

nothing to do with ability Chinese in US who desire return to do so.

However, important fact was no Chinese in US had alleged that in this

or any other manner my govt had obstructed his departure from US if

he desired do so through channel established that purpose. On other

hand, Americans in his country, including most notably Mr. McCarthy,

had alleged this. His govt not only refused accept but also refused act

upon representations made through channels established in agreement.

37. Wang replied no matter how I explained this matter, so long

as requirement for Taiwan entry permit not removed, we could not be

regarded as acting in accordance agreement. Other hand no matter how

I explained away this matter, I could not confuse question obstruction

with question persons who committed crimes.

38. I asked who were we talking about when made agreement?

He perfectly well knew then Fr. McCarthy in prison. In fact he for­

mally informed me of that. Not said then agreement was not to apply

to Fr. McCarthy. In those weeks of discussion I wasn’t talking of

abstract Americans. Both us talking about very specific Americans—­

those Americans in prisons.

39. Wang said we did not then discuss matter in terms of regarding

holding of American offenders as obstruction their return. Had they

not resolutely fought against and refused my demand for release these

prisoners in definite time? When had he ever agreed persons in this

category would be released within given time? Case Charles McCarthy

included therein. Did he not make it quite clear at the time cases these

persons would have to be dealt with in accordance with substance and

nature offenses and also allowances for good behavior? Fact Charles

McCarthy not yet released, indicates not yet fulfilled conditions for ear­

lier release.

40. I asked did we not reject and did he not agree to elimination of

any distinction in agreement between those he termed as having com­

mitted crimes and those who had not? Did not we say in agreement all

would be permitted return expeditiously?

41. Wang said that was exactly what his govt doing in dealing with

these cases. If his govt not acted this way how could one expect greater

part Americans this category able return. He had not said all persons

would be released at same time and all together and did not consent

do so.

42. I replied we had said they would all be released expeditiously.

I did not, my govt did not, and I did not think any reasonable person

would think they had been released expeditously. Question not if some

or majority, question was if all released expeditiously.

43. Wang replied, talking about expeditious release, I would recall

I  given him names 103 Chinese students more than year ago, who

desired return. After more than year 23 still not yet returned. Did I term

this expeditious return? Another 52 persons who desired return and

concerning whom request had been made to my side for inquiry; but

these persons had not returned. Could anyone consider this expeditious

return? In accordance with connotation word “expeditious” Chinese

Govt enabled majority Americans to return—­not case so far Chinese my

country concerned.

44. I said had not given him list 103 persons desired return. Had

never so termed it. Had given him list of 103 persons who had been

ordered during limited period not depart from US. Those orders issued

without regard whether they desired return or not. I had explained that

quite clearly at time. Each these persons had been formally officially

notified that these orders had been withdrawn and they were entirely

free proceed Wang’s country if wanted do so. If they had not done

so it because they did not desire do so. If they desired do so and felt

obstructed they entirely free contact Indian Embassy. Best my knowl­

edge, none had alleged any obstruction.

45. Wang said any case in present circumstances ordinary Chinese

subject to interference in his communication with family, wife and

friends and in same way under great mental strain if he desires com­

municate with Indian Embassy. This one of questions on which he had

made repeated representations and still hoped my govt would take

effective measures to correct it.

46. I did not see that a man was under much mental strain in drop­

ping letter in letter box or picking up phone to phone Indian Embassy.

47. Wang had nothing further.

48. I suggested Thursday, December 13. He agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 50

Geneva, November 30, 1956

Dear Walter:

I have just returned from the meeting and dictated my summary

telegram. As you can see it was a sterile performance with absolutely

nothing new except my ability to introduce Lew’s return and their

reply to O’Neill. I debated also throwing in their refusal to let O’Neill

take the initiative in seeing the other prisoners but decided to stick

for today to the more basic points, particularly on the McCarthy case.

My occasional stubborn streak came out in the last part of the meeting

when I determined I was just not going to let him have the last word

and kept it going until he cried uncle. I could hardly keep from smil­

ing toward the end when he got himself wound-­up in to the point he

was just mixing up his words and at one point even stuttered. It was

some emotional satisfaction and I hope might have some slight effect in

demonstrating to them how weak their public case on implementation

really is. Our release of Lew has immensely strengthened my hand.

I also had debated refuting today their allegations on FBI interference

with correspondence by counterattacking with their registration of

families and “bringing of pressure” by their letter writing campaign.

However, as the meeting went I feared this would sidetrack us from the

main issue and saved it for possible use next time. I hope that Herman

will concur in my little lecture on American jurisprudence.

After learning of Nehru’s prospective visit to the States I entirely

concurred in your estimate that they would mark time today. However,

I am still of the opinion that they consider they have now placed them­

selves in a position to break at a time of their choosing. I hope I have

been able somewhat to shake their confidence on this but am not too

sanguine I have done so.

I know that you will inform me of anything of significance to me

during Nehru’s visit. I would be very surprised if with everything hap­

pening elsewhere he would do much carrying of the ball for Peking.

Thanks very much for your letters of November 23 and 26 which

were both here when I arrived. I particularly appreciated the most inter­

esting report of Suhrawardy’s visit and am returning it to you. Don’t

you feel it would be a good idea pretty thoroughly to brief such persons

on the prisoner issue before they talk with the Chinese, not with the

objective of having them take it up, but so that when Chou comes back

with his torturous position they would be somewhat forewarned and

not lead Chou to feel they are impressed with his position?

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The postscript is handwritten.

I am not sending any comment telegram this time as I really have

nothing but the obvious to say.

I presume the Department will be agreeable to arranging the long­

est Christmas recess that seems feasible. As I have to get Jennifer back

to school in Lausanne about January 9, it would be of considerable per­

sonal help to me if I could make the subsequent meeting during that

week. Ekvall’s orders expire December 30. Would you please do the

necessary to set the machinery for their renewal in motion.

Wang was with me on the plane from Prague on Wednesday. We

had the roughest flying I have had since I was caught in a typhoon in

the Pacific during the war. It looks as if it may be another long cold

winter, literally and figuratively.

Regards to all,

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. If you have the opportunity tell the Secretary we are all

delighted he has made such a marvellously quick recovery and is able

to be back on the job.

UAJ

Letter No. 61

Washington, December 7, 1956

Dear Alex:

We are immersed in the preparation of briefing papers for Nehru’s

impending conversations with the President. We are doing a paper on

the Geneva talks, as well as one on China policy in general. We are also

doing one on Chinese Representation Issue in the UN. It is a problem to

get everything that needs to be said within the one page that is allowed

for each subject. We will send you a copy of each briefing paper as soon

as they are multigraphed. Since the Secretary is leaving for Europe and

will not be able to brief the President in advance, we understand the

President himself may read these briefing papers.

Informal.

There is increasing evidence that the Chinese Communists are

getting ready to release some or all of the 10 American prisoners as

a part of the big play Nehru is expected to make for some modifica­

tion of our China policy. We sent you the text of an AP dispatch out of

New York yesterday which quoted Krishna Menon’s speech. It is clear

that Menon would not have made such a speech without something

pretty definite to go on and probably some form of clearance from the

Chinese Communists. We also have it from Kuh of the Chicago Sun

Times that Indian Ambassador Mehta said the day before yesterday

that he expected the prisoners to be released before Nehru’s arrival in

Washington. Nehru is due here on the 16th.

We are preparing ourselves for the eventuality of release of the

prisoners. We expect to have a statement ready, and John Lindbeck’s

study of the maltreatment of Americans over the entire seven year

period is being dusted off, although it might not be used immediately.

If the release of all the prisoners should take place just before your

next meeting on the 13th, we would have something of a problem as

to how the next meeting should be handled. I should think that after

taking note of the action in proper fashion we would concentrate on

renunciation of force. We certainly would not want to open up any new

subjects, and I don’t believe we will be ready to take up the missing

servicemen again as early as December 13. However, the Department

continues to receive numerous letters from Congressmen and relatives

of missing military personnel pressing for further action with regard

to them and we will probably want you to bring this matter up again

soon, although we are not sanguine that it will produce any results. At

least we would go on record as having pressed the Communists as far

as we could on specific cases where there is evidence the Communists

should have information. There are enclosed additional materials on

nine Navy and two Army cases which may be useful to you. They have

just reached us and we have not had time to study them. Defense is

making the review of these cases a continuing project, requiring reports

on a quarterly basis, so you can expect to receive additional material.

We anticipate that the matter of travel of newsmen to Communist

China will come up immediately in acute form, if and when the prisoners

are released. We are committed to reexamine the whole question at that

time, and I don’t imagine we can delay the reexamination very much.

I am enclosing the full text of the speech that Ernie Gross made

before the American Assembly at Harriman, New York on November 17.

Ernie was not very happy about the points in the speech which the

New York Times chose to highlight, and wrote a letter to the Editor of

the Times which was published on November 25. He argued that the

report was unbalanced and conducive to misunderstanding of his point

of view. You will note the reference to the Geneva talks in the speech.

I am also enclosing as of some background interest a copy of a

recent letter from Karl Rankin to Joe Grew.

We have had no reply from you to the questions we raised in our

letter No. 58 about Helenka’s status. Don’t you want that question pur­

sued further?

Bill Sebald and I expect to arrange a Geneva meeting today or

tomorrow and we count on getting your instructions out by the close of

business on Monday.

It seems to me that unless some special reason for an earlier meeting

develops, we should seek to pass up a meeting during Christmas and

New Year weeks, and arrange to have the next meeting on January 10.

There will be something on that in your guidance telegram.

Regards and the very best holiday greetings and good wishes to you,

Dave, Helenka and Col. Ekvall from Bill, Ralph and Doug as well as myself,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Dossiers on 11 Missing Military Personnel

5. Speech by Ernest Gross at American Assembly.

638. For Johnson.

Guidance for December 13 meeting.

1. Continue your excellent attack of November 29 on Chinese

Communist progressive nullification of terms of Agreed Announcement,

drawing again on McCarthy case to illustrate your points.

FYI We are asking British to take up McCarthy case again in

Peiping along lines suggested by O’Neill. There were some indications

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and McConaughy; cleared by Phleger.

last week that Communists might plan release some or all Americans

coincidental with Nehru’s visit December 16, but Chou’s December 9

press interview Calcutta raises some doubt. In event of release we

would expect you to alter presentation accordingly, but maintain

emphasis on implementation Agreed Announcement unless all ten

released. Supplementary instructions will be sent you if time permits.

Contingency statement drafted for possible use here being wired sepa­

rately. END FYI

2. Maintain previous position on other issues.

3. Propose next meeting January 10 because of holiday season.

Hoover

640. Verbatim text. For Johnson.

Following draft text for release by Department if all ten Americans

released:

QUOTE The Department of State is gratified to learn that the

ten American citizens so long unjustly imprisoned by the Chinese

Communists have finally been released. On September 10, 1955, more

than a year ago, the Chinese Communists agreed that these Americans

would be permitted expeditiously to return to their homes in the US.

Only now have the Communists made good on their agreement. The

American people are most appreciative of the good offices extended by

the Indian Government and other governments in prevailing upon the

Chinese Communists to honor their undertaking.

We hope that this long delayed action foreshadows a willingness

on the part of the Chinese Communists to make a meaningful renunci­

ation of force to include the Taiwan area. UNQUOTE

Following to be used in event only part of Americans released:

QUOTE We are glad that at long last these American citizens are

again free. We have all been distressed by the sufferings which they and

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough, Lindbeck, and Phleger; cleared by Phleger in draft

and Sebald.

others have unjustly endured under the Chinese Communists. If the

Chinese Communists had honored their pledge of September 10, 1955,

they should have been free long ago. The American people are most

appreciative of the good offices extended by the Indian Government

and other governments in prevailing upon the Chinese Communists to

take this step toward carrying out their undertakings.

There still remain (blank) Americans in Communist jails. Despite

the Chinese Communists’ promise over 15 months ago to take meas­

ures to permit all Americans held in China “expeditiously” to exercise

their right to return, they continue to hold (blank) Americans as polit­

ical hostages.

Only full implementation of the Agreed Announcement can resolve

the problem of the return of American civilians. Until the Chinese

Communists honor their commitment, the United States will continue

to press for the release of the remaining Americans UNQUOTE.

Hoover

643. Verbatim text. For Ambassador Johnson.

Following UP report yesterday’s date from Washington transmit­

ted for your information. Department has no independent confirma­

tion of quoted statements:

QTE The Indian Embassy has helped some 20 Chinese nationals

return to the Communist-­held mainland, it was disclosed.

Indian Ambassador G.L. Mehta told reporters that he knew of no

Chinese represented by the Embassy who had been barred from leav­

ing the United States by the State Department.

In some instances he said difficulties arose because of the American-­

born wives or children of the Chinese nationals wanting to leave. But

he said a majority of the score or so applicants already have returned

to China.

Drafted by Henderson (FE/P); cleared by McConaughy and in NEA and SOA.

The Chinese Communists and the United States government

agreed some time ago that India would represent any Chinese who

claimed they wanted to leave this country and could not. The British

perform the same function for Americans detained in China, ten of

whom still are in jail there.

Mehta talked with reporters after visiting Undersecretary of State

Herbert Hoover Jr. to discuss the forthcoming Washington visit of

Indian Prime Minister Nehru.

His remarks were made when reporters questioned him about a

statement in Calcutta by Communist Chinese Premier Chou En-­lai.

Chou said the next move was up to the United States if it wants to get

the rest of its nationals out of Red China. UNQTE.

Hoover

597. From Johnson.

It seems to me draft press release Deptel 640 unjustifiably tends

give virtually entire share of credit for release to India and thus depre­

cates US Govt’s efforts as well as UK role.

Accordingly suggest text first draft be revised along following

lines:

“The Dept of State is gratified to learn that the ten American cit­

izens so long unjustly imprisoned by the Chinese Communists have

finally been released in belated fulfillment of their commitment of Sept

10 1955 at Geneva.

“Only now after fourteen months of repeated representations in

the Ambassadorial talks in Geneva, of efforts by the UK representative

in Peiping in accordance with the agreed announcement of Sept 10 1955

have the Communist Chinese permitted these Americans to return.

The American people are most appreciative of the influence exerted

by the Govt of India and other govts in prevailing upon the Chinese

Communists to abide by this agreement.

Distribution.

“We hope that this long delayed action foreshadows a willing­

ness on the part of the Chinese Communists to make and to abide by a

meaningful renunciation of force to include the Taiwan area and thus

contribute to the preservation of peace in the Far East.”

Suggest text second draft be revised along following lines:

“We are glad that at long last these American citizens are free.

We have all been distressed by the sufferings which they and others

have unjustly endured under the Chinese Communists. If the Chinese

Communists had honored their pledge of Sept 10 1955 they, and the

(blank) others who still remain in Communist jails should have been free

long ago.

“Only now after fourteen months of repeated representations in the

Ambassadorial talks at Geneva and efforts by the UK representative in

Peiping, in accordance with the agreed announcement of Sept 10 1955,

have the Chinese Communists taken this step toward carrying out that

agreement.

“The American people are most appreciative of the influence

exerted by the Indian Govt and other govts in prevailing upon the

Chinese Communists to permit these Americans to return.” Last two

paragraphs as in Dept’s draft.

Gowen

647. For Johnson.

Substance recommendations your 597 incorporated without

change in contingency press releases.

Hoover

Limit Distribution. Drafted by McConaughy.

Geneva, December 13, 1956, noon

605. From Johnson.

Two hour fifty minute meeting this morning almost entirely on

implementation except for review by Wang of FMC, trade, and cultural

proposals with emphasis on latter two. Cited Coleman statement on

trade and American Assembly statements on trade and cultural rela­

tions and newsmen in support contention “American people” favor

action on these subjects. If US genuinely desires settle problems it

should express its views with regard to these specific proposals on

questions whose resolution would be easy and in interest both peo­

ples; implementation discussion followed familiar lines except that in

reply he renewed charges US interfering with correspondence Chinese

students, I made strong statement charging them with campaign bring

pressure on students through organized letter-­writing from families.

He reiterated old position on imprisoned Americans and there was not

slightest indication of any plans for early release.

In reply my suggestion January 10 next meeting he suggested

January 12 and opposed January 17 and then finally agreed on Saturday,

January 19. Returning Prague tomorrow.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

611. From Johnson.

1. I opened 63rd with prepared statement:

A. At last meeting I again referred manner in which your author­

ities seem steadily have nullified each of provisions announcement

Distribution.

until it has ceased have any substance with respect Americans your

country who were and still are being prevented returning their country.

I again point out unwillingness your authorities resolve this first sim­

ple straightforward question we were called upon deal with, as well as

carry out first agreement reached between us, cannot but raise serious

doubts concerning intent your government carry out its agreements

and resolve other questions.

B. However, instead taking action remove these doubts I regret

note since last meeting your authorities seem be continuing their atti­

tude of not only ignoring this agreement but even ignoring fact you and

I have been meeting here for past sixteen months with mutual agree­

ment our first order business was return civilians.

C. In July last year on eve beginning our talks your Prime Minister

made public statement which was widely interpreted as indicating

desire and willingness quickly resolve question Americans detained

your country permitting them return. He was quoted to effect that

number Americans detained your country was small and speedy reso­

lution problem their return should be possible. I was accordingly will­

ing accept your proposal with regard announcement between us on

understanding this would, as stated in announcement “expeditiously”

resolve question as also stated in announcement, “Americans who

desired return”. However, it has not done so.

D. It seems me we have rather now almost come back in full circle

from where we started as far as ten still detained Americans concerned.

E. Have noted recent statements your Prime Minister in which he

again saying number Americans is small, is again making statements

about possibilities their release as if we had never entered into agree­

ment September 10 last year. He has also ignored fact my government

has not only carried out agreement but even gone beyond its terms meet

your point of view. However, it not my purpose here attempt edit or

correct public statements your officials. Also, as have often said here, it

never been my intention specify your authorities manner or procedures

they should take implement their commitment under announcement.

That something which only they can decide. However, it been and will

remain my intent insist they do implement that agreement and permit

those still detained return my country. I do this not only for sake these

Americans but also for importance that respect for this agreement has

in determining course our future relations.

F. I, therefore, hope this morning you in position make clear state­

ment on intentions your authorities with respect this agreement and

ten Americans still being detained.

2. Wang replied greatly regretted my statement this morning did

not seem contain any new constructive views. I had made many unjus­

tified charges against Chinese Government on question return civilians

which he could not possibly accept. At opening these talks last year

Chinese Prime Minister did state number Americans in China small

and problem could be resolved easily. During more than year of nego­

tiations here his government exactly been settling problem in accord­

ance spirit that statement made by Premier. As result great majority

Americans in China already returned as Premier made clear in state­

ment. If we examined record of handling question return civilians by

Chinese and American Governments, facts clearly showed Chinese

Government exactly worked in accordance spirit agreement and made

many efforts this respect. On other hand, on question return civilians,

side which should be reprimanded is entirely US Government instead

Chinese Government. Therefore, it is up to US Government make fur­

ther efforts on this question present moment. I had just observed we

seem to have traveled in circle and come back to point when started

these talks. But blame not his side. It my side which to blame because it

had consistently chosen delaying tactics. Now that year 1956 coming to

close he regretted say our talks not been able make any more progress

than had year before.

3. Wang continued, question which side willing and ready resolve

issues and which not should be determined by actual facts. No empty

charges or words can determine this matter. At very beginning discus­

sion on second item agenda his side put forward proposal for holding

Sino-American FMC. It always been his view such conference would

play decisive role in easing and settling tensions and disputes in Taiwan

area. Regretted say, however, my govt up to now failed respond to or

accept this reasonable proposal.

4. Wang continued (from prepared text) it also hard understand if

my side genuinely desired settle disputes and improve relations, why

my side still had not responded to simple and reasonable proposal put

forward by his side Aug 21 this year proposing lifting embargo. However

American people did not share this view of mine. They properly feel lifting

embargo and restoration traditional trade relations between China and

US advantageous to both sides. He did not pretend speak for American

people but what had read in American press indicates American people

want to do away with obstructions to trade. Mr John Coleman, President

US Chamber Commerce at interview in November expressed self in

favor lifting embargo and restoring Sino-American trade ties. Also noted

tenth American Assembly held New York not long ago expressed same

view. Such views proper expression desires American people. As he had

previously told me, in imposing unreasonable embargo against China

my govt did not succeed in causing China any formidable difficulties.

This did not however absolve US of unrighteousness of embargo pol­

icy. Therefore it essential embargo must be lifted before minimum basis

Sino-American relations could be established. They felt sooner my govt

adopted such reasonable outlook, better.

5. Wang continued, neither had my side responded to proposal for

promotion human contacts cultural exchange made by his side Sept 22.

My side had thus shown lack willingness reach even limited agreement

such as this. In taking such line preventing normal exchange my govt

could not make self popular. Above mentioned American Assembly

had also recommended my govt permit American newsmen scholars

visit China also advocated increased interflow culture and information.

Such were exactly ideas covered by his Sept 22 proposal and they felt

these desires American people reasonable and proper.

6. Wang continued, if US had genuine desire resolve problems it

should make progress in second item agenda. It made unfounded futile

charges instead taking action in discussing those specific proposals

which could be easily resolved and which in interest both our people—­

such manner conducting these talks futile. If US really wanted settle

problems it should express views these proposals his side. They contin­

ued await response my govt these proposals.

7. I replied he seemed to have missed point I had tried make again

this morning on relationship of first agreement between us on civilians

and other proposals which he had made. He had also seemed ignore

fundamental relationship to question renunciation force and agreement

settle our differences by peaceful means only. Again wanted stress until

these fundamental matters resolved, these subsidiary matters could not

fall into place. I had all along and still expressed willingness discuss

and do best resolve any other subsidiary matters which properly come

within terms reference our talks, once fundamental matter resolved.

Could not be denied it had been continued unwillingness his govt

resolve these fundamental matters which had continued for all this

time prevent us from going on to other matters. Even before he and I

met here our govts agreed first matter to be settled was return civilians.

I had made it very clear right from beginning these talks that my inter­

est not in words and appearances of agreement—­my interest was in

resolving this question. My govt demonstrated its good faith and took

action to resolve this question even before he and I met here by remov­

ing admitted restrictions which had theretofore been placed on depar­

ture from US some few Chinese students. He had indicated to me here

in 1954 and his govt indicated through consular level talks here as well

as through public statements that this was their primary interest. Thus

rather than proposing formulae for public statements, my govt took

concrete action resolve this question in which he had indicated interest.

8. I continued when he had raised question concerning Chinese

alien criminals in American prisons, my govt also took concrete action

resolve that. As had previously informed him there not now in prison

any Chinese alien who desired return his country. We took all these

actions without condition, without demanding concessions, as our

earnest desire quickly resolve this problem. We did this frankly in hope

his govt would on own initiative take corresponding action to solve

problem of Americans imprisoned his country. It could easily have done

so if it had desired resolve this question and this whole matter which

had continued be irritant in our relations could have been disposed of

in first few days our talks. However, he had insisted on public agree­

ment on this subject and third party arrangement which would be able

determine facts. As had pointed out to him at time, that agreement

in self solved nothing. Only implementation that agreement could

solve question. Nevertheless I willing enter into that agreement with

him on understanding it would be implemented and would resolve

question. As I had noted this morning it had not done so. He had spo­

ken of actual facts with regard implementation that agreement. It was

his suggestion we establish third party arrangement so facts could

be determined. I accepted that arrangement and it was that arrange­

ment which best demonstrated facts. I had often cited fact here that

in no case had we received any notification from third party that any

obstacle had been placed in way any Chinese my country who desired

return his ­country. In reply that he had at times intimated here that

Chinese may fear communicate with Indian Embassy. As I had pointed

out this utterly absurd. Absurd think person would fear put letter in

mail box or pick up telephone to communicate with Indian Embassy

if he felt he being obstructed from leaving US. His govt must be per­

fectly aware this fact and perfectly aware facts regard communications

between Chinese in my country and Indian Embassy. In this connection

I had noted press statement made this week by Indian Ambassador in

US in which he quoted as saying Embassy had assisted some twenty

Chinese in returning Wang’s country. This established that Chinese

able to and in fact were in communication with Indian Embassy. Indian

Ambassador had gone on to say knew of no Chinese who had been

barred from leaving US. I regretted UK Charge Peiping not able make

similar statement. Regretted that facts with regard Americans his

country would not justify or support such statement by Charge. UK

Charge would have to say ten Americans who desired return US still

held in prison. He would have to say Wang’s authorities refused accept

representations from him with respect these Americans even though

this clearly set forth in agreement. He would have to say authorities

prevented him even from investigating facts of case as clearly set forth

in agreement. I did not know how I could better illustrate or establish

who had been carrying out this agreement. These not what he termed

unjustified charges or unsupported allegations. These were actual facts.

These were actual facts established by arrangement which he himself

suggested for establishing such facts. I had cited these facts not only

because of importance in themselves but because of relationship of

them to fundamental question whether agreements between us were to

have substance. It had yet to be demonstrated that this first agreement

between us had substance. It had yet to be demonstrated whether his

govt willing resolve first question we called upon to deal with.

9. Wang replied my statement on question civilians could not be

regarded as in accordance facts. He could not see how settlement of

our issues could be facilitated by repeating these statements. As matter

fact even prior opening our talks here Americans in China who desired

return my country had been able to because his govt never adopted any

illegal restrictive measures against their departure. At present still were

number of Americans who desired remain his country. At future if any

these people desired return my country his side would continue enable

them depart in accordance with agreement. In addition these ordinary

American civilians, I must also know number former American pris­

oners from Korean War who refused repatriation and who had ­chosen

reside China. Recently two of this group indicated desire return my

country. His side had promptly assisted them do so. This showed they

always ready assist those who desired return my country to do so. In

future if any these former prisoners of war should desire return, his

side would continue help them depart. At time these talks opened here

there were 40 Americans in China who had committed various crimes.

To show good will, his govt taken special measures of ­leniency by

announcing release of 11 of them on very first day our talks. In course

our talks, Chinese Govt had taken further measures in giving 19 prison­

ers opportunity exercise right return. All these 19 persons had returned.

Therefore could be said China not only enabled all those American

nationals who desired do so leave country, but also taken further meas­

ures enable great majority American prisoners exercise right return.

Under such circumstances to charge China failure carry out or violate

agreement was deliberate distortion facts.

[10.] Wang continued (from prepared statement) insofar as remain­

ing ten American ­prisoners concerned, as he had always indicated if

they displayed good behavior authorities would adopt lenient mea­

sures within framework their legal system give them early release. Their

policy with regard American prisoners was entirely legal and lenient in

every respect. No one could deny this fact. Let us examine record my

government in handling question release civilians. Up to now my side

had refused hand over list all Chinese imprisoned in America. Even

list of Chinese prisoners in America we had produced not complete

one. My authorites continued force Chinese go Taiwan. With regard

this, he wanted point out my side not yet withdrawn requirement

Taiwan entry permit which violated our agreement September 10

last year. They continued receive information on this matter. In case

where Chinese nationals forced to Taiwan, my immigration authori­

ties playing leading role. My side had not yet stopped interfering with

correspondence of Chinese students with families. My side must stop

all these examples obstruction return in flagrant violation agreement.

They continued press for accounting on group 26 persons and group

52 persons—­exactly why these persons had not returned. Until such

accounting given, people could only assume their return obstructed.

Insofar as Chinese prisoners concerned my side not yet taken measures

as China had done so could exercise right return. On other hand my

side actually adopted illegal screening method so that these people left

in same situation as before.

At one moment my side had alleged not single one these desired

return. At next moment I said a single one did desire return. At one

moment I said agreement not cover these persons at next moment said

did cover them. How could such contradictory statements convince

people my side trying settle this problem? Even so in whole course

these talks my side permitted only single Chinese in prison return

China. Sharp contrast to fact in same interval his side permitted 30 of

sion here with regard civilians were those who desired return. I had said

in past and I repeat again and my statements substantiated by third party

he had designated in US—­no Chinese national in US who desired return

Wang’s country was being obstructed doing so. Chinese nationals who

had not returned have done so only because of own free choice. He had

persisted in misunderstanding and misrepresenting what he called ques­

tion Taiwan entry permits. First let me say I did not consider it proper

subject of discussion here since it had no relationship to those who desired

return his country. It had relationship only to those who desired extend

temporary stay in US—­that is remain in US. Nevertheless I had been will­

ing explain matter here. I had explained in past nobody required obtain

what he termed Taiwan entry permits. Persons desiring extend stay in

US must be able show they can proceed to another destination at end of

stay. This is not something that applied just to Chinese—­it something that

applied all aliens in US. Applied equally to Indian, Swiss or British subject.

13. I continued he had also again spoken of what he termed inter­

ference with correspondence. What he was doing was attempting put

blame on my government for situation which his own authorities cre­

ated. I had refrained previously from talking on this matter because I

hoped his authorities would realize absurdity such charge. We have

learned that in spring this year his provincial authorities were enforcing

mass registration of families of Chinese studying in US. Such registra­

tions are known to have taken place in Canton between March 30 and

Similar mass registrations are known to have taken place in other areas

during same period. In succeeding months, purposes of this became

all too clear. Chinese students my country began receiving letters from

relatives—­letters which were on whole quite different in content from

those they had previously been receiving. These letters contained

similarities of language and content that were beyond probabilities

of chance; some of them hinted that unless student returned immedi­

ately to mainland his family there would suffer; still others contained

warnings disclosure of correspondence would bring reprisal on fami­

lies. Some students received letters mailed other than from mainland

telling them to disregard earlier letters, as they had been written under

pressure. Purpose of this pressure was all too clear. However, some

students, in their anxiety for fate their families, had turned for advice

to various Chinese welfare and religious organizations in my country.

Some brought their cases to attention authorities my country. Eventully,

as was inevitable, whole maneuver came to light in public press. I found

it incredible attempt now being made lay blame for situation on author­

ities my country. If any pressure had been exerted on Chinese students

my country, it had come from his country. My government has real sym­

pathy for both students and families. My government had and would

continue follow humane course of allowing each Chinese in US make up

own mind whether remain or leave. It had not brought pressure bear on

students; nor had it attempted through them exert pressures on families.

14. I continued, my govt had not alleged Americans in his country

who desired remain there in fact desire return. It had never attempted

bring pressure on these Americans to return. I had been very careful

from beginning these talks not bring subject these Americans into talks.

Had not attempted complicate our talks by making false allegations

about these Americans. Had discussed only question of Americans

who unquestionably did desire return. At very outset these talks had

given him list these Americans. It those Americans I had been talking

about. It those Americans who were subject of agreement. It was ten

those Americans who still not given right return which they granted

under agreement. It with regard these Americans UK Charge Peiping

not even able carry out subsidiary provisions that agreement. It those

Americans who subject terms reference these talks. Until all, not just

majority, those Americans had returned, first item our discussion had

not yet been resolved. I again urged it be resolved by his govt permit­

ting them return.

15. Wang replied, I had stated our agreement Sept 10 related to

persons who desired return their country; that was right. On other

hand, I demand that ten Americans who had committed crimes and

now serving out terms should immediately be released; that was

wrong in error. Our agreement did not at any place state all Americans,

including criminals, be able return. Such demands were illegal. Such

interpretation of agreement was distorted one. On other hand, it was

rather Chinese nationals in US who desired return and who being

obstructed from doing so.

16. Wang continued, very surprised listen my statement with

regard investigation correspondence Chinese. Well known China sent

large number students abroad study in places including Europe, US,

Japan. These students sent abroad either by govt or their families. Didn’t

go there stay but rather serve their motherland at conclusion study.

Question whether these students desire return country does not arise in

any civilized country. Yet they had seen this problem arise in US because

US trying detain these students and prevent them return motherland.

Not yet seen more striking instance in history civilized world. Only

too natural Chinese Govt and families express concern these students.

Nothing secret and entirely open that families of Chinese students have

gathered in public meetings to put forward demand their kin in US

be allowed return. His delegation had received large quantities mail

from families Chinese students in US requesting assistance for student

return rejoin families. This only too natural. It entirely matter Chinese

internal affairs as to what advice offered by Chinese Govt to these rela­

tives to help kin—­these students—­return motherland. Only too natural

sentiment for these relatives advise and appeal for return their kin in

US. Nobody can expect their relatives to advise their kin remain there.

Information in my statements entirely proved fact US Govt investigat­

ing and interfering in correspondence Chinese students with families.

This act could only be regarded as violation of personal rights and free­

dom Chinese in US. What was purpose this investigation correspon­

dence? Purpose was bring pressure bear on minds Chinese students in

US prevent their returning China. This investigation of people’s corre­

spondence reminiscent days KMT rule in China. In those days people’s

correspondence also investigated and we termed this activity work of

special agents while in other democratic country this called police activ­

ity. They vigorously opposed to this action of US Govt which violation

personal liberty and democratic spirit.

17. I replied information had given him [garble] what he termed

investigation of correspondence. It resulted from voluntary acts of per­

sons receiving correspondence calling it to attention our authorities

and asking for advice. From his statements seemed quite clear he did

agree there was campaign to bring pressure through families on these

Chinese students to return or [garble] might not desire return would

naturally show some concern. Would naturally be especially concerned

when, as some informed us, had received one letter from relative post­

marked from Wang’s country urging them to return and subsequently

received another letter postmarked elsewhere telling them disregard

first one. Fact of matter was not my govt attempting bring any pressure

on these students. They were mature enough make own decisions. Fact

of matter was all evidence showed not single Chinese been obstructed

from leaving US if desired leave country. Evidence for this was not my

unsupported statement. Evidence was third party which established to

determine just this very fact. Fact of matter was, as best exemplified in

case Fr. McCarthy, third party in Wang’s country not even permitted

investigate facts of case where person alleging obstruction return. Facts

with regard performance our two govts on agreement all too plain.

18. Wang replied, I had spoken of campaign launched by his govt

to urge Chinese students in America return motherland. Fact was rela­

tives these students hold many public gatherings voice demand to his

govt that govt should make reps my govt for return their kin in US. It

was quite public matter. Such campaign made necessary simply because

Chinese students my country prevented from returning. If not pre­

vented from returning, such campaign would have been unnecessary.

Relatives had written letters. No matter where mailed and no matter by

what means mailed, purpose of letters was urge members family return

motherland. This reasonable and expression entirely humane desire. But

absurd, utterly absurd, for parents urge members families remain in US

all their lives and die in US.

19. Wang continued, he would remind me terms reference these talks

did not cover only question return civilians but covered wide range mat­

ters at issue between two countries. He referred second item agenda. In

course these talks his side had made various proposals designed resolve

other matters at issue between us. He regretted my side not in position

join in discussion these matters and because of this attitude my govt, no

progress made in discussion second item agenda. It to be hoped my govt

would devote necessary attention second item agenda and join in rea­

sonable discussion those items and proposals made by his side.

20. I replied hoped his govt would resolve first item agenda and

thereby show desire resolve issues between us.

21. Wang replied had already made quite clear their opinion as

to how first item agenda to be settled. On their part always acted in

accordance with agreement. Their opinion was problems could only be

resolved this way.

22. I asked did that mean Americans his country who desired

return would be able expeditiously do so. If so I welcomed statement.

23. Wang said matters could only be resolved in accordance agree­

ment. Impossible ask beyond scope agreement.

24. I said had asked for nothing beyond scope agreement. Agreement

said Americans who desired return would be able expeditiously do so

and that his govt would take necessary measures that regard. Agreement

said anybody who felt obstructed from returning could communicate

with UK Charge. Agreement said UK Charge could investigate facts in

any such case. Agreement said his govt would accept representation

from UK Charge. I could not see single aspect our agreement which

being honored with regard those ten Americans still there.

25. Wang said with respect ten American prisoners serving prison

terms China, his govt could not accept any unilateral demand of US

Govt because such demands unreasonable and did not conform with

agreement. People other than ten Americans serving sentences, other

Americans in China including former prisoners of war who refused

repatriation would be assisted by his side without any condition

depart from his country if they desired so. They might ask how many

Americans formerly in Chinese prisons allowed return and how many

Chinese in US prisons allowed return.

26. I said all Chinese in US including those in prison who desired

return been able do so. Ten Americans his country who desired return

not been able do so.

27. Wang said these ten Americans not permitted return because

had not served out terms given them for their offenses. This was

accepted practice every sovereign govt.

28. I said in other words, our agreement had no meaning with

respect these ten Americans.

29. Wang said agreement did not state all American prisoners

should be released within specified time.

30. I replied agreement said Americans desiring return would be

able expeditiously do so.

31. Wang said that only one aspect of problem.

32. I said however one termed it, it was agreement between us

which not being carried out.

33. Wang rejoined it was US which not carrying out agreement.

34. I stated third party arrangement showed which side carrying

it out.

35. Wang complained US had not assisted third party to perform

functions.

36. I pointed out that not what third party said.

37. Wang asked since two items on agenda, why had US not pre­

sented views on second item.

38. I replied US had at great length presented views on second item

agenda and US had also expressed views with regard first item. US

expects agreement on first item be carried out and US expects funda­

mental items under second item be resolved. It still hoped—­even after

this passage of time—­that his govt would make decisions resolve these

matters.

39. Wang stated now up to US take such measures resolve ques­

tion. Removing requirement for Taiwan entry permit would do more

good than to sit here and engage in long empty statements. It was

American people who demanded lifting embargo. Why had my govt

not taken measures do so? It was American people who demanded

American pressmen be allowed visit China. Why had not American

Govt taken action permit do so? He hoped US would take concrete

action which could be seen by everybody rather than by making

empty statements or empty professions of desires.

40. I noted for 180 years my govt considered fully qualified speak

for American people. I thought no less qualified do so today. This did

not mean, happily, that no difference of opinion among American peo­

ple. This did not mean, happily, that persons having different opinions

not able publicly express them.

41. Wang commented we had not come here for history courses.

42. I suggested January ten for next meeting in view Christmas and

New Years holidays.

43. Wang proposed January 18 which I found inconvenient and we

agreed on Saturday, January 19.

Gowen

Letter No. 51

Geneva, December 13, 1956

Dear Walter:

I am again not sending any comment telegram as there is really

nothing new to say and much can happen before the next meeting.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

I must confess that the news stories from India certainly make my

prediction that Nehru would not talk much about Communist China

look entirely wrong. It now looks as if he might do much talking about

it, and may be carrying some messages. Therefore, I presume that what

happens at the next meeting will to a considerable degree depend on

what is or is not said during the Washington visit.

Do you see any significance in Wang’s persistence on the January

18 date? I do not have Chou’s schedule here and wonder if it could be

related to the post-Washington meeting between Chou and Nehru and

Chou’s return to Peiping.

I pressed for the January 17 date as Swissair is no longer flying to

Prague on Saturdays and Sundays and I have to go back by Czech Air

on those days for which I have no stomach. (They have had too many

crashes with their old Soviet planes and the week preceding my last

return by Czech Air, killed a whole plane full taking off from Zurich.)

I agreed to Saturday with the thought I could lay-­over here Sunday and

go back Swissair on Monday [text not declassified].

I am sorry I failed to reply to you about Helenka. However, as

I had talked over with her the suggestion you made regarding leave

without pay and as she was agreeable I had dismissed it from my

mind as finished business. Nevertheless, I should have said some­

thing to you.

I pressume you have by now received my letter about extending

Ekvall beyond December 30. (My letters to you seem to take an extraor­

dinary time in transit).

As a side light Wang was with me on the plane coming down

Tuesday and while we were in the airport at Zurich I showed him two

articles and pictures in the New York Times of Chou’s Indian visit. In a

little while he came over and gave me the Prague English news bulletin

of NCNA giving the account of Chou’s Calcutta interview. It was to that

I was particularly referring this morning and he knew it as I had it on

the table.

I didn’t feel as pleased with today’s meeting as I had with the

last meeting in that I wasn’t able to keep it as exclusively on the ten

Americans as the last meeting. However, I felt it was time to call him on

their tactics with respect to the Chinese students and this inevitably led

us somewhat down that road. However, all in all, I think I was success­

ful in continuing to keep him on the defensive.

I am very glad you accepted my suggestions on the contingency

statements in the event of any releases. I just felt we were giving the

Indians entirely too much credit.

I did not put too much stock in Menon’s statement as indicating

knowledge by him of an early release, but would be inclined to give

considerable credence to Mehta’s remarks if Kuh was correctly quoting

him. (Incidentally thanks very much for the press account of Mehta’s

statement on Chinese in the U.S. As you will have seen I made very

good use of it.) I would be most surprised if they released all 10. If they

are going to make any gesture I think it much more likely they will at

the most let 8 go.

If and when I bring up the missing servicemen again I suggest

I should also include some blanket inquiry that would cover not only

the 11 Coast Guard and Navy personnel but the recent weather plane

incident in the Japan Sea on which I forwarded you a reply to a let­

ter from Mrs. McLaughlin. That is, without individually mentioning

all such incidents an inquiry framed in such a way as to attempt to

draw from him a disclaimer of knowledge of survivors of any such

incidents so that we could assure inquirers we have done our best

for them.

Holiday greetings and best wishes for all. May 1957 be more pro­

ductive than 1955 and 1956.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

768. Letter from Clough to Osborn

Washington, December 19, 1956

Dear Dave:

The last batch of data on unaccounted for military personnel was

sent to us by Defense in such haste that they failed to get to us the

enclosed covering memorandum. I note from the memorandum that

there should be data on twelve persons rather than eleven, as Walter

stated in his letter of December 7 to Alex. Defense now tells us that in

the rush they sent over extra copies of some of the dossiers which they

would like you to send back, since one will presumably satisfy your

needs. They have also told us that the Navy is declassifying the mate­

rial on Naval personnel so that it can be used in negotiation.

by Clough.

We would be interested in your comments on the usefulness of this

latest batch of material. The Department is under continued pressure

to do something about the unaccounted for military personnel and we

may want this subject brought up again at the next meeting.

With such long gaps between meetings you must be turning into a

regular member of the Consulate General staff which we regret, since

FE pays the bill and we could use you to much better advantage here.

However, there seems to be no solution to this unsatisfactory situation.

Awana and I send best wishes to you and Helenka for the holiday

season and hope to hear from you.

Sincerely,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosure:

Memo from Defense dated December 6

769. Letter from Osborn to Clough

Geneva, December 26, 1956

Dear Ralph:

I am returning the extra copies of the missing-­personnel dossiers

you mentioned in your letter of December 19. As you say, we did get

data on twelve persons.

It should be possible to make a pretty good presentation on the

basis of the material we now have, if we can have discretion as to the

use of material from some of the classified dossiers. Although some of

the new material is still utterly valueless in our context (e.g., Pvt Worley,

Lt. Gleaves, Lt De Lacy, Lt Cochran, Lt Batson, Lt Nelson), I don’t think

this would necessarily hurt our presentation. We now have a few cases

we could cite in some detail to cast doubt on the so-­called “accounting”

in both the “escaped” and the “no-­data” categories (e.g., Pvt Walker, Lt

Biesterveld, Capt Moreland—­why have we no new data on him?—­and

several of the Air Force cases). Taking off from this, we could strongly

renew the demand that this “practical matter” between the two sides

be settled by the simple and feasible action on Peiping’s part that we

have asked for all along. It has seemed to us here we might also want

to work in a blanket demand for information on any other US person­

nel, whether or not involved in the Korean conflict, of whose fate the

Communists might have knowledge. In this connection, it might be

useful for us to have whatever unclassified information is available on

any US planes that have gone down near China since 1950—­plane num­

bers, crew names, etc.

Probably Wang will not even give us a nibble this time. If he

does respond, it will probably be with a counterattack. He can if he

chooses attack the failure of the UN side to submit any accounting

at all; but this line can be exploited by us against him, as it would at

least be an acknowledgment that MAC business can be dealt with

here. Wang could, if he chose, make a fairly good counterattack on

the 14,000, even though these are not comparable to the unaccounted-­

for personnel. He could point out that the PRC has let those of the

US non-­patriots wishing to do so return; he could ask whether the

14,000 have the same right; he could point out that this is a practical

matter between our two countries. Of course, he would be wrong, but

it might prove uncomfortable having to argue the point. However,

this line of counterattack somehow doesn’t seem Wang’s style in the

present pattern.

I was glad to learn from your card that Joe Bennett is to be join­

ing you. He is an excellent man. As to when I might rejoin you—­the

Ambassador has indicated a sympathetic understanding of my disin­

clination to stay on here if the talks assume—­or retain—­the character

of an indefinite and sporadic maintenance of contact. We both feel that

the next meeting ought to be somewhat more indicative than most in

regard to the future of the talks.

I realize, of course, that this doesn’t give you in CA much of a firm

basis for planning ahead on personnel, which is another reason I’m

glad Joe Bennett is coming.

Helenka and the children and I had a good Christmas, and hope all

of you in CA did, too. We’re taking advantage of the year-­end holidays

to spend a few days in Italy, which I’ve never seen.

Happy New Year to all.

Sincerely,

David L. Osborn

Enclosures: Extra dossiers of missing personnel for Defense

Letter No. 62

Washington, January 4, 1957

Dear Alex:

I have checked with Bill Godel in General Erskine’s office on the

status of Col. Ekvall. Bill assures me that there will be no difficulty in

extending his present assignment. Apparently the red tape that has

vexed us previously will not have to be contended with again. However,

Bill warned me that Ekvall is nearing the mandatory retirement age

of 60. He wanted to give us due notice so that we would have ample

time to make other arrangements. We have checked the Army register

and find that Ekvall was born in February, 1898. Hence his compul­

sory retirement date should be February 28, 1958. That is far enough

in the future so that we will not have to worry about the matter for the

present. As you know, we now have a modest Foreign Service inter­

preter training program under the guidance of Howard Sollenberger

of the Foreign Service Institute. The first trainee, John Dexter (already a

Chinese language Officer) should complete the interpreter training by

early next year.

We have received intimations from Dave and Helenka that he is

very eager to return to his work in CA and that you might be will­

ing to consider releasing him after the next meeting. Undoubtedly FE

would get a much larger over-­all return from Dave if he were working

full-­time for us here in the Department, rather than for brief and infre­

quent periods at Geneva. This would seem to be doubly true since the

talks have entered a stereotyped phase where there is little for him or

any other assistant to contribute. It has occurred to me that we might

explore the possibility of bringing Dave back, and detailing Ed Martin

to commute between London and Geneva for the meetings, if you are

receptive to the idea. Probably it would have to be understood that

there would be no more than two meetings a month in this event. We

have not discussed the matter with EUR or Embassy, London, and will

not do so until we got your reaction. We have ascertained that such

an arrangement apparently would be feasible from the FE budgetary

standpoint, although FE’s travel expenses, plus the differential pay

which Dave would receive when he is back in the Department, would

come to a little more than we are now spending. I have to make this

Official–­Informal. Drafted by McConaughy.

letter unclassified, since otherwise there would be a long pouch delay.

However, I believe the essentials are spelled out.

We intend to see that you get all the support you feel you need, and

if the proposed arrangement would not suit you we want you to say so.

It would be clearly understood, of course, that if you do give up Dave,

we would reassign him or someone of comparable qualifications for

full-­time service should the talks take a new turn involving the discus­

sion of other major substantive matters.

Regards and good wishes to you and Pat for all of ‘57.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

771. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Prague, January 7, 1957

Dear Walter:

I have just received your unclassified letter of January 4 and hasten

to reply in the same way mailing this by APO channels from Nurenberg

when I go through there tomorrow.

It is reassuring to know that if I am still at this in 1958 a substitute

is in the mill. You can be sure I most fervently hope that the contingency

will not arise.

I had told Dave that if by the end of the next meeting it looks as

if things are going to continue on the same course I would be willing

to tell the Department I was willing to release him to return to the

Department, subject, of course, to the arrival of a replacement. I had not

thought of Ed Martin from London but am delighted at the prospect

and believe that from my standpoint it would be entirely practicable if

we continue at our present pace of not more than a meeting each two

weeks. This would leave the problem of a secretary which I will discuss

with Geneva when I arrive there. With Dave Popper at no. 2 there now

I may be able to work out something more satisfactory than previously.

I will let you know.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” A handwritten note on the letter indicates it

was received on January 14.

I hope you have lots of news waiting for me at Geneva, so that I

know at least as much as the other fellow about what has happened, if

anything.

All the best,

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

Letter No. 63

Washington, January 14, 1957

Dear Alex:

I hope you got my letter No. 62 of January 4, sent to you at Prague.

I presume you did since we received no word that you would carry

through the travel and leave plan which you were considering when you

I am leaving on the 17th to participate in a panel discussion of

Communist policy at the Air Command and Staff School at Maxwell

Air Base, Alabama. I hope we can get our guidance telegram for the

January 19 meeting on the wires not later than Wednesday, the 16th. I

hope we can have a preliminary meeting today. There will be nothing

really new to put in it unless we decide to have you bring up the missing

servicemen again. I’m going to recommend that the subject be brought

up at this week’s meeting. I assume you will have enough time to pre­

pare your presentation, and it needs to be done to satisfy Defense, and

to back up many letters to the relatives in which we state that we are

continuing to pursue the question actively. It is evident that we are not

going to make any headway in the MAC. I agree with the suggestion

in your last letter that some blanket inquiry be included which would

cover other incidents where military personnel have disappeared in the

general area of China and adjoining waters.

We do not feel that we have any good explanation for Wang’s insist­

ence on not having this week’s meeting on January 17. Chou ­En-­lai’s

current trip to Poland may have something to do with it, although

it seems doubtful that Chou’s present itinerary had been planned in

Informal.

detail as early as December 13. As you know, extensive changes in

Chou’s travel plans have been made, or at least announced, since then.

We have sent you what little we have on Nehru’s conversations

touching on China matters while he was recently in this country. We

have no reason to think that anything took place in those talks which

would influence our tactics with Wang. I gather that Nehru is not san­

guine about the prospects for any immediate favorable action on the

prisoners by Peiping.

We are in a rather difficult position in our efforts to hold the line

on travel of Americans to Communist China. The unexpected entry of

the 3 American newsmen into Communist China has complicated our

problem. The present disposition here is to refrain from any sort of legal

or administrative sanctions against these three. The “Look” Magazine

people have already ordered Stevens and Harrington out and the

“Afro-American” publisher has promised to advise Worthy to leave

promptly, although Worthy is not actually an employee of the “Afro-

American” and may not feel obligated to respect their wishes. Wiggin of

the “Washington Post” is making a comprehensive study of the whole

subject for the American Society of Newspaper Editors. While he is not

entirely unsympathetic to our position his report may make it more dif­

ficult to hold the line 100 percent. There is a strong effort to break down

our position to the extent of letting in a selected few newsmen. But we

do not see how we can discriminate against people in other occupations

who have plausible reasons for going in. We intend to continue to use

all the moral suasion we can while avoiding tangles with the courts and

with public opinion. It seems important to get out a better statement of

our reasons for opposing travel to Red China than we have yet done.

Such a statement is being worked on now.

Our difficulties have been compounded by the digging up of a

1952 press release (copy enclosed). This release announces that all pass­

ports will be stamped not valid for travel to various Communist coun­

tries including Communist China but explains that “this procedure in

no way forbids American travel to those areas.” None of us were here

when this press release was issued. Do you recall any background on

why it was stated that we would not object to travel in Communist

China? That is hard to understand since it was issued at a time when

the Korean War was still going on and more than 40 Americans were

unjustly imprisoned in Communist China.

Our endeavor to keep the pressure on the Communists to release

the American prisoners by refusing passports to mainland China

until they are released has been further damaged by the action of the

defense lawyer in the Powell sedition case, Abraham Lincoln Wirin.

He has given the court a long list of witnesses in Communist China

whose testimony he claims is essential to his clients’ defense. The judge

has issued an order providing that the testimony of these witnesses be

taken in the form of depositions before an American consular officer in

Hong Kong. However, Wirin avers that in order to get the witnesses to

come to Hong Kong he must go personally to Communist China and

North Korea to interview the witnesses and others with information

relating to the case (including Chou En-­lai and Kim Il-­sung.) Having

been denied a passport valid for travel to Communist China and North

Korea, Wirin appealed to the court and the judge issued an order (copy

enclosed) to the effect that he was to go to these two areas as an officer

of the court, at government expense, depositing his passport in Hong

Kong, and the court would protect him from any criminal or adminis­

trative action against him by reason of this travel. L, which has primary

responsibility in this situation, has decided not to contest the judge’s

action and Wirin has announced, according to the press, that he will

depart for Hong Kong and Communist China on January 28. Thus, we

have another precedent and another breach in the dike.

Regards and good wishes to all of you,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

2. Copy of court order.

3. Two Nehru Briefing Papers:

(a) Chinese Prisoners in U.S. Penitentiaries.

(b) Background Paper on Father C.J. McCarthy.

4. Copy of Television Interview—Edward R. Murrow and Chou

En-­lai

P.S.

It would be useful if you could let us know right away if any

breaching of the line at all on travel of Americans in Communist China

would compromise your position in your talks with Wang. You will

recall that you have mentioned several times to Wang that we could not

change our policy while Americans are unjustly held. If you have any

important observation on the effect in Geneva of any modification of

the policy, it might be well for you to telegraph as well as write.

We are naturally interested in the interview which Worthy is to

have with American prisoners in Shanghai today or tomorrow. But we

have decided it would be inappropriate for us to transmit any ques­

tions for Worthy to put to the prisoners, as we have an opportunity to

do. We do not wish to seem to be capitalizing in any way on Worthy’s

visit when it has been termed contrary to official policy. Furthermore

we do not believe any additional information would result from action

on our part. The questions which might logically be asked are obvious

and will occur to Worthy without any prompting from us.

It now seems as if we may put out a strong statement immediately

on our handling of Chinese prisoners and students, in order to correct

the harmful misrepresentations which Chou En-­lai is making in the

course of his current tour.

736. For Johnson.

Guidance for January 19 meeting.

1. Express deep disappointment and concern of American people

that new year has begun with terms of Agreed Announcement still

unfulfilled by Chinese Communists. Many months have passed since

last American released. It now appears Chinese Communists taking

no repeat no measures permit Americans expeditiously return US as

promised in Agreed Announcement, but instead compelling each pris­

oner serve out term of sentence prior release. Such action is flagrant vio­

lation of Agreed Announcement and contrary Wang’s assurances that

prompt action could be expected. It also in sharp contrast to US action

regarding Chinese prisoners in US. Only Chinese prisoner choosing

go mainland China released after serving only two and one-­half years

of seven to twenty year sentence. US has extended benefits of Agreed

Announcement to all Chinese in US including common criminals in

prison such as narcotics offenders and murderers. US even invited

Indian Embassy interview all such prisoners. Chinese Communist

refusal permit interviews cannot obscure fact US has done more than

required by Agreed Announcement regarding Chinese in US, while

Chinese Communists have failed carry out their commitment regard­

ing Americans.

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy, Sebald, and Phleger in draft.

2. Renew demand for accounting by Chinese Communists for

missing military personnel. Frame demand in terms broad enough

encompass both personnel missing from Korean War and other US mil­

itary personnel missing from aircraft lost vicinity of China. Select from

dossiers forwarded to you best-­documented cases missing individuals

reliably reported at one time in Chinese Communist hands and present

in detail to Wang. (Material sent you McConaughy’s letter December 7

all now declassified.) If Wang should refuse consider subject, refer state­

ments of Communist side at Panmunjom at 67th Meeting of MAC on

November 26, 1956 that personnel QUOTE detained by authorities out­

side Korea UNQUOTE or QUOTE disposed of UNQUOTE by Chinese

Communist regime not repeat not subject discussion at Panmunjom.

Point out this is obvious issue between us, one of great concern to

American people, and therefore suitable subject for Geneva talks.

3. Maintain previous position other subjects.

4. Propose next meeting February 7. (FYI Lengthening interval

between meetings will serve to emphasize to Communists our dissatis­

faction their attitude in talks and make less frequent demands on your

time.)

Dulles

Geneva, January 17, 1957, noon

705. From Johnson.

Re travel Communist China as indicated Mytel 67 Aug 16 from

Prague felt fact issue largely turned into one between US press and

USG had largely destroyed negotiating value position here and best

course was find some way acquiesce and capitalize on situation rather

than have correspondents travel in defiance USG policy. As some cor­

respondents have now in fact travelled and further such travel must be

anticipated if correspondents now there not prosecuted or courts refuse

convict, and as Wirin’s travel will probably give rise to question travel

by others such as families prisoners who may well consider selves more

deserving, feel negotiating value position thus far taken here has now

been destroyed.

This, as CHICOMS feel selves well on way accomplishing imme­

diate purpose this field with bonus of having created issue between US

press and USG, in spite our position here, continuation that position

will not constitute effective pressure on them expedite release remain­

ing Americans.

Do not believe there is sufficient possibility modification US posi­

tion would expedite releases to justify such modification solely on this

ground but do not feel such modification would have adverse effects

and in fact might have slightly favorable effects. However, such modifi­

cation could not now be exploited here and if such decision were taken

it could probably best be done by public statement pegged to appropri­

ate appeal from Society Newspaper Editors or other such action.

[garble] fully recognizes extreme difficulty such modification at

this time feel this action preferable to further erosion our position by

developing events.

Re inquiry McConaughy Jan 14 letter cannot recall clearance with

ther clarification would appear indicate language may not have been

considered in FE. However, it possible language was cleared on basis

we were at time also discouraging travel Taiwan in view possibility

spread Korean hostilities that area. Taken in context and from my rec­

ollection practical application it seems clear intent first sentence second

para was simply state endorsement did not constitute inflexible ban on

such travel which however could be undertaken only after authoriza­

tion accordance procedure second sentence second para.

Gowen

Letter No. 52

Geneva, January 17, 1957

Dear Walter:

I have just received your letter of January 14 and in accordance

with your suggestion have this morning sent off a telegram giving my

views on the present situation with respect to travel to Communist

China. I well realize that it may not be exactly what you are expecting

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

but I cannot in all honesty say anything else. David and I both feel very

much the same on this. I of course base myself primarily on our evident

inability to hold the line and to obtain public support or support from

the courts.

In my telegram I also answered your query in regard to the press

release of May 1, 1952. In this connection we were not at the time pre­

venting travel to Communist China on the grounds of their unjust

imprisonment of American citizens but on the more general grounds

of the Korean hostilities which made such travel unthinkable. We, of

course, had American citizens unjustly imprisoned at the time in other

Communist countries and while I recall that that was a factor in restrict­

ing Americans traveling to those areas, I do not believe that we have in

any case other than China made it the sole factor. As a matter of fact

while the Otis case was a factor in including Czechoslovakia in the ban

we never entirely prevented all travel to Czechoslovakia, particularly of

newspaper correspondents, and removed the restriction with regard to

Czechoslovakia even though we had and still have at least one American

unjustly in prison there.

I am surprised that you did not get word of my leaving Prague on

January 8. I sent an OM well before Christmas confirming the plans

I had mentioned in my previous letter to you. I also sent a telegram

on the day I left. I fortunately received your letter of January 4 just

before leaving and sent a reply by open air-­mail from Nuernberg on

January 8 which you should have received well before your letter of

January 14. In that I had said that I was agreeable to Dave and Helenka

going back after the next meeting if it looked as if things were simply

going to continue to drag along, subject, of course, to obtaining an ade­

quate replacement for Dave. I said that I was delighted at the prospect

of having Ed Martin and thought that his commuting here would be

entirely practical.

I do not understand your reference to having sent me material on

the Nehru conversations as I have received nothing except background

papers prepared in FE. Perhaps you have sent something to Prague

which I missed.

I have to close this hurriedly in order to make the pouch.

Regards to all

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. [text not declassified]

710. From Johnson.

Desultory two hour forty minute meeting this morning with noth­

ing new except my presentation missing military personnel item to

which he responded along same lines as in 1955.

In prepared opening statement Wang reviewed course of talks

along standard lines leading up to reiteration next move up to US. He

stuck to this position throughout give and take. No implication intent

their part break off.

When I proposed February 7 for next meeting, he suggested

February 14 which I accepted.

In course implementation discussion, Wang handed me name

address Chinese allegedly forced by US to Taiwan against will: Lee

Li-chuen, (characters not received) 45 Ludlow Street, Apartment 2,

New York 2, N.Y.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

712. From Johnson.

Minutes 64th meeting being pouched leaving Geneva January 20.

Gowen

Distribution.

778. Telegram unnumbered from Geneva

Geneva, January 19, 1957

Unnumbered. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 64th with prepared statement: As talks between

us enter third year would not be without purpose if we reviewed at

this first session of new year ground talks so far covered. These talks

owe origin to Asian African Conference Bandung April 1955, where

premier of Wang’s country first made proposal negotiations should

be started between China America. Ensuing developments led to ele­

vation on August 1, 1955 of Consular level contact to present talks on

Ambassadorial level. Agreed agenda of talks included return civilians

and other matters at issue between two sides. Attitude held by each

side towards two items throughout entire course negotiations showed

who been consistently working devotedly for negotiation and resolu­

tion problems and who been lacking in sincere desire for resolution

issues and obstructing progress in talks. Sincere desire his side for

settlement problems these talks displayed at first meeting, when his

side took special measures of leniency, even before entering into dis­

cussion of substance, to grant early releases of 11 airmen who been

convicted of intrusion into territorial air of China to carry out espio­

nage activity.

2. Wang continued China had tens thousands its nationals in

US including several thousand students. Since proclamation of PRC,

when US Government began actively carrying out policy of hostility

towards China, these Chinese nationals had lost freedom of returning

to homeland. In violation international law and principles of human­

ity, US Government even issued orders prohibiting Chinese nationals

returning motherland, while obstructing and unlawfully persecuting

those who desired return. In discussing first item of agenda it was

essential that such abnormal state affairs should be corrected. American

nationals in China had always been able return their country freely and

China had never tried obstruct them doing so. This was entirely in

contrast attitude my side towards Chinese nationals. After Agreement

September 10 was reached, Wang’s side faithfully carried out, and in

addition continuing offer assistance departure of those Americans

desiring return, they had also taken further lenient measures in advanc­

ing release of greater part American criminals.

Distribution. Drafted by Johnson. Sent via pouch. Received on January 24.

3. Wang continued, US, however, not only failed give China names

of all Chinese in US but also resorted to various means continue obstruct

return Chinese in defiance agreement. In this respect there still 52 of 55

and 25 out of 103 who thus far not returned. Besides, US also failed

take corresponding measures on own initiative settle cases imprisoned

Chinese so as enable them return. My side not only refused submit

complete list imprisoned Chinese but even adopted illegal screening

operation. Under such circumstances, my side still sought disregard

Chinese law by demanding immediate release ten remaining American

criminals!

4. Wang said on second item, attitude my side even more unsat­

isfactory. Their side made, under second item, proposals to hold FMC

and lift embargo. My side had raised proposal for making declaration

on so-called renunciation force. Here it should be pointed out it was

only after period unreasonable delay my side entered into second item.

Intent this proposal of my side been clear from very start, that is, it

designed interfere with internal affairs Wang’s country, and obstruct his

country from liberating its rightful territory Taiwan. With view reach­

ing agreement acceptable both sides, Wang’s side had put forward on

October 27, 1955 reasonable draft declaration regarding proposal my

side. Subsequently, in order meet point view my side, his side succes­

1956, but my side not given up in slightest its attempt interfere internal

his country, and obstruct liberation its own territory, and consequently

obstructed ever since agreement on this problem.

5. Wang continued it not fortuitous my side should have adopted in

these protracted talks such attitude and performance which had noth­

ing in common with desire settle outstanding problems and improve

relations. Ever since Chinese people overthrew reactionary rule Chiang

Kai-shek which had been renounced and discarded by entire Chinese

nation, US been hostile to Peoples’ Republic and been attempting

overthrow it by every means at its command. To achieve this end, US

Government not hesitated resort to open warfare and covert subver­

sion. US Government still at this moment occupying China’s territory

Taiwan by armed force.

6. Wang continued, on international plane, US Government repeat­

edly been obstructing restoration lawful rights PRC in UN. This pol­

icy of unscrupulous opposition to PRC could not win US prestige. On

contrary, could only lead to moral bankruptcy and failure. No matter

whether certain people like it or not, Peoples Republic stood in world

and was ever making progress.

7. Wang said since opening these talks, his side already taken many

steps. He would hope at this first session of new year, US would make

new efforts and I would be in position put forward constructive opin­

ions that would give us good start in new year.

8. I replied I too had hoped we could have gotten off to better start

during this new year. If statements Wang had made here and state­

ments of his government on desire for improving relations had real

content his government would long ago have implemented first agree­

ment between us. When he and I first came here in August 1955 I tried

in every way I could impress upon him importance this question of

Americans detained his country. I would not have done that if I had

not hoped for quick substantial progress in these talks. His authori­

ties appeared have recognized that fact by accepting this question of

return civilians as first item agenda. They appeared indicate, in public

statements at time, desire resolve this problem and appeared indicate

it was capable of ready solution. I had told him at time we entered into

Agreement September 10, 1955 of very favorable effects it would have

on our discussions and future course our relations if it were faithfully

implemented. I had told him of very favorable reception it received

from public my country and their very great satisfaction that this prob­

lem apparently resolved. I had been encouraged by release ten these

individuals at time we entered into this Agreement. This showed what

his authorities could do if they wanted to resolve this issue. I had taken

it as token of their intent speedily resolve this issue. I had taken it as

token their intent carry out agreement we entered into that day. Wang’s

government had it within its power at that time, by carrying out this

agreement, bring about I would say very marked improvement in

atmosphere surrounding these talks and our relations. His government

had it within its power demonstrate it prepared honor fully letter and

spirit agreements into which he and I entered.

9. I continued, here we were at beginning 1957; this agreement

we entered into 1955 still not fulfilled. This is source most keen dis­

appointment to me, to my government, to my people. As I had often

said here it could in all honesty be said we had gone backwards since

we made this agreement. It been many months since even single

American been released. Whereas prior to our agreement it appeared

some Americans released prior to completion their sentences, it now

appears his government adopted policy requiring them serve out full

terms their sentences before being released. This not only direct viola­

tion commitment Wang’s government entered into on September 10,

1955, but even step backward from position existing prior that time.

This deeply discouraging; cannot be reconciled with genuine desire on

part his government resolve outstanding problems between us.

10. I continued, Wang’s failure resolve this problem cannot be

obscured by repetition these vague unsubstantiated charges concern­

ing Chinese in US. Action—or rather inaction of his authorities in this

matter stood in very stark contrast to action which has been taken with

regard Chinese in my country. He continued make here very vague

unsubstantiated charges concerning US obstruction Chinese desiring

return his country. Even though his country still maintained exit permit

procedure, he attempted characterize action US took prohibit depar­

ture some few Chinese students as violation international law and

rules humanity. That surely extraordinary charge particularly in view

procedure for exit aliens maintained his country. In any event as I had

informed him August 2, 1955, all orders concerning those few persons

had been removed. They withdrawn not because were violation of

international law and rules humanity but in order fully resolve to his

satisfaction question with regard these students. Any Chinese in US

who desired return Wang’s country did not need apply to anyone to

do so. He simply did so. Under our Agreement if rightly or wrongly

he felt in any way being obstructed he could communicate with Indian

Embassy. We entered into this Agreement September 10, 1955; it now

January 19, 1957. During that period, Indian Embassy had not brought

to our attention single case in which Chinese desiring leave my country

had been obstructed from doing so. We had even extended this right of

return to common criminals.

11. I continued, Wang appeared charge my government with giving

false information to Indian Embassy and not giving it list all Chinese

alien nationals in our prisons. I resented this charge, which utterly false.

Fact that his authorities refused agree to Indian Embassy interviewing

these prisoners to determine their desires could not obscure fact we had

done more than our agreement of September 10, 1955, whereas they

failed carry it out. Even though they refused permit Indians carry out

offer made them, we nevertheless went ahead and took steps return

his country any imprisoned Chinese who desired return. As I had told

him, the prisoner desiring return, as determined by impartial survey

American Red Cross, was permitted do so promptly even though had

served only two and half years seven to twenty year sentence. He

permitted do so even though he committed common crime and even

though under normal parole and commutation procedures under our

law he not entitled release.

12. I continued, with regard second item agenda, my suggestion

for first step between us to resolve peacefully our disputes was very

simple and fundamental one that we simply say we going resolve them

by peaceful means only. No amount misrepresentation proposals I had

made here obscures fact his government still refused accept that first

and fundamental proposition. No amount proposals on subsidiary

items from his side could obscure fact his government still unwilling

state unconditionally that our disputes could be settled only by peace­

ful means. Rather than my side refusing negotiation, question is one

of his side refusing first fundamental step toward peaceful resolution

disputes. Not question at this time discussing merits those disputes

which he seemed continue try mix in with these discussions, but rather

saying they will be settled only by peaceful means. No amount words

or charges could obscure fact his government still unwilling accept

this simple proposition. If his government desired we make progress

here; if his government willing give substance to, rather than just give

appearance of, desire improve relations, way open to it is very clear

and simple: resolve first issue between us by carrying out first agree­

ment entered into between us and then agree that differences between

us will be resolved only by peaceful means, including our differences

in Taiwan area. Nothing unilateral in these two simple propositions.

Acceptance of both propositions could be of tremendous benefit to

his government and to peace of world. I still failed understand why his

government delays acceptance these propositions.

13. Wang replied he had made statement this morning briefly

reviewing ground covered our talks. He intended make it as reminder

essential we strive go ahead with talks rather than remaining dead­

locked without making progress. However, lengthy statement I had

made not given him impression US Government now ready contrib­

ute progress these talks by putting forward constructive opinion. If any

had been discouraged by these talks, as I said, it him who been dis­

couraged and disappointed. If purpose these talks improve relations

and solve existing problems, then purpose not achieved by repeating

series empty statements but only by taking concrete action. It should

be pointed out ever since talks started his side taken concrete steps

toward settlement our problems in both first and second items agenda.

This action his side had fully shown sincerity on their part in these

talks. However he regretted point out success our talks could not be

achieved by efforts only one side. During these talks US had not taken

concrete constructive steps toward resolution our problems but merely

content making unjustified unfounded charges against his country in

many respects. Such approach these talks in no way contributed to suc­

cess our talks. I had also remarked our talks going backward. He ready

accept this observation, but this does not come from intent his side.

14. Wang continued my remarks with regard non-existence obstruc­

tion to return Chinese in US did not obscure fact US authorities do

obstruct their return. In this connection he would here call attention to

specific case in which deliberate obstruction on part US has been estab­

lished. They had received information that a Chinese resident in New

York, Mr. Lee Li-chuen (no Chinese characters) had received orders

from American Immigration authorities during October last year telling

him leave for Taiwan. He wanted point out this represented yet another

serious violation of Agreement September 10. This case indicated how

US Government consistently in defiance Agreement continually coerc­

ing Chinese nationals proceed destination to which they did not desire

go. Wang’s side demanded my government immediately stop these and

other acts obstruction of return Chinese nationals and requested me

promptly make investigation and give accounting of this case. For my

information he giving me name and address (he did so). From actual

cases such as one just mentioned, fact clearly seen who faithfully car­

rying out agreement and who not. If anyone dissatisfied with state in

which Agreement implemented it actually and exactly his side which

dissatisfied.

15. I replied did not know exact circumstances case Mr. Lee Wang

mentioned. However could categorically tell him even in case ordinary

Chinese citizens who entered US illegally—that is not accordance our

immigration laws, such as case seamen who jump ship or something

that nature—he not forced go Taiwan or any other destination against

his will. While he required leave US, he permitted go any place which

would receive him. I knew many cases seamen for example subject

deportation for illegal entry who had been deported to Wang’s country

in accordance their choice. Wang’s authorities must be perfectly aware

these cases. I also know if Mr. Lee wanted go Wang’s country and felt

he being obstructed do so, he entirely free communicate with Indian

Embassy.

16. I continued he had spoken of improvement our relations and

resolution our existing problems by concrete action rather than empty

statements. That exactly point I was trying make here for all these many

months. What I trying say was insofar as Americans detained Wang’s

country, empty statements would not resolve problem, but only con­

crete action permitting them return. There another concrete question in

which my government was and is still extremely interested. Question

which I raised earlier our discussion second item agenda and also still

not resolved.

17. I continued from prepared statement:

with you question missing American military personnel. Pointed out

this was practical matter unavoidably affecting relations between our

two countries, one which clearly came within terms reference our talks.

b. Your position that time was this question should be dealt with

through MAC in Korea. You will recall I replied it was immaterial

whether accounting furnished here or in MAC. What was—and still

is—important is this practical matter at issue between us be settled.

c. Over year has now gone by, matter still not been settled, either

here or in MAC. It not my intention this morning enter controversy

over question proper place for accounting requested by my govern­

ment. What simply wanted do is underscore this question is real, vital,

practical matter at issue between our two countries; this question arises

not because I, or my Government, have chosen raise it but because your

side not even after this long lapse years carried out its clearly expressed

obligation this matter vital interest to American people

d. My government responsible to American people not just in

abstract, but to them as individuals. It is responsible to Mrs. ­Vergie

Walker. Mrs Walker’s son, Army Private Archie Walker, reported miss­

News Agency broadcast report by one its correspondents listing

names addresses persons in US to whom American prisoners war in

certain camp in Korea wished send greetings. One of persons named

was Mrs. Vergie Walker. Since then she had no word whatever of her

son. He not repatriated. His body not returned. No report his death

received. Most careful questioning repatriated prisoners not resulted in

any firm information concerning his fate. Mrs. Walker does not know

whether he alive or dead. She naturally incredulous when your official

news agency and radio at one time serves as channel for sending her

greetings from her son and then subsequently your side says it knows

nothing about her son. She cannot but have hope her son may still be

alive. However, if he is dead she would naturally like know even that.

She clearly entitled some definite information this regard and clearly

entitled feel your side must have such information. She and my govern­

ment find it impossible understand why it not made available.

e. My Government responsible to family and friends Army Captain

Harry D. Moreland. Captain Moreland was captured in Korea October

27, 1952, following crash his plane. He reportedly lost left leg in that

crash. According other Americans imprisoned with him, his right

leg also amputated in November 1952. Some time during November,

Captain Moreland taken from his room, not seen subsequently.

f. My Government responsible to relatives and friends Ensign

Thomas Biesterveld. There no doubt about fact Ensign Biesterveld’s

capture April 29, 1951, following crash his plane. There uncertainty

about what happened Ensign Biesterveld subsequently. When last seen

by fellow prisoners, June 1951, he suffering from severe burns received

in crash his plane. He also contracted pneumonia dysentery. On June 25,

1951, Ensign Biesterveld removed from prison camp. According later

statement Chinese interpreter to one Biesterveld’s fellow-­prisoners, he

died in prison hospital June 26, 1951. There never been any official con­

firmation this, however, nor has his body been returned.

g. Could mention many other similar cases, cases where man’s

family knows beyond any doubt he held prisoner by forces your side,

but has no other information any kind. For these people, this issue

overshadows all others between our two countries. Towards many hun­

dreds persons thus directly and deeply concerned by your Government’s

refusal thus supply information it must have, my Government has

responsibility it cannot shirk. This matter at issue between us cannot

be resolved by simply ignoring it, or by arguments over proper forum,

but only by action your authorities providing information which I have

requested, and which I again formally request this morning.

h. Even apart from such solemn international commitments as

Korean Armistice Agreement, it common international practice for coun­

try rescue survivors, recover remains, and inform country of origin in

any case where aircraft or vessel of another country is lost in or near its

territory.

i. Accordingly, in addition this accounting for US military person­

nel still missing from Korean hostilities, request any additional infor­

mation which your authorities now have or may in future acquire

concerning Americans surviving or killed in such accidents or inci­

dents. This is another matter on which only concrete action by your

authorities either here or in MAC in Korea, can resolve outstanding

issues between us.

18. Wang replied, matter I had just brought up an old matter I had

already raised in early part our talks. I would recall at that time his

side had firmly rejected attempt bring up such matter in our discussion,

because it not within terms reference our talks. This still held to present

moment. His side not prepared enter into discussion any such matter.

19. I replied whether Wang rejected it or not, it still matter at

issue between us. As I had said it immaterial to me where this mat­

ter resolved. When we raise matter in MAC, Wang’s side there states

that individuals held outside Korea do not come under authority MAC,

and it therefore irrelevant discuss in MAC. His representative in MAC

states MAC no connection with prisoners of war disposed of by Wang’s

government. Wang could not have it both ways. Either matter for dis­

cussion and resolution here or matter for discussion resolution in MAC.

I had waited over year for this be resolved in MAC. It had not been

resolved there. It was matter at issue between us.

20. Wang replied he had kept saying matter which taken place at

given place must be resolved that place. The alleged matters concerned

persons in Korea and should therefore be referred to organization in

Korea itself. During Korean war US Government in gross violation of

international agreements forcibly detained immense numbers prison­

ers war. Specifically, some 14,000 captured Chinese personnel sent to

Chiang clique by force. Chinese Government received no accounting

for this gross violation international agreements. Families these 14,000

captured Chinese prisoners will always remember kinsmen forcibly

sent to Chiang clique by US Government. Such is matter which Chinese

Government so far received no accounting—but they had not proposed

raise this matter at this conference. Now that US deliberately brought

up matters this nature, does US now intend account for 14,000? Who

should be held responsible for so-and-so missing on Korean field?

Responsibility lies on government which had sent those persons there.

Who sent these young men to place thousands miles away from home

to engage in war of aggression? It those who sent people there who

should be responsible. Such matters would not have arisen if govern­

ments concerned had not sent men go war in that place.

22. I replied in first place, as I had pointed out, no parallel between

persons for whom we had asked accounting—who still missing—and

persons from his side who voluntarily chose go Taiwan. I had not raised

question here of those Americans who decided go his country. I raising

with him here persons who clearly captured by his side; persons whom

his own official channels of communication admitted holding at one

time and with regard to whom his side now says there is no informa­

tion. His representatives in MAC state they have no information regard­

ing these men and at same time state have no connection with prisoners

of war who may have been disposed of by Wang’s government. Official

information agencies of his government at one time admitted knowl­

edge many these men. Seems incredible his government did not now

have information regarding what happened to them. As said previ­

ously with regard this question, making no charges, merely asking for

information which all evidences showed must be in posession his gov­

ernment. As had also said immaterial to me where furnished. If he felt

proper place furnish it was MAC it entirely satisfactory to me. However,

not been furnished through MAC and therefore still remained an issue.

Also desired point out UN members MAC had told members his side

fully prepared give detailed accounting all persons of whom his side

has requested an accounting whenever his side prepared give account­

ing persons still missing. However, simply saying had no information

regarding men of whom at one time they clearly did have information

could not be regarded as satisfactory accounting.

23. Wang replied he had stated his attitude toward this matter. Did

not consider it necessary repeat it all over again. However would be

glad if I had any opinion put forward on second item, specifically con­

cerning their proposals on lifting embargo and personal contacts and

cultural exchange (Wang’s interpreter also mentioned FMC).

24. I replied I previously clearly expressed our attitude on this and

would not take time repeat this morning. I had hoped this morning he

would have been able take more positive attitude regard saying uncon­

ditionally our disputes would be settled only by peaceful means, and

thus clear way for our discussion subsidiary matters. Other questions

between us could only fall into their proper place when his govern­

ment willing say it willing settle these matters only by peaceful means.

Continued overhanging threat his government resort force, if it could

not otherwise obtain objectives, remains fundamental issue between us.

25. Wang replied if I wanted talk about threats, it US which threatens

China. If one were to speak about resolution problems unconditionally

by peaceful means, it US which should do so. In course talks his side

already made many efforts. If talks going make any progress efforts of

only one side of two could not achieve this end.

26. I asked who had proposed we unconditonally refuse to resort

threat or use force resolve issues between us? Who is it thus far refused

do this?

27. Wang pointed out American occupation Taiwan was one such

condition and American insistence right self defense in Taiwan area

another such condition.

28. I stated unconditionally means we unconditonally say we will

not go war about these problems but will seek their peaceful solution.

29. Wang said there was more to “unconditional” than that. If US

ready accept their draft US would thereby prove sincerity.

30. I answered that his proposals did not constitute unconditional

renunciation force. I had been in past and remained willing consider

any proposals which did accomplish this. Not willing consider propos­

als which gave appearance doing so but in fact avoided doing so. Not

willing accept proposals which mean one thing one side and another

thing to other side. Particularly not willing do so after our experience

with agreement on civilians.

31. Wang insisted had dealt with all these problems in past and did

not like my “new” opinion in this regard this morning.

32. I suggested next meeting Thursday, February 7. Wang preferred

February 14. I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 53

Geneva, January 19, 1957

Dear Walter:

Back from the 64th. As I implied in my summary it was a dreary

affair. Today he seemed to be saying that he was willing to sit there

just as many months as I was but I should not believe he was going

to make any further moves and I said the same back to him. So there

we are. It is not a cheerful prospect. As a footnote, if I did not seem too

brilliant at the end it was because my mouth was hurting from a tooth

I had to have pulled late yesterday evening which, together with other

facts of nature, made me desperate to get out of there.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

Incidentally, I told the New York Times man here yesterday that,

without any direct quotation, he could indicate I was very unhappy that

some correspondents had traveled to Communist China in spite of the U.S.

Government’s position as it obviously had greatly weakened my position

vis a vis Wang here. I hope this will be of help to the Department.

I also had USIS expand out their story from here on today’s meeting

to review the facts on the release of Americans and the fact no Chinese

have been obstructed in leaving the U.S. I suggest you take a look at it.

I thought it would be useful for the field to be reminded of some facts to

counteract the line Chou has been putting out on his journeys.

The talks now seem in a complete cul de sac and look as if they could

well continue indefinitely in that state. It now seems to me that while they

would probably quickly fall into any move on our part which would place

the onus for a break on us, they are not going to take the onus for break­

ing and only some major outside development or a move by one side or

the other in the talks can resolve the impasse. It seems clear we cannot at

the present stage expect the release of any Americans other than possibly

slightly expedited releases of those whose terms will shortly expire.

I am, of course, entirely willing to go on as we are if it is still felt it is

serving a useful purpose but I hope that that decision will be fully exam­

ined at a high level. I am not arguing that the exercise is not useful, I think it

may well be, but I just want to be sure that the Secretary also still thinks so.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

260. Your 705 from Geneva.

Though effectiveness US ban on travel Communist China as

pressure on Chinese Communists release imprisoned Americans may

possibly have been somewhat weakened by fact three correspondents

defied ban, we do not believe US Government can or should alter

opposition to travel Americans in area where no repeat no protection

Repeated for information to Geneva for Osborn as telegram 769. Drafted by Clough and

Sebald; cleared in draft by Phleger and in FE/P and SCA.

can be provided, where regime continues hold Americans as political

hostages, and where it desires promote cultural exchanges to break

down US policy of non-recognition and non-seating in UN. For US to

acquiesce in such travel would encourage Communists to redouble

efforts to promote QUOTE cultural contacts UNQUOTE while taking

no repeat no action to release imprisoned Americans.

Following considerations have bearing on Department’s position:

1. Employers of Look correspondents ordered them out of

Communist China after policy explained to them. Department believes

moral suasion will still effectively keep most correspondents and other

Americans from going.

2. Investigation under way to determine if three correspondents

who defied ban misused passports preliminary to determining what

further action will be taken.

3. Wirin travel to Communist China and North Korea is unique

case of individual travelling as officer of Federal court pursuant to

court order specifically authorizing such travel for purpose of offering

opportunity to prepare defense of persons accused by our Goverment

of crime of sedition. If Wirin’s travel prevented, this might seriously

prejudice Government’s efforts prosecute case. Wirin’s passport was

not validated for Communist China or North Korea.

Under present circumstances Department will therefore continue

adhere to policy of discouraging to greatest possible extent travel to

Communist China by any Americans including correspondents and

will refuse to acquiesce in requests for approval such travel either with

or without passport.

Dulles

781. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Prague, January 28, 1957

Dear Walter:

I received a copy of Taipei’s despatch No. 240 of December 10 com­

A–159 of January 15 on the same subject. Although I was not able to

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

check what envelope they came in I presume CA sent them to me for

my information and I appreciate it very much. I found both most inter­

esting. My only purpose in mentioning it is to be sure the copy of the

Department’s instruction was in fact intended for me and that a copy

was also sent to Taipei.

Thanks very much for the word on the travel of the correspond­

ents. I will of course be most interested in knowing before my next

meeting whether anything developed between Chou and Nehru on the

subject of the remaining prisoners.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

782. Letter from Osborn to Clough

Geneva, January 30, 1957

Dear Ralph:

I talked with Ed Martin by phone yesterday and he told me

London is somewhat less than enthusiastic about having him fly here

for the meetings. From the absence of direct word from CA, I expect

you all are encountering a similar lack of enthusiasm on the part of

FE/EX for incurring the additional travel expenses that would be

involved in sending out a replacement from CA, particularly in the

light of the uncertain future of the talks.

I don’t know whether you have already considered and discarded

the idea, but if the interval between talks is to stay at its current length,

would it not be a possibility to have me or some other CA officer fly out

for each meeting? On a thumbnail basis, I make it out to be less than

$200 a month more expensive than just keeping me here, if a reason­

ably cheap rate on tickets could be obtained from the airlines. Such an

arrangement would have the additional advantages of not wasting an

officer’s time between meetings, and maintaining closer liaison with

FE. I haven’t talked this out fully with the Ambassador yet, but I did

mention it to him briefly.

Official–­Informal.

Needless to say, Helenka and I both hope something can be worked

out. Not only for various personal reasons—[text not declassified]—­but

also for the official and principal reason, that there just isn’t any work

for me to do here between meetings.

However it works out, we appreciate the efforts we know you’re

making.

Sincerely,

David L. Osborn

Letter No. 64

Washington, January 30, 1957

Dear Alex:

read by Messrs. Robertson, Phleger and Sebald. All of us sympathize

with you in the frustrating and exasperating position in which you find

yourself, with the talks apparently leading nowhere and dragging on

indefinitely with the same tired points being reworked ad infinitum

and ad nauseam at every meeting. Undoubtedly it is difficult for the

man who is on the scene and who is carrying the chief burden to see the

further utility of the exercise. However the talks are precisely fulfilling

the primary purpose envisaged by the Secretary in 1955. Mr. Robertson

told him yesterday about your letter including the question you had

raised about the desirability of prolonging the talks. The Secretary smil­

ingly recalled that when he was giving you your instructions he had

mentioned to you that you should be prepared to carry on the talks for

two years. The Secretary said that you were handling the talks exactly

in accordance with his wishes, and that the talks were serving the pur­

pose he had in mind. He appreciated the difficulties you confront but

his views as to the importance of the talks and the desirability of con­

tinuing them had not changed. He said that when the Middle East pres­

sures subsided somewhat, he would be glad to review the ­matter and

give careful attention to any arguments against continuation of the talks

which we might consider overriding. But as of now he felt the talks

Official–­Informal.

should continue and that you should know that he approves the way in

which you have conducted the talks.

Undoubtedly the talks continue to cause us some embarrassment,

and lead to some misunderstanding of our posture vis-a-vis Communist

China, especially in the Far East. Also the continuance of the talks

makes it difficult for us to manifest the full extent of our dissatisfac­

tion at Chinese Communist violation of the Agreed Announcement. On

the other hand, we still have the Chinese Communists tied up in talks

which may make it more difficult for them to start any hostilities in the

Taiwan area. If they should initiate any such action while conversations

are going on, the risk they would run of general world condemnation

and possible multilateral sanctions against them would be appreciably

increased. While the Chinese Communists obviously estimate at this

stage that their interests are best served by continuing the talks, they

are probably not happy over the negotiating situation in which they

find themselves and would be delighted if we broke off the talks. An

onus would attach to the side which took the initiative to break off the

talks, and this the Chinese Communists want to avoid. We have them

in a situation where they are on the defensive on both of the principal

points at issue, and unable to improve their negotiating position. As

one officer put it, if we broke off the talks now we would in a sense be

letting the Chinese Communists off the hook and would be giving up

just at a time when we for once are beating them at their own game by

out-sitting and out-talking them. As Mr. Phleger put it, “Alex is doing

fine, and should carry on along the lines that he has already developed

so well”. You don’t need to worry about repetition, or lack of new top­

ics. It may be a dreary, boring business but it is serving a purpose which

is more apparent here than it can be in the front line. The talks undoubt­

edly are reducing the pressures from European quarters for other U.S.

contacts with the Chinese Communists and they make it much easier

to refute the arguments advanced for a Foreign Minister level meeting.

2. We were quite interested in the record of the last meeting. Wang’s

argumentation was of some significance, even though there was noth­

ing new in it. It was all right to send the full report by pouch. It arrived

in four days.

3. We were somewhat taken aback at the New York Times despatch

of January 19 from Geneva quoting you as feeling that your negotiating

position had been seriously weakened by the visits of the three news­

men to Communist China. While your negotiating position certainly

was not helped by the visits, we do not see that it was helped by the

public attribution of this feeling to you either.

4. We are sending you herewith a full report of O’Neill’s inter­

view with Huang Hua on December 28, 1956. In this conversation,

Huang Hua explicitly denies that the Agreed Announcement applies

to American prisoners. We anticipate that this will give you plenty of

material for the February 14 meeting.

5. We released our statement on Chinese Communist failure to

release imprisoned Americans on January 29. A copy is enclosed for

your files. We are also sending a copy to Osborn. We thought Chou

En-lai’s statement in Nepal about a possible “exchange of prisoners”

gave us a good occasion to issue the statement. However it has not

received as much play in the press as we hoped for.

6. There has been a new development in the Powell case. Having

been authorized by the judge to travel to Communist China as an

officer of the court, leaving his passport in Hong Kong, the defense

attorney, Wirin, now claims to have received a cable from his contact in

Peiping stating that he will not be admitted without a validated pass­

port and that the United States Government should communicate with

the Chinese Communist authorities concerning his travel. (Copies of

the defense motions are enclosed.) Wirin is reported to have mentioned

orally to the judge that the Geneva talks would be a suitable channel

for communicating with the Communists concerning his travel. The

Department of Justice attorney who is handling the Washington end of

the case informed us that the judge categorically turned down Wirin’s

request for a court order that his passport be validated for travel to

Communist China and North Korea. The judge said he had no author­

ity to issue such an order. The judge is reportedly unsympathetic to

Wirin’s latest gambit. He has asked that appropriate government

authorities provide him with an affidavit setting forth the United States

Government’s position with regard to the Chinese Communist and

North Korean regimes, travel by Americans to those areas and the facts

concerning the Geneva talks. We are preparing material on these sub­

jects for Justice, which will then prepare the affidavit. A hearing is set

for February 2, when the judge will consider this information.

It seems clear that the Chinese Communists are using the Powell

case as another lever to compel a change in our policy regarding travel to

Mainland China. They probably feel that they are in a strong position in

this case, since if the U.S. Government blocks Wirin’s travel to Communist

China, there is a good chance that the case against the Powells will be

dismissed. Thus, whichever way we move, the Communist movement

would stand to gain. Peiping’s tactics in this case strongly suggest that

they are not interested in utilizing the Powell case to revive the germ

warfare charges against the U.S. If they were, they would certainly be

more inclined to facilitate Wirin’s travel. Their propaganda, too, has

supported this conclusion, since they have played up the Powell case

as another attempt by the U.S. to persecute journalists who try to tell

the truth about Communist China. Germ warfare has been barely men­

tioned. We are giving Justice the information we have on the various

efforts by Peiping to break down our passport policy, so that they can

pass this background informally to the judge.

7. It now seems as if the passports of Stevens and Harrington of

Look Magazine will be made valid only for return to the U.S. Action on

Worthy will be withheld until we get a full report on his travel and the

use he made of his passport.

8. It has been good to talk to Pat, and to get some further news of

you and your children through her. I wish you could join her here.

Regards and good wishes,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Press release No. 43

3. Defense motions on Powell Case

784. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Prague, February 6, 1957

Dear Walter:

I have just received the Radio Bulletin containing your January 30

statement.

It is an excellent job and the most convincing statement we have

put out. It should do much to dispel the doubts of those who have felt

that there must be some fire behind the Chicom smoke screen.

I see in the New York Times we even got some grudging support out

of New Delhi.

With respect to the next to the last paragraph of the statement, it

is excellent from my and a public relation standpoint. However, are

we not going to have to be careful not to get ourselves into the box of

in effect making an open ended commitment to deport to Communist

China any Chinese alien who desires to go there regardless of the crime

he may hereafter commit. I have tried to skirt around this in the talks

Official–­Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

by sticking to the 34. We can of course meet this problem if and when

it arises. I do not believe the statement as drafted does commit us

but it may carry that implication. In this connection do you have any

information on arrests of Chinese aliens subsequent to the survey that

turned up the 34?

I have heard from Dave that London refuses to release Ed. I know

this must be very disappointing to you as it is to me. It seemed to be

the ideal solution. I will be open to any other suggestion you may have.

Incidentally, I have written to Ed Freers about coming back on a

couple of weeks consultation this spring—perhaps around April or

May—if there continues to be a months gap between meetings. I told

him to get in touch with you if he thought well of it. It will have then

been close to two years since I was home and there is much I would like

to talk over both on FE and EUR matters.

Regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

815. For Johnson.

Guidance for February 14 meeting.

1. Take issue with virtual repudiation Agreed Announcement

by Huang Hua in interview with O’Neill December 28, when former

stated that until American prisoner released from jail QUOTE question

of encountering obstruction UNQUOTE did not arise. As Wang well

knows, Americans imprisoned or under house arrest were the very

ones that were subject of American representations and there would

have been no purpose Chinese Communists declaring they would

QUOTE further adopt appropriate measures so that they can expedi­

tiously exercise their right to return UNQUOTE if it were not to apply

to Americans in jail. Furthermore, recall that even though Chinese

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and Sebald and Phleger

in draft.

criminals in US jails were not covered, when Communists suggested

they were covered if Americans in Communist jails were, US while

denying this interpretation, nevertheless so there could be no question

proceeded to see that Chinese criminals in US jails were given oppor­

tunity to go to Communist China. If Wang counters with usual charges

regarding QUOTE obstruction UNQUOTE Chinese departing US, refer

categorical statement by spokesman of Foreign Ministry, New Delhi,

February 1, that Government of India QUOTE unable find any obstruc­

tion being placed on their exit UNQUOTE.

2. Again press for accounting missing military personnel, present­

ing additional individual cases.

3. Maintain position other subjects.

4. If Wang endeavors exploit current controversy in US over travel

newsmen Communist China, refer as necessary to Communist treat­

ment Americans as reason for US policy, but avoid extended discussion.

5. If Wang refers press reports US plans station Matador unit

Taiwan, avoid comment.

6. FYI Lee Li-chuen, who Wang alleged being forced go Taiwan,

is seaman who entered US November 1, 1955 on GRC-registered ship

Union Power. At one time deportation Taiwan planned. Immigration

states Lee now under order deportation plans depart voluntarily own

expense San Francisco February 23 for mainland China. Since Lee may

fail depart as scheduled, believe preferable not repeat not inform Wang

now. However, if he raises case, you may state categorically Lee never

obstructed from leaving US for any destination. END FYI.

7. Propose next meeting March 14.

Dulles

Letter No. 65

Washington, February 11, 1957

Dear Alex:

1. Developments in the issue of travel of newspapermen to

Communist China have not been very favorable for us. The press is giv­

ing strong support to Stevens and Worthy. Apparently they have been

able to whip up a certain amount of public support for their position.

Worthy appeared on Eric Sevareid’s nation wide newscast Sunday after­

noon February 10 and probably evoked quite a bit of sympathy for his

position. Worthy left Moscow before the Embassy received our instruc­

tions, and he refused to submit his passport to the Legation in Budapest

for restrictive endorsement. He also refused to say yes or no on the

passport hearing which was offered him, placing his case in the hands

of the Civil Liberties Union. When Worthy passed through Immigration

at Boston his passport (by decision) was not taken up or restrictively

endorsed. As I see it this will make it difficult for us to follow through

in Stevens case. Look Magazine plans to fight the case of Stevens and

Harrington. Presumably there will be a passport hearing in Washington

when Stevens returns to this country. Stevens was given the choice of a

hearing in Moscow or Washington before restrictive action was taken,

and Look Magazine instructed him to choose a hearing in Washington,

which will presumably take place a few weeks hence.

The decision to seek to restrict the passports was taken with some

reluctance in view of the local uncertainty but our hand was more

or less forced by the press release of December 28 in which it was

stated flatly that the passports would be made valid for return to the

U.S. only. We did soften the proposed action by making it clear to our

Embassy in Moscow that we did not require Stevens to come home.

The instruction was to endorse the passport “upon departure from

the Soviet Union, valid for return to the U.S. only”. This would enable

Stevens to continue his assignment in the U.S.S.R. without interrup­

tion. However Look has elected to bring him home in late March in

order to fight the case.

We are faced with a flat defiance of the Department by Worthy,

and strong resistance short of defiance in the case of Look Magazine

and Stevens.

­Informal.

The Secretary took a very strong position in his press conference

of February 5. We have been looking through the Geneva records for

the best documentation that we can find based on Wang’s remarks. Of

course we have the Wang statement about the handling of the prison­

ers being influenced by the state of relations between the two coun­

tries and the tie in between visits by American citizens and the “state

of relations”. We have found nothing along this line dated later than

September 28, 1955. I presume neither you nor Dave recalls anything

later or more specific than this. I understand you got a copy of the

Secretary’s press conference separately, but to make sure that you have

it, a copy is enclosed herewith. We still hope to hold the line by voluntary

action of the press, plus limited administrative action where necessary.

No acourt action is being considered but we may run into difficulties

even here with administrative passport action. The line up against us is

pretty solid, especially since Senator Humphrey has entered the picture

with a proposed Senate investigation, and since the American Society

of Newspaper Editors has sent a resolution to the President.

2. We anticipate that your instructions for the February 14 meet­

ing will follow the usual line. We expect you to hammer hard at Wang

on the subject of the interview of December 28 between O’Neill and

Huang Hua in which Huang Hua virtually repudiates the Agreed

Announcement by saying it has no application to the Americans while

they are imprisoned. I sent you a copy of O’Neill’s report to Prague

with my last letter of January 30. I hope you received it. As a precaution

another copy of O’Neill’s report is enclosed herewith.

3. Also enclosed is a working draft of a proposed new press release

on travel to Communist China. It has been drafted largely with a view

to clarifying the questions and ambiguities which seem to exist as a

result of the events of last week. Bear in mind that this has not been

approved and may undergo further changes if it is put out at all.

4. In answer to the question raised in your letter of January 28

from Prague, the Department did intend for you to have the copy of

5. We are working hard on a replacement for Osborn. The Embassy

in London is very shorthanded now in the sections which cover both

FE and Middle Eastern Affairs. It would be difficult for them to spare

Ed Martin at all till June. I believe we could get him then. We have your

telegram 389 agreeing to Dave Popper as an interim measure if we can

get him. We intend to sound out Geneva on this today and will prob­

ably authorize you to take it up with Gowen while you are in Geneva

this week. We fear that Geneva will feel that they cannot spare Popper.

We will work out some solution in any event.

6. Judge Goodman in San Francisco is still considering the Wirin

request for a passport to go to Communist China. The Judge has

requested Justice to submit briefs on two questions as follows:

1. Whether the Court possesses the power to compel the Secretary

of State to validate Wirin’s passport.

2. Whether the Court could compel the Government to elect either

(a) to validate Wirin’s passport or (b) the dismissal of the indictment.

We armed Justice with quite a bit of material for the meeting which the

Judge held on February 1. We endeavored to show that the Communists

were using the Powell-Schumann trial as a lever to force official accredita­

tion of an officer of the Court for activities in Communist China.

7. We are wishing you well and hoping that at the very least you

will not have dental trouble to plague you this time.

Regards,

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

3. Memorandum from [text not declassified] in Karachi dated

December 28, 1956 re Chinese Communist Prime Minister’s visit.

4. Working Draft of proposed new press release re travel to

Communist China.

Publishers Assoc. Resolution sent to the President.

784. Your 815.

Concur.

Gowen

787. From Johnson.

Three hour meeting this morning devoted almost entirely

implementation.

I opened with strong point by point refutation Huang Hua’s

December 28 statements to O’Neill along para one Deptel 815. While

avoiding any detailed rebuttal Wang reiterated previous position on

question return not arising while Americans in prison. Then led into

long prepared statement in course of which referred to January 29 press

statement, Secretary’s February 5 press conference, Robertson’s speech

in Bloomington, and US press criticism of USG position on travel cor­

respondents. Termed January 29 statement as “groundless charges” to

cover up facts with regard to Chinese in US. With reference Secretary’s

February 5 statement PRC conditioning release Americans on visits

correspondents “refutation superfluous as American press already

done job for them in dismissing story as groundless fabrication”. PRC

approval applications American correspondents visit China was ges­

ture goodwill and US attempt link with question release Americans

was “outright insult to pressmen”. “US alone attempting introduce

link.” Robertson’s Bloomington “vituperation and slander” and “other

unfriendly utterances he has made not even worth trouble refutation”.

US should be aware that “slander and threats could not help progress”.

Can only expect progress when I ready discuss his proposals FMC, cul­

tural relations, and trade.

I made long extemporaneous statement reviewing course negotia­

tions on prisoners and reminded him of his previous statements linking

release Americans to “improvement relations”. Could only interpret

this as demand political concessions as price release. At other times he

and PRC authorities appear base failure release Americans on alleged

grounds imprisoned Americans not covered by agreed announcement

and that at other times on alleged violation agreement by US with

respect Chinese in US. Challenged him show single misstatement fact

January 29 press statement. Cited GOI February 2 statement as confir­

mation our January 29 statement with respect Chinese in US and chal­

lenged him produce similar statement from UK on situation Americans

in PRC.

Limit Distribution.

Major portion his subsequent remarks devoted to themes: (1) “era

long passed China could be brought into submission by threats or pres­

sure” or aliens could break Chinese law with impunity; (2) PRC friendly

gestures (release airmen and others, Chou’s statements to American

correspondents PRC desired friendship with US and American people,

permission newsmen visit China, etc.) had been met only with hostil­

ity from US side. “If anybody going present relations between our two

countries as only involving question of few criminals he could only

say it is making game of these talks”. US uses “pretext” few criminals

prevent improvement relations.

I, of course, refuted along usual lines both governments had agreed

civilians first order of business, major concessions US had made with

respect Chinese in US, PRC implementation September 10 agreement

test of good faith and fundamental first step in improvement relations,

etc. Another fundamental step was renunciation force.

He made no reply whatever to my presentation on missing service

men referring only his previous statements.

He proposed and I agreed next meeting March 14.

Gowen

Letter No. 54

Geneva, February 14, 1957

Dear Walter:

I received your letter sent to Prague enclosing the O’Neill-Huang

Hua December 28 interview and the material on Wirin’s travel before

I left. Yesterday I also received your February 11 letter. (Fast service!)

Thanks very much for both of them.

I talked with Gowen and he has agreed also to loan me Popper. He

sent a telegram on this last night. I am sending you a telegram today on

the contract employment of a secretary to replace Helenka. I had hoped

I could use Popper’s secretary who previously worked for me but she

is going on leave shortly and I did not want to strain the office here by

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

asking them also to furnish a secretary. In any event, I think that the FE

budget is now getting off very easily.

As you know, I know and respect Dave Popper tremendously, but

he, of course, simply does not have the specialized FE experience that

would be most useful to me. He also has more than a full time job here

with not much time to devote to this and the office needs him badly in

many ways. I therefore hope that we can shortly shake Ed Martin or

someone else loose before long. Dave Osborn has some ideas he will

discuss with you.

I have been hit hard here by the press, particularly the New York

Times, on the Secretary’s February 5 statement on the newsmen and

the Americans, wanting to know exactly how and when the Chicoms

made the proposition. I have, of course, said nothing except to point

out our often reiterated statements that the Chicoms were holding the

Americans as political hostages.

In this regard there is, of course, no specific statement in the record.

The most specific statements are, as you have noted, those on the “state

of relations” which he long ago dropped when he saw the box into

which it had placed him.

Since his last “state of relations” statement on September 28, 1955

there are only a few relatively obscure statements bearing on this that

I have been able to recall or Dave has been able to find. At the 56th

meeting (para 16) I picked up his remark (para 15) that a “reasonable

solution (on trade) would contribute to resolution other disputes”, but

he sidestepped. At the 63rd meeting (para 6) he said “if U.S. had gen­

uine desire resolve problems it should make progress in second item

agenda”. Both of these are very tenuous and only have any meaning at

all within context.

You will recall that in accordance with my original basic instruc­

up the possibility of visitors after all Americans were released, and at

more specific with respect to correspondents. I cannot recall that the

subject again came up until the Chicoms issued their invitations to cor­

respondents last August and at the 55th meeting I gave him a copy of our

August 7 press release emphasizing the last paragraph (para 14 Mytel

cultural exchange proposal and I made preliminary comments (paras 11

Thus, while he took the initiative in raising “state of relations” as

a factor in the timing of the release of Americans I took the initiative in

specifically relating the travel of correspondents to their release. He has

always been very careful not to be specific as to exactly what he meant

by “state of relations” and although I have not the slightest doubt that

they would have considered our permitting correspondents to travel to

mainland China as a step toward “improvement of relations” I cannot

point to any specific statement that says this. However, I have always

felt that they would consider travel of correspondents as only one fac­

tor in “improving relations” sufficiently to release all of the Americans.

That is, I have never felt that they had in mind releasing all of the

Americans in exchange for the travel of correspondents, although, as

you know, I felt it might produce the release of a few. I have not gone

back over all my messages in this regard, but I regret if I misled you or

the Secretary in any way on this.

While there was nothing new in today’s meeting I think that you

will find much of it very interesting reading. (Incidentally I am sending

it by cable as there is no courier from here until Sunday which would

mean almost a week until you received it.)

You will see that he more thoroughly developed the theme of U.S.

“hostility”, pressure, etc. than he ever has in the past. Throughout his

presentation I could not but help think of Chou’s remark to [text not

declassified] that the release of the Americans would be regarded as a

confession of weakness. I think that that remark and Wang’s expansion

on it today is the real key to their attitude. You know that I have long

felt, and I continue to feel, that whatever other very useful and impor­

tant purposes it may serve, the building up the issue of the release in

fact works in the opposite direction. However, we are now so far down

this road that I see no choice but to continue what we are doing. They

have, of course, behaved very stupidly. The Agreed Announcement

gave them a perfect back-drop against which to release them and

they would, in fact, have gained enormously if they had done so. I am

amazed that they did not have the intelligence to see it. It only goes to

prove that they are not “eight feet tall”. However, they have now got

themselves in such a box on this that they could not do so even if they

desired.

I greatly appreciated Walter having spoken to the Secretary and

having obtained a re-confirmation of his desires. I am, of course, will­

ing to go on as long as it is thought to be useful. I just wanted to make

sure that this was the case. I do well see and appreciate the objectives,

and will try to carry them out the best I can.

Incidentally, I have just realized that the material on missing Air

Force personnel forwarded us in June has not, at least technically, been

declassified. Paragraph 2 of Deptel 736 declassified the material sent

me with your letter of December 7. However, as the Air Force material

had been sent to us previously this does not cover that. Will you con­

firm to me whether I can also consider it declassified so that I can use

it as occasion arises.

Pat arrived this morning just as I was leaving for the meeting.

Haven’t had a chance really to talk with her yet.

Regards to all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

790. From Johnson.

1. I opened 65th with prepared statement:

A. On Dec 28 1956 representative your Ministry Foreign Affairs told

UK Charge Peking question of departure Fr McCarthy could not arise

until his prison term expired or your govt advanced date his release.

Should like call your attention paragraph our agreed announcement

Sept 10 1955 which reads: “PRC recognizes Americans in PRC who

desire return US entitled do so, and declares it has adopted and will

further adopt appropriate measures so they can expeditiously exercise

their right return.”

B. Does your govt deny Fr McCarthy is American? Does it deny he

desires return US? If not, then question return Fr McCarthy to US has

already arisen. It arose Sept 10 1955, under agreement into which you

entered with me on that date. It had arisen even earlier in very specific

manner in these talks, for I had given you list names, on Aug 2 1955, of

Americans desiring return and being prevented from doing so, and Fr

McCarthy’s name was among them. We had been talking for six weeks

about return of precisely this group Americans. Can you point to any­

thing in our announcement which would withhold its application from

Fr McCarrthy?

C. The representative also told UK Charge question Fr McCarthy’s

encountering obstruction could not arise while he was in prison. What

does our annoucement have to say about obstruction? “If any American

in PRC believes contrary to declared policy of PRC he encountering

Distribution.

obstruction in departure, he may so inform office of Charge ­d’Affaires

UK.” Under our announcement, it clear question obstruction arises,

not  when PRC wishes to raise it, but when “any American in PRC

believes he encountering obstruction.” Is Fr McCarthy American in

PRC? Does he believe he is encountering obstruction? Then question of

obstruction has arisen.

D. The representative also on Dec 28 told UK Charge his request

for facilities investigate facts was not in accordance terms agreed

announcement. What are those terms? Any American who believes

he being obstructed, and again I quote from our announcement, “may

so inform office of Charge d’Affaires UK in PRC and request it make

representations on his behalf to Govt PRC. If desired by US, Govt of

UK may also investigate facts any such case.” Did Fr McCarthy inform

office of UK Charge of his belief his departure being obstructed? Did he

request UK Charge make representations on his behalf? Does US desire

facts this case be investigated? Can you point to any other terms our

announcement bearing on this question of investigation of facts? Can

you cite any part announcement which can be used justify refusal your

authorities permit this investigation?

E. Would like ask you in all seriousness this morning whether

there any provision of announcement which your authorities intend

apply to cases Fr McCarthy and nine other Americans whose depar­

ture still being obstructed by your govt. Or is it your intention utterly

repudiate our agreement? This is question of most fundamental impor­

tance for if relations between our countries are to be placed on some

other basis than that of profound distrust and mutual suspicion, it is

up to two of us take first steps in that direction. It up to us show nego­

tiations between our two countries can result in understandings and

agreements which will be carried out in good faith. Impartial testimony

shows my govt has and is continuing demonstrate its good faith in car­

rying out this first agreement between us. I continue seek evidence of

intention your authorities do same.

2. Wang said attitude adopted by China in this conference has all

along been relations between China and US should improve, disputes

between us should achieve settlement. From statement I had made this

morning he did not see display similar spirit.

3. Wang (turning to prepared statement) continued, might mention

press statement of US Dept State Jan 29 again indulged total inversion

right and wrong to confuse world. No amount such malicious argu­

ments can establish point that making American criminals serve sen­

tence which accordance law, China guilty violation accord Sept 1955.

4. Wang (from notes) continued, I had asked question whether

agreement between us was to be repudiated. His answer was no amount

groundless charges could distort facts this matter. Good faith his govt

carrying out that agreement beyond question. I had asked question

about McCarthy. There no question as to his being American and he

might desire return home. Had to point out while he serving sentence,

question his return did not arise. In dealing with this and similar cases

question violation agreement by his govt had not ever arisen. His

govt welcomed third power representative investigating cases where

obstruction departure Americans from China reported; but his govt

in no case would accept interference on part third country to attempt

investigate anything which properly within scope and terms reference

authorities their Justice Dept. He wanted point out no obstruction had

been offered to any American national in China who desired return

US. In fact since liberation China already more than 1000 Americans in

China had freely departed without encountering any obstruction. All

Americans desiring return my country had done so and his govt so far

not received single complaint obstruction to departure of any.

5. Wang (from prepared statement) continued, my side repeatedly

making hostile propaganda and raising outcries against China in vain

attempt hoodwink and mislead world. By now I should have come to

realize era long past when China could be brought into submission

or abandonment sovereignty by threats or pressure. Chinese people

would never bow to threats. Era gone and will not come back, when

American or any alien could break law and get away with it. Americans

who broke law in China now must put up with jail in accordance sen­

tences meted out by Chinese authorities. This natural for any sovereign

country. Unless criminals displayed good conduct in prison they would

have to serve out their sentences. However press statements of my side

had not succeeded in covering up or obscuring violation agreement on

part my side. On record, still remain two groups of 52 and 25 persons

who had not been able come back as result all sorts obstruction by my

country, and my side still refused account for them. Obstructive tactics

of my authorities now developed to extent of encroaching on human

rights to include examination of correspondence between Chinese

and relatives. Already many relatives have reported correspondence

with folks in US was breaking off. This apparent outcome threats and

pressure applied by American authorities. Furthermore while repre­

sentative US Govt conducting negotiations with representative PRC,

American authorities had seen fit continue coerce Chinese residents

and send them Taiwan. Such activities and other violation agreement

call for strong condemnation. Press statements my side also attempted

cover violation agreement of my side with regard question imprisoned

Chinese. My side taken unilateral action in subjecting prisoners to

illegal screening process. Intent this all too clear—it is to detain such

people through this illegal screening process. Under no circumstances

would they accept such process. They continued urge US take action

on own initiative enable these people return as had been done in case

former American convicts.

6. Wang continued, during past weeks world had witnessed two

leading members US Dept State trying in turn pass rash judgement on

China. Mr Robertson’s vituperations and slanderous statements from

Bloomington rostrum and other such unfriendly utterances he has

­chosen to make not even worth trouble refutation. However people

could not fail take note statement American SecState at press confer­

ence Feb 5. Mr Dulles reported to have declared China conditioning

release American convicts on permission by US Govt for US correspond­

ents go China. He did not know on what ground Secretary created this

story. However, refutation from his side seemed superfluous as news­

paper editors in US already seem to have done job for them in dismiss­

ing this as groundless fabrication. Anxiety of American correspondents

visit China shows American people did not approve of policy American

Govt in obstructing exchanges between peoples. American newsmen

desired visit China. China had accepted applications. This gesture

goodwill Chinese people toward American people. Establishment link

between question American pressmen and release American prisoners

constituted outright insult to American pressmen, by American author­

ities. My side alone attempting introduce link between these two dis­

tinct matters. Notice which caused my side attribute this piece of pure

fabrication to his side is none other than desire hoodwink world and

slander China and make pretext for barring American press visits to

China. He and I been associated here long time. I must have become

aware long ago slander and threats could in no way help progress

in talks. Interests of talks could only be advanced when I abandoned

this and ready discuss his proposals, namely FMC, relaxation trade

embargo and cultural exchange, movement between our two countries.

This always their hope.

7. I replied he and I had spent long time discussing these subjects.

I had been and continue be willing take time do it because I feel issues

are of such overwhelming importance. Question of American civilians

in his country could not be disposed of as his authorities apparently felt

it could by what we might call simply sweeping it under rug. I had in

past and continued try do best to understand and appreciate his point

view. Frankly and as one who had talked to him now for long time, this

subject one I simply could not understand. Even before we came here for

this series talks Wang’s govt perfectly aware of importance we attached

to question these civilians. In terms reference our talks it agreed this

question would come first. However unjust we felt action taken by his

authorities was, I had not demanded unilateral action with regard them.

I had not had and did not now have any interest in attempting humili­

ate his govt or obtain any propaganda victory in this matter. This one of

reasons that right at outset these talks I had suggested they be private

in character. My sole interest was finding method resolving this prob­

lem so that it could be removed as irritant our relations. I had known

from talks we had 1954 attitude his govt with regard Chinese students

in US. I had attempted before we ever came here to meet his point view

in this regard. I had not raised with him any question US sovereignty,

US jurisdiction, or other such theoretical questions. My govt had taken

action to resolve this question to his satisfaction. My govt had taken

action to entirely remove restraints which had been placed to departure

of some few Chinese from my country. I had conceded to his point view

on declaration by US. At same time, he knew perfectly well my primary

interest was in these imprisoned Americans. It perfectly proper for us

reach agreement which included not just Chinese in US but Americans

in his country. His reaching such agreement was certainly not in any

way derogation sovereignty but was an exercise his sovereignty.

8. I continued, insofar as discussions leading up to agreement

concerned, he would recall that they concerned these imprisoned

Americans. I would not take time review those discussions—he was

as familiar with them as I. He would recall though that particularly

in discussion leading up finally to use world “expeditiously” in that

agreement, it related to time when these imprisoned Americans would

be released. Fact he and his authorites at that time well recognized this

agreement related to imprisoned Americans had been well demon­

strated by their release ten imprisoned Americans on same day and in

connection with issuance agreement. For his authorities now to go back

and say the agreement has no relation to those imprionsed Americans—

just persons we talking about at time we made the agreement—simply

not logical, just, or defensible.

9. I continued, he spoke of threats, pressure, exercise sovereignty.

Hard as I tried understand and follow him on this I just unable do so.

I could not see how asking that agreement freely entered into be carried

out constitutes threats or pressure. I could not understand how any

govt able say carrying out by it of agreement, into which it has entered,

is derogation of its sovereignty. In fact it seems me it is opposite—it is

exercise of its sovereignty. If I or my govt wanted see continuation of

type relations which had so unhappily heretofore existed between us—

certainly never would have laid stress I had on importance resolving

this question civilians.

10. I continued, for him to demand concessions and agreements

from me on other subjects prior to resolving what our govts both agreed

was first question between us and prior carrying out this first agree­

ment between us, is taking completely unilateral point view. At times

his authorities and he here seemed take position their failure carry out

this agreement based upon allegation agreement did not cover these

imprisoned Americans. At other times he seemed have taken ­attitude

this agreement would not be carried out and Americans released unless

and until there were further political concessions by my govt on matters

of interest to his govt. I could not but interpret in this sense statements

he had made with regard improvement relations between us being a

factor in timing of release those prisoneers. At other times he seemed

take attitude because of alleged violation of agreement by US with

respect Chinese in US, his authorites in retaliation were refusing imple­

ment agreement with regard Americans still in prison in his country.

Continued he had spoken of press release my govt Jan 29 and

had termed it groundless charges. I would not take time go thru that

press release—seemed to me be most sober, careful presentation facts

this matter. Instead trying dismiss it as groundless charges I asked him

show me single misstatement fact in release. This not just my opinion

or opinion my govt. He would recall and had probably noted with

respect Chinese in US, following that release, Feb 2 spokesman GOI

stated Indian Embassy Washington had found no case of any proved

obstruction any Chinese in US desiring return his country; that while

few cases alleged obstruction been drawn attention Indian Embassy, in

no case had it proved true.

12. I continued, he had said here this morning his govt had not

received any complaint obstruction of departure of any American his

country. He knew and I knew Govt UK had not and could not make

statement supporting that allegation such as Indian Govt made sup­

porting statement I had made here this morning. To go into any further

detail would simply obscure these fundamental undeniable facts.

13. Wang replied, in my statement I had termed most fundamental

issue between two sides question civilians. In this regard, greater part

this problem already resolved as result efforts made by Chinese Govt.

That was to say, most of Americans or practically all Americans ­desiring

depart this country to return US had already been enabled freely do so.

Number people who had done so not in neighborhood several scores or

several hundred but more than 1000 done so. If I wanted say question

civilians sole issue involved in improvement relations, it could be said

good basis already established this respect. What US trying do was pre­

sent this matter as only concerning few criminals—this what he could

not agree with. They felt that problems existing between our two coun­

tries concerned kind of issues which arise between two great powers

and are of great consequence to humanity. If we failed see problems

from this point view, it would seem be what people call losing sight of

forest when only seeing single tree. If anybody going present relations

between two countries as only involving question of handful criminals,

can only say it making game of these talks, with pretext of question few

criminals. If we were to take that course he afraid people would have

pass judgment on those who had wasted so much time and failed carry

out fervent desires entrusted to them by people.

14. Wang continued, he also found it hard follow my logic when

I said in concluding international agreement sovereignty had to be der­

ogated. They took different view. They thought in concluding interna­

tional agreement it should not prejudice but safeguard sovereignty.

15. Wang continued, in discussing question return civilians, one

must take note of fact Chinese Govt always been carrying out that

agreement faithfully. They could never concede to any allegation

Chinese Govt introduced any obstruction departure Americans from

China. If such obstruction existed, how could one explain fact majority

Americans in China had been able leave. Most convincing fact and prac­

tical matter was fact in cases number former American prisoners war

who refused repatriation whenever any of these persons desired return

my country his authorities had not obstructed and had always given all

facilities enable them do so. In fact number these already returned my

country. As he had told me if in future any other persons this category

changed mind and desired return my country they would help him do

so in same way. This showed that his authorities always carried out

agreement in assisting departure any American who desired do so.

16. Wang continued there were number criminals in China and

this involved another matter. They had saying in China debtors must

pay debts and murderers undergo punishment. So they had taken

position that question repatriation did not arise with respect persons

serving prison terms. However they had repeatedly made it known

if these persons in question had displayed good conduct they would

also be enabled exercise that right. But if anybody tryng force issue

upon Chinese Govt pressurize it into abandonment established proce­

dure law—this something which simply not done in China. I would

recall when we first met in this room 1954 I had told him restraints

imposed my govt on Chinese students my country matter jurisdiction

my govt and categorically declared I not going change that legal pro­

cedure my govt.

17. Wang continued with regard my allegation that his govt on

question American criminals trying extract political concessions from

my side. He could only regard this as inversion of fact. His govt in inter­

est improving relations made number constructive proposals, but my

govt so far refused take up these proposals—moreover my authorities

repeatedly banned correspondents from visiting China. This could be

termed attempt by my authorities by various means try extract political

concessions from China. If there genuine desire improve relations, one

would have to take into due consideraton views of both sides instead

of sticking to ones own viewpoint. He sure I aware public conversation

made by Premier Chou with number American correspondents. Premier

spoke about China’s desire friendly terms with US and American peo­

ple; specifically pointed out Chinese side taken many steps forward.

In order really improve relations both sides must take steps forward

simultaneously.

18. I replied, first let me correct apparent misunderstanding.

I understood he thought I had said that concluding an international

agreement is derogation of sovereignty. I did not say that nor at least

did not intend to. What I said was exactly opposite—that concluding

international agreement not derogation of sovereignty—in fact is exer­

cise of sovereignty. Interesting though it might be my point was not

enter into philosophical argument but my point was that his govt hav­

ing entered into agreement Sept 1955, its carrying out that agreement

would be exercise sovereignty rather than derogation sovereignty.

19. I continued, I did not believe I had said question civilians most

fundamental question between us. What I had said was it a fundamental

question between us and both our countries had agreed it first question

between us. Demonstration our ability resolve what our govts ­considered

first question between us certainly fundamental to resolving others. A fun­

damental question between us still remains question whether permit our

misunderstanding in Taiwan area to lead war. Remains still for us say

unconditionally unequivocally it will not. However to go back to what

both agreed was first question it not question resolving it in part, for some

Americans or most Americans—it question of resolving question.

20. I continued, when we issued statement Sept 10 we not talking

of Americans who already left his country and returned US. We talking

about 19 specific Americans still in prison that time. Not talking about

American POW who voluntarily decided remain Wang’s country. We

talking about these 19 Americans. He had termed it matter of few crimi­

nals. I could not agree with him on that. We had in past and still consid­

ered imprisonment these Americans completely unjust. However I did

not ask him agree me on that. I only asked that first problem we came

here resolve be resolved and good faith be shown here in resolving it.

As had pointed out here many times, not only did we consider good

faith not been shown in resolving it, but seem to have gone backwards.

Considerations Wang’s country’s sovereignty and judicial procedures

had not prevented release eleven fliers day our meetings opened here.

It had not prevented release 10 Americans Sept 10 at time we issued

agreement. Since that time, seemed quite clear they had adopted policy

requiring these unfortunate people serve whole term their sentence.

21. I continued, it perfectly natural in light this history of carrying

out agreement and treatment afforded Americans his country, that my

govt felt it would be delinquent in its responsibility protect Americans

to approve their travel to his country.

22. Wang replied, on their part they had also many grievances

in connection with treatment their nationals in US. I had described

these meetings as going backward. He agreed with me, but pointed

out they had nothing to do with it. If one of two partners trying go

forward while other trying pull backward, of course it very difficult

have results. I had referred release 11 member American Air Force on

their own initiative and had referred to release number Americans

on day agreement. These releases had been effected simply as result

decision Chinese authorities in accordance judicial procedure. Also

took these measures in expectation and hope such lenient measures

given Americans would be example goodwill and eventually lead

to improvement relations between two countries. What was reward

of this gesture goodwill their part? US taken series unfriendly actions

against Wang’s country and had demanded Wang’s country do that

and that while my authorities doing unfriendly things toward Wang’s

country. For us demand that other side do something, and not do it our­

selves would not improve relations. In last part statement I had referred

to responsibility US protect Americans in China. They had just seen

number American correspondents returning in safety to my country

from visit China. Nothing wrong done to them. One could not fail note

American press, including Association American Publishers, refuted

allegation that protection and safety of correspondents was an issue.

It was friendly thing for American correspondents to wish visit China, it

was friendly for Chinese Govt to let them come, but US Govt forbidding

them was unfriendly act; to say it was matter of safety was still more

unfriendly act. It would bring no good to American Govt continue pose

such unfriendly and hostile attitude and spreading unfriendly state­

ments against China.

released Sept 10 as motivated by desire improve relations. I supposed

then I could only interpret continued holding of 10 who still there in

spite our agreement as motivated by opposite desire. Certainly hard for

me believe behavior of 10 still here so much worse than behavior those

released as to preclude release. Let us be clear about this. We given as

first task question civilians. That been completely resolved on independ­

ent evidence of agency and govt which he designated to confirm this

with respect Chinese in US. Even though did not enter into original

discussions, it been resolved even for Chinese imprisoned for common

crimes. I had not thrown off fog of arguments about jurisdiction, sover­

eignty, other such terms—we had gone ahead and resolved it. We still

did not see evidence intent his authorities resolve it equally as far as

Americans his country concerned. We resolved it without asking any

political concessions. We resolved it completely in spirit and letter of

agrement into which we entered. We still look for similar intent on part

his authorities.

24. I continued, not only had they not resolved this, but not

resolved question Americans still missing from Korean hostilities. Both

are simple straight-forward questions resolvable not by talk or formu­

lae but by action. Nothing complicated about them. They think things

can be done simply. When I first raised question Americans still miss­

ing Korean hostilities he had said not properly within scope our talks

here. As I had told him at time, I did not raise subject here in order raise

controversy between us—I raised it solely get resolution. It made no

difference to me where it was resolved. When after lapse of over year

I raised it at last meeting he made remarkable allegation this responsi­

bility my govt. He made this allegation in spite responsibility his side

assumed under Korean armistice agreement and in spite clear evidence

his govt at least at one time had info regarding these men. I had cited

to him evidence this—reasons we and families these men felt they must

have some info with regard their fate. I simply could not understand

why that info could not be given to us. As said it makes no difference

where, either here or Korea.

cast info regarding Mr Casimire T. Demoll indicating to his family he

alive and well in prison camp at that time. On June 27 that year similar

broadcast concerning William D. Schonder and on June 29 concerning

Myron Johnson. It certainly not responsibility US that hopes families

raised in regard these men. It certainly not responsibility US there no

further info regarding them. These were just few of many many cases

in which it clear Wang’s authorities at one time had these in their hands

and had info regard them. I again asked that info be made available US,

whether here or in Military Armistice Commission Korea. Was making

no allegations; if these men died, it was all the info we asked for. I could

not understand, though, why info withheld.

26. Wang replied, advance release 11 airmen at opening these nego­

tiations and release ten American criminals Sept 10 1955 all effected

in accordance judicial procedure his country and had been made vol­

untarily on their part. Those releases indeed represented vital effort

made his govt view improving relations between two countries. This

recognized fact throughout world. World recognized Chinese Govt did

not merely engage in talking but had actually taken concrete action

improve relations. Deterioration relations between two countries not

result unfriendly attitude to US but on contrary, had solely been result

hostile, unfriendly attitude US toward China. Even after series friendly

actions taken by his govt, US Govt had not in any single instance shown

similar intent toward China. These actual facts speak for themselves.

It US lacking desire improve relations with China, not any lack good­

will part China. Therefore he would like call attention to fact if rela­

tions between two countries to improve, it required equal simultaneous

effort both sides. If my govt kept demanding one thing from his govt

one day and raising another the next, it is simply wishful thinking. He

would refer to saying in his country that if person treats me well, I will

go one better but if he treats me ill, let him beware of consequences.

With respect other points I raised my statement he had at last meeting

and also this morning expressed position and would not take time go

over them.

27. I said I had not asked him take any action with regard those

remaining Americans other than what he had taken with regard eleven

airmen and ten civilians. Not asked to take any action other than what

we had taken in regard Chinese in US.

28. Wang rejoined, he had made it clear time and again progress

talks depend concerted efforts two sides.

29. Wang suggested next meeting March 14. I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 66

Washington, March 8, 1957

Dear Alex:

1. Dave Osborn returned on March 4 and received a warm wel­

come. His ringside report on recent developments has been illuminat­

ing and has given us a better feel of the atmosphere. He reported to

Mr. Robertson briefly on March 5. Unfortunately Mr. Phleger could not

attend that session. Mr. Robertson left with the Secretary March 6 for

the SEATO meeting at Canberra. Mr. Robertson will visit several of our

SEA and SPA posts after the Canberra meeting and will not return to

Washington until March 25. A copy of his itinerary is enclosed.

2. The Secretary on March 5 personally authorized your home

leave following the next meeting on March 14. He agreed that you

should take your full home leave, passing up the April meeting as far as

you are concerned. We will have something to say in our guidance tele­

gram which is to go out on March 11 regarding the way you will handle

the announcement of your home leave plans with Wang at the next

Informal.

­meeting. The instructions will also cover the action you should take

if Wang should insist on a meeting at some level while you are away.

EE feels in any event you should go back to Prague for two or three

days after the next meeting because there may be some excitement on

March 15 generated by the Hungarian issue, which might have some

repercussions throughout the bloc. We assume you would not plan to

come direct to the States from Geneva in any event. The foregoing is all

based on the assumption that you would like to take your home leave

immediately. If you would prefer to postpone it until late spring or early

summer, there is no opposition on anybody’s part. More on this in your

guidance telegram, and possibly in a follow-up letter by Monday’s

pouch which should reach you on or before the next meeting.

3. We are sending you several enclosures on the issue of American

travel to Communist China, including the Secretary’s comments at his

March 5 press conference and a memorandum of conversation he had

with an executive of the UP at the Gridiron Club dinner last Saturday

night March 2. Also enclosed is an excerpt from the President’s Press

Conference of yesterday. This whole question is probably being debated

right now on the Secretary’s plane enroute to Canberra. The Secretary,

Robertson, and Andrew Berding, the new Assistant Secretary of State

for Public Affairs, were planning to review the matter at length aboard

the plane. It looks as if there certainly will be no general relaxation and

we in FE are hopeful that a strong line can be maintained.

4. You will have received news of Mackensen’s reported release

from prison upon expiration of his sentence. But we gather that he

is so thoroughly brain washed that he is likely to elect to remain in

Communist China at least for the present. No Departmental comment

on Mackensen’s release and his apparent decision to stay in China is

now contemplated.

5. We are enclosing a copy of recent correspondence regarding the

cases of prisoners Edwin Pon and John Woos. In regard to the Woos

case, it is the confirmed U.S. Government position that dual nationals

who are not dependents are not entitled to the benefits of the Agreed

Announcement. For your background, we do not consider that we are

bound to extend the benefits of the Agreed Announcement to alien

Chinese criminals incarcerated after our offer to Chinese aliens of

last summer. The benefits of the Agreement are being offered to Pon

because it seems desirable to do so in view of the fact that he was sen­

tenced about the time of the arrangement of last summer. But this does

not constitute a binding precedent. Each case will be judged on its own

merits.

6. We do not contemplate any new tack in your instructions for the

next meeting. Mr. Robertson’s last word was that you could and should

be as tough as you wanted to be in dealing with Wang on the violation

of the Agreed Announcement. He sees no reason to pull your punches

on this issue.

for the talks with the UK.

Regards and good wishes and a hope that we shall have the plea­

sure of seeing you soon.

Sincerely,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosures:

1. Mr. Robertson’s itinerary.

2. Correspondence on Edwin Pon Case

4. Memorandum of Conversation between the Secretary and Frank

5. FBIS March 6—Text of Chou En-lai’s speech

6. Press Release No. 111—Secretary Dulles’ News Conference

Washington, March 11, 1957

895. For Johnson.

Guidance for March 14 meeting:

1. Keep discussion throughout meeting centered on growing

sense outrage American people over failure Chinese Communists keep

pledge of September 10, 1955. This evidence bad faith casts doubt on

Chinese Communist protestations they desire improvement relations.

US attitude throughout on issue been one of extreme forbearance.

Chinese Communists have had ample time demonstrate good faith.

However far from showing good faith by implementing ­announcement

they have been increasingly demanding political advantage. Chinese

Communists should realize no progress can be made these talks by

repudiating agreements, making false charges, or holding hostages for

political ransom.

2. If Wang threatens public statement you should point out such

statements not conducive to progress, reserve right public reply and

point out no amount false charges and distortions can substitute

for performance. FYI We consider our case so strong this point that

Communist statement can do little damage. END FYI.

3. On other subjects maintain position as required, leading discus­

sion back to civilians by pointing out essential establish some mutual

good faith before considering other agreements.

4. In your discretion, cite Mackensen case as example violation

Agreed Announcement. He presumably would have been released at

end of term even if Agreed Announcement non-existent. Challenge

Wang to show any part Agreed Announcement was applied by

Communists his case.

5. If you decide on consultation and home leave at this time, sug­

gest you inform Wang you must return to US for extended period this

purpose and propose next meeting late May.

Herter

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and Osborn; cleared in draft by Phleger. The time of

transmission is illegible.

Letter No. 67

Washington, March 11, 1957

Dear Alex:

Walter McConaughy received a message yesterday that his 86-year

old father was seriously ill following a heart attack, so he flew to

Alabama. He hopes to be back on Wednesday but that will, of course,

depend on his father’s condition.

I have only one item to add at this time to Walter’s letter of March 8.

The Department of Defense “Prisoner Officer,” Jim Kelleher, has told

us that there is strong sentiment in Defense for an official “progress

report’’ of same kind on actions taken by State and Defense regarding

the missing 450. Both departments, but particularly Defense, are under

continuous pressure from relatives and interested parties in Congress

and elsewhere for action. Congressman Lane’s proposed resolution

that this be made the “primary objective of the foreign policy of the

United States” (later toned down at our suggestion) is an indication of

the feeling. Unfortunately, the only progress report we could make is

one which said, in effect, “no progress,” but it would serve to show that

we have not been idle. We would appreciate any ideas you might have

as to the kind of public statement that might be usefully made on this

subject. We would, of course, have to decide whether we would stick to

the 450 figure or use the new figure of 383, with a suitable explanation

to account for the difference.

We will meet today to draft instructions for your next meeting. As

Walter said, we do not expect to come up with anything new. We are all

looking forward to seeing you when you come home on leave.

With best regards,

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Official–­Informal. Drafted by Clough.

874. From Johnson.

Would appreciate info whether Lee Li-chuen departed February 23

as mentioned para 6 Deptel 815.

Gowen

Limited Distribution.

899. Your 874.

Lee Li-chuen departed February 23 President Wilson ETA Hong

Kong March 18.

Herter

Drafted by Seward (FE/CA/RA).

881. From Johnson.

Two hour meeting this morning with no new developments. Wang

opened with statement attacking “stepping up” of slanderous attacks

and false charges by US spokesmen. Secretary’s Canberra statement

was “particular evidence this campaign poison atmosphere and try

slander China in order arrest improvement Sino-American relations”.

This contrary attitude of even American people where even including

“some occupying important positions were speaking out for change in

US ostrich policy toward China”. USG “trying through renunciation

force doctrine induce China recognize present status American control

over Taiwan”. Military control over Taiwan being “incessantly inten­

sified” extending military bases and planning install guided missiles.

“Aggressive steps by US in Taiwan would only enable all Chinese

patriots including those now on Taiwan recognize” US attempting

enslave Chinese nation. Chinese people desire “be kindly terms” with

American people. Referring to FMC, trade and cultural proposals “if

there will and desire” by US improve relations should get down to

serious discussion rather than entangling talks by introducing side

issues.

I carried out theme paragraph 1 Deptel 895 pointing out PRC had

agreed civilians first matter and by refusing to solve was one block­

ing progress. Agreed announcement was also test good faith and value

of agreements but had operated only to advantage PRC. American

spokesmen had and would continue express growing sense outrage of

American people against PRC bad faith in carrying out that agreement.

PRC failure resolve question American civilians belied their profes­

sions desire improve relations, et cetera. Also cited failure PRC agree

renunciation force.

Give and take centered almost entirely around implementation

with Wang reiterating familiar charges, and I reiterating theme only

way to progress was carrying out agreed announcement, citing GOI

and UK as proofs of who had demonstrated good faith with respect

agreement. During course give and take informed him departure of Lee

Li-chuen.

Limit Distribution. Repeated to Saigon unnumbered for Robertson.

Meeting closed on note my blunt reiteration release Americans and

renunciation force essential.

He accepted my proposal next meeting Thursday April 11.

Full record by pouch leaving tonight.

Returning Prague tomorrow morning.

Owens

797. Telegram unnumbered from Geneva

Geneva, March 14, 1957

Unnumbered. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 66th with prepared statement. As result my side

dragging out talks and persisting in unreasonable demands we have failed

make progress. This state affairs could not but cause them doubt that my

government had any sincere desire resolve problems. Even in U.S. itself,

more and more people getting fed up this attitude my side. More and

more people, even including some occupying important positions, were

speaking out for change in U.S. ostrich policy toward China. These people

take view removal trade barriers, cultural exchange, holding of Foreign

Ministers Conference, might be carried out as concrete steps leading to

improvement in U.S.-Chinese relations.

2. Wang continued instead of considering these ideas, however,

spokesmen of U.S. Government stepping up slanderous attacks and

false charges. Recent statement U.S. Secretary of State at Canberra

meeting was particular evidence of this campaign poison atmosphere

and try slander China, in order to arrest improvement Sino-American

relations. In course these talks, my side trying incessantly through

so-called Renunciation Force Doctrine induce China recognize present

status American control over Taiwan. U.S. also incessantly intensifying

military control over Taiwan, extending military bases and planning

install guided missiles. Such maneuvers could hardly be reconciled

with purposes we should pursue in these negotiations. Aggressive

steps adopted by U.S. in Taiwan would only enable all Chinese patriots,

Distribution. Sent via pounch. Received on March 19.

including those now on Taiwan, to recognize that steps now being

taken by U.S. were attempt enslave Chinese nation.

3. Wang continued Chinese people desire be kindly terms with

American people. Chinese people not to blame for failure bring about

improvement Sino-American relations. In discussions here his side

already contributed series efforts with aim improve relations between

two countries. Proposals made by his side calling for meeting between

Chinese and American Foreign Ministers, removal of trade barriers,

and peoples contacts and cultural exchange are just such effective steps

for improvement in relations between the two countries. If there still

any desire on part my government for improvement relations as well

as resolution questions between China and America he did not see

why there should be further delay our getting down to serious discus­

sions. Only by putting forward constructive opinions and display of

good faith, rather than entangling talks by introducing side issues, can

improvement in relations be effected. This what he had always tried

achieve in these talks.

4. I replied he had spoken of what he alleged were attempts of U.S.

entangle these talks with side issues. Impossible for me understand

how he could make such statement in light history steps leading up to

these talks and talks themselves. In fact I had been one who had been

attempting keep us to resolution problems with which we given to

deal. No amount such statements could change fact our governments

gave us as first task question of return civilians.

5. I continued in Terms Reference setting up these talks his gov­

ernment had agreed that was first question. Even before meeting began

his authorities stated this question would be easy to settle with respect

Americans detained in his country, and my authorities, even before these

meetings began, settled it with respect to Chinese in my country. When

his authorities agreed to those Terms of Reference and made those state­

ments, they well knew from the talks which he and I had had here in 1954,

and the subsequent contacts between respective consular officers, that my

country not interested theoretical concepts or abstract theories; that it was

not then concerned about Americans who appeared to have chosen to

remain in his country or other irrelevant questions—what we might term

side issues. It interested solely ensuring that a specific group Americans

should be able return their country—Americans who being denied their

right return either through refusal exit permits or through imprisonment.

If there any possibility doubt this regard, it would have been entirely

­dispelled by statements I had made at very opening our discussions

here. Indeed our discussions respect Americans leading up to Agreement

September 10, 1955 had to do entirely with that group Americans whose

names I had given him. He had given me every reason believe agreement

proposed by him would lead to “expeditious” resolution that problem,

and on that basis I had entered into Agreed Announcement.

6. I continued, results however had been precisely contrary not

only to our expectations but to clear words of pledge contained that

Agreement. For more than year it been apparent policy his government

require all remaining imprisoned Americans serve full terns their sen­

tences even down to last day. There seemed be clear intent not resolve

first question with which we called upon deal, even at price violating

solemn public commitment. There seemed be clear intent perpetuate

this acknowledged first obstacle to improvement relations between us.

American people, American Government and myself find it entirely

impossible reconcile statements he and his authorities had made with

regard desire improve relations between our two peoples and contin­

ued failure carry out first agreement between us. At time we entered

into that agreement I pointed out to him as earnestly and clearly as

I could that if it were desire his government improve relations between

us, the carrying out of that agreement was of utmost importance.

I pointed out at time, agreement itself meant nothing. Only its imple­

mentation could have meaning. He was well aware at time we entered

into that agreement of very favorable effects it had on public opinion

my country. I pointed out to him at time that those effects would be dis­

pelled unless it carried out. As had often pointed out here it would have

been better never enter into agreement if it not to be carried out. What

I had said at that time I believed had been amply borne out. Those

effects had been dispelled.

7. I continued there was increasing sense outrage among American

people and American Government not only over failure these

Americans return, but over what we could only consider as bad faith

which had thus far been demonstrated in carrying out this first agree­

ment between us. Spokesmen for American Government could not,

even if they would, conceal or ignore this feeling. They had and would

continue express sentiments of American people this regard. If facts

unpleasant to Wang’s authorities, it was they who must blame them­

selves for creating this set of facts. They could not expect extract price

political advantage for carrying out their already pledged word. This

could not be obscured by introducing proposals on subsidiary matters.

Progress could not be achieved by repudiating agreements which had

been made, by making false charges or holding hostages for political

advantage. It could not be concealed by charges that U.S. using these as

pretext to prevent improvement relations.

8. I continued I had reiterated that his authorities had agreed

that this question return civilians would be first question we should

handle here. They could not conceal fact that their failure make prog­

ress this first question was what had prevented progress these talks.

Attitude my government regarding this question had throughout these

long months been one of greatest forbearance. Only his authorities

could remove this continuing block to progress which they themselves

had established. Only his authorities could make decision that they

willing renounce use armed force in achievement their objectives and

accept simple and straightforward proposals we had made for renun­

ciation force and settlement these issues only by peaceful means. If, as

Wang said, atmosphere being poisoned, it not been by any action U.S.

It been by failure his authorities carry out already pledged word and

by failure his authorities renounce their threat use armed force achieve

their ambitions. They and only they could correct this situation.

9. Wang replied every time he came here he had had determined

hope my authorities would change present policy dragging out talks

and preventing progress these deliberations. However, each time after

he had finished listening to my words he had felt that attitude I main­

tained could not contribute to progress these talks. Their side had made

clear in past that number American nationals in China small and reso­

lution their problems could be made easy. If we examined course these

talks from opening meeting to present with sober mind, we able readily

see Chinese Government had always faithfully carried out agreement

entered into with respect question civilians. All charges being poured

upon his government in connection question civilians false and not

true. Government which failed carry out concluded agreement on civil­

ians none other than American Government itself.

10. Wang continued he had in past repeatedly called attention of

my government to fact steps being adopted by my authorities in con­

nection requirement Taiwan entry permit and permanent residence

requirement entirely violated agreement between us. Action taken by

my authorities in restricting and interfering with freedom of communi­

cation between Chinese residents in U.S. and families in China as well

as action taken by my authorities in coercing Chinese residents in pro­

ceeding to Taiwan were all violations of agreement. U.S. failed up to

now account for failure of return 53 Chinese in U.S. whose names he had

given me and failed account for failure another group 22 persons return.

Could this attitude taken by American authorities be reconciled with

provisions our agreement. Although he had made repeated represen­

tations in these meetings, this failure carry out Agreed Announcement

with respect Chinese in U.S. had not been corrected or improved.

11. Wang continued charges made by American Government in

connection with question civilians could only be considered as tactic

to cover American Government’s own failure carry out agreement with

regard Chinese in U.S. So far as improvement in relations between our

two peoples concerned, of which I had spoken this morning, Wang’s

side aware there was such a desire among American people, in same

way as Chinese people had desire improve relations between two

countries. Statements made by American spokesmen entirely contrary

to this desire of American people. I had spoken about what I called

feeling of outrage against his country among American people; his side

could not discover any such feeling among American people. Rising

sense of outrage seen my side was not outrage against China but rather

outrage against American Government’s repeated efforts try continue

prevent reestablishment contact between Chinese and American peo­

ples. If one was going to talk about improvement relations, lip serv­

ice not sufficient, but rather adoption of concrete steps toward real

improvement in relations between two countries. These concrete steps

include putting forward concrete opinion and steps with view to really

improving relations. A single action of advantage to both sides was a

greater contribution to improving relations than much empty talk. The

taking of such action would not only help progress our talks, but action

itself in interest both peoples.

12. I replied I believed I probably in better position speak for and

represent feelings American people. However, he entirely right when

said American people desired better relations with people his country.

They did this in spite hostility his government demonstrated toward

U.S. and its allies. He made serious error if he interpreted these expres­

sions of desire for better relations with his country as lack concern for,

or absence resentment of, fact that his country had thus far failed either

to release our fellow citizens whom Wang’s country holds, or to carry

out first agreement between us. American people did not enjoy living

in attitude of hostility with anyone or toward anyone. No one would be

quicker to respond to action by others indicating desire for such friend­

ship. He had well said that lip service not sufficient, concrete steps are

what counted. This precisely what I, my Government, and American

people been seeking with regard to first item agenda. This precisely

what his government had not done. As I had previously said, the ques­

tion resolving first item agenda by action rather than words was some­

thing which transcended even importance of individual Americans

concerned. It was test whether agreements between us were to have

substance and whether they to be carried out. He had talked about

necessity of agreements being advantageous to both sides. I would cer­

tainly not argue with that. What had happened with respect this first

agreement between us was that it appeared be entirely to advantage his

side, with no advantage my side. In fact as I had again pointed out this

morning, it seemed to have worked to positive disadvantage our side.

Whereas even prior our agreement, his authorities had on ­occasion

released Americans prior expiration full term sentences imposed, now

his side not only not permitted all return expeditiously in accord­

ance agreement between us, but even required them serve full term

sentences.

13. I continued, on other hand I had from beginning fully met all

pertinent points his views regarding Chinese in U.S. In 1954 we had

talked of Chinese students in U.S. who being prevented returning his

country. By time we met here August 1955, all orders preventing return

such students had been withdrawn. Thus in that matter I had entirely

met his point view. That I had done so and that any Chinese in U.S.

desiring return his country could do so, was proven by official state­

ments of very agency he himself had suggested for establishing facts.

14. I continued no amount of distorted efforts to attempt misrep­

resent various aspects U.S. immigration legislation could change fact,

established by evidence of third power agency established for purpose,

that no Chinese in U.S. desiring return to Wang’s country had been or

was being obstructed from doing so. Chinese steadily returning to his

country whenever they desired do so. My latest information was that

277 had returned by direct route to Hong Kong since beginning our

talks here. I had no way knowing how many returned other routes. He

continued speak of 53 and 22 and demanded what he termed account­

ing for them. U.S. was under no obligation provide accounting for

Chinese in U.S. What it was under obligation to do and would do was

not obstruct departure of any Chinese in U.S. who desired depart. As

far as 53 and 22 concerned I had told him in past and reiterated categor­

ically that their return not being obstructed and if they had not returned

it was because they did not desire do so. If they felt being obstructed,

they, along with any other Chinese in U.S., entirely free communicate

with Indian Embassy. They had not done so as far as I knew. Certainly

no case alleged obstruction brought to attention my government by

Indian Embassy. I certainly did not propose have them cross-examined

as to reasons for whatever decisions they may have made.

15. I continued there was another example of continued freedom

of Chinese in U.S. to proceed to Wang’s country if they desired do so.

I referred to case Lee Li-chuen, whom he mentioned 64th meeting here.

This man at no time prevented from returning Wang’s country if he

desired do so. This true even though he was seaman on ship registered

by Government Republic China and had overstayed period temporary

admission to U.S. and was therefore subject to deportation. According

my information he had departed from U.S. on February 23 en route to

Hong Kong. It my understanding he expressed intention proceeding

Wang’s country at time he left. However, whether he did so was of

course matter his own choice.

16. I continued again as matter meeting Wang’s point of view and

advantageous his side, after he had raised with me question impris­

onment Chinese common criminals U.S. we took measures assure any

Chinese desiring proceed Wang’s country able do so. The one who

desired do so was enabled do so—even though he far from having

served term sentence or even eligible for parole.

17. I continued, thus situation regard Chinese in U.S. contrasted

sharply with that of Americans imprisoned in Wang’s country. Thus

there appeared to have been what he would term no advantage to

American side in this agreement. However what is even more serious

is that it calls into question whether agreements between us are to be

mere forms and words or whether they to have concrete substance. It

calls into question whether we to give appearance by form of words of

having resolved questions between us—or whether we to resolve them.

Thus first question we called on to deal with been resolved with respect

Chinese in my country. It had not been resolved with respect Americans

imprisoned in Wang’s country; and it would not be resolved until they

permitted to return in accordance agreement entered into 1955.

18. Wang replied I had quoted him as having said in past that what­

ever agreement we entered into should be advantageous to both sides.

I had indicated having accepted this opinion. However when it came

to concrete facts, I had always demonstrated attitude entirely ignor­

ing interests his side, while simply seeking advantage my own side.

This particularly conspicuous respect Chinese now in U.S. prisons for

offenses. This group Chinese in prison in U.S. very big yet my side so far

failed give his side complete full list their names. In dealing with ques­

tion Chinese in U.S., my side only thus far released one of these people

and allowed him return China. My side not taken steps with respect

remaining prisoners. My authorities even conducted illegal screening

process on them against their will. Wang’s side could not believe anyone

in prison could freely express his choice as to where he wished to go.

19. Wang continued he glad be informed by me concerning desire

among American people improve relations between two countries.

However American officials not only dared not openly make remarks

expressing such desire but had deliberately insulted and made false

charges against China. Wang’s side agreed that improvement rela­

tions between two countries urgent task we called upon to serve. They

acknowledged question civilians had been one part of differences

between us. Insofar as question civilians concerned his side already

entered into Agreed Announcement and up to two sides to carry out

this agreement faithfully. Frankly he had to make it clear that while his

government, his side, willing continue strive for improvement relations

between two countries, his government could not be made to renounce

its sovereignty. What was more, question civilians was far from being

sole issue between us. In addition to this question there were other

questions such as Foreign Ministers Conference, removal of embargo

against his country and reestablishment of peoples contacts and cul­

tural exchange between two countries. All these questions and maybe

others urgently call for solution between us. If I were going to entangle

these talks by sticking to question civilians while refusing take steps

resolve other important questions, he could only interpret this as delib­

erate attempt prevent progress our talks by using question civilians as

pretext. This certainly cannot result in any benefit to our talks.

20. I replied tangling had been done by his side. If his side wanted

to resolve first question civilians, could have done so August 2, 1955 by

simply matching action my government already taken, that is permit

civilians both sides who desire do so to return. Evidence of third parties

designated under our agreement of September 10, 1955 showed who

had permitted that take place and who had not. Difficult foresee value

further agreements between us when first agreement not carried out

and when his side refused unconditionally to say our disputes would

be settled only by peaceful means.

21. After Wang indicated he had nothing more to say I proposed

next meeting Thursday, April 11. Wang agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 55

Geneva, March 14, 1957

Dear Walter:

You will see that nothing remarkable developed at today’s meet­

ing. At the end I virtually dared him to make a move to break off if he

wanted to but he didn’t accept the challenge.

First, I enormously appreciated your letter and the authority from

the Department to take home leave if I desired to do so. Please express

my personal appreciation to the Secretary at a suitable opportunity.

Frankly, when I wrote to EE I had no thought whatever of the possi­

bility, and, as I told them, was thinking only of a quick trip between

monthly meetings. However, I must confess that the prospect of some

leave at home is most attractive, and opens up new vistas that I had

not contemplated. [text not declassified] Therefore, to extract maximum

advantage from the opportunity I  took advantage of your generous

offer to set my own time and did not ask for the postponement this

time. My present thought is at the meeting May 9 or thereabouts to

ask for the following meeting July 11. This would enable me to leave

directly from Geneva following the May 9 meeting, spend the week

of May 13 in the Department, start leave the week of May 20 taking

about six weeks ending about June 30, and be back in Prague for the

July 4 reception, and then come down here for the meeting the follow­

ing week. This is, of course, always subject to any last minute develop­

ments either here or in Prague that would clearly make it undesirable.

I would appreciate your letting EE know of this plan, and confirming

Informal. Drafted by Johnson who signed the original “Alex.”

that neither FE or EE have any objections. I do not know how Wang will

take it, but the more I think about it I think that it might not be a bad

idea from the standpoint of the talks themselves. In any event, I might

come back with a somewhat more sprightly approach. Frankly, I feel

run out of ideas at the moment.

Now for other business. Thanks very much for your letter of

March 8, as well as for Ralph’s of March 11. [text not declassified]

I see that Taipei came up with about the same idea as the Secretary’s

on the correspondents. It seems like a very good out to me and hope

that it goes through.

I have gone over the ICRC list of Korean POW’s (your transmittal

I am struck by some very odd aspects that appear to indicate it is in itself

very incomplete. You will note that it is arranged alphabetically start­

ing off with “Chidester” an American and continues with Americans

“no materials available” through “Smith” and then suddenly shifts to

“Southworth” British through “Wylie” British “no materials available”

and then again starts up with Americans running from “Adamo” through

“Chavez”. It then starts out with “Macnair-raga” an American escapee

and runs alphabetically through “Zawacki” later starting with “Alcorn”

as an American escapee and running through “Levitski”. Subsequently

it starts another alphabetical list of Americans “no materials available”

with “Jensen” and running through “Ziemer”, but there does not appear

to be any place that the first part of that alphabetical series is given. In

any event I would appreciate knowing what Defense makes of it, and

whether it adds anything to what we were given at Panmunjon.

With respect to Ralph’s inquiry on my views concerning a public

“progress report” on this question, I certainly have no objection from my

standpoint. I think that by all means we ought to use the new figure of

383 with an explanation of the difference. I have no particular thoughts

on what form it might take, but perhaps a letter to a Congressional

committee pegged to Lane’s resolution might be the best. I have no

objection, and, in fact think it ought to include what we have done here

on the subject, keeping it entirely factual.

I notice that in the Secretary’s statement at Canberra he spoke of

the Chinese Communist refusal to renounce war “as an instrument of

its policy in relation to Taiwan and Penghu”, whereas we have previ­

ously been very careful to use the term “Taiwan area” so as to embrace

the offshore islands. Does this have any significance? I am sure it will

be noted in Peiping and Taipeh.

Has the “Wirin case” entirely subsided or is it going to raise its

head again?

Tell Dave we have been moved out of our room because of the

Hungarian hearings and are back where we were during the Foreign

Ministers’ Conference.

I hope you have a chance for a little relaxation at Bermuda. I do not

suppose you are getting to make the slow cruiser trip, but it would be

nice if you could.

All the best to everyone.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. Tell whoever handles it that they no longer need to send the

Daily Summary extracts to me here. With the gap between meetings the

copies I receive at Prague are entirely sufficient.

Attachment

Note from McConaughy to Freers

Washington, March 20, 1957

Ed,

Please read the attached letter of March 14 from Alex Johnson.

I  presume EUR has no objection to his proposal to take leave from

about May 10 to July 1, but I would like to have definite confirmation

of that before I answer his letter. I am also attaching a copy of my letter

to Alex of March 8.

Walter P McConaughy

I regret to have to bring up a complication but thought you should

know that a meeting of the Eastern European Chiefs of Mission is now

scheduled for May 10 through 13 in Vienna. Burke Elbrick will preside,

and among others expecting to attend are Messrs. Henderson, Murphy,

Perkins and Bill Clark from USIA. We feel it very important that you

be there to present your views about the situation in Czechoslovakia at

the meeting.

I hope the delay of a few days will not seriously disrupt your home

leave plans. You will be receiving more specific information about the

meeting very shortly.

Best regards,

Sincerely,

Edward L. Freers

487. Wang’s interpreter called Ekvall this morning and asked for

postponement next meeting to May 15 as Wang was in China in con­

nection visit Polish Prime Minister. I have replied May 15 not possible

for me and have suggested any time between May 6 and May 9. Will

inform Department when reply received.

Johnson

Priority.

Prague, April 8, 1957, noon

491. Mytel 487.

Wang has replied not possible meet before May 15. In view desir­

ability my meeting with him after his return from Peiping and before

my consultation with Department have agreed to May 15 meeting.

Usual announcement postponement meeting will be made at Geneva

but have authorized PAO there inform any press inquirers on back­

ground basis postponement at Wang’s request.

At May 15 meeting will propose July 11 for next following meeting.

Plan depart Geneva evening May 15 arriving Washington after­

noon May 16.

Johnson

Letter No. 68

Washington, April 17, 1957

Dear Alex:

The cancellation of the April meeting at Geneva has somewhat

disrupted the normal exchange of letters with you there. CA has been

sending to Geneva some of the material that would normally have been

sent as enclosures to a letter, so as to keep down the bulk of the letter

I will send you in time for the May 15 meeting. However, Defense has

raised some questions with regard to the missing personnel issue, going

beyond the immediate context of the Geneva meetings, and we would

appreciate your preliminary thoughts on the matter, if possible before

your arrival in Washington.

Informal. Drafted by Osborn.

I am enclosing a copy of the letter from Defense asking about the

current status of your efforts at Geneva, and whether it would be desir­

able for the UNC again to raise the issue in the MAC. The Defense letter

enclosed a copy of a statement prepared by the UNC for possible use

in the latter eventuality, and asked for our approval or comments. We

sent Defense an interim reply to the effect we were asking you for your

comments and would reply more fully when we had heard from you.

On the desirability of taking the issue up in the MAC, it is our

feeling here that we can build up a better public position if we maintain

a posture of unremitting efforts in both forums to get an accounting,

continuing to bring it up both at Geneva and in the MAC.

I think you will agree that the proposed UNC statement is not of

the sort best calculated to build up a strong public position, and that it

should be re-written to bring it more into line with the approach you

have followed at Geneva. To be of maximum usefulness, a public posi­

tion on the missing personnel question ought to be ready for disclo­

sure by the fall, shortly before the opening of the UNGA. It would be

good if, before that time, all the well-­documented individual cases (i.e.,

those where the Communists obviously should have information, but

have indicated “no data” in their accounting) could have been cited,

either in your presentations at Geneva, or the MAC, or both. We also

feel our position would be stronger if the UNC took more note of the

Communist “accounting,” calling attention to its falsifications and its

inadequacies, but not simply ignoring it. For example, with regard to

the “escaped” category, the UNC could ask the Communists to provide

supplementary data on the time and place of escape. Naturally any pres­

entation in the MAC should be cleared by such other of the 16 allies as

have unaccounted for personnel on the list, but this ought not to prove

too difficult.

If a general strategy along the above lines can be agreed upon, it

would not cause much of a change from your past approach to the prob­

lem at Geneva. There would be individual presentations on perhaps

four or five persons per meeting, drawing your material largely from

the better documented cases in the Air Force roster (as the Air Force list

was entirely in the “no data” category in the Communist “accounting”).

We have sent on to Geneva material on 20 USAF personnel. However,

you need not feel restricted to the use of this material, as Defense has

informed us that all the information on the copy of the roster you have

(Air Force included) may be used as though it were unclassified, except

for actual citations of certain specific intelligence sources.

With regard to the selection of “well-­documented” cases for indi­

vidual citation, we believe after talking to Defense it would be better

to let you choose on the basis of the material you have in Geneva, as

you will in any case to work up the presentation. We will effect some

coordination with the effort in the MAC by keeping Defense informed

of the cases you have cited.

I would hope that when you are here on consultation we will

be able to arrange a meeting on the missing personnel question with

Defense representatives. We would appreciate any comments you may

be able to send us before your arrival in Washington, however, as they

would help prepare the ground for our discussions.

Sincerely yours,

Walter P. McConaughy

Enclosure:

ies of letter, and statement proposed by the UN Command.

803. Letter from Johnson to McConaughy

Prague, April 24, 1957

Dear Walter:

I have received your letter of April 17 with regard to the next steps

concerning the missing POWs.

I should have, perhaps, earlier expressed my thoughts on handling

this. I have been thinking that the most useful, and also effective from

the standpoint of public relations, procedure would be that of what

might be termed a “whipsawing” operation somewhat in the past pat­

tern. That is, take it up alternately in Panmunjon and Geneva along

the pattern of our first exercise. That is, Panmunjon had not got any

place on it, so I took it up in Geneva. Then Panmunjon took it up again

and received some very small although entirely unsatisfactory results

in that the other side did accept the lists and did make some small pre­

tence of an additional accounting. I then, again took it up at Geneva,

and it would now seem to me that it would be well for Panmunjon

again to take it up before I make another move in Geneva on it. I am

sorry that it has not been taken up again before now in Panmunjon. If

and when they get no place at Panmunjon, I will again hit Wang with

it in detail. In the meantime I will continue to take advantage of all

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

suitable opportunities to mention it as a still outstanding item of busi­

ness. Perhaps it would be well for me to at least touch on it again at the

May meeting.

I do not see any particular advantage in attempting to exhaust by

individual presentations what might be termed the well-­documented

individual cases. They having accepted the list of names, we are always

in position accurately to tell inquirers that the individual case in

which they are interested has specifically been brought to the attention

of the other side. You will note that the cases I have thus far used and

I believe to be by far the strongest from the standpoint of such a pres­

entation are those in which Peiping had itself admitted they were at

one time being held. I am under the impression that I have already used

the best cases in this category, although there may be a few more. Not

having the lists here I am not sure, but Dave who did all the research for

me on this will undoubtedly be able to recall. In any event I will look

into it on my next trip. If my belief is correct, I am now or soon will be

at the point of citing cases in which the evidence is primarily unilateral

from our side. While, I do not, of course, question the validity of such

evidence and its usefulness in other contexts it seems to me that for

Geneva purposes it is much better that I continue to make my stand on

those cases where Peiping itself had acknowledged the man was being

held. I have left him now with the impression that I may well still have

a large number of such cases in my pocket. If I pull out any consider­

able number of other types of cases he will undoubtedly heave a sigh of

relief that I do not have him on as bad a spot as he is with those I first

cited. Therefore, I would propose that the next time I take the matter up

in detail I cite any additional cases I may have in the first category, or if

necessary refer back to those previously cited rather than taper off on

what may be weaker cases from a Geneva standpoint.

I cannot think of anything that would be better calculated to give

them the impression our sole purpose is to make a propaganda play out

of this issue rather than a serious quest for information than the draft

statement submitted by the UNC. While I well realize the difference in

tone between the Panmunjon and Geneva meetings I should think that

it would be worthwhile for the UNC to at least try a somewhat different

approach on this subject. It probably will not produce any more results,

but it certainly stands a better chance of doing so than the approach in

the draft. Also, it seems better to me from the standpoint of the 16 and

public relations when the record is published. I also thoroughly agree

that any such statement must take account of the Communist “account­

ing” calling attention to its falsifications and inadequacies rather than

simply ignoring it. I should think that this would be much more effec­

tive than building the case almost entirely around the fact that some

prisoners were taken to Mainland China as in the draft, the apparent

presumption being that we think that the PRC is holding all or most of

those on our present list. Our primary interest is not whether prisoners

were taken to China, but in information about them. From my exam­

ination of the present cases I would doubt that many of them involve

their ever having been taken to China. While they may be holding back

some information, my feeling is that in fact they probably just do not

have the records, particularly in the cases of those who fell into the

hands of the North Koreans. This does not mean that we should not

keep pressing them, but I am not sanguine we will ever achieve any

substantial results.

I also do not see the point in the draft of laboring the point on

PRC belligerency ­and “volunteers” in Korea. They seem largely to have

dropped this fiction and I do not think we should seem to be going out

of our way to labor the point.

I would, therefore, suggest a complete rewriting of the draft and

believe that Dave Osborn should be able to do so. He thoroughly

knows the subject, knows my ideas on it, and I would be content with

anything he produces.

I assume the UNC has now been informed of what I have last

done at Geneva on the subject. I should think it would be well to

arrange to keep it informed on a current basis and ask that they do the

same. Because of the GA resolution I should also think it well to keep

the record clear on keeping Hammarskjold informed.

I will, of course, be very glad to discuss the subject when I am in

Washington. My present plan is to spend the week beginning May 20 in

the Department and I hope to be able to finish everything in that week. It

will be a busy time and I hope that between you and EE you can sched­

ule it in the most efficient way. I leave myself entirely in your hands so

feel free to arrange anything you think useful. I hope that the Secretary,

Walter and Herman will be there at some time during that week.

I am leaving here May 8 for the Vienna EE Chiefs of Mission meet­

ing which begins May 10. (There are no planes on May 9, the national

holiday here, and also for various reasons I would prefer to be out of

town on that day.) I plan to leave Vienna the morning of May 13 and

arrive in Geneva the same afternoon. I then plan to leave Geneva the

evening of May 15 for New York, and if my car is ready drive down to

Washington May 16. If you want to get in touch with me while I am in

Vienna you can, of course, do so through the Embassy there.

Pat is leaving here directly May 10 and will arrive in Washington

May 12.

Regards to all and looking forward to seeing you soon for a real

good chat, I remain

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

Letter No. 69

Washington, May 10, 1957

Dear Alex:

Walter McConaughy has gone off on a short trip to Alabama

and expects to be back early next week. The Senate Foreign Relations

Committee, after twice postponing his appearance before them to dis­

cuss his appointment as Ambassador to Burma, has indicated that they

will call him late next week. Naturally he is anxious to complete this

procedure and receive his confirmation.

Since you have not had a letter from CA for some time I will try

to include here mention of the principal developments relating to

your talks during the last month. We intend to begin preparation of

instructions for your next meeting today and will probably meet with

Mr. Robertson on Monday to put them in final form. We do not antici­

pate any new departure.

1. Appearances of Department Officers on Hill on March 23: Bill Sebald

and Walter McConaughy appeared before the Far East Subcommittee

of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs to answer questions about

the ban on correspondents travel to Communist China. The members

of the Subcommittee were quite sympathetic to our position, with only

two or three members appearing to question it seriously. The majority

appeared to take the position that the central question was whether or

not a distinction between newsmen and ordinary citizens for the pur­

pose of travel was justified. We have sent you separately the record

of the proceedings. On April 2, Mr. Murphy went before the Senate

Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights. He made a very forceful pre­

sentation of the Department’s policy, which was put out as a press

release by the Department, and a copy of which has been sent you.

The Senators were somewhat less sympathetic and understanding

than the Representatives had been with Bill Sebald and Walter. Their

questions were sharp and the hearing was rather lengthy. Following

the hearing, Senator Fulbright sent over an additional list of some 35

questions to be answered by the Department. The questions were for

the most part along the same lines as the ones asked in the hearing

itself, but some of them were very trickily worded. One of them, for

example, was the question whether the fact of non-­recognition itself

made it more difficult for the Department to extend protection to

Americans traveling in Communist China. As you can imagine, it is

Informal.

difficult to phrase an answer to this question without appearing either

to offer an argument for recognition or, on the other hand, to discount

the validity of the argument that we cannot offer protection as one

of the reasons behind our policy. Another question which appeared to

be somewhat loaded was the question of whether you at Geneva still

felt that removing the travel ban would have an unfavorable effect on

the prospects for release of the prisoners or whether you had come

to believe, in the light of the propaganda advantage that Peiping had

already gained from exploiting the issue, that the ban no longer had

any value in your negotiations. Our answer to this one was in effect

that your position at Geneva had always been along the lines of the

Department’s press release of August 7, that you felt the travel of cer­

tain reporters in defiance of the ban had weakened your position vis-­

a-­vis the ban, and that you had stressed that the Communists would

probably not release the Americans in exchange for a removal of the

ban. The Department agreed with this analysis, and in any case did

not intend to bargain for the release of Americans. (I am enclosing a

copy of the FE portion of our reply).

2. The Worthy Case: William Worthy was given a hearing on April 29

in order to inform him officially of the tentative denial of his request for a

new passport. The Department, at this stage, kept the focus on the issues

as defined in the passport regulations. The next step will presumably be a

hearing before the Board of Passport Appeals.

3. Cases of Downey, Fecteau and Redmond: We have already sent to

Geneva a memorandum of conversation with Mrs. Downey, the mother

of John Downey, in which Mr. Robertson discussed with her various

possibilities growing out of a contact she had with Dag Hammarskjold.

You will see that there is a possibility she might come to Geneva at the

time of your next meeting for an interview with Wang. The Department

did not attempt to discourage her from making the trip, although we,

of course, could not give her any assurance that the interview would be

granted, or that it would have any effect on the release of her son. We

are attempting to find out more about Dag Hammarskjold’s reported

willingness to take up again the cases of Downey and Fecteau, on

the grounds of their being civilians under the authority of the UNC

in Korea, and therefore entitled to repatriation under the Armistice

Agreement. You will recall that at the time of Hammarskjold’s visit to

Peiping in January 1955, although he went there primarily on behalf of

the 11 airmen, we left the door open to the inclusion of the two civil­

ians in the category of personnel who should be released under the

Armistice Agreement. Also, in Wang’s list of Americans in China which

he gave you at the start of the talks, Downey and Fecteau are placed in

a separate category from the other civilian prisoners. Of course, in any­

thing that we might do or ask the Secretory General to do, we would

have to be careful not to appear to relax our demands that the Chinese

Communists release forthwith all the prisoners without regard to their

status or any other distinction.

In the above connection, William Worthy has been stirring up a

good deal of trouble among the American relatives of the prisoners.

He tried to lead Mrs. Fecteau on into saying that the Department

had for two years failed to permit her to send parcels to her son.

Fortunately, Mrs. Fecteau issued a refutation of this allegation through

her Congressman, Mr. Lane, to whom CA also supplied a statement

summarizing our efforts to get parcels to Fecteau and all the other pris­

oners and making the point that, almost as soon as we learned of the

fact that Downey and Fecteau were alive and in prison in Communist

China, we commenced efforts to make it possible for their families to

send them parcels. Worthy has also been in touch with Mrs. Redmond

trying to convince her that the Department has not done everything in

its power to get her son’s release, and advising her that she might speed

up Redmond’s release if she made a trip to Peiping.

A Yonkers citizens committee for the release of Redmond has also

been very active lately, demanding an interview with the Secretary,

and protesting the relaxation of CHINCOM controls as a sign the

Department is “aiding Red China while our boys are rotting in prison.”

The committee claims to have been responsible for sending Mao

­Tse-­tung over 300,000 “polite” letters on behalf of Redmond. It also

appears to be under the misapprehension that the Department made

some sort of “deal” with Red China whereby Father Rigney was put

at the head of the list to be released. The committee apparently attri­

butes the success of this “deal” to the efforts of Rigney’s Congressman,

Mr.  MacCormack, and it appears they may use this allegation in attack­

ing Congressman Gwinn, in whose district Yonkers is. Naturally, this

adds to the complications of the matter.

4. Case of Daniel Kelly: We have had some correspondence lately

with an American who is interested in assisting Daniel Kelly, the son of

an American father and a Chinese mother, all now living in Peiping, to

come to the States to complete his pre-­medical training. It would appear

that the boy has a valid claim to American citizenship, but the Chinese

Communists probably consider him also Chinese. We have recom­

mended that Daniel Kelly be advised to apply for an exit permit, and

if it is refused, to notify the Office of the UK Chargé. We did not want

to make an issue of this case at Geneva, as we would naturally prefer

to have it settled without having to cite the Agreed Announcement. It

would be out of line for us to insist upon the application of the Agreed

Announcement to a dual national, unless he were trying to leave in

order to accompany his parents. This is apparently not the case in this

instance.

5. Matador: The first elements of a USAF unit equipped with

Matador guided missiles arrived in Taiwan about May 6. A press release

giving the bare facts, emphasizing the defensive nature of the action

and the US control of the unit was issued May 7 by Embassy Taipei and

the GRC Foreign Ministry. Comment by US officials is to be limited to

a minimum. The Chinese Communist reaction has already appeared

in an article in the “Peoples Daily” on May 8. Copies of this article and

our announcement are enclosed. Wang may bring up the matter in the

next meeting.

6. Father Wagner’s Condition: A despatch from Hong Kong (No. 860),

a copy of which was sent to Geneva, reports Father Gross as saying

Wagner’s asthma is quite serious, and that there were at one time

“hints” he might be released in advance of his sentence (June 1958).

Despite some feeling that pressure on the Communists might prevent

Wagner’s early release, we are considering having the British make up

representations as well as the possibility of asking you to take it up at

Geneva.

7. Donald Blackwood Enters Communist China: An American cit­

izen, Donald Blackwood, with his Korean wife and son, went into

Communist China from Macao April 27. He appears to have gone vol­

untarily but we are at a loss as to his motivation. Such information as

we have on this mysterious development is contained in a summary

attached. There is no reason at present to bring this matter up at Geneva

but it is conceivable that it might become a subject of discussion there

in the future.

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosures:

1. Copy of Questions & Answers for Senate Subcommittee.

2. Copy of article in “Peoples Daily” on Matador.

3. Copy of announcement on Matador.

4. Copy of British Despatch on Fr. Gross.

5. Summary of Blackwood case.

Washington, May 11, 1957

1181. For Johnson.

Guidance for May 15 meeting.

1. Concentrate on continued failure Chinese Communists imple­

ment Agreed Announcement. There is no justification whatsoever for

Communists to continue hold eight Americans twenty months after

they promised to take measures permit them expeditiously exercise

right to return. So long as promised action not taken, result can only

be to deepen distrust Peiping’s pledges and render sterile present talks.

2. As further instance Communist retrogression on implementation

cite Communist abandonment any pretense considering humanitarian

factor, as exemplified by continued imprisonment Father Wagner, who

reported seriously ill.

3. If Wang attacks MATADOR, deployment, review entirely defen­

sive nature our collective security arrangements with GRC and point

out MATADOR being sent Taiwan by agreement with GRC as part

these security arrangements. Defensive measures obviously required

in situation where Communists continue pose threat of hostile action

and continue reject meaningful renunciation of force.

4. Maintain position other issues.

5. Set July date for next meeting.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by Clough and Osborn; cleared in draft by Jones (FE). The time of

transmission is illegible.

1193. For Johnson.

Supplementary guidance regarding paragraph 3 Department’s

telegram 1181.

Public policy on MATADOR deployment to Taiwan has been to

emphasize defensive nature of move and treat weapon on same basis

as any other piece standard US Air Force equipment. You should take

same line, emphasizing need for US defensive arrangements in Taiwan

area, but avoiding discussion of propriety this particular weapon if

Wang should attempt draw you into discussing this.

Dulles

Drafted by Clough and Henderson; cleared by McConaughy and Jones.

1166. From Johnson.

One hour and forty minute meeting this morning.

I opened meeting with statement on implementation along lines

para one and two Deptel 1181. Wang replied along usual lines with

detailed presentation case of Dr. Lin Lan Ying (spelling uncertain) who

departed San Francisco President Wilson January 6, 1957. Was Sylvania

Electric Employee. Alleged great pressure by FBI and INS, including

at stop in Honolulu, persuading her not to return. On departure San

Francisco thorough search including body search and taking from her

all notebooks and $6,800 in travelers checks. Protested “rough han­

dling” and asked for return personal property including notebooks and

travelers checks.

Limit Distribution.

Wang also made strong statement re stationing guided missiles

Taiwan. Spoke of guided missiles being atomic weapons. Statement

included “strong protest in name of his government” at this “act of

aggression”, “hostile act and another serious provocation” proving fal­

sity US professions peaceful intent. “US must be held responsible for all

consequences this act aggression”. If US purpose is to achieve peaceful

settlement good faith should be demonstrated by acts, etc. If US were

not in military occupation of Taiwan reunion would have been realized

long ago. China will never tolerate and certainly will liberate, etc. etc.

I replied along lines para three Deptel 1181 and Deptel 1193

including reaffirmation lawful administration Taiwan by GRC, mutual

defense treaty with GRC and that those who had no aggressive intent

had nothing to fear.

With respect Dr. Lin pointed out she had, in fact, returned in con­

trast the eight Americans still in Chinese prisons and those who would

never return because of death under mistreatment. Cited fact she

had not contacted Indian Embassy if, in fact, she felt she was being

obstructed. Also strongly made point agreed announcement thus far no

advantage but rather disadvantage to US.

Interesting to note that in today’s meeting for first time Wang con­

sistently used terminology “Geneva agreement” in referring agreed

announcement and to “Geneva talks”.

Next meeting July 11.

Popper

808. Telegram unnumbered from Geneva

Geneva, May 15, 1957

Unnumbered. From Johnson.

since he and I first entered agreement here to resolve first question with

which we called upon to deal. It had been 20 months during which

the high hopes of myself, my government, my people, that this prob­

lem of civilians could be resolved, had been disappointed. It had been

Distribution. Drafted by Johnson, Popper, and Freeland. Sent via pouch. Received on

May 20.

20 months during which failure his authorities carry out this agreement

between us had blocked improvement relations between our two coun­

tries. So long as his authorities continued fail carry out this agreement

between us, it could only have result increasing our distrust and increas­

ing doubts concerning intent his authorities carry out agreements into

which we entered. So long as this situation continued we could not

expect anything other than the sterility which had thus far existed in

resolving other problems in these talks. Apparently it was intent his

authorities emphasize that none of persons whom we had been talking

about in the Sept. 10 agreement would be released until expiration their

sentences. Last two persons released, Reverend Mackensen and Father

Gross apparently held until very last day their sentences, thus empha­

sizing this pattern.

2. I continued entirely apart from question of obligation of his

authorities under Agreed Announcement, he had often spoken of

his authorities humanitarian and lenient approach toward unfor­

tunate victims of their oppression. It difficult for me not conclude

even this had now been abandoned. For example, we know Father

Wagner was in hospital and seriously ill. I would have thought any

policy of leniency and humanitarianism would certainly have dictated

release Father Wagner long before this. I wanted express hope Father

Wagner could certainly be released at latest next month at time Father

McCarthy and Father Houle due to be released so he could accom­

pany them. I would have hoped he would have for me this morning

some indication his intent, not only about Father Wagner, but about

other imprisoned persons—­and his intent concerning carrying out our

agreement so that this block to progress in dealing with matters we

called upon to consider could be removed.

3. Wang replied (from prepared statement) he also had feeling

although more than twenty months had passed since we entered talks,

yet problems we called upon consider remain as deadlocked as ever.

People of our two countries held high hopes with regard talks between

us; however they seem be disappointed in this hope. Must be made

clear that he and I entered into this series talks for purpose achieving

peaceful settlement problems between China and US. Therefore, good

faith of each side must be demonstrated with regard reduction tensions

and improvement relations between two countries.

4. Wang continued, however, for an extended period, aggressive

acts of my side in Taiwan area entirely contrary this purpose. My gov­

ernment had recently taken new steps to aggravate tensions in Taiwan

Area by flagrantly stationing guided missiles unit on territory of

Taiwan, thus turning Taiwan into launching ground for attacks against

China. This hostile act of US could only be regarded as another serious

provocation against China. This act also served prove pronouncements

of our peaceful intent, which I had made repeatedly in past, were

entirely false.

5. Wang continued, in name his government he lodged strong

protest. My side must be held responsible for all consequences this act

aggression. Inside Conference Room my side continued stalling tactics,

refused discuss tensions Taiwan Area and refused discuss his proposal

removal embargo and cultural exchanges, etc. Outside of Conference

Room my side tightening grip on Taiwan in attempt obstruct efforts

Chinese people liberate Taiwan and continuing war-­like acts to increase

tension. One could not but doubt serious good faith my side.

6. Wang continued, so far as question civilians concerned, charges

I had made were unacceptable to him. Ever since we had entered into

Sept. 10 agreement his government had always been dealing with ques­

tion civilians in accordance that agreement. As contrast to this there

still remain 33 Chinese civilians in US prisons. So far as other Chinese

nationals in US concerned, they still encounter repeated obstruction on

part US authorities. He had raised such matters with me repeatedly

in previous meetings. This morning he wanted take up case Chinese

student Dr. Lin lan ying (spelling uncertain) who returned early this

year. Since this case involved performance of US authorities in carrying

out agreement of Sept. 10 and this related to ability thousands Chinese

students in US return China, he felt it necessary call my attention to her

complaint.

7. Wang continued. Dr. Lin graduated University Pennsylvania

in US and employed in Sylvania Electric Co. in Philadelphia till her

President Wilson. Succeeded return homeland only after going through

series unreasonable obstructions by US authorities. Let us follow story

of unhappy lady and see what American authorities were doing in

so-­called carrying out of our agreement. When Dr. Lin was known to

desire return, agents of U.S. Immigration Service came early December,

1956 interrogate her, used every vicious slander in intent intimidate her

and compel her change mind. This sort interrogation and intimidation

repeated Dec. 20, 1956, this time by agents FBI, who intruded in her

apartment to do this. When these FBI agents failed to intimidate her

they tried induce her move her family out of China.

After these two attempts failed to shake her resolve return, US

authorities resorted to rough handling. On Jan 6 1957 when Dr. Lin

waiting for embarkation San Francisco FBI agents suddenly turned up,

made search all her baggage. What was more insulting was forced body

search. In disregard her protests, agents also took away all notebooks

and private property of $6,800 in travellers checks. When liner arrived

Honolulu US authorities made last attempt by sending immigration

agents aboard attempt influence her against continuing journey.

8. Wang continued, my authorities had remarkable record attempts

hinder return Chinese students. Dr. Lin only one among many such

unfortunate victims. That many more Chinese students so far unable

return, due to our obstructions, was beyond question. Dr. Lin was

Chinese student who had never offended our laws, yet subjected to

rough handling by our authorities merely because she desired return

and invoked Geneva accord to return. What was there to assure freedom

of Chinese in US to return? He urged my government actually take nec­

essary measures stop all violation of agreement to return Chinese from

US. With view safeguarding legitimate interests of Chinese nationals,

Wang also asked me request my authorities return to Dr. Lin her private

property of $6,800 and all notebooks taken from her and give assur­

ances against all recurrences such incidents. In addition, if I had any

information with regard 52 and 22 persons who failed return, as well as

concerning Chinese confined in our prisons, he glad hear it.

9. I replied, with regard Dr. Lin, I noted two things. First by his

own statement she had returned to his country. Eight Americans who

covered by our Agreed Announcement had not returned. There were

other Americans who would never return—who had died from treat­

ment they received in his prisons. There were others who had returned

broken in mind and body. Virtually without exception they tell stories

of most violent mistreatment. Second point I noted with regard Dr. Lin:

if in fact there was basis for statements which he said she had now made

and if in fact she felt being obstructed from leaving, she was at all times

free to communicate with Indian Embassy. Fact that she apparently did

not do so, fact that Indian Embassy not yet called to our attention single

substantiated case obstruction among thousands Chinese in US, was

incontrovertible evidence of faithfulness with which my authorities

been carrying out our agreement. This has been affirmed also by public

statements issued by Government of India and Indian Embassy.

10. I continued, with regard first part his statement I must flatly

reject his completely erroneous statements that US had, or had intent

carry out any acts aggression. We had to start with recognition of fact,

whatever the views and policies of his government might be, the terri­

tory of Taiwan was lawfully occupied and administered by a govern­

ment with which US had long had diplomatic relations, by a government

recognized as a lawful government by majority of nations of world, by a

government also so recognized by UN. US had with that government a

treaty of mutual defense which had been published and registered with

UN. That treaty and all our arrangements and understandings with that

government were publicly and irrevocably defensive in their nature.

Very first article of that treaty very specifically sets forth the agreement

of both parties to it to settle any international dispute in which they may

be involved by peaceful means. This an element which common to all

our treaties with like-­minded countries who entered into arrangements

to pool defensive strength against aggression. US adherence to this prin­

ciple without exception and without equivocation amply demonstrated

to world in recent months. None who did not have aggressive intent,

none willing accept principle peaceful settlement disputes had anything

to fear from any defensive arrangements US might make with countries

of like mind. No threat to use force being posed by US anywhere in

world, including area Taiwan.

posal here that force be removed in settlement our disputes including

dispute in Taiwan area. That was proposal which he thus far rejected.

Threat hostile action Taiwan area thus still being maintained by his

authorities. US would be deficient in carrying out international obliga­

tions and lacking in responsibility if it did not recognize this fact and

take whatever defensive measures appeared be prudent. This posed

no threat to his country or anyone of peaceful intent. I still hopeful

he would accept proposal I had made for unconditional renunciation

force in Taiwan area as well as elsewhere. No one of truly peaceful

intent could object to that proposal.

12. Wang replied, cases Chinese civilians residing US who encoun­

tered unreasonable obstruction on part American authorities appear­

ing every day. Experience of Dr. Lin to whom he referred this morning

was only one of many similar such cases. Actions taken by American

Immigration authorities in case Dr. Lin assumed such scale one could

only term it plain robbery by taking away private property and con­

fiscating all her notebooks. I had just now argued Dr. Lin returned

Wang’s country after all. He wanted point out she did not return freely

as entitled to under Geneva Agreement. Succeeded returning only after

encountered series unreasonable obstructions by American authorities.

Fact that Dr. Lin succeeded returning did not absolve US authorities of

responsibility for obstructing her return. As to allegations I made this

morning regarding alleged ill-­treatment Americans in China, he could

only term them entirely unfounded and irresponsible allegations.

There were facts to prove even persons released out of prison, desired

remain in his country of their own free will. These facts would shatter all

unfounded rumors and slander against his country.

13. Wang continued with regard protest he had lodged with our side

this morning regarding act aggression by US government by station­

ing guided missiles atomic unit on Chinese territory Taiwan, he could

not accept statement I had just made. It was entirely due to military

occupation by US government that Taiwan still not united with Chinese

mainland. Unreasonable stand taken by US government in supporting

in Taiwan the KMT regime to oppose the Chinese government also met

a disapprobation by all peace-­loving peoples of the world. Underlying

factor in existing tension Far East entirely created by US in military

occupation Taiwan. Had there not been American military occupation

in Taiwan, reunion between Taiwan and Chinese mainland would have

been realized long ago. Chinese people would never tolerate occupa­

tion of Taiwan by US. Chinese people certainly will liberate Taiwan.

No force on earth could ever deter this determination on part Chinese

people. No amount rationalization and argument offered by me could

ever cover acts of aggression by US government demonstrated in their

latest military threats, posed in the Taiwan area in form of stationing

guided missiles unit on Taiwan.

14. Wang continued, had been common practice by aggressor

governments in history always speak of aggressive arrangements as

if these aggressive arrangements entirely for defensive purposes. The

stark fact at present is that it is US government occupying Chinese

territory and not Chinese government occupying any territory of US.

Fact is at present US posing threats against China and not China pos­

ing threats against US. If one desires talk of renunciation of force he

should make good his words by actual deeds. In face of latest tension

created by US in Taiwan area, how could anyone believe any more in

any peaceful promises by US. Chinese people would oppose to end

such open aggression, provocation. If US had any peaceful intentions,

it should demonstrate sincerity by concrete acts. This what he always

looked forward to.

15. I replied, nothing he had said changed fact that it his govern­

ment which still posed threat use force in Taiwan area. There was vast

difference between saying willing settle disputes peacefully if other

side surrenders to your point of view and saying unconditionally you

willing settle disputes peacefully.

16. Wang replied, facts show who was advocating peaceful set­

tlement dispute Taiwan area and who was willing use force that area.

These facts could not be distorted. Today when people everywhere

oppose policy of war threats, latest steps taken by US government in

Taiwan area can never be explained as resulting from peaceful intent.

Latest military threat posed by US government in Taiwan could never

succeed in frightening people. On the contrary, they can only stir up

indignation and hatred.

17. I replied, our problem not to reach agreement on situation in

Taiwan area. Problem is to agree we will not use force to settle it. That

and carrying out of first agreement between us are still the essential

steps in bringing about that improvement in relations which we, on

our side, seek.

18. Wang replied he had made clear his point of view that this

series talks here in Geneva should have as purposes relaxation interna­

tional tensions and improvement relations between our two countries.

In accordance this purpose he had made series proposals advantageous

to both peoples, both governments. Believed these proposals advanta­

geous to both sides. They continued hope there should be progress in

these talks between us.

19. I replied I accepted first proposal he had made here. I accepted

it with understanding it would be advantageous to both sides. I could

not see that there had been any advantage—­in fact, it seemed to have

been disadvantageous.

20. Wang rejoined whether advantageous or disadvantageous,

only the facts could prove.

21. Wang had nothing more to say, and I had nothing more. I sug­

gested next meeting July 11. Wanted him know I planned return this

evening to Washington for consultation and short rest with my family.

22. Wang agreed.

Popper

809. Letter from Clough to Johnson

Washington, July 5, 1957

Dear Alex:

I haven’t a great deal to add to our conversation last Tuesday.

I have discussed the matter of your instructions for the next meeting

with Dave Osborn and Howard Jones, and we have some ideas on how

to meet the problem which you mentioned to the Secretary. We plan

to discuss the draft instructions with Mr. Robertson either today or

Monday and will also send them up to the Secretary.

The problem of travel of newsmen to Communist China remains

unresolved and the Secretary is currently considering the latest pro­

posal for some kind of pool arrangement. We still feel here that if news­

paper men are permitted to go, it would be very difficult to hold the

line on travel of others.

With respect to the missing military personnel, we are still think­

ing in terms of having the next move take place in Panmunjom. We

have been urging Defense to move on this, but they have not yet

indicated when they will be ready to do so. I hope that it will be before

your next meeting so that we could then shift the attack to Geneva if

it seemed desirable. We are tentatively thinking that if new efforts at

both Panmunjom and Geneva bring no results, it might be useful to

publish a joint State-Defense report on this subject, going into some

detail as to the criteria for placing names on the list, mentioning our

various attempts to obtain an accounting from the Communists and

giving examples to show how defective has been the accounting we

have received.

Tseng Kuang-­chih, the student from Purdue University who has

been in the state mental hospital at Logansport, Indiana was deported

June 13 aboard one of the President liners. Other cases of whom the

Chinese Communists have or may have knowledge are:

Lin Lan-­ying (memos attached)

Chang Chih-­ye (memo attached)

John Woos (copy of letter attached)

Edwin Pon (copy of letter attached)

We have been informed by Immigration and Naturalization Service

that Pon is leaving July 7.

We will try to cover in your instructions the various subjects which

Wang might raise, and suggest appropriate lines of reply. We have sent

to Geneva various items of background material which we thought

might be useful to you and are attaching to this letter certain others.

As a general practice, we send materials as soon as they come to hand

rather than hold them to enclose with a letter, since letters have become

too infrequent.

We will be watching with interest to see whether Wang presents

anything new. We don’t really expect him to, but many remarkable

things have been happening in the Communist world of late and he

may surprise us.

It was a great pleasure to see you the other day. You can count on

us to support to the best of our ability your tedious but skillful endeav­

ors at Geneva.

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Director for Chinese Affairs

Enclosures:

1. Dept. of Defense Press Release re Aircraft Carrier Hornet

2. FBIS Item re “Armistice Meeting Request Backed” dated June

3. FB1S Item re Korean Ambassador’s Statement re Korean

Armistice Agreement.

4. Despatch No. 631 from Taipei re “Cause and motivations for

riots of 5/24.”

5. Chronology of mob attack on U.S. Embassy and USIS at Taipei.

6. Memo for files re “Increased Tempo of Hostilities around

Offshore Islands”

Plane Hit by Red Chinese Gunfire”.

of the MAC.

ing of MAC.

Invade Kwangtung”.

Hostile to China”.

its enclosures.

Mr.  Clough re “Dr. Lin Lan-­ying—removal of $6,800 in Travelers

Checks at San Francisco”.

Dies in China.

17. Memo from Aylward to Osborn April 4 re Deportation of

Chinese Aliens.

19. Paper entitled “Interim Assessment of Riots of May 24 in

Taipei”.

22. Statement by Mr. Robertson before the Foreign Operations

36. For Johnson.

Guidance for July 11 meeting:

1. Remind Wang one of basic obstacles progress in talks and peace­

ful discussion and settlement problems threat posed by Communist

insistence on use force if necessary.

This also basic cause of tension Far East, which imposes heavy bur­

den on peoples of area. Essential first step to remove threat and tension

is reciprocal renunciation force. Step deserves serious discussion long

as necessary to reach agreement. Responsibility cannot be evaded by

submitting number of drafts which reflect no serious attempt meet US

view, then attempting shift discussion to corollary problems as Wang

did year ago.

2. Tell Wang your trip to US brought home depth concern American

people for six prisoners. This ought to be short-­run problem which

need not require long discussion. Only requires measures promised

by Communists in Agreed Announcement. American people cannot

understand failure take such measures. FYI We hope that shifting usual

order presentation foregoing subjects and emphasizing fundamental

nature renunciation force problem and US willingness undertake pro­

longed discussion if necessary may help counter possible Communist

belief that release remaining prisoners would result in prompt with­

drawal US from talks END FYI.

3. Regarding Wang’s inquiry on Lin Lan-­ying, inform him search

made accordance customary procedures and with customary safe­

guards. She was allowed take money required for trip and excess

taken from her as required by long-­standing regulations and placed

in blocked account. Note that Chinese Communist regulations strictly

limit funds Americans permitted take out of Communist China. If

Wang inquires about Tseng Kuang-­chih or Edwin Pon inform him

they left US on June 13 and July 9 respectively for Communist China.

If he mentions Woos, inform him Woos entered US 1922 as US citizen

by birth and Agreed Announcement not applicable US citizens.

4. If Wang attacks UNC decision introduce modern weapons

Korea or US despatch missile unit Taiwan point out actions taken only

in response long-­term Communist introduction modern weapons

Distribution. Drafted by Osborn and Clough; cleared in draft by Jones and Robertson.

Korea in violation armistice agreement and in case Taiwan as reaction

to continued build-­up military facilities opposite Taiwan and refusal

renounce force.

5. Wang may refer to Secretary’s San Francisco speech, Taiwan riot

or plane incident Swatow, probably as part generalized attack on US

policies in Far East. Your response should demonstrate, using material

from speech and elsewhere, that US policies of which Wang complains

made necessary by threatening nature of Communist policies. It should

not be necessary be drawn into discussion of either plane incident or

riot which would place you in undesirably defensive position.

Dulles

30. From Johnson.

Hammarskjold saw me this morning to say he wanted continue

to coordinate with me on question missing military personnel and

Downey and Fecteau. He said with respect missing military person­

nel someone suggested recently proposed congressional resolution

makes it desirable take some new action. However, his view was that

as matter now primarily in my hands here and at MAC best that he

not cross wires and would do nothing additional unless we asked

him. I said I agreed.

With respect Downey and Fecteau same consideration applies.

In reply my query as to what he thought he could do he said that as

Chou had taken initiative raising their cases with him he could readily

go back to Chou with personal communication concerning them. He

said argument some made against this was that it would single out

Downey and Fecteau from other civilians still held. I said latter con­

sideration did not seem too important to me as Downey and Fecteau

were not only covered by agreed announcement but also by Korean

armistice and thus within scope U.N. resolution under which he acting.

I was therefore inclined to favor such approach by him at this time.

Distribution.

I did not see it could do any harm and it might do good in indicating

that U.N. interest in them still alive. Said I would inform Washington

and Ambassador Lodge would be in further touch with him concerning

matter.

Gowen

31. From Johnson.

Two hour ten minute meeting this morning.

Wang opened with generalized statement attacking “policy of hos­

tility” and “aggressive policy” aimed at overthrowing PRC set forth in

Secretary’s San Francisco speech as well as referring stationing guided

missiles on Taiwan and plane incident. No rpt no mention Korea. Policy

set forth by Secretary was meeting increasing opposition abroad and in

US as well as meeting with defeat as exemplified by recent actions other

Western countries concerning embargo. “Even in Taiwan patriotic peo­

ple have risen in protests against this policy.” US proposal of renuncia­

tion of force was “deceptive and hypocritical excuse.” Then continued

with statement on implementation referring previous inquiry on Dr.

Lin and making statement Tseng Kuang-­chih. Situation with regard to

Chinese in US continues to be unsatisfactory.

I replied with long statement along lines paras one and two

Deptel  36 as well as making strong counterattack on PRC record of

hostility toward US, PRC attack on US in Korea, PRC attempts at sub­

version of and support of rebellion against Asian states friendly to

US, etc. Made detailed reply on Dr. Lin pointing out that though she

attempted take US funds in violation of US regulations she was per­

mitted to proceed. Also made detailed reply on Tseng using material

Deptel 40 which much appreciated and most useful. Characterized

our handling both Dr. Lin and Tseng as most considerate for which

we should receive appreciation rather than complaint. Wished problem

imprisoned Americans would be handled with same consideration.

Solution problem of imprisoned Americans “would permit us direct

Limit Distribution.

undivided attention to question reciprocal renunciation of force which

remains fundamental to successful discussion other items under sec­

ond part our terms reference.”

Subsequent give and take largely restatement respective position

on renunciation of force. PRC will never agree to any formula which

violates its sovereign rights. Many PRC proposals for improvement

relations have not raised “response or echo” from US.

No surprises or new developments, line taken by Wang being very

much along lines anticipated by Deptel 36. His presentation, though,

was largely pro forma and carried no intimation any intention break

talks or make new move. At one point when I used term “new depar­

ture” in referring to renunciation of force he eagerly picked it up and

used it as take-­off point for urging new departure by US in talks. He

also pointed out both sides agreed Taiwan area tension is fundamental

problem. Gave no indication whether he caught my point on willing­

ness continue talks even if all Americans released.

Next meeting August 8. Detailed record by pouch arriving Dept

Monday.

Gowen

813. Telegram unnumbered from Geneva

Geneva, July 11, 1957

Unnumbered. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 68th with prepared statement. As he had repeat­

edly stressed, purpose of talks was for both sides to arrive at peaceful

settlement of disputes between two countries. In this desire his side

had put forth series of practical and feasible proposals each of which

could lessen tensions and open up prospects of improved relations

between China and America. But what had history of talks shown?

My side had not only shown no intention of contributing to that real­

ization, but had not abandoned its hostility toward China. My side

was only interested in working up tension and stepping up threat of

armed force against China. This willful policy of U.S. was increasingly

Distribution. Drafted by Johnson. Sent via pouch. Received on July 18.

meeting with defeat. For example, a great number of Western countries

relaxed embargo in face U.S. objections. U.S. policy of hostility against

China did not conform to interests of peace or of American people.

Even people in U.S. criticizing that policy.

2. Wang continued, in San Francisco, Secretary of State Dulles not

only clung to that outworn policy but called for even more aggressive

policy. American Secretary of State was not yet willing to reconcile him­

self to fact PRC had existed for eight years. His speech did not hide

intention subverting and overthrowing PRC. Dulles called PRC passing

phase and pledged self to contribute to this passing. Could this be called

sincere desire for settlement disputes and relaxation tensions between

two countries? U.S. not only unwilling renounce occupation Chinese

territory Taiwan but had installed guided missile bases on Taiwan. An

American squadron had intruded in Chinese territorial waters and

66 sorties of carrier-­based planes violated Chinese air space. However,

this U.S. policy of creating tension and threat of aggression against

China could not achieve its ends.

3. Wang continued, not only was this policy opposed by Chinese

people but it being condemned by all peaceful people. Even in Taiwan,

under close control American aggressor, all patriotic people can no

long­er endure being enslaved nor countenance Taiwan being turned

into American base; they have therefore risen in protest against this

policy and against outrageous slaughter of Chinese people. 600 million

people would never forget this and other bloody crimes committed by

American aggressor against China.

4. Wang continued, after seizure of Chinese Territory Taiwan, my

side has been proposing what it calls Renunciation of Force. During

these negotiations my side had never slackened aggression against

China, and continued set up bases for aggressive guided missile atomic

warfare against China. My side continued create provocation incidents

to increase tensions. Under these circumstances the Renunciation of

Force proposal was a deceptive and hypocritical excuse. As long as U.S.

did not change its policy of hostility and aggression tensions would

not be relaxed, disputes would not be settled, relations would not be

improved and there would be no results in our talks and the U.S. would

be held entirely responsible for the consequences.

5. Wang continud, he had another matter to bring up. At previ­

ous meetings he had given examples of unreasonable obstructions.

Last year on February 9 at the 36th meeting he had given me a list of

names including Tseng Kuang-­chih. Tseng had now returned to China

but story he had to tell was appalling one. Wang had thought my side

would have taken measures concerning, and give accounting of, indi­

viduals on that list. He understood Tseng taken away in handcuffs

under orders Immigration Service and confined in solitary confinement

in mental institution. Until recently Tseng had been subject to depor­

tation although he had not violated any laws. It is hard to understand

under what authority so many have been detained, and, in the cases of

Mr. Tseng and Mr. Liu, imprisoned in mental hospitals. Repetition of

this kind of treatment shows US authorities pay no heed to our Agreed

Announcement. This situation increases our anxiety concerning the

fate of the 50 and the 32 people who not yet returned. Wang urged

me impress on US authorities that they should stop violating Agreed

Announcement and give accounting of those being detained. With

regard to detention of Dr. Lin which he had mentioned last meeting

he would like to hear any comments I had and would like to know

whether US prepared to return property to owner.

6. I replied during past two years we had long and frank discus­

sions of certain questions existing between our two countries. Although

our differences unhappily remain deep and fundamental I believed he

would share my view that it had nevertheless been desirable and useful

to have such a direct exchange of views between us. We had though, at

times, tended to digress from what both of us agreed was a fundamental

matter, and I first wanted briefly to return to that this morning. I referred

to the question as to whether we were going to permit the clash of our

policies and in particular our differences with respect to the Taiwan area

to lead to a clash of arms. He would recall that at the very beginning

of our discussion of this subject I had proposed the simple first step of

a reciprocal renunciation of force couched in terms that would make it

clear that neither of us were renouncing any policy objectives that we

considered ourselves legitimately entitled to achieve.

7. I continued, Wang had this morning again spoken of what he

called the policy of aggression and hostility of U.S. government against

his country. He could not ignore fact that from beginning these talks

it was U.S. which had made proposal we renounce force as means

achieve national policy objectives and especially with regard clash our

policies in general and specifically with regard Taiwan area. From very

beginning of the time when his authorities took control of Mainland

China they exhibited policy of undisguised hostility toward my coun­

try and everything for which my country stood. This hostility not only

extended to my country but also to countries with which my country

stood in relationship of friendship and alliance. It was authorities of his

country who had grossly mistreated U.S. officials and made impossi­

ble the maintenance of U.S. official establishments on territory under

the control of Wang’s authorities. It was the authorities of his country

who expelled, mistreated and imprisoned Americans who attempted

remain in territory under control Wang’s authorities. U.S. never had

threatened, and never would initiate the use of arms against Wang’s

country. It was Wang’s country which had attacked U.S. forces in Korea

who were there on a lawful mission under the authority of the U.N. It

was his authorities who had supported and fomented rebellion in the

territory of countries friendly to the U.S. I would not take time further

to review record but that record clear one of undisguised hostility of his

country toward my country.

8. I continued it was with hope bringing about fundamental change

in that situation and thus opening of way to peaceful settlement in

those disputes that I had made my proposal for peaceful settlement of

disputes between us. It not possible to ignore the fact that one of basic

obstacles to progress our talks here and peaceful discussion and settle­

ment of our problems continued to be unwillingness of his authorities

to agree to this simple proposition. It was a source of deep disappoint­

ment and concern that they continued to insist on their intention to

use force if necessary to achieve their policy objectives. This was basic

cause of tension in the whole Far East which imposed a heavy burden

on the people of the area. Neither those people nor the United States

and its allies could ignore this threat nor fail to take such steps as were

within their power to meet the possibility of its implementation. It was

absurd to say that the steps taken by the U.S. and other like-­minded

countries to meet this threat were the cause of tension. The cause of ten­

sion came not from those who took reasonable and sensible precautions

to defend themselves against the publicly announced threat of attack

but rather from those who refused to renounce such threats. It was

equally absurd to say that if those subject to such threats would only

not take any precautions and supinely leave themselves defenseless

against such threats there would be no tension. Of course, there would

be no tension if all who were subject to threats in this world would

meekly surrender to those who attempt to arrogate unto themselves

the authority to tell peoples and countries how their lives should be

ordered. However, it hard to believe that those who take such point of

view understand the meaning of negotiation and settlement of differ­

ences by peaceful means between self-­respecting sovereign countries.

9. I continued therefore essential first step remained removal of

this threat, and tension it caused, by a reciprocal renunciation of force.

This step was of such transcendental importance to the peaceful settle­

ment of our differences that I considered that it deserved discussion as

long as necessary to reach agreement rather than ignoring it or pretend­

ing that the problem did not exist. Neither can the problem be evaded

by submitting numbers of drafts which reflected no serious attempt

squarely to face the issue and then shift the discussion to other.purely

corollary problems. Such a course could not contribute to progress in

our talks here.

10. I continued, as Wang knew, I had just returned from trip to

U.S. I want him to know that my conversations there not only with

officials of my government but also with private individuals brought

home to me depth of concern of American people over Americans

still imprisoned in his country. They also concerned over failure give

us that information about Americans still missing from hostilities

in Korea which his authorities must have. Question of imprisoned

Americans ought to have been and still could be short-­run problem

which need not require long discussions. All it required was that his

authorities take those measures for their release that were envisaged

in the Agreed Announcement. It was evident that none with whom

I  talked was able to understand the failure to carry out the prom­

ise contained in the Announcement. Neither could I. Chinese in U.S.

desiring to return their country, continued be entirely free do so. In

fact, to best of my knowledge at least 345 had done so since beginning

our talks here.

11. I continued, in accordance with request made at our last meet­

ing which Wang had repeated here this morning, I had looked into the

matter of Dr. Lin Lan-­ying who returned to Wang’s country early this

year. Contrary to the statements Wang said she now makes, she at no

time prior to her departure made any allegation that she was in any way

being obstructed or prevented from departing and very fact she did

depart is best evidence that there was no such obstruction. At the time

of her departure a search was made by the Customs Authorities—­not

by the FBI as Wang asserted—­in accordance with customary procedure

and with all customary safeguards to determine whether there was any

attempted violation of law. It was found that Dr. Lin was, in violation

of a long standing regulation of which she must have been perfectly

aware, attempting to take with her an amount of U.S. dollar funds far

in excess of any reasonable needs for the trip. In spite of this attempted

violation of our laws and regulations no action was taken against her

and she was permitted to proceed without hindrance. Excess funds she

was attempting to remove from the country had not been confiscated

as implied in Wang’s statement but had rather been deposited to her

credit in a blocked account. Further search was made only to deter­

mine whether she was attempting to remove additional matter or infor­

mation in violation of U.S. law and rather than delay her departure

she was told that written matter carried by her would subsequently

be examined for such information. Not only is this a matter entirely

within the competence and authority of my government but I had

noted that Americans who had returned from Wang’s country reported

that Wang’s authorities had very strictly limited the amount of funds

they had been permitted take with them. Thus, I saw no grounds what­

ever for any complaint with regard Dr. Lin who, in spite of attempted

violation of U.S. law, was freely permitted proceed to Wang’s country.

12. I continued Wang had this morning mentioned and his radio

had carried reports making entirely erroneous statements concerning

Mr. Tseng Kuang-­chih. Purport statements was after Tseng indicated

desire return Wang’s country, Tseng arrested and falsely handled as per­

son mentally unsound. Facts of matter were quite different. Mr. Tseng

entered U.S. on January 30, 1948 and originally entered as student

Maryland University. In somewhat more than a year he showed signs

of mental illness. Between June 1949 and March 1950 he was treated

in Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore and Spring Groves State

Hospital in Maryland. He improved and was released and entered into

study at Ohio State University, then Illinois University, then Purdue

University. Although visa for admission into US expired Sept. 1955, he

was permitted remain. Although Wang had included his name on list

given Feb. 9, 1956 as person who desired return Wang’s country, Tseng

himself in March 1956 formally and specifically applied for extension

his stay in U.S. It became evident to authorities at Purdue University

where he studying that he again becoming mentally ill. They made

arrangements for his admission to Wabash Valley Sanatorium on

April 18, 1956. At recommendation of doctors in that hospital, he was

admitted to Logansport Indiana State Hospital on May 25, 1956. At

time moved from Wabash to Logansport he placed under restraint at

recommendation of doctors for own protection. The restraint imme­

diately removed on admission Logansport Hospital. Any implication

that this done on recommendation Immigration Service entirely false.

It done entirely on recommendation doctors for own protection and

those around him. Student advisor at Purdue remained in touch with

him to see what could be done for him. After admission to hospi­

tal, he indicated to student adviser that he desired return to Wang’s

country. Student adviser communicated with Dept. of State and there

was also communication with Indian Embassy concerning his case.

Doctors treating Tseng certified not advisable nor was he compe­

tent to travel alone. Thus there arose question payment for attendant

for him during his travel. Indian Embassy said not authorized pay for

an attendant. I would not go into details, but in January of this year

Mr. Tseng informed the Indian Embassy that in order to facilitate ques­

tion of attendant, he had informed U.S. Immigration Service of desire

leave country. Embassy replied they had no objection if he desired use

facilities INS rather than Embassy. INS then arranged for an attend­

ant to accompany him. INS paid cost of such an attendant as well as

cost of travel. He now returned safely to Wang’s country and arrived

there. I thought handling this case by authorities my country showed

utmost care in assisting him as well as facilitation his return to Wang’s

country. Rather than ill-­considered complaints, I should have felt an

expression of appreciation would be more in order. I regretted that

cases of Americans imprisoned in Wang’s country desiring to return

had not been as considerately handled as our authorities had handled

cases Mr. Tseng and Dr. Lin. This problem of Americans remaining

in prison in Wang’s country was readily resolvable by his authorities

so that further discussion of it between us would not be necessary.

The solution of this problem would permit us to direct our undivided

attention to the question of reciprocal renunciation of force, which

remains fundamental to successful discussion of other items under

second part our terms of reference.

13. Wang replied question of taking effective steps and means to

relax tension Taiwan area and settling disputes between our two coun­

tries was at center of terms reference leading to present talks between

us. In talking about causes and sources tension Taiwan area and dis­

putes between our countries he had to flatly reject my statement which

he could only consider arbitrary. It entirely reversed and obscured the

facts. It failed to take into account facts of situation. Liberation of China

and establishment of PRC entirely natural development of internal

forces China and no foreign country should have any right to interfere

in this affair.

14. Wang continued, since establishment PRC U.S. been pursuing

policy downright hostility to China and policy which did not recognize

existence of PRC. Furthermore, U.S. taken series steps in opposition to

PRC. It was U.S. which had initiated policy embargo against China.

It U.S. started aggression in Korea and brought about armed threat

against his country. It U.S. who still occupied by armed force their terri­

tory Taiwan and established aggressive military bases against his coun­

try. It was U.S. which carried out threatening and aggressive activities

around territory his country. It was U.S. which did everything it could

deprive PRC of right take part in affairs of international community.

15. Wang continued, objective this series hostile policies and activi­

ties was interfere in internal affairs his country and as Dulles announced

object of US was try subvert Wang’s government. No amount statements

could cover up the series arbitrary and gross violations of standards

international conduct, and of Charter U.N., against Wang’s country.

Wang’s country could not be shaken by such aggressive and hostile pol­

icies by U.S. China would exist forever and would become consolidated

and stronger. Those who would suffer would be persons who tried play

with fire in this respect.

16. Wang continued, today’s situation was that U.S. stationing

military bases on territory other countries. It was U.S. threatening and

attempting subvert Wang’s country rather than Wang’s country try­

ing subvert my government. It was no more than deception to present

this sort of policy of hostility as being steps for defensive purposes. In

point of fact people in Asia as well as all other places rising to protest

against U.S. policy of creating tensions. This was underlying cause

present tension in Far East, and cause failure achieve relaxed situation

there. This was reason he proposed discuss question relaxing tension

in Far East. They on their part had made repeated efforts and made

series of proposals in course talks in order that tension in Taiwan Area

may be relaxed.

17. Wang continued, we had discussed for nearly two years and

still had not achieved anything. He had always been dissatisfied with

the situation. It not his side who stalling in this question, not his side

who had digressed from this problem. Still remained to see whether

serious efforts would be made in these talks to relax tension in Taiwan

Area. In this regard no empty words would settle the problem.

18. I replied all I had to say was important thing not that we agree

on past history. Important thing was we take new departure. I pro­

posed that new departure two years ago. That departure was to make

it unequivocally clear that we were not going to use force or threat of

force to settle our differences. His government still publicly and in

this room maintained threat use force if it could not otherwise achieve

its objectives. Nothing that had been said could change that fact. Once

that threat clearly and unequivocally removed so negotiations could

take place free from that threat, attempts to resolve them could be

undertaken with some hope of success. To say U.S. in conjunction

with allies would renounce common sense measures taken to meet

that threat was not serious attempt at negotiation, but rather a call to

surrender to Wang’s point of view. What I have asked and still asked

was that the threat be renounced.

19. Wang replied, in course past two years he had repeatedly said

we should take active steps to settle dispute in Taiwan area. They

had time and again expressed dissatisfaction at fact meetings being

stalled and problems remained unsettled. They had made various con­

crete proposals but these had not aroused either a response or an echo.

I had mentioned need of taking up new departure—­new starting point.

This would be welcomed on his part. This would mean one should not

further drag out these talks but take steps to push talks forward, to

stop empty statements, and one should take concrete action. Even more

important would be to see concrete action coming out from new depar­

ture I had referred to.

20. I replied, new departure I had referred to was renunciation

threat force proposed by my side. It was departure he still refused to

undertake. It was departure which was fundamental.

21. Wang replied I had said that relaxation tension in Taiwan

area was fundamental problem to be dealt with between us. To this

he agreed. Question remained by what formula disputes between us

were to be settled. Any proposal for settlement this problem which

violated sovereign rights of one side was unacceptable. Any proposal

to solve this question should be based on respect of sovereign rights.

He had made this fully clear in course our discussion and in propos­

als his side put forth on renunciation force. Method of dragging out

talks could not settle these problems between us. Now it remained for

us to see what action U.S. would take to bring about genuine settle­

ment this dispute.

22. I replied, first problem not question settling one way or other

sovereign rights nor settling formulae or forums in which this matter

may be discussed. I had tried to make it clear first question was to agree

we were not going to fight—­that is, that the threat to use force had

been withdrawn. I had offered him various formulae for draft declara­

tions which would enable him fully to preserve his position and enable

him to pursue his policies without using threat of force. He had come

back with various formulae and drafts which in themselves in the light

of discussions here, and of public statements, made it clear he preserved

right threaten and use force. He asked that I negotiate substance of ques­

tion itself under that threat. I had tried make it as clear as I could this is

what I could not and would not do. However, once that threat removed

in clear and unequivocal statement we could then in that atmosphere

discuss further steps to be taken.

23. Wang replied, in settlement tension in Taiwan area, the question

of sovereign rights could not be put aside. If sovereign rights were dis­

carded, then a state could no longer be considered a state. I had stated

the central problem was avoiding war between us. But China not pro­

posing to start a war with U.S. They were prepared to settle problems

between us by just methods but this did not mean surrender to any

side. It would not serve useful purpose to repeat old words which had

been repeated many times. Repetition of old words and remarks did

not constitute new departure. With respect my remarks this morning

concerning Chinese civilians in U.S. he could not be satisfied with those

remarks. He reserved comments for next meeting.

24. I had nothing more and suggested next meeting August 8. He

agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 57

Geneva, July 11, 1957

Dear Ralph:

I want to thank you most heartily for your letter of July 5 and the

very full enclosures which, together with your most welcome telegram

on Tseng enabled me to be fully armed for today’s meeting. As you

will see I was able to smother him with detail on Tseng and he had no

comeback whatever at today’s meeting.

As far as comment on today’s meeting is concerned, I have nothing

to add to my telegram. I, of course, did not expect he would in any way

overtly react to my effort to put across the point we would not necessar­

ily stop the Talks if the Americans were released, and it is hard for me to

tell whether it went across. It may not have, and I will work on this as

opportunity arises. Tell the Secretary I greatly appreciated his personal

message on this and will continue to play it as best I can. While it is

only a factor in their failure to let them go, it is perhaps one that I will

be able to remove.

It was good to have Ed here but was sorry to learn after his arrival

that it meant again busting up his vacation.

With Ekvall now staying in Paris between meetings there will be no

one here to receive messages, handle correspondence or sort out incom­

ing material. (Incidentally, I told Wang that Popper would be the con­

tact here for any messages between meetings.) Therefore, I have several

suggestions for handling material along the lines of our conversation.

First, on the understanding that CA will screen and transmit to

me all pertinent material from the FBIS, I suggest that FBIS be told no

longer to transmit its file to me.

I would suggest that insofar as is practical a copy of such material

be sent directly to me as well as to Ed as it appears without waiting for

the now monthly letter.

I would suggest that press statements on our part, records of

MAC meetings, speeches and similar unclassified material be similarly

handled.

In general, it would be best that classified material such as the FBI

reports on Dr. Lin or other classified material for which I may have

a need in meetings continue to be sent to me here. This obviates the

problem of my having to carry classified material with me on the plane.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

Also, please tell whoever handles it that they can cease sending me

here the tear sheets from the Daily Summary but I would appreciate

continuing to receive them at Prague.

I am asking Mrs. Gross, who is my secretary on a contract basis,

to come in once a week to go through and sort out incoming mail, but

what I suggest above will reduce its volume. I may well have other

suggestions later.

With regard to Ekvall he has been told by the MA office in Paris that

he should be in the States two months before his retirement date which

is the latter part of February. They have told him that he should therefore

plan to depart in December. Therefore, if we want to hold him through

the January meeting DA should say something to the MA in Paris. So that

both of us know where we stand I suggest you get someone to work on

this right away with the DA and get the date definitely established.

Vreeland is also leaving but I have been able to arrange with the

Consulate to have Cameron Le Clair replace him beginning next meeting.

I forgot to mention in my telegram, but you will notice from the full

record that I threw in a short reference to the missing military personnel

at today’s meeting. I felt that in the context of mentioning my trip to the

States and the press stories on the Congressional Resolution its omission

by me at today’s meeting would have been conspicuous.

I hope Walter Robertson is getting along all right. Give him my

best.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

37. Reference Hong Kong Niact to Department 62, repeated

Information London 5, Geneva 2.

Johnson-Wang Talks.

Johnson left Geneva by air for Prague this morning. Reference tele­

gram repeated Prague.

Gowen

Letter No. 71

Washington, July 18, 1957

Dear Alex:

I have just received your letter of July 11 and will not try to com­

ment on it in detail at this time. Needless to say we will proceed to act

on your various suggestions, none of which seems particularly difficult

to accomplish.

The purpose of this letter is to inform you that the Secretary,

Mr. Berding and Mr. Robertson are meeting today with representatives

of American press media to see whether a formula can be worked out

which would permit limited travel by correspondents to Communist

China without too seriously compromising our China Policy. Whether

it will be possible to devise any effective safeguard against a gradual

erosion of all travel restrictions, I rather doubt. However, it looks very

much as if we will make the attempt.

If we should undertake a limited relaxation of our travel ban to per­

mit correspondents to go to Communist China, do you see any advan­

tage in announcing this to Wang at Geneva simultaneously with or prior

to public announcement? Since we took a firm position last year that

we would not authorize such travel so long as the Chinese Communists

refuse to release the imprisoned Americans, it is hard to see how we

could get any mileage out of announcing to Communist China that we

are backing down on this point. On the contrary our action might simply

confirm the Communists in their apparent belief that time is on their side

and that we will eventually make the concessions they desire without

their releasing the Americans or taking any other step which they might

regard as concession to us. This of course would be the case whether we

announced our action in the Geneva forum or not.

marking. A copy was sent to Martin.

We would appreciate your views on this as soon as possible. There

is enclosed a draft press release which will give you an idea of the type

of announcement which is being considered. It is by no means final and

may undergo many further changes.

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosure

Draft Press Release No. 92

Washington, July 11, 1957

DRAFT PRESS RELEASE

The policy of the United States with reference to Communism in

China, non-­recognition, no commercial or cultural relations and related

matters has been recently restated by the Secretary of State in his

address of June 28, 1957, at San Francisco. In application of this policy,

there are relevant laws and executive orders, notably the Trading with

the Enemy Act and determinations there-­under. Generally speaking, it

is not consistent with United States policy, or lawful, that there be travel

by Americans to the areas of China now under Communist control.

However, the Secretary of State has determined that, in view of

the desirability of additional information respecting current conditions

within China, it may prove consistent with the foreign policy of the

United States that exceptionally, there be travel by a strictly limited

number of American news representatives to the China mainland to

permit direct reporting by them to the American people about condi­

tions in the area under Chinese Communist control.

The Department of State is therefore willing on an experimental

basis to issue passports not restricted as regards travel to and on the

mainland of China to not more than ten to fifteen experienced profes­

sional American news representatives. These representatives will be

designated, not by the Department, but by the major news media—­

newspapers, radio, television and magazines—­as they have in other sit­

uations requiring a limitation of numbers. The Department notes that

representatives of many news media have already suggested that a rep­

resentative from each of the twelve organizations which maintained full-­

time American correspondents in China at the time of the Communist

assumption of power be included in the designated correspondents, and

the Department is prepared to adopt this suggestion if there is substantial

agreement by the major news media. The provisions of the Trading with

the Enemy Act and the regulations issued there-­under will be suspended

to the limited extent required by this experiment. The experiment will be

carried out on the following assumptions:

(1) That the present validation of passports will be for a period

expiring December 31, 1957.

(2) That those traveling to mainland China do so knowing that

they face abnormal personal risks due to the failure of the Chinese

Communist regime to treat American citizens in accordance with the

accepted code of civilized nations.

(3) That all of the representatives designated by the major American

news media on this basis receive Communist permission to enter the

China mainland, with the understanding that they intend to travel,

get information, and freely report as to real conditions in China. It is

hoped that American correspondents in mainland China will be able to

report on the condition and treatment of the Americans illegally held

in Chinese prisons, as to whose fate there is deep concern on the part of

the American nation. It is also to be understood that the United States

will not accord reciprocal visas to Chinese bearing passports issued by

the Chinese Communist regime.

(4) The Department emphasizes that the limited exception here

suggested is upon an experimental basis. If for any reason it cannot

be carried out substantially in accordance with the conditions stated

above, or is otherwise found by the Department to have direct or indi­

rect consequences adverse to the foreign policy of the United States,

then the experiment will be discontinued.

817. Letter from Johnson to Clough

Prague, July 26, 1957

Dear Ralph:

The couriers have just brought in your letter of July 18 and I am

sending this reply back directly with them. I entirely agree that there is

nothing to be gained by my making any statement to Wang on a partial

signed the original “Alex.” A copy was sent to Martin.

relaxation of our travel ban on correspondents for Communist China if

that should take place.

On a hurried reading of the draft press release I am somewhat

struck by the word “experiment”. It appears in it several times. Would

perhaps “trial period” be preferable?

Hurriedly yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

Letter No. 72

Washington, August 2, 1957

Dear Alex:

We have just received your letter of July 26 with your recommen­

dation against mentioning at Geneva any partial relaxation which may

take place in our ban on travel to Communist China. The results of

the meeting to which I referred in my letter of July 18 were inconclusive

as you will see from the enclosed memorandum of conversation. The

Department has just written to all news organizations which maintain

at least one full-­time correspondent abroad, inquiring whether they

would station a correspondent in China if it were possible to do so. It

is hoped on the basis of the replies to reach a more realistic estimate

of the number of American correspondents who might be stationed in

Communist China on a more or less permanent basis. The matter will

then be discussed further with the press.

Wang’s comments on the Secretary’s speech have been paral­

leled by other Chinese Communist statements, notably a speech to

the National Peoples’ Congress by Chang Han-­fu (copy enclosed).

Judging from these statements I would expect Wang to maintain his

rather hard line at the next meeting. We have just received a report

from a highly sensitive source to the effect that Mao Tse-­tung in his

speech of February 27 stated that the most appropriate time to estab­

lish diplomatic relations with the United States would be during the

countries in economic power would be considerably reduced by that

time. However, he added that the Formosa problem would have to be

Informal. Drafted by Clough and Osborn. A copy was sent to Martin.

resolved first. This confirms indications we have received from other

sources that the Chinese Communists do not expect any early prog­

ress in the direction of formal relations with the United States and are

willing to bide their time.

A correspondent telephoned Mrs. Fecteau to tell her that the press

was about to be permitted to send representatives to Communist China.

Her immediate and spontaneous response, which was picked up by the

wire services, was that if they went she wanted to go too and see her

son. She has not yet made any request of the Department, but certainly

if correspondents go we can expect immediate pressure from relatives

of the prisoners to be allowed to do so.

I have sent you a copy of the memorandum of conversation with

Mr. Dalal from the Indian Embassy concerning the impounding by

Treasury of a sum of money from another departing Chinese, Hsiao

Chi-­mei. We have since furnished Mr. Dalal at his request copies of

pertinent extracts from the Foreign Assets Control Regulations and

the trade control regulations of the Department of Commerce. I have

explained to him that these regulations apply to everyone alike and

that there is nothing in the Agreed Announcement which requires us

to discriminate in favor of returning Chinese with respect to export of

goods or money to Communist China.

Defense is instructing Panmunjom to make a statement in the MAC

on the missing 450. The text of the statement is the one you approved

while in Washington of which I am enclosing a copy. We do not know

yet when the UNC will make the statement, but we hope it will be

before your September meeting.

At the request of Fathers McCarthy and Houle, the American Red

Cross sent a telegraphic plea to the Chinese Red Cross in Peiping for the

release of Father Wagner on humanitarian grounds. A curt message just

received by the American Red Cross reads “Authorities contacted not

consider release J.P. Wagner.”

We have been in correspondence with John Dexter, who is being

trained in Taiwan to replace Bob Ekvall as interpreter next January.

Present plans are for him to leave Taiwan September 18th and receive

an additional month’s training in the Department’s Language Services

Division following his leave and before going to Geneva. We are negoti­

ating with EUR in the hope that we can have him put on the EUR payroll

as a regular member of the Consulate General staff, but with the under­

standing that he would be available to you as desired and that he would

receive further language training at the Ecole des Interpretes between

meetings and in addition to his regular duties. He is one of our most

talented young Chinese language officers and has been working hard in

preparation for this assignment. I am confident you will find him satis­

factory, although I realize it will be quite a jolt to part with Bob, who has

the work so well in hand. We want John to have a week or two of consul­

tation with Bob either in Washington or Geneva depending upon how

the schedule of meetings is running at that time. The ideal thing would

be for him to sit in with Bob at a meeting before he takes over on his own.

Mr. Robertson will be away the last two weeks of August and I am

hoping to take off the last week myself. It would therefore be much more

convenient for us if your September meeting could fall on September 12

rather than September 5th.

Regarding the sorting and preparation of material received in

Geneva during your absences, I believe that if we keep the volume

down to the necessary minimum, and follow your suggestion of send­

ing copies whenever possible to Ed in London as well as to Prague, it

should prove possible for Bob or Ed to arrive in Geneva a few hours

ahead of you and complete the sorting in that time.

We have asked that the FBIS Daily Reports no longer be sent you,

and will scan them here for items of interest to you. However, we asked

that the ticker service for the few days before each meeting be contin­

ued, as the volume should not be too great, and as otherwise you might

miss something of importance.

I believe that we have taken care of the other points you raised in

your letter following the last meeting. However, we received only the

original of that letter, and it had to be routed to the front office, where

it seems temporarily to have disappeared. I hope you will remind your

secretary to send us a carbon in the future, and if you have a copy of the

last letter we would appreciate your enclosing it in your next.

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosures:

1. Copy of memorandum of conversation of July 18 re Meeting

with Radio and Press Representatives.

2. Copy of Text of speech by Chang Han-­fu.

3. Copy of Draft Statement for use in MAC.

4. Copy of Exchange of Telegram between ARC and Chinese

Communist Red Cross re Release of Fr. Wagner.

5. Copy of letter to Mr. Dalal with extracts from the Foreign Assets

Control Regulations.

Commodity Controls on Chinese Aliens Departing for Communist

China.

148. For Johnson.

Guidance for August 8 meeting:

1. Review course negotiations on renunciation force. When talks

began situation existed particularly in Taiwan area which threatened

peace. This situation still exists and in some respects threat increased.

U.S. has from beginning insisted essential prerequisite to discussion

other matters at issue is to remove this threat by reciprocal renunci­

ation force. However, Chinese Communists have been unwilling for

over year discuss seriously renunciation of force, having instead shifted

discussion to side issues. Renunciation force deserves more serious

consideration. Hence your statement last meeting you considered vital

discuss long as necessary reach agreement.

2. Remind Wang he promised under Agreed Announcement take

certain measures enable imprisoned Americans exercise right return.

Only measures taken with regard any of Americans still remaining

have had contrary effect. Challenge Wang to cite any measure taken by

Chinese Communists to carry out Agreed Announcement with respect

to Downey, Redmond, Fecteau, McCann, Wagner or MacCormack. It

would have been simple matter for Chinese Communists demonstrate

sincerity and good faith by release these prisoners had they desired do

so. Such action even now would have favorable effect on atmosphere

these talks.

3. Maintain position other matters also.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by Osborn and Clough; cleared by Robertson in draft and by Jones.

138. For Johnson.

Two hour and five minute meeting this morning.

I opened with long statememt reviewing renunciation of force

­discussions closing this portion of statement with “I am prepared to

discuss this vital issue as long as necessary to reach agreement, and

when this has been accomplished we can go on to discuss other ­topics

under agenda item two.” I concluded statement on implementation

strongly noting no prisoners released since Dec 1955 prior to comple­

tion of sentence and asking him “cite one single measure” taken to

carry out agreed announcement with respect to remaining six.

His reply on renunciation added up to no further interest or

intention of seriously discussing unless and until basic US policy of

“hostility” toward PRC changed. “Futile wishful thinking to expect

PRC will ever recognize under guise of right of self-­defense US occu­

pation Taiwan.” “If US not going give up policy of hostility and sub­

version  and aggression against PRC and indulges in empty talk of

renunciation of force this can only be termed as a deceiving tactic.” He

repeated usual charges on implementation alleging Tseng Kuang-­chih

“always desired to return” and was thrown into mental hospital as “act

of reprisal” and to frighten other Chinese students; briefly mentioned

Hsiao Chi-­mei as example of “detaining funds to discourage return;

and Yi Teh-­yun who deported from New York March this year and

“nearly lost life because serious stomach ailment not properly cared

for during his detention.”

During course give and take I returned hard to theme Americans

had derived no benefit from agreed announcement and situation of

imprisoned Americans remained same or even worse than situation

prior to announcement. His refutation weak and consisted primarily

of counter-­attacking with respect Chinese in US. “Under circumstances

in which Chinese residents in the US continue meet obstructions in

departure one cannot demand anything extraordinary” with respect to

Americans in China.

Next meeting Sept 12. Full record by pouch leaving Geneva

August 10.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

821. Despatch unnumbered from Geneva

Geneva, August 8, 1957

SUBJECT

China Talks—69th Meeting

1. I opened 69th with following statement:

a. “In looking over the record of our nearly two years’ of negoti­

ation on the vital topic of renunciation of force, I am concerned that

despite the many months of discussion there has been no progress since

early 1956. Indeed I might even say that with the submission of your

draft of May 11, 1956 much of the progress which had been achieved

before then seems to have been wiped out. I am deeply concerned with

this because the threat to peace in the Taiwan area which prevailed

when we first began discussion of this topic still exists and, in some

respects, has increased. Your side has continued building up its armed

strength in the Taiwan area while at the same time continuing to make

clear that it will use this armed strength if necessary to achieve its pol­

icy objectives.

b. The basic views of my government as to the question of renunci­

ation of force remain those which I set forth in our meeting on October

8, 1955. You will recall that I stressed that the U.S. was not proposing

that either side abandon its views or give up the right peacefully to

pursue its policies, or that either side renounce the right to defend

itself. I  simply sought, and I still seek, an agreement whereby both

sides would renounce force as a means of pursuing their respective

policies, both generally and particularly in regard to the Taiwan area.

Such a reciprocal renunciation of force we regarded, and still regard,

as an essential first step toward the peaceful settlement of differences

between our two governments.

c. At our October 27 meeting you submitted a draft agreed

announcement dealing with the subject of renunciation of force. As you

will recall we found your draft deficient in its omission of any reference

to the right of self-­defense and in its failure to relate renunciation of force

to the Taiwan area. We also felt that your suggestion for a foreign min­

isters meeting was, at best, premature at that stage when your side was

still unwilling unequivocally to renounce the use of force with respect

to the Taiwan area. In our draft agreed announcement of November 10

we attempted to use language which would be mutually agreeable, not

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Johnson. Received on August 12.

prejudicing the substantive position of either side and yet meeting the

fundamental requirements. Thus our draft made it clear that renuncia­

tion of force would not prevent either side from peaceably pursuing its

policies or deprive either side of the right of self-defense, but it would

have application to the Taiwan area as well as general application.

d. With these two drafts before us we continued our discussion of

the problem of renunciation of force during our 26th and 27th meet­

ings and at our 28th meeting on December 1 you submitted a draft

which was brief and couched in rather general terms. While this draft

of December 1 did not entirely meet the requirements of the situation

it did represent, we felt, a distinct step forward toward agreement. We

were still disturbed, however, by the absence of specific reference in

your December 1 draft to the Taiwan area or to the right of self-­defense,

and on January 12, 1956 we suggested two simple amendments to your

draft designed to cover these two points.

e. In our meetings during the next six weeks much of our discus­

sion centered around the two amendments which we had proposed at

our January 12 meeting. You will recall that I drew a distinction between

the claims and views of the two sides with respect to the situation in the

Taiwan area and the question of renouncing force as an instrument of

policy. Our proposals with respect to the draft declaration on renuncia­

tion of force were not designed, and are not now designed, to bind your

side to an acceptance of our policies with respect to the Taiwan area any

more than our agreement to such a declaration binds us to accept your

policies respecting the Taiwan area. In an effort to reassure you that

our proposed amendments did not seek to prejudice your policies with

respect to Taiwan, we submitted on April 19 further proposals, revising

those we had put forward on January 12.

f. Nevertheless, you declared our further efforts to meet your point

of view unacceptable and in your arguments made it clear that what you

objected to in our April 19 draft was really that it failed to prejudice the

U.S. position—­not that it prejudiced your side’s position. You made it

clear that your side would consider acceptable only a declaration which

permitted it to continue to exploit the threat of the use of force. Then

on May 11 you submitted a new draft announcement which wiped out

completely the fairly extensive area of agreement which had seemingly

been achieved by the submission of your December 1 draft. Your May

11 draft, unfortunately, included every element of your side’s position

to which we had expressed opposition together with new unacceptable

points not previously put forward.

g. I have reviewed in some detail the course of our negotiations on

renunciation of force because of my deep concern that we should not

relax our efforts to reach agreement on this fundamental issue. Since the

submission of your draft of May 11, 1956, which, as I have just pointed

out, represented an unfortunate retrogression in the progress of our

negotiations we have made no progress on this subject, and I have felt

that you have not been sincerely interested in reaching agreement on

it, but rather have attempted to obscure our discussions by bringing up

subsidiary side issues. This tactic will not get us anywhere, for only by

resolving satisfactorily the issue of renunciation of force can we expect

to make progress on other topics under item two of our agenda. As

I said at our last meeting I am prepared to discuss this vital issue as

long as necessary to reach agreement, and when this has been accom­

plished we can go on to discuss other topics under agenda item two.

h. Mr. Ambassador, it is unfortunate that nearly two years after we

had reached an agreement under agenda item one I should still find it

necessary to come back to that item in these meetings. It is difficult for

the American people and I must confess for me, Mr. Ambassador, to

understand how six of the Americans whose cases we came here two

years ago specifically to discuss can still remain in prison in spite of

our agreement. Once again let me stress, too, that it is not only a mat­

ter of American inability to understand how this situation can exist,

but a matter of strong and deeply felt indignation on the part of all

Americans that it does exist.

i. As far as I can see, Mr. Ambassador, if there have been any

measures taken by your government since the agreed announcement

respecting the Americans who remain imprisoned in your country, they

would seem to have had an effect opposite to that which was clearly

set out as your intention in the agreed announcement. Otherwise, how

can it be explained that during the whole year of 1956 and up to the

present in the year 1957, not a single imprisoned American citizen has

been released by the authorities of your country until his full sentence

was completed? Is this by any stretch of the imagination an indication

that measures have been taken to help these unfortunate citizens return

to their country? Is it possible that not one American who remained in

your jails after December 1955 could be credited with good behaviour

which might have enabled the authorities in the normal course of events

(regardless of the agreed announcement or of these discussions) to

have released the prisoner a few weeks or months before the expiration

of his sentence? On the record of the past year and a half, it is difficult

to escape the conclusion, Mr. Ambassador, that the agreed announce­

ment solemnly made between us has in no way expedited the release

of the imprisoned Americans. If this is not so, I would appreciate it if

you could cite one single measure taken by the authorities of your gov­

ernment to carry out the agreed announcement with respect to Messrs.

Downey, Redmond, Fecteau, McCann, Wagner or MacCormack.

j. Release of these imprisoned Americans, all of whom have served

many years in jail already, would have been an action not only in keep­

ing with the letter and spirit of this agreed announcement but also a

demonstration of sincerity and good faith on the part of your author­

ities. I profoundly regret that your side has not seen fit to take such

action. Even now, however, release of these prisoners would have a

most favorable effect on the atmosphere of our meetings here as we

continue to discuss the other issues before us.”

2. Wang replied. He had listened carefully to the review I had

made of the two year old negotiations on which I had tried to draw

a balance sheet for the past two years. However, he could discover

no new factors or elements in the new statement which I had made at

great length and taking great time. The essential issue before us is an

old one, that is, how are we going to settle disputes between our two

countries and how tensions between us in the Taiwan area are going to

be relaxed. In the course of the negotiations we have disputed at great

length our respective points of view on this issue. Now let us recognize

that we could not bring about agreement in respect to the positions of

the two sides. If we could have done so, he would assume we would

have already reached agreement long before. However, to repeat old

arguments and old positions gives no help to the present discussions.

3. Wang continued. They have agreed to the idea of making a dec­

laration by the two sides on the renunciation of force. Indeed, they have

put forward a number of drafts of such a declaration. The objective

of any declaration must be to find ways and means for settlement of

disputes between the two countries in the Taiwan area so that tension

there could be relaxed. The proposals my side has put forward under

cover of so-­called renunciation of force, and unreasonable position con­

tained therein have long been refuted by his side. Our side’s attempts to

get them to recognize the present situation of American occupation of

Taiwan under cover of what we call right of self-­defense are futile and

wishful thinking.

4. Wang continued. During long discussions during the two years

of these talks U.S. side has shown it does not have serious desire to

improve Sino-American relations or relax tensions in the Taiwan area

because our side continues to carry out a hostile policy toward China.

Even in the course of these talks, our side has never ceased to create

tensions in the Taiwan area and around the territory of his country. That

is the fundamental problem which still exists.

5. If the United States is not going to give up a policy of hostility

and subversion and aggression against the PRC, and indulge in empty

talk of renunciation of force, this can only be termed as a deceiving tac­

tic. He did not see how it would get us anywhere or give us any help in

our present talk to repeat the old arguments made this morning.

6. Wang continued. I had suggested at the last meeting a new

departure. However, he did not feel my statement this morning is

prompted by the idea of a new departure.

7. Wang continued. Insofar as implementation of the agreement

on the first item of the agenda is concerned, if anyone is dissatisfied

it is his side. As is generally known, since the opening of the talks all

Americans who desire to return have done so except criminal offenders

serving prison terms, whereas on the U.S. side the Chinese who are

imprisoned in jails there still remain in these jails without any change

in their situation.

8. Wang continued. Our side consistently obstructs the return of the

Chinese nationals who wish to return. Those persons who returned all

spoke of the unreasonable obstruction by our authorities. Our authori­

ties have employed many means of obstructing their return. One of the

familiar patterns is when one of their citizens lets it be known that he

wants to go, threats are made, political questions are asked, and he is

even threatened with being sent to Taiwan or resort is made to induce­

ments by offering him what is known as permanent residence. When

the above threats failed, the next step is rough handling. The individual

is detained for immediate deportation and is not allowed a reasonable

time to prepare for deportation, including persons who are sick.

9. Wang continued. Hu Teh-­yun, who was deported from New

York in March of this year has experienced this suffering. Mr. Hu nearly

lost his life as his serious stomach ailment was not properly cared for

during his detention.

10. Wang continued. As to the practice of our authorities in put­

ting Chinese students who want to go home in mental hospitals,

Mr. Tseng Kuang-­chih has provided a solid example. He must refute

my explanation made at our last meeting on this case. Mr. Tseng

Kuang-­chih always desired to return. For this reason Wang gave me

his name at last meeting. Yet instead of taking measures in accordance

with the agreed announcement our authorities had to put him in hos­

pital for fourteen months despite the fact that his studies and work

were normal. Confining him for mental illness was evidently an act of

reprisal. It also was to frighten other Chinese students who wanted to

return. When our authorities failed to stop his leaving they retarded

his departure.

11. Wang continued. In the case of Dr. Lin Lan-­ying and

Mr. Hsiao Chi-­mei they also reported similar incidents.

12. Wang continued. He must point out this obstruction is the pol­

icy of our side and also violates our agreement and all humanitarian

principles. He demanded an accounting 42 and 47 persons who still

have not yet returned.

13. I replied that I regretted that I could not find in anything he

had said here this morning the slightest indication that his government

is willing to renounce its threat to use force if it could not otherwise

obtain its policy objectives in the Taiwan area. This is the difficulty we

faced when came here to find a method of peacefully settling our differ­

ences and the difficulty we still face. No amount of words or misrepre­

sentation of the plain words in the proposals we have put forward can

change this fact.

14. I continued. With regard to the first item of our agenda he

entirely ignored the genesis and history of our talks on this subject. We

are not here to put forth propaganda statements for the public which

obscure the issue, but we are here to discuss on the basis of facts and,

between the two of us, to settle these issues.

15. I have tried calmly, objectively and frankly to deal with him

on the questions that we face. A statement such as “since the opening

of these talks all the Americans who desired to return have done so

except for a few criminals serving sentences” does not contribute to a

settlement of this issue. Both of us perfectly well know when we came

here we were discussing precisely those Americans who were in prison.

I accepted the proposals and suggestions he made which he said would

expeditiously resolve the problem. As I have again pointed out this

morning, rather than resolve, it appears to have worked in the opposite

direction. Since December 1955 not a single prisoner has been released

even a day before the completion of his sentence. I again pointed out,

entirely apart even from the agreed announcement, it is common prac­

tice even under normal procedure for prisoners to be given time off for

good behavior. However, each of these prisoners has been held right

up to the last day of his sentence. I asked him this morning how the

agreed announcement could be said in any way, under the most liberal

or strained interpretation, be said to have been applied to them. I asked

him to cite one single measure taken by his authorities with respect to

the six who still remain in his prisons. I still await his answer.

17. I continued. With regard to the Chinese in the United States his

vague, unsubstantiated and erroneous charges of obstruction to their

return does not obscure two basic factors. The first fact is the Chinese

who desire to do so are steadily and regularly returning to his country.

To the best of our knowledge not less than 353 have returned since the

beginning of our talks here. The second fact is that the very agency

which he suggested for the purpose has not called to our attention a

single case of any obstruction to departure.

18. I went on to say that such statements as “On the United States’

side Chinese still imprisoned remain without any change in their sit­

uation”, as he was well aware, did not correspond to the facts. Every

Chinese in our prisons who desired to do so has been permitted to go

home without regard to length of sentence and without regard to his

eligibility for normal parole and release.

19. I continued. As far as Mr. Tseng is concerned, I pointed out

that less than a year and a half from his entry into the U.S., that is, in

June 1949, he showed signs of and was treated for mental illness. I also

pointed out to Wang that when Mr. Tseng asked to return to his country

and it appeared that he was able to make a decision, he was given every

assistance in doing so. The Indian Embassy with which he was in cor­

respondence was kept informed of his case. Not only was he permitted

to return but an attendant to care for him during his trip was furnished

by the United States Government. As I said at our last meeting, rather

than ill-­founded complaints, an expression of appreciation for the care

offered him would be in order.

20. I continued. As far as the Chinese returning to his country vio­

lating laws and regulations of the United States concerning the export

of funds or regulations are concerned, all I can say is that they (no more

than any other alien or American citizen) would not be permitted to do

so. These long-­standing laws and regulations are applicable to all per­

sons. It is my understanding that his country has comparable laws and

regulations which have been rigorously applied to Americans leaving

his country. Dissatisfied as we may have been, I did not and have not

raised this question with him. What I was interested in was that these

Americans be permitted to return.

21. Wang replied with regard to the question of civilians he had

already made it quite clear that U.S. residents are free to return with­

out any obstruction. His position in this regard is exactly in conformity

with the agreed announcement between us. Insofar as American civil­

ian offenders are concerned the facts also have given evidence that of

the 40 persons in this category at the beginning of our talks there now

remain only six. We have noted that many Chinese are imprisoned in

the United States. Of 34 persons whose names I gave him, there still

remain 33 in prison.

22. Wang continued with reference to the question of an expression

of their will, while these persons still are being kept in prison, he had

made it clear that it was hard for him to believe persons in these cir­

cumstances are able to express their free will. The number of Chinese in

the United States is very great. The number of Chinese students alone

is about some 5,000 persons. The number of persons who have returned

to his country is very small.

23. Wang continued. There are still many Chinese in the U.S. who

desire to return and are not able to do so. Those who did return did not

return easily but only after they have experienced all sorts of obstruc­

tion and all sorts of threats or inducements have they succeeded in

coming home. Persons are even dealt with as mental patients without

any reason at all and are handcuffed as criminals. No amount of words

can cover up these facts. If any side is dissatisfied over this question,

it is his side. It is his sincere hope that the American Government will

change this obstructive behaviour so that all Chinese who desire to do

so can return without encountering any obstruction.

24. I replied that he had made to me the statement that American

residents in China are free to return. As I recalled it, this was precisely

the same statement he had made to me on August 2, 1955. We then

discussed the question of Americans in prison. I had entered into the

agreed announcement with a clear understanding that that would have

an effect on their situation and enable them expeditiously to return. As

token and confirmation of my understanding, on the same day as the

agreed announcement, he announced to me the names of ten persons

who were released. Since December 1955 not a one has been able to

return prior to the full completion of his sentence.

25. I went on to say that I had asked him this morning and again

asked him in what way had the agreed announcement been applied

to or in any way affected the ability to return of those persons since

December 1955 or those six who still remained. I found not the slightest

evidence of what the effect had been, except apparently for the worse.

26. Wang replied that the action we had taken on this question of

civilians wholly conformed with what they had said in public. Nobody

can ever point out an incident in which an American resident in China

has been obstructed in returning. This even extends to those former

prisoners of war who refused repatriation at the end of the Korean war.

Whenever any one of this group indicated he had changed his mind

and wanted to return, they did everything they could to help him real­

ize his wish.

27. Wang continued. Nobody could ever cite any evidence that

they had either in the past or at present called the American criminal

offenders in prisons ordinary civilian residents in China. There had

been no change whatsoever in their policy or practice with regard to

this group of criminal offenders. Any allegations or charges which did

not conform to reality are not acceptable to his side.

28. Wang continued. In dealing with such an issue thought must

be given to the situation existing on both sides. Under circumstances in

which Chinese residents in the United States continue to meet obstruc­

tion in departing one could not demand anything extraordinary on his

side’s part. He had consistently been concerned with the question of

improving the situation of residents abroad.

29. I replied that he would recall that when we were negotiating

the agreed announcement he first asked for the inclusion of an excep­

tion for persons in prison. However, I had opposed this and finally we

had agreed upon the elimination of any such reference. I had asked him

and I again asked him in what way the agreed announcement had in

the slightest affected American citizens in China as compared with the

situation before its existence.

30. Wang replied that the matter is quite clear. They had never

mixed up these two groups of Americans—­ordinary American resi­

dents and American criminal offenders. This was quite clear and he

presumed no such confusion will be consented in any other country.

31. I responded that he had not answered my question.

32. Wang replied that if I did not want to recognize a distinction

between the two groups, that was unilateral thinking on the part of

the U.S. If they had at that time settled on the basis that there was

no distinction between ordinary Americans and American criminal

offenders what would have been the use of entering into an agree­

ment. They could have simply released everybody.

33. I responded by asking what the purpose of the agreement was.

34. Wang replied that the purpose of agreement was that ordinary

residents and nationals of both countries could return to their coun­

tries freely. As a matter of fact, many Chinese in the U.S. who desire to

return have as yet not been able to do so. This is a matter to which the

United States government must give attention and carry out the agree­

ment strictly. In addition to many Chinese imprisoned in the U.S., even

innocent Chinese in the U.S. who have never offended against any law

are still prevented from returning.

35. I replied that Wang said, before we ever entered into the agree­

ment, what he called ordinary Americans could leave his country. But

what he now seemed to be saying was that the agreed announcement

did not and was not intended by his government to bring about any

change in the situation which existed prior to the agreed announce­

ment. All I could say was that this was flatly contradictory to my under­

standing and to the plain words of the announcement itself.

36. Wang replied that this was only an American statement. It was

no use making such a statement. They always acted in accordance with

the agreement. However, Americans who have offended against the

laws of China must be dealt with in accordance with those laws.

37. As neither of us had anything further to say, I suggested

September 5 for the next meeting. Wang countered by suggesting

September 12 to which I agreed.

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Letter No. 58

Geneva, August 8, 1957

Dear Ralph:

Well, another meeting went off just about as expected. I decided

not to follow up more at today’s meeting on renunciation but save it for

the next meeting. Of course, the result will be that he will more flatly

refuse to discuss it, but nevertheless think that I can write a pretty good

speech on it tieing back to what he said today. The same on implemen­

tation. He went further today than he has for a long time in taking the

position that the agreed announcement did not apply to prisoners until

they were released, and I can renew the attack next time on that. As

always, any new ideas any of you may have will be welcomed.

He must be reading your mail to me. Frankly, I was going to disre­

gard your suggestion for the next meeting on the 12th. As there did not

seem too much new that would require attention from you and Walter,

I thought it best to retain the four-­week pattern, and I had personal

plans involving my children and saving money on getting them back

to the States that made it much better for me to meet on the 5th. I sug­

gested the fifth, and he came back with the 12th, to which I, of course,

agreed. Thus, once again I have been able to carry out the Department’s

thought on extending the period between meetings with the record of

the meetings showing that the initiative has always come from him.

The sending of the material to me is working out fine and I have

no further suggestions. As you will see from a separate despatch I am

sending in, the Consulate here received a fearsome bawling-­out from

Communications on my having sent in the record of the last meeting

in telegraph form, and I am, therefore, sending this one in by despatch

form. If you do not get fast enough service on it at your end, I leave it to

you to fight it out with Communications and tell me how to handle it.

I am not surprised at Mrs. Fecteau’s reaction to the possibility of

travel of correspondents. From my talk with her I am certain that you

will be receiving the same thing from Mrs. Downey and it seems to me

that if the correspondents’ travel goes through it is going to be most

difficult to resist the appeals of these two.

If Dexter is not going to arrive until January I presume that you

will do the necessary with the Army to make sure that Ekvall can stay

here until the January meeting.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.” The enclosure is printed as Document 814.

Thus the third year has begun. Regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

Enclosure:

1 copy of letter No. 57

823. Letter from Johnson to Clough

Prague, August 29, 1957

Dear Ralph:

Thanks very much for so promptly getting to me the text of the

release on the travel of correspondents which I was very happy to see.

I suppose that we should have anticipated the Peiping reaction which,

I believe, was mostly triggered by the specific statement that we would

not give reciprocity. They probably found this, together with the rest of

the statement, too much publicly to swallow. The press have been so

intent on the Department being their only block that they have utterly

failed to take into consideration the possibility of Peiping not giving

the visas. Thus, things have now been worked around to where they

should be—­that is, the controversy is between Peiping and the press,

rather than between the Department and the press, and Peiping is

really put on the spot. If they grant the visas they will appear publicly

to a degree to be acquiescing in the Department’s position as set forth

in the statement. If they do not grant them, they will be incurring the

rising wrath of the American press expressing its outrage at what it

feels is a double-­cross by Peiping. It seems to me the best thing for the

Department to do is to sit quiet and let Peiping and the press fight it

out. My guess is that Peiping will try to find a way out by again invit­

ing a few correspondents (perhaps some on our list and some not) for

a limited trip. However, this is certainly not going to make the press

happy, particularly those that do not receive invitations. It seems to me

that they have pretty much shut the door, at least for the time being, on

granting visas to all twenty-­four.

signed the original “Alex.” A copy was sent to Martin.

As far as the next Geneva meeting is concerned it does not now

seem likely Wang will take the initiative in raising the matter, except per­

haps by oblique reference to the Department’s statement in character­

izing them as not civilized, etc., as another example of “hostility”. I do

not believe I should take the initiative in any way raising the matter, but

if he should do so I would have considerable material for rebuttal that

would fill up time. I could, of course, refer to his previous statement to

me that they were not asking reciprocity for Chinese correspondents to

visit the United States, and on the “civilized” aspect I could come back

to implementation.

Of course, there may be further developments by the time of the

next meeting that may change the picture, but I wanted to pass on these

thoughts at this time.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

P.S. After writing the above I have just seen in this morning’s

paper an August 27 Washington story quoting the Secretary as saying

that we will “consider” applications of Chinese Communist correspon­

dents. If the Secretary was correctly quoted this may put a somewhat

different light on the possibilities of the subject coming up at the next

meeting, and the desirability of my taking the initiative on it. I believe

it is something on which I might make a little mileage. It certainly goes

a long way to give Peiping a way out of the box in which they are now

in if they want to use it. Of course, “consider” certainly does not mean

we will grant any visas, but it would seem to me that it does mean we

would accept applications to be “considered” on their merits and our

laws and regulations. I know that you will send me at Geneva the full

text of the Secretary’s statement, which the article I have seen in the

Herald-Tribune does not give, together with as much amplification as

you can to enable me to handle it with Wang whether or not you want

me to take the initiative. As far as the legal aspects are concerned the

contemplates the possibility of issuing visas to holders of passports

of non-­recognized governments. I suppose this frequently comes up

in issuing visas to officials of non-­recognized governments to attend

the UN. However, I do not know of any case in which we have issued

such a visa to non-­officials although the principle would presumably

be the same. Of course there is also the whole background of waivers

being required for members of the Communist Party, etc. In the case

of recognized Communist governments this has usually been handled

by giving correspondents official visas which do not require a waiver.

However, it would seem to me that this would be entirely out of the

question in the case of an unrecognized government.

Letter No. 73

Washington, September 6, 1957

Dear Alex:

Your letter of August 29 was very timely reaching us yesterday in

time to permit me to comment on it prior to your meeting next week.

I anticipate as you do that Peiping will eventually admit only a few

American correspondents. However, they may now seek to use the reci­

procity issue as leverage on us to admit Chinese Communist correspond­

ents to the U.S. As you will see from the enclosed copy of the Secretary’s

August 27 press conference, the door to that possibility has been left ajar. So

far no application for entry of a Chinese correspondent has been received.

The decision to authorize limited travel to Communist China by

correspondents has greatly reduced the pressure on the Department

over this issue. Some of the correspondents waiting in Hong Kong have

criticized the wording of the Department’s announcement as predis­

posing the Chinese Communists to reject the proposal but for the most

part the onus now appears to be shifted to Peiping.

I think you are wise in not wishing to take the initiative in raising

the travel issue with Wang at the next meeting. Wang may raise it

taking the same line as the original Peiping reaction to our announce­

ment. But his position is an awkward one and you will have no diffi­

culty in handling it. It is possible that a Chinese Communist newsman

will apply before the next meeting to be admitted to the U.S., in which

case you could simply reiterate our position that such individual

applications would be considered on their merits and in the light of

the applicable U.S. laws and regulations.

We are trying to get a copy of the new law on fingerprinting passed

by Congress last week but may not have it in time to enclose with this

letter. Briefly it authorizes the Secretary of State and the Attorney

General jointly to waive fingerprinting requirements in certain cases

for persons coming to the U.S. as temporary visitors. This will make

it possible to admit visitors from iron curtain countries and even from

Communist China without fingerprinting and without declaring the

individuals to be officials which as you point out would be out of the

question in case of an unrecognized regime.

I enclose a copy of the order issued by the Federal District Court in

the Powell-Schumann Sedition Case calling on the Chinese Communist

courts for judicial assistance. This was sent by the court direct to

Peiping. The Executive Branch of the Government did not participate in

Informal. A copy was sent to Martin.

any way, and legal opinion in the Department is that such action has no

bearing on the matter of recognition. Once the necessary showing has

been made as to the availability of witnesses and the substance of their

testimony, the Judge will have to decide whether he would be justified

in dismissing the case should the Department continue to refuse the

defense counsel a passport for travel to Communist China.

We have been assured by Major Hoffman in the Attache Branch

in the Department of Defense that Bob Ekvall will be permitted to stay

in Paris until mid-January next year. We will have Dexter in Geneva

before that time.

In regard to Hu Teh-­yuin, the deportee Wang alleged “nearly lost

his life” because a serious stomach complaint was not properly cared

for during his detention, Immigration and Naturalization Service has

informed us there is no record of Hu’s having complained of any illness

during his detention prior to deportation. He surrendered himself in

New York for deportation on March 12, and was held in the immigra­

tion detention center there for two days before being transferred to Los

Angeles. The records of the center have been examined, and there is no

record of his having reported any complaint. Between March 14 and

March 16, when he boarded the President Cleveland in Los Angeles,

Hu was confined at the Chula Vista camp. The records of that camp

also show that Hu was in good health and registered no complaints.

Medical service was freely available in both the New York camp and

at Chula Vista. It is of course possible that Hu may have suffered from

indigestion aboard ship, as this has been known to happen aboard the

President line ships. However, if he did, he would have had the same

medical attention that any other passenger would have received.

We have been considering the possibility of having Hammarskjold

take up the cases of Downey and Fecteau in a letter to Chou En-­lai,

in line with your conversation with the Secretary General. This would

involve, so far as we have tentatively thought it through here, making

the following points: (1) Downey and Fecteau were under the juris­

diction and authority of the United Nations Command at the time of

capture; (2) they were, accordingly, entitled to repatriation under the

Korean Armistice Agreement, even though civilians; (3) however, their

existence was concealed by the Chinese Communists until after the

negotiations on repatriation at Panmunjom had been concluded; (4)

by the time their existence was disclosed, we had already established

a contact at Geneva which was considered an appropriate forum for

arranging the return of the two men; (5) the two men were covered

by our Agreed Announcement of September 10, and it was anticipated

they would be released in accordance with that agreement, hence no

separate representation was made on their behalf under the Armistice

Agreement; (6) in view of the long lapse of time since the Agreed

Announcement and the continued failure to release the men, we desire

to remind the Communists of their responsibility to repatriate them

under the Armistice Agreement; and (7) it makes no difference whether

the men are released under the Agreed Announcement or under the

Armistice Agreement, but until they are released the Communists will

be in flagrant violation of both agreements.

Defense has sent out to the UNC instructions for a new meeting

of the MAC on the subject of the missing personnel. We have already

forwarded you a copy of the draft statement sent out for the use of the

UNC. We do not know yet when the meeting will be held, but presum­

ably it will be in the near future. We will let you know as soon as the

results of the meeting are received, so that you will be able to plan your

next presentation to Wang on this issue. Of course, if the occasion arises

in the meeting on the 12th, you should restate our position on the miss­

ing personnel item, but it will probably be wise to defer an extensive,

detailed presentation until after the MAC meeting.

I would appreciate your comments on the approach to

Hammarskjold, particularly with regard to the tie-­in with the Korean

Armistice Agreement. We are of course consulting with the other peo­

ple involved here in Washington, both in NA and Defense, and the

points outlined above are entirely tentative at this point.

Mr. Robertson has been away for nearly three weeks on leave and

I have just returned to the office from two weeks off. Mr. Robertson

will be back in time to participate in the preparation of the instructions

for your next meeting. We do not anticipate any new departures. It is

interesting to note the importance placed by the British on continuation

of the talks as indicated by Ed’s letter of August 20.

With best regards,

Sincerely,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosures:

1. Court Order

2. Copy of letter to Congressman Alger

3. FBIS re “Offer to U.S. Newsman Termed ‘Deception’.”

from Acting Secretary to American Citizens Contemplating Travel to

Communist China.”

News Conference of August 27, 1957”.

6. Two tickers dated Sept. 6 from Reuters

P. S. The News Division has just informed us that there is a ticker

in advising that the Chinese Communists are allowing the students vis­

iting Peiping to see the American prisoners held in Communist China.

I am enclosing a copy and we will let you know by telegram of any

further significant developments in this regard.

244. For Johnson.

Guidance for September 12 meeting:

1. State that reciprocal renunciation force applicable to Taiwan area

fully as essential today as when talks began two years ago. Refusal

Chinese Communists renounce force and terminate their military threat

in Taiwan area is fundamental obstacle to lasting peace.

2. Failure release remaining six Americans as required by Agreed

Announcement continues constitute standing indictment Chinese

Communists for not honoring public commitment. Again call atten­

tion Wang’s gross distortion of record at last meeting in attempting

distinguish between QUOTE ordinary Americans UNQUOTE and

QUOTE criminal offenders UNQUOTE. Incontrovertible meaning

of plain language Agreed Announcement is that all Americans have

right leave Communist China expeditiously. No distinction stated or

implied between Americans in prison and those out. Wang has in past

admitted Announcement applied prisoners, who were only Americans

under discussion when Announcement agreed on. Attempted previ­

ously without foundation assert term QUOTE expeditious UNQUOTE

as applied prisoners had to be interpreted in light seriousness offense,

behavior, etc. Now apparent even Wang unable any longer stretch term

QUOTE expeditious UNQUOTE to encompass delay over two years,

hence he attempting further distort Announcement.

3. If Wang raises question reciprocity re newsmen, remind him this

reversal his position year ago when he stressed Chinese Communist

invitation US newsmen not conditioned on reciprocal US action. If they

now desire exclude American correspondents, that entirely matter their

choice. If Wang requests assurances US will admit specific group of

Chinese Communist newsmen or other exchange arrangement, advise

him applications individuals will be accepted at any American Foreign

Service post end considered on merits, like any other application.

4. If Wang mentions Hu Teh-­yun and his alleged stomach com­

plaint, tell him careful check of records at places Hu detained during

four days prior deportation reveal no medical difficulty or complaint

his part. Any illness which developed during voyage would have been

treated by ship’s medical staff on same basis as that any other passenger.

Dulles

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Osborn and Clough; cleared in draft by Robertson and

Jones.

Geneva, September 12, 1957, noon

235. From Johnson.

One hour twenty five minute meeting this morning mostly

devoted to correspondents. Wang proposed and I rejected draft agreed

announcement (full text by separate telegram). Under this PRC rpt

PRC and USA “agreed to give permission, on an equal and reciprocal

basis, for correspondents” to enter the respective countries. In rejecting

I made exact statement in para 3 of Deptel 244 including last sentence.

At close of meeting Wang stated they were going to release text draft

agreed announcement but did not indicate timing.

Wang opened with long statement in hard tone referring to my

“general repetition of worn-out arguments” at last meeting and gen­

eral attempt to place blame for lack of progress on PRC, “consistently

hostile attitude” of U.S. and leading into correspondents by reference

to cultural exchange proposal September 22. 1956. “In spite of US obsta­

cles” Stevens, Harrington and Worthy came to PRC and “completed

their press coverage”. In spite of obstacles US youth delegation had

also entered PRC and were being “warmly welcomed and with an

abundance of good will”. “Does not this show that no official ban can

prevent Chinese and American peoples from showing their demand

for better contacts”. After nearly a year US had on August 22 under

great pressure given permission certain number of correspondents

visit PRC. “In same breath statement in entirely unreasonable terms

refused accord reciprocal visas to Chinese newsmen. Subsequent state­

ments have not altered this”. US August 22 statement set tasks for US

correspondents in PRC and thus ulterior motive and US undisguised

attempt interfere in PRC internal affairs all too clear. None could con­

ceive PRC would accept August 22 statement which disregards reci­

procity and equality. PRC believes exchange visits of correspondents is

a practical and concrete step to improving Sino-American relations and

therefore proposes agreed announcement. Text meets need for equality

and reciprocity.

In reply I “found it astounding” that he had “entirely reversed”

position he had taken last year when he had stressed PRC was not ask­

ing reciprocity for admission correspondents. Also under US laws and

regulations impossible to assure reciprocity. Therefore in light these two

facts statement reciprocity included August 22 statement. Also found

Limit Distribution.

it astounding that he now characterized entry of US correspondents

many of whom were same men to whom they had previously extended

invitations as undisguised interference their internal affairs. However,

if they now desire exclude US correspondents that entirely matter their

choice. PRC has not previously raised question of reciprocity nor has

any PRC correspondent applied for admission to US. “If any journalist

from your country desires to enter the US he is entirely free to make

application to any Foreign Service post for a visa and it will be consid­

ered on its merits just the same as any other visa application”. “I am not

in a position to enter into any agreement or understanding with you

any more than I am with any other government that a full and equal

number of correspondents be admitted to the US or that any particular

individual will be granted admittance to the US. Neither do we make

any such demand from your side. It is entirely up to your own deci­

sion as to whether you wish to admit any individual or any number of

individuals”. Purport his subsequent statement was that Department’s

statement on reciprocity in August 22 statement had entirely altered

nature of questions and closed door on exchange visits of correspond­

ents. Responsibility lies entirely with U.S.

I reiterated substance para 3 Deptel 244 and said that I expected

they would consider application visas accordance their laws and regu­

lations in same manner as US would do and that I would not attempt

dictate their action any more than I would accept dictation from them

our actions. If they decided refuse visas correspondents could not in

any way shift responsibility to U.S. That was their own decision.

Full report of meeting follows by telegram.

Next meeting October 10.

Gowen

240. From Johnson.

1. Wang opened 70th today with statement that at last meeting

I willfully tried present course two year talks in false light. My repe­

tition old worn-out arguments was vain attempt shirk responsibility

my side for dragging out talks. Facts before us are clear; namely with

respect to agreement reached under first agenda item, my authorities

during past two years have employed 101 means of obstruction to pre­

vent those who can return from doing so and even those who have

returned home met all kinds of obstruction.

2. Wang continued that on second agenda item he still protests our

seizure of Taiwan and continued inadmissible interference in internal

affairs. He added my side refuses to discuss Foreign Ministers confer­

ence, removal of embargo, cultural exchanges and peoples contacts. At

same time threat peace by my side increases, tensions are continued by

my side following hostile policy towards China. This is display complete

lack of good faith toward his country. His side consistently worked for

improvement Sino-America relations. With view to promoting tradition

friendship, they have put forth proposals for cultural exchanges and

human contacts at our 58th meeting.

3. Wang continued I will recall both sides agreed adopt measures

promoting contacts between two nations. In an earlier move to demon­

strate good faith, his government on own initiative permitted entry

number US press representatives. They had believed that there was no

reason why such a proposal of equality and mutual benefit should not be

accepted. My side, however, refused discuss proposal and also refused

permission enter. It thus clearly tells on which side Iron Curtain hangs

after all. In spite of the obstacles, Stevens, Harrington and Worthy came

to our country and completed press coverage. Recently the American

Youth delegation visited China despite instructions and were warmly

welcomed and with an abundance of good will. Does not this show that

no official ban can prevent Chinese and American people from show­

ing their demand for better contacts. Again does not this explain why

US Government policy of preventing exchanges is bound to lead to an

uproar and pressure on the part of the American people.

4. Wang continued. Nearly a year has passed since the pro­

posal of the 22nd of September last year. On August 22 this year US

Limit Distribution.

Government made statement under great pressure permitting a certain

number of newsmen visit China. In same breath press statement, in

utterly unreasonable terms, refused accord reciprocal visas Chinese

newsmen. Subsequent statements have not altered this. This press

statement shows my government ignorance international practice and

is an insult to China. That my government has an ulterior motive in

sending newspapermen to China is all too clear. In its August 22 state­

ment my ­government absurdly tried to specify the tasks of newsmen

and instructed them to report on prisoners in China. This is virtually an

undisguised attempt to interfere in Chinese internal affairs in telling US

newsmen to serve American policy.

5. Wang went on. This move of the US Government, which it

­nominally passes for consent, in its true light it is a maneuver to dupe

public opinion because no person of average intellect would conceive

that China could accept such a move disregarding reciprocity and

equality. His side absolutely cannot agree to unilateral decision of the

US because it runs counter to desire of peoples for better relations and

mutual understanding. They believe, however, that exchange of visits

US newspaper correspondents is practical and concrete step capable

of improving Sino-American relations. Based on their consistent policy

will and in line with their proposal of 22 September 1956 he proposed

that we discuss and adopt the following agreed announcement. (Text

sent separately).

6. Wang continued. Adoption of above agreed announcement

meets demands of peoples of both sides and meets desire of news cor­

respondents for news coverage. Perusal of text of agreed announce­

ment above will enable me to see that it promotes privilege of equality

and reciprocity of both sides. He would like to hear any views I had.

7. I replied I would address myself first to statement he had made

regarding the travel of correspondents. I said let me say I found it

utterly astounding that he had entirely reversed position he took last

year in this regard. I well recall that at time we discussed this last year

he stressed to me that this invitation to American correspondents was

not conditional reciprocal action by the US. I recalled that he made

statement to me here and if I recollected rightly it was also made in

public statement by his Government or press. Next point I wanted to

make was that under our laws the US is not in any position to assure or

guarantee full reciprocity. Therefore, in light of these two facts and in

order that there can be no misunderstanding, the August 22 statement

of Department of State made this fact clear.

8. I continued I found it incomprehensible and astounding that

he now reversed his position and said that because reciprocity cannot

be granted, he did not intend to permit the entry of American corre­

spondents. I also found it astounding that he now characterized the

entrance of American correspondents into his country many of whom

had previously been in receipt of invitations from the authorities of his

country, as an undisguised attempt to interfere in his internal affairs.

If it is the decision of his authorities to reverse their previous position

and exclude American correspondents, that was of course a matter of

his own Government’s choice. As far as I was aware neither he nor his

Government had ever previously raised the question of reciprocity nor

has any journalist from his country ever applied for entry into the US.

If any journalist from his country desired to enter the US he is entirely

free to make application at any Foreign Service Post for a visa and it

would be considered on its merits just the same as any other visa appli­

cation. I was not in a position to enter into any agreement or under­

standing with him any more than I was with any Government, that a

full and equal number of correspondents be admitted to US or that any

particular individual would be granted admittance to US. Neither did

we make any such demand from his side. It was entirely up to his own

Government’s dicision as to whether he wished to admit any individ­

ual or any number of individuals.

9. Wang replied it is consistent belief of his side that exchange of vis­

its is an important step toward gradually improving relations between

two countries. The simple reason is that such mutual exchange of visits

corresponds with the interests of both peoples and countries. Through

such exchanges mutual understanding and trust can be expected to

increase. It was in this spirit that his Premier made his statement at

Bandung conference of 1955 that traditional friendship existed between

Chinese and American peoples, and his Government has consistently

worked in direction of improved relations between China and America.

This attitude of his Government could be testified to by all proposals

made during our talks of past two years. However, they found that inso­

far as matter was concerned, there are two entirely different attitudes

and practices. In handling matters within realm of relations between

our two countries, his Government has always acted in accordance with

created international practice while he has always acted in contrary

sense. In handling matters of Sino-American relations his Government

has always worked to remove obstacles to intercourse and exchanges

whereas US is consistently engaging in obstacles.

10. Wang continued, in their handling of Sino-American relation­

ship they have always observed principle of equality and reciprocity, that

is, the principle of mutual benefit whereas the US has always ­violated

such a principle. He will just cite an instance. As I was probably aware,

sometime during the Chinese Opera Company’s tour of Europe, it had

received an invitation to stage performances in the US. His authorities,

in observance of principle of reciprocity immediately followed by an

invitation to an American company to give performances in China. As a

result of obstruction on part of American Govt such an exchange could

not be realized.

11. Wang continued. In order to develop mutual visits and con­

tacts his govt in addition to 22 Sept proposal also on own initiative

had given permission to American correspondents to visit China for

news coverage. After stubborn obstructions and prohibitions on part

of U.S. Government three American press representatives in person of

Stevens, Harrington and Worthy succeeded in going there and com­

pleting their coverage. When they did so, they expected that following

this step on their part the US would also take corresponding measures

in this respect. Now the application of reciprocity in international inter­

course is a matter of common knowledge familiar to everybody. He

was afraid that I would not be able to quote any remarks of their side to

effect that only American correspondents could enter China while no

Chinese correspondents could enter US. Now the August 22 statement

of my government says arrogantly in effect that only American corre­

spondents are going to China while no Chinese correspondents will be

allowed into US. Now anything in common between this statement and

the friendly gesture indicated by his side? Such a haughty and arrogant

statement by U.S. is an insult to Chinese people and Chinese people can

in no way accept that.

12. Wang continued. Now it not his intention to enter into debate

with me on US law. What he proposed and was interested in was mutual

exchange of visits between Chinese and American people and mutual

improvement of relations between two countries. It showed he recog­

nized that no question can be resolved in international intercourse if we

adopt an attitude of imposing one’s decision on the other. The unilateral

decision of the US Dept of State has not only caused great ­indignation

on part of people of China but has also met with ­condemnation inter­

national public opinion.

13. Wang continued that proposal he made this morning would

offer reasonable solution to question of news coverage by two countries.

It was his hope that we would be able to make some progress on this

matter. He believed that this step would bring something good in our

talks.

14. I replied that I found it impossible to understand his position on

the basis for what he called indignation. Some time ago his authorities

indicated they desired visits of American newspaper correspondents. The

US has now rpt now agreed to validate passports for such travel. The

US was certainly not rpt not imposing anything on him. If his govern­

ment has now changed its mind and decided to not grant visas that was

entirely a matter for decision of his government. I could not and would

not attempt impose decision on him that his government grant visas for

these correspondents.

15. I continued. He said that August 22 statement said that only

Americans could go to China and no Chinese could go to the US. The

statement does not say anything of the kind. It simply says that the US

is not in a position to accord reciprocity which is a legal fact I could

not change. Only now for the first time so far as I knew has question

of Chinese going to US even been raised. As far as I knew we never

received even an application for anyone to go to US. As I had told

him here this morning, if any individual or number of correspondents

makes application, their applications would be considered on same

basis as any other application.

16. I continued that he had spoken of his government as always

one which had worked to remove obstacles and that the US always

­created obstacles. I was astounded that in face of record here that he

could make such a statement. Even before we came here we made it

entirely clear that major obstacle was that of imprisoned Americans in

his country. We entered into an agreement that was supposed to resolve

that problem. Yet in the face of the very exact words of that agreement

and whole history of our talks here, he had temerity to allege that agree­

ment does not even apply to the Americans that we were talking about.

And in face of this he proposed even entering into further agreement.

17. I continued he surely could not believe that I or my government

was that naive. We entered into the first agreement and here two years

later the six Americans still in his prisons stand as an indictment of

his government for not honoring its commitments. If his government

really wanted to remove obstacles instead of talking about it, and really

would honor the principle of reciprocity, this agreement would long

since have been carried out and this obstruction removed. Appealing

to supposed violations by the US which have no basis in fact, in no

manner relieves his government of obligation to carry out this agree­

ment. Vague and unsupported statements do not constitute facts nor

take place of facts. Facts are that the very agency which he suggested

for seeing that agreement carried out has not called our attention to a

single violation in any way.

18. Wang continued that when we got to question of return of

civilians, the principle of looking after interests of both parties still

applied. From time we began talks to present, it can be said that almost

all American residents in China including criminal offenders have

returned to U.S. Whereas in US prisons alone, US is still holding some

19. Wang continued, as far as whole question of correspondents was

concerned, the measures taken by authorities his country last year to

permit entry was one matter. The statement of August 22 of my govern­

ment denying reciprocity was another matter. This step altered nature

of problem and closed door on exchange of visits of correspondents. If

our authorities insist on August 22 statement then the responsibility for

obstructing visits of correspondents entirely lies on U.S. If the idea of

simultaneous visits by correspondents is accepted, then he cannot see

why the statement proposed this morning cannot be accepted.

20. I replied that all I could say was that it was entirely up to him

whether his government wished to permit the visits or not. I had not

and would not attempt to dictate to him on that any more than I would

accept dictation from him. If his government decided not to grant visas,

he was certainly not going to hear any protest from me. All I could do

was to express surprise at the change in his decision and express even

greater surprise that he could allege that the United States had dictated

his decision.

21. I continued. The question of who is to be permitted entry into a

country is certainly one of the oldest aspects of sovereignty that exists.

It is up to his government to decide whom it would have enter into his

country just as it is up to my country to decide who will enter the United

States. If any Chinese correspondent applies for entry into the US his

application will be considered according to our laws just as I expect his

government would consider applications in accordance with its laws.

22. Wang replied by expressing his surprise as to why we could not

come to an agreement on such matters. He stated that wording in their

proposed announcement was very clear. Nothing in it imposed anything

on any person. In order to make their position on whole question clear

they would find it necessary to make text available to public. He regret­

ted that I could not find myself able to accept the draft proposal made

this morning.

23. Wang proposed next meeting 10 October. I agreed.

Gowen

Letter No. 59

Geneva, September 12, 1957

Dear Ralph:

Finally, after these long months we again had a little excitement.

Thanks very much for your prompt action on my phone call. I am glad

everyone agreed it was best quickly to put out something here. I am

also glad everyone agreed that I had done right by immediately turning

down his proposal rather than temporizing on it in any way until next

meeting. It seemed to me clearly within my instructions to do so, and

I felt any temporizing could only lead to confounding the confusion.

I sent you the full record by telegraph as there is no courier until

Saturday, the meeting was fairly short and I thought it best to let you

know exactly what was said in case anything further arises. You will

note that I became very sharp in tone toward the end on implementa­

tion, and that I did not bring up “renunciation”. As the meeting had

developed I felt it better to end on this sharp note, and that to have

gone any further into implementation or into renunciation would have

been anti-climactic. I made no move to suggest the next meeting and

he came up with that.

As far as the correspondents are concerned I do not believe they

have entirely closed the door but have left themselves some freedom

of action. If they were really intelligent, from their standpoint, instead

of just attempting to act clever, they would now give visas to a few

Americans, have a few Chinese apply to us, and then indicate they

were waiting to see what we did before acting on the other American

applications. At the same time they feel they have a very good theme

in “reciprocity and equality”, particularly in Asian States and can be

expected to play this hard.

They have just brought me in a Reuters ticker from Washington

which I am enclosing. You can see this goes far beyond the line I was

instructed to take today and is certainly no help to me here. I care­

fully avoided committing ourselves to admitting any correspondents,

and indicated no interest in any agreed announcement on the ­subject

whether the word “reciprocal” was used or not. I understood my

instructions to refer to any “exchange arrangement”. If, as is likely, this

issue is still alive by the time of the next meeting, I hope you will be

sure that my instructions are as full and clear as possible.

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

Incidentally, I wonder if we are perhaps entering into some seman­

tic difficulty. As I interpreted, and I believe Peiping interpreted, our

August 22 statement it meant that the U.S. would not give any visas to

any correspondent bearing a Chinese Communist passport. As subse­

quently interpreted by the Secretary, we were prepared to accept appli­

cations from Chinese Communist correspondents but could not give

any advance assurance as to whether any or what number would be

approved. If we are in fact prepared to give favorable consideration to

a qualified applicant it seems to me we are in fact giving reciprocity. In

short, it does not seem to me as commonly used “reciprocity” necessar­

ily involves one for one exchange. As a minor point in this connection,

Bob and Ed have noted that the Chinese terms used for “equal and

reciprocal” in his draft today are not the same as used for those terms in

the “Five Principles”. (I am enclosing a copy of the Chinese text.)

amended and his subsequent orders read so as to cover travel from

any point in France on which he is on official duty to Geneva rather

than just from Paris. Believe it or not he started his previous trip from

Roquebrune which is closer and cheaper to Geneva than Paris, but

Embassy, Paris refuses to pay him anything for it because his orders

read only from Paris. Such are some administrative minds.

Regards to all.

U. Alexis Johnson

Enclosure 1

Copy of Reuters Ticker

reut 51542

Following recd ES Washington:

An exchange of American and Chinese Communist correspond­

ents may be worked out if China does not insist on the use of the word

“reciprocal” in any agreement, informed sources said today.

Immediate State Dept reaction to the Chinese proposal at Geneva

that American and Chinese reporters should be allowed to enter each

others country on such a basis, was to go no further than the position

recently expressed by Mr. J.F. Dulles the SecState.

A Department spokesman said: “if any Chinese Communist news­

man applies for a visa, his application will be considered in the light of

relevant laws.”

But informed sources indicated that the United States might even­

tually agree to exchange approximately equal numbers of reporters

with China.

“If the Chinese would agree to avoid the word ‘reciprocal’ some­

thing probably could be worked out,” one U.S. official said.

“I dont think it would be exactly twenty-five Americans for 25

Chinese, but the numbers could be nearly equal.”

Enclosure 2

Chinese Draft

September 12, 1957

[The Chinese text is illegible.]

Letter No. 74

Washington, September 27, 1957

Dear Alex:

We have been pondering the Communist actions with respect to

the newsmen in order to reach some conclusions as to where we stand

on this question and what we may expect from the Communists. I have

embodied the results of our thought and discussion in the enclosed

memorandum on which I would appreciate having your and Ed’s com­

ments. If you have any comment which you think might influence the

formulation of the instructions for your next meeting, please telegraph

them as a letter would probably not reach us in time. I expect to be writ­

ing again next week but wanted to get this memorandum to you earlier

so that you would have more time to consider it.

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosure:

Memorandum on Chinese Communist Actions with Respect to

Newsmen.

Official–­Informal. Drafted by Clough. A copy was sent to Martin.

Letter No. 75

Washington, October 4, 1957

Dear Alex:

I suspect the principal subject at your forthcoming meeting will be

the newsmen issue. As pointed out in the memo attached to my letter

of September 27, it seems doubtful that the Chinese Communists are in

a hurry to resolve the present impasse. It seems more likely that for a

while at least they will continue to exploit it in their propaganda and

press you hard for some sort of recognition in principle of equal and

reciprocal treatment for newsmen. We will try to anticipate possible

moves on their part at the next meeting and make your instructions as

complete as possible. We feel we are in a satisfactory position if we con­

tinue to refuse any general agreement by holding the door open for any

Chinese Communist newsmen to apply for a visa if he wishes.

We have been informed by Justice that the Court has again denied

Wirin’s request that the Court order the State Department to issue him

a passport valid for Communist China. The case has not yet reached the

posture at which the Judge would have to decide whether the refusal of

a validated passport to Wirin would justify dismissing the case. When

that time comes, we have told Justice we will consider our position

once more.

We have sent you a copy of Hammarskjold’s message to Lodge that

he was writing to Chou En-lai concerning Downey and Fecteau. I am

not sanguine that this will accomplish anything but it certainly can do

no harm. We still have no word from Panmunjom that the matter of the

unaccounted for personnel has been taken up in the MAC. I think it is

just as well for you not to make any elaborate presentation on this issue

pending word from the MAC. I suppose it is possible that Wang will

seek a little publicity after the next meeting if he should come up with

some new proposal. If it seems appropriate to do so we could consult by

telephone concerning a press release by you. We felt that your release

last month was quite effective.

With best regards,

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Official–Informal. A copy was sent to Martin.

366. For Johnson.

Guidance for October 10 meeting:

1. Take Wang to task for increasingly evident Chinese Communist

responsibility for preventing progress in talks. On September 10, 1955

they declared all Americans entitled expeditiously exercise right return.

Instead of carrying out promptly this public commitment, they adopted

specious argument that term QUOTE expeditiously UNQUOTE must

be interpreted in light length sentence, behavior of prisoners. At last two

meetings Wang even argued that Agreed Announcement applied only

to QUOTE ordinary UNQUOTE not QUOTE offending UNQUOTE

Americans. Plain words of announcement do not support this view and

Wang well knows that at time announcement issued, U.S. concerned

only about prisoners, hence announcement must have referred to them

or been meaningless.

2. Communist responsibility for lack progress also apparent from

refusal renounce use force. Reciprocal renunciation force applicable to

Taiwan area merits full attention for whatever time necessary attain

goal of terminating military threat to peace that area. Interests of two

countries and world not served by introduction of subsidiary issues.

3. If Wang raises question newsmen’s travel and his draft agreed

announcement of September 12, reaffirm U.S. position applications

individual newsmen for visas will be considered on individual case

basis. If Communist China wishes approve or deny newsmen visas on

group or blanket basis, that matter its choice. U.S. will act in accordance

its own laws, subjecting applications individually to criteria specified

in law.

4. If Wang presses for yes or no answer on principle reciprocity and

equality or for assurance one or several Chinese Communist newsmen

would be admitted, remind him U.S. newsmen applied individually

for visas, that he himself stated these applications would be considered

individually and we are only asking that Chinese Communist news­

men do the same. U.S. cannot approve visas in advance on blanket or

hypothetical basis.

5. Your 190 considered in formulating above.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by Osborn and Clough; cleared by Robertson and Jones and in S/S.

833. Letter from Clough to Johnson

Washington, October 8, 1957

Dear Alex:

I looked into the matter of a possible amendment for Bob Ekvall’s

travel authorization, along the lines of your letter of September 12, but

it appears the administrative mind works the same in Washington as it

does in Paris. The orders on which Bob travels to Geneva were issued

by State, whereas his orders for travel within France are paid by Army;

to have him perform a trip employing both sets of orders, however

amended, would entail all sorts of budgetary complications involving

overlapping agency responsibilities, which our administrative people

would rather not contemplate. However, if Bob can work out some pro­

cedure acceptable to the Embassy in Paris, I will try to have our execu­

tive office take another look at the problem.

Best regards,

Sincerely yours,

Ralph N. Clough

Director for Chinese Affairs

Official–­Informal. Drafted by Osborn.

347. From Johnson.

One hour twenty minute meeting this morning with no new

developments.

I opened with statement along lines paragraphs 1 and 2 Deptel

366. Wang’s reply was along familiar lines but with particular stress on

“principles of equality, mutual benefit and reciprocity” and ended with

correspondents which example of renewed U.S. violation of these prin­

ciples. “PRC demands US subscribe to principle of equality and reci­

procity.” In reply I stressed US interested in substance not words and

that facts of performance under September 10 agreed announcement as

witnessed by UK and India glaring example PRC failure carry out their

principles. Then made point paragraph 3 Deptel 366.

During course rebuttal Wang made statement that PRC had never

tried prohibit Chinese correspondents going to US and Chinese corre­

spondents make own decisions this matter which I picked up to reply

that then there is apparently no problem, no Chinese correspondents

having applied to go to U.S., apparently none desire to do so. Pointed

out American correspondents travel to most countries of world includ­

ing Communist countries and correspondents from most of those coun­

tries travel to U.S. without any agreements between governments. If

any of those governments asked agreement similar that asked by PRC,

our answer would have to be same as to PRC. At this point Wang con­

ferred with aide and said he had nothing further.

I suggested next meeting November 7. Wang countered with

November 14 and I accepted. Full report by pouch.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

835. Despatch unnumbered from Geneva

Geneva, October 9, 1957

SUBJECT

China Talks—71st Meeting

1. I opened 71st with following statement:

a. “Mr. Ambassador, in our last meeting you made the allega­

tion that while your government has been the one which has always

worked to remove the obstacles in the path of improvement of rela­

tions between our two countries, the United States Government was

always creating such obstacles. I expressed my astonishment that you

should feel it ­possible to make such a statement. It seems to me that the

clearly that it has been the attitude adopted by your authorities which

has placed serious obstacles in the way of the improvement of relations.

b. When our talks first began I emphasized the vital importance

attached by my government, and by the American people, to the ques­

tion of the release of Americans imprisoned in your country. The first

six weeks of our negotiations were taken up entirely with this subject

and were culminated in the issuance of the Agreed Announcement

of September 10. It was, as I have repeatedly pointed out, the under­

standing of my government that this Announcement applied to all

Americans in the territory controlled by your authorities, including

those who were imprisoned. No other interpretation can logically be

placed either on the wording of the announcement, or on the negotia­

tions which led up to its issuance.

c. It was our sincere hope that, with the issuance of the Agreed

Announcement, a solemn commitment had been made by your author­

ities to eliminate one of the major sources of friction between our coun­

tries. Unfortunately, we were to be disappointed in this hope. Hardly

had the Agreed Announcement been issued than you began to inter­

pret it in such a way as to distort the clear meaning of the words used,

and thus to try to excuse the failure of your authorities to implement

the Announcement. You lost no time in making the specious argu­

ment that the term “expeditiously” must be interpreted in the light of

the behaviour of the prisoners and of the seriousness of their alleged

crimes, and so forth.

Distribution. Drafted by Johnson. Received on October 17.

d. An even more serious distortion of the Agreed Announcement

has been the argument which you have put forward during the last

two meetings, as well as on previous occasions, that the announce­

ment applies only to so-called ordinary Americans residing in China

and not to those who are alleged to have committed offenses. Neither

the words of the Announcement itself, nor the record of the negotia­

tions leading up to it, support this argument. The clear intention of the

Agreed Announcement was to bring about the expeditious release of

all Americans who were against their will prevented from leaving your

country, including most obviously those who were imprisoned. By their

failure to implement this clear intention, your authorities deliberately

sought to deprecate the value of agreements between us. Your authori­

ties have thus been careful to maintain what they full well know is one

of the principal obstacles to the improvement of relations between us

and to progress in these talks. No amount of words can change these

facts or obscure the full responsibility of your side.

e. In all frankness, Mr. Ambassador, I must also make the same

indictment of your side on the question of the renunciation of the use

of force. Again it has been the intransigeant attitude adopted by your

authorities which has prevented us from making progress on this vital

matter. We dealt at considerable length at our meeting in August with

this extremely important question and I do not propose to review today

the various arguments which I put forward then. I do wish to stress,

however, that in the view of my government the reciprocal renuncia­

tion of force with respect to the Taiwan area is a step which is fully as

essential today as it was when these talks began more than two years

ago. I earnestly wish to point out once again, Mr. Ambassador, that the

refusal of the authorities of your country to renounce force and to ter­

minate their military threat in the Taiwan area remains a fundamental

obstacle to the attainment of lasting peace. The removal of this obsta­

cle certainly merits our full attention for whatever time is necessary to

achieve results. Introduction of subsidiary issues by no means serves

the interests of our two countries nor of the world.”

2. Wang replied. He had repeatedly pointed out during the course

of the talks that in order to improve relations between our two coun­

tries, it is necessary that obstacles lying in their path must be removed.

I had this morning referred to the record of our talks of the past two

years. He might say that this record does not give any indication that the

U.S. is making efforts to remove such obstacles in our relations. From

this record of our talks it can be clearly seen that their complaints against

us have been based on facts. They consider that relations between two

countries must be based on equality, mutual benefits and reciprocity.

The U.S., however, has consistently denied this basis. The principle of

equality and reciprocity has been generally accepted as one of the bases

of international relations. He did not see any reason why our side should

continue to object to it.

3. Wang continued. Let us take the question of returning civilians.

His side has faithfully carried out the agreement of September 10, 1955

while my side has not, thus violating the principle of reciprocity. Now

all those ordinary American nationals in China who desire to return

have left. Even among the American prisoners, 34 have been released in

advance or at the expiration of their terms. Yet Chinese in the U.S. who

desire to return continue to encounter obstacles and persecution so that

many cannot return. Nor do those Chinese prisoners in the U.S. enjoy

similar lenient treatment as do those U.S. prisoners in China.

4. Wang continued. Next he wanted to take up the visits of news­

paper correspondents. Last year his government took the initiative

in admitting American correspondents. All those who wanted to do

so did not succeed in coming due to obstructions placed by the U.S.

Government. Three went and they succeeded in completing their

­coverage. On this score the U.S. has again failed to observe the principle

of reciprocity. On August 22 my government had announced permis­

sion for American correspondents to enter China but flagrantly refused

to announce permission for Chinese correspondents. The draft agree­

ment introduced by his side at the last meeting called for reciprocity for

newsmen to come and visit on a reciprocal basis. This was rejected by

my side.

5. Wang continued by saying that on relations between China and

the U.S. and on such concrete matters as cultural exchanges, human con­

tacts, and visits of newspapermen, our side has violated the principles

of equality and reciprocity, thus showing contempt of the principles in

international relations. They consider that in Sino-American relations no

question can be settled if one departs from this principle. In this respect

they have consistently insisted on equality and reciprocity, and they res­

olutely demand that our side subscribe to this principle. Otherwise their

side cannot unilaterally undertake commitments.

6. Wang continued. With regard to the renunciation of force, his

position has always been that the relaxation of tension in the Taiwan

area constitutes one of the vital aspects in the improvement of relations

between China and America. Previously they had dealt at great length

on the importance of this issue. The fact before us is that the Chinese

territory of Taiwan is under the direction of the U.S. and peace in the Far

East is disturbed by the attitude of the U.S. Government. His side has

repeatedly put forward their views with regard to how this ­situation

can effectively be resolved. It is now up to the U.S. to put forward con­

crete opinions if the U.S. is genuinely willing to respect the sovereignty

of China and genuinely desires to contribute to peace in the Far East.

7. I replied. He had again this morning as in the past spoken

much of the terms equality and mutual benefit and reciprocity. I told

him when we came here more than two years ago my interest and the

interest of my government is in substance rather than words. At his

­suggestion we entered into an agreement more than two years ago

which was supposed to embody the principles of equality, mutual ben­

efit, and reciprocity. I could not see that that agreement has in any way

insofar as implementation by his country is concerned demonstrated

either equality, mutual benefit, or reciprocity. The evidence of this is

not the unsupported statements of myself and of my government; the

evidence is the impartial observations of the third parties named in that

agreement to determine whether it was being carried out in good faith.

With respect to his country the UK is witness to the fact that it has not

even been able to carry out the subsidiary provision of that agreement.

The UK is witness to the fact that for more than two years there has

not been even any pretence of releasing the imprisoned persons who

were subject to that agreement. Prisoners are now being held up to the

very last day of completion of their sentences. I cannot see the slightest

evidence of what he termed lenient treatment, much less any evidence

of carrying out the terms of the agreement permitting these people to

return to the U.S.

8. I continued. On the other hand the Government of India which

was named by him in the Agreement with respect to its operations in

the U.S. has not yet called to our attention a single case of obstruction

to the return of any Chinese who desires to return to his country. The

question, he full well knew, is not whether a majority of Chinese resid­

ing in the U.S. have returned to his country or whether a minority have

returned. The question is whether those who desire to return have

been and continue to be free to do so. The Government of India and

the Indian Embassy in the U.S. are witness to the fact that they are able

to do so.

9. I continued. Thus it is clear, not on the basis of my words but

on the basis of impartial evidence to whose benefit that agreement has

operated. However, apart from all this, his government full well knew

even before we came here that the question of Americans imprisoned

in his country and prevented from returning to the U.S. was one of the

major obstacles to the improvement in our relations. The very terms of

reference agreed upon by our two governments for these talks are wit­

ness to that fact. I have not and do not ask him to agree as to whether

this position is right or wrong, but what I have asked him to recog­

nize is that it is a fact. It is a fact of fundamental importance and a fact

which is readily within the control of his government. I agreed to the

proposal which he made for our agreed announcement on the subject

on the understanding that his authorities would be willing and able to

remove this block to the improvement of our relations. In spite of all

this his authorities deliberately are maintaining this block to our rela­

tions. It is entirely impossible for me to understand why they continue

to do so. It is entirely impossible for me to reconcile this undisputed fact

with progress for improvement in relations and improvement in these

talks. I had most earnestly in every way I could think of attempted to

make this clear to you.

10. I continued. With respect to correspondents it is a similar sit­

uation, that is, is his interest in words or is his interest in substance?

I failed to see the ground for his complaint. As far as I knew no news­

paper correspondents from his country had ever applied for entry into

the U.S. In fact until a few weeks ago he never indicated any interest

in the subject. As I told him at the last meeting, if it is the desire of

any newspaperman to enter the U.S. his application will be accepted

at any foreign service post throughout the world. His application will

be considered on an individual case basis in accordance with our laws

and regulations. If his authorities desired to approve or deny the appli­

cations for visas which have been made to him by U.S. correspondents

whose passports have been validated for travel to his country, that is

entirely a matter of their choice. If they wanted to deny all of them on a

blanket basis or deny or approve them on an individual basis, that was

entirely a matter of their choice. As far as the U.S. was concerned, under

our laws, applications must be considered individually. I could see the

basis for his complaint about this position or why it should prevent

exchanges of newsmen.

11. I continued. As far as the question of renunciation of force was

concerned, the situation still is that his authorities refuse to agree to an

unconditional renunciation of force such as I had proposed. Their posi­

tion still appears to be that they are asking the U.S. to surrender to their

point of view with respect to the Taiwan area even while they contin­

ued to use the threat of force. I could not see in that position the slight­

est element of any willingness to settle disputes by peaceful negotiation

or the slightest element of equality, mutual benefit, or reciprocity.

12. Wang replied. I had spoken a lot of words concerning mutual

benefit, equality and reciprocity. All these words sounded quite all

right to him whereas in substance the record of our talks shows that in

the course of these talks I had always been telling the Chinese govern­

ment to do this and to do that whereas the U.S. Government has never

indicated its willingness to make any effort. Insofar as the agreement

on civilians is concerned, the record shows that the U.S. side has always

been telling the Chinese Government to take actions whereas the U.S.

itself has not been taking actions to implement that agreement. Insofar

as the release of prisoners is concerned according to my way of stating

the matter it would seem that only the question of American prisoners

is concerned while there is no question of Chinese prisoners. Such alle­

gations do not conform with the actual situation.

13. Wang continued. With respect to the visit of newspaper corre­

spondents, the official statement of my government indicated that it was

going to allow a certain number of American newsmen to go to China

while it does not even try to conceal its refusal to give reciprocal treat­

ment to Chinese newspapermen going to the U.S. All this shows that lip

service to reciprocity does not mean reciprocity actually. With regard to

the question of Chinese going to the U.S., this is entirely a matter for the

Chinese correspondents to decide on because his government has never

tried to prohibit or prevent the visits of correspondents as my govern­

ment has done. Thus the Chinese correspondents can make their own

decision on this matter. The question does not depend on the Chinese

Government or on the Chinese correspondents but it is up to whether

the U.S. is willing to observe the principle of reciprocity and equality.

14. I replied. Then apparently there was no problem. Apparently

no Chinese correspondent desired to go to the United States as no one

has made application to do so.

15. Wang continued. He had made it clear that it was not a question

of this or that correspondent but was a question of whether the U.S. is

going to observe the principles of equality and reciprocity in interna­

tional affairs. They could not in any way accept the position of the U.S.

which unilaterally refused to accord equality and reciprocity to Chinese

correspondents. This position violated all standards of international

behaviour.

16. I replied. We simply made it clear in view of the history of this

question and in view of the legal framework in which we must operate

that we could not be bound as a matter of right to permit, or to give

advance approval, to a number of Chinese correspondents correspond­

ing to a number of American correspondents which they might decide

to admit to their country. If and when any Chinese correspondent

makes application to go to the U.S. we are entirely willing to consider

his application. He himself had said that application for visas to his

country would also be considered individually.

17. I continued. United States correspondents travel to most of the

countries of the world including those which have social and economic

systems similar to his own, and correspondents from those countries

travel to the U.S. In no case did I know of any agreement on reciprocity

or equality nor has the U.S., for those countries, insisted on any such

agreement. If they were to do so, we would have to give them the same

answer I gave him here.

18. He then indicated he had no more to say.

19. I did likewise and suggested we meet again on November 7.

Wang said he would prefer November 14. I agreed.

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Letter No. 60

Geneva, October 9, 1957

Dear Ralph:

As stated in my summary telegram, there was nothing new at this

morning’s meeting. He obviously had no new instructions, his perform­

ance was almost listless, and his replies entirely perfunctory. As you

will also note he cut the meeting off short. I feel that given the situation

I made out very well today and that his position on the correspondents

was very weak. I think that they full well realized this and that they do

not have much of a public issue unless and until Chinese correspond­

ents apply for visas and are refused. I am surprised that this has not

been done up until now but perhaps they did not have their “ducks

lined up” and think that it is very likely that they will do so before the

next meeting. It of course depends on what their principal objective is.

They can hardly expect to be successful in making us formally and pub­

licly retract the “reciprocity” issue. They have not been successful in

rousing our own press to the fray. The press elsewhere seems to have a

marked lack of interest in the whole subject now. However, if we were to

turn down an application from one of their correspondents they would

probably be successful in again arousing interest in the subject both in

our own press and abroad. One can only speculate as to whether they

really desire to have any American correspondents enter their country.

If they do not, the present impasse may not be unwelcome to them and

they might let it continue rather than take the risk of it being broken by

our issuing visas to one or more of their correspondents.

Nevertheless, in connection with the possibility of some Chinese

correspondents entering the United States I think that we should be

prepared for the possibility of their attempting to contact some of the

Chinese students, particularly those for whom they have names and

addresses, and for the difficulties that may well ensue. Given past atti­

tudes of the students I think that we can depend on most of them being

unwilling to see correspondents, particularly one from Communist

China, and of their attempting to use this as proof that we are “terroriz­

ing” the students. If they do see any, I think that we can depend on the

students taking at the best an ambivalent attitude on their reasons for

not returning. I do not have any suggestions at the moment for meet­

ing this problem but merely mention it as something we should think

about.

Informal. Drafted by Johnson who signed the original “Alex.”

I was, of course, disappointed that the Department did not accept

my suggestion from Prague for taking a little initiative in this field at

today’s meeting. Although the meeting went off well without it, I do

not think it safe to assume that this will always be the case or that they

will not take another initiative in this field. Frankly, as you know, I am

not happy with consistently being in the position of responding to his

initiatives and never having an initiative of my own to which he is

required to respond. I have felt that this correspondents issue gave an

opportunity for somewhat turning the tables on him.

As far as the next meeting is concerned I think we simply have

to wait and see what they do or do not do between now and that time.

I fully expected him to turn down the suggestion for November 7 for

the next meeting as that is the 40th Soviet anniversary and will be given

a big play throughout the bloc. However, I wanted to leave it to him

to suggest a later date. I should mention a point Ed Martin called to

my attention with regard to the memo enclosed with your letter to me

at Prague. Neither of us have a copy here as we do not like to carry

classified communications but it is the recollection of both of us that in

the last paragraph there was a phrase which in effect credited Chinese

Communists with forcing us to change our policy on the travel of news­

men. While it is true that Peking’s issuance of invitations to American

correspondents started the whole issue, it was not pressure from Peking

that brought about a change in our policy but rather the pressure from

our own press.

Incidentally, the amendment of Ekvall’s travel authorization men­

tioned in the last paragraph of my letter of September 12 has not yet

been made and his new orders came out in the same form so he has not

yet been able to collect for his previous travel.

Kindest regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

P.S. For your information there has been a change in the courier

arrival here so that your letters arrive here Wednesday afternoons.

Thus, if there is anything of special importance in your letter it would

be good to make some mention of it in our guidance so that if the cou­

rier is late for any reason we can ask you to telegraph the substance.

Letter No. 76

Washington, November 8, 1957

Dear Alex:

We have just emerged successful from a spirited encounter with

the Chinese Communists supported by the rest of the Soviet bloc at the

Red Cross Conference in New Delhi where the Communists endeav­

ored to exclude the Republic of China. Since Ed was present there is

no need for me to describe the affair in detail. It is possible that Wang

may attack us at the next meeting for our activities there and we will

cover this point in your instructions. We sent an official delegation to

the Conference only after considerable debate within the Department

and with strong misgivings on the part of FE. We felt it would establish

an unfortunate precedent for the U.S. Delegation to be present officially

with the Chinese Communists. However we did go on the basis that

this was to be a unique, humanitarian, non-political meeting at which

all those having a reasonable claim to be present would be admitted. We

of course could not assent to seeing the Republic of China excluded and

the final result of our efforts was the admission of the GRC at which the

Chinese Communists and the other Communist regimes walked out.

Judge Goodman in the Powell-Schumann sedition case handed

down an order on November 1 giving the U.S. 30 days in which to

issue defense attorney Wirin a passport valid for travel to Communist

China, failing which he would dismiss the case. I will enclose a copy

of the order if we can secure a legible one. In the meeting today with

L we decided that the overall interests of the U.S. Government would

probably be best served by validating Wirin’s passport. Not to do so

would place the responsibility on the State Department for dismissal of

the case. Now that we have validated passports of American newsmen,

we feel that validating Wirin’s passport would not appreciably decrease

the pressure from others who desire to go to Communist China. He

has reasons for going which are unique. I don’t believe that validating

Wirin’s passport will necessarily lead to his admission to Communist

China or the procurement of the evidence which he is seeking. The

Chinese Communists in a letter dated October 30 rejected the court’s

request for judicial assistance from Chinese Communist courts on the

“ground that there is no agreement for judicial assistance between

the U.S. and the Peoples Republic of China”. My guess is that Peiping

will continue to play this case in such a way as to endeavor to force the

Official–­Informal. A copy was sent to Martin.

U.S. in the direction of Government to Government arrangements or

agreements. Final decision has not been made yet as to whether Wirin’s

passport will be validated but I believe it will be approved.

Another month has gone by and no Chinese Communist corre­

spondent has applied for a visa. Their inaction supports the specula­

tion in your letter of October 9 that they may not really desire to admit

American correspondents to mainland China at this time. If this is the

case we can expect Wang at the next meeting simply to repeat his old

accusations that we refuse to grant equality and reciprocity and that no

exchange can take place until this obstacle has been removed. I have a

feeling that they take this insistence on reciprocity rather seriously and

to the extent they feel their overall international position is growing

stronger they will be less inclined to act with flexibility to bring about

actions toward breaking down U.S. restrictions on relations with them

unless such actions could be taken on a plane of equality and reciproc­

ity. The aftermath of the “sputnik” may make them more adamant in

this respect. The manner in which they handle future developments in

the Powell passport case may afford some clues to their thinking.

I am enclosing another copy of our memo of September 30 on

Chinese Communist motivations and intentions with respect to travel

of Americans so that you will have one in Geneva. Of course it is true

that it was pressure from the American press which brought about

our change in policy on passports for correspondents and not Chinese

Communist pressure. The intent of the last paragraph of the memo

was to say that looking at it from Peiping’s point of view since their

rather clever and dramatic act of approving visas for a large number of

American correspondents set in motion the whole train of events lead­

ing to our change in policy, they must give themselves a considerable

share of credit for that result.

I sent you and Ed copies of a memorandum to Mr. Robertson regard­

ing our position with respect to Chinese aliens sentenced to prison sub­

sequent to May 31, 1956. In brief it seems to me we have to have a

cut-off date beyond which we cannot go in offering Chinese aliens the

choice of deportation to Communist China. If we were to make a con­

tinuing operation of extending the terms of the Agreed Announcement

to Chinese aliens regardless of his date of sentence, we might get into a

situation where any Chinese would have carte blanche to commit any

crime in the book. Or so it might seem to Justice and to the various State

authorities. At the same time, I feel we should not be deprived of our

flexibility in this regard, and for that reason I recommended that we

not state our position to Immigration and Naturalization Service at this

time. So far as we know there is only the one case (Lee Poy) of a Chinese

sentenced after May 1956 desiring to return to Communist China under

the terms of the Agreed Announcement. He does not appear to have

brought his case to the attention of the Indians.

John Dexter, who is going to take Bob Ekvall’s place as interpreter,

is now in the Department on consultation. He intends to do some work

with Language Service Branch here in the general techniques of con­

ference interpreting, following which he will take a little leave before

proceeding to Geneva. We hope he will be able to arrive in Geneva

in time for the December meeting. It would be desirable, if you can

work it out, to have Dexter sit in on the December and January meet­

ings. It is up to you, of course, whether you wish to introduce Dexter

at the December meeting as Ekvall’s replacement, or to have him take

La Claire’s place for the December and January meetings. Although it

is somewhat irregular, I should think it might serve as a demonstra­

tion of our continuing interest in the talks if you introduced Dexter

frankly as Bob’s replacement. It would also be more useful to Dexter

if he could concentrate on following the interpreting rather than be

required to take notes. We are having some trouble fitting Dexter in at a

post convenient to Geneva. The only job which has been given serious

consideration as a possible slot for Dexter at Geneva is the conference

administration position formerly occupied by Bill Sabbagh, but this job

is felt to be not entirely appropriate. The difficulty with assigning him

to Bern or Zurich is the matter of his language training between meet­

ings. As you know we are asking Ed to look into language training

possibilities, but we are not too sanguine about those places.

As you will have noticed from the verbatim record of the 79th MAC

meeting, the UNC opening presentation on the missing servicemen

was based almost entirely on the draft statement which you saw here

last May. There were a couple of unfortunate interpolations, however,

which have given rise to some false impressions. In the latter part of

the opening statement, it is noted that the Communist falsification of

their “accounting” only strengthens the conviction widely held in the

United States that American citizens are still being held. The USIA ticker

on the MAC meeting misquoted this passage so that it appeared the

U.S. Government shared this conviction. The other unfortunate state­

ment in the UNC presentation was the reference to the 1,084 persons on

the UNC list against whose names the Communists noted in their last

“accounting” that they had no data. This gave rise to the mistaken infer­

ence in the USIA ticker and in some news stories that the figure 1,084

is the total number of missing servicemen for whom we are seeking

an accounting. As you know, we regard the Communist accounting as

unsatisfactory throughout, and not just with regard to the persons on

whom they say they have no data.

On the whole, despite these unfortunate passages, I believe the

meeting went pretty well. I do not see that the Communists offered us

any particular openings for exploitation at Geneva, but they did in their

rebuttal concentrate somewhat more than formerly on the proper issue

of an accounting.

Their stress upon the fact that the UNC has not yet submitted an

accounting for their list of 98,000, if Wang takes the same line at Geneva,

should give you the opportunity for the citation of additional individ­

ual cases by way of proving our contention that their accounting is

completely unsatisfactory and hence does not meet the condition that

we have set for rendering an accounting of their missing personnel.

Kindest regards,

Sincerely,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosure:

1. Memo re “Chinese Communist Motives and Intentions with

Respect to Travel of Americans”.

Washington, November 12, 1957

497. For Johnson.

Guidance for November 14 meeting:

1. Reiterate continuing concern at failure Chinese Communists

release imprisoned Americans despite commitment to do so over two

years ago.

2. Express to Wang our deep regret Communist side in MAC at 79th

meeting October 22 again refused account for UNC missing personnel.

This refusal perform what even Communist side admits is obligation

under Armistice Agreement demonstrates anew Chinese Communist

contempt for sanctity agreements, as well as disregard humanitarian

considerations. State that failure Communist side respond in MAC

compels US raise again in Geneva forum. Cite individual cases from

list to demonstrate falsification in previous Communist “accounting”.

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough and Osborn; cleared by Robertson and Dulles in

draft and by Henderson in substance. The time of transmission is illegible.

3. If Wang refers to Red Cross Conference, New Delhi, you should

point out US concern with maintaining universal humanitarian char­

acter Red Cross as demonstrated by our attendance despite presence

­official delegations of various regimes we do not recognize. Communist

walk-out demonstrated their fundamental disregard for basic human­

itarian non-political character Red Cross. You may wish remark that

scorn for basic principles Red Cross shown New Delhi consistent with

Chinese Communist refusal admit ICRC representatives to their prison

camps during Korean war.

4. Maintain position on newsmen if Wang raises issue. Decision

solely in hands Chinese Communists whether they admit US newsmen

or permit their newsmen apply US visas.

5. Maintain established position other issues.

Dulles

Geneva, November 14, 1957, noon

448. From Johnson.

Uneventful one hour meeting this morning. Wang opened with

statement on implementation which, together with his replies during

give and take, was mildest yet made. Emphasis was on 50 of 56 names

given me and 21 of 103 names I had given him not having returned as

well as only one prisoner having returned. Allegations of obstruction

based on experiences of those having returned. During course give and

take for first time made statement “to say that there is this number of

Chinese in US is not same as saying they all desire return or we want

them all return.”

In reply my statement on missing military personnel accordance

para 2 Deptel 497, he refused enter into discussion stating I well knew

their attitude that it was not in terms of reference talks. I, of course,

stressed was “practical matter” between us and refusal discuss or

attempt ignore problem could not solve it.

Next meeting December 12.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

840. Despatch unnumbered from Geneva

Geneva, November 14, 1957

SUBJECT

China Talks—72nd Meeting

1. Wang Opened.

It had been more than two years since the two of us reached agree­

ment on return of civilians but a majority of Chinese nationals are still

prevented from returning to China. This raises a question of good faith.

There are tens of thousands of Chinese nationals still in the U.S. Among

these, students alone number more than 5000. These students left China

many years ago and are now anxious to return to their homeland.

Before we reached agreement our authorities were apparently detain­

ing them. After we reached agreement our authorities are still trying to

delay them by all sorts of obstructive tactics. At our meetings here he

had given us 56 names. 50 of these have not yet returned. The U.S. has

submitted 103 names of which 21 are yet to return. With regard to these

21 specific persons who have not returned the American side has failed

to give an accounting. They have been continuously receiving letters

from relatives of these unfortunate persons appealing for assistance to

bring their sons home. He also takes note of the fact that of the 34 per­

sons listed by the U.S. authorities, except in the case of one person, all

the rest have not been returned. A sharp contrast arises between the

failure of my authorities to carry out the Agreement and its implemen­

tation by his side. As the result of his side’s faithful implementation of

the Agreement, all those Americans who wanted to return have done so

including among those, a majority of the criminal offenders who have

been returned at the expiration or prior to the expiration of their sen­

tences. He felt it incumbent upon himself to stress once again that since

the Agreement was concluded between the two sides, both sides should

honor the Agreement. It is hoped that the American Ambassador will

impress upon his government that the Agreement must be carried out

so that Chinese nationals can return to their country without further

obstructions.

2. I replied. We agreed at the outset of our talks here insofar as the

return of nationals of either side were concerned that what we were dis­

cussing was those who desired to return. In fact, that language is incor­

porated in our Agreed Announcement on that subject. As he himself

Limit Distribution. Received on November 18.

pointed out here this morning, there are tens of thousands of Chinese

nationals residing in the U.S.A. They had been residing there even before

his authorities took control of the mainland of China. Most of them

have been residing there for many years. With respect to the students,

it is entirely understandable that many of them do not desire to return.

He seemed to take the position that because they have not returned

or because some of their relatives desire to have them return, they are

prevented from returning by some mysterious obstructions imposed

by my authorities. The fact of the matter is very clear on the face of it

that those who have not returned have not done so because they do

not desire to return. As I had pointed out to him many times, we have

no desire nor reason to detain people in the U.S. against their will. He

and his authorities continued to make vague unsupported statements

that these people are being obstructed in returning. It is incredible to

me that he finds it possible to make such statements in the face of the

facts. The facts are that the very agency which he himself suggested has

not called to our attention a single case of obstruction. The Chinese in

the U.S. have continued to be entirely free to depart for his country if

they desired to do so. The sole question—let me say the sole determing

factor—is their own desire. He had again this morning presented vari­

ous figures. With regard to the 56 names he had submitted to me, I had

told him in the past and I told him again categorically this morning,

they and every other Chinese are entirely free to leave the U.S. if they

desire to do so.

3. I continued. He had talked about the figure of 103 and again

misrepresented that figure. As I had told him at the time I gave him

those names, they were not names of persons who necessarily desired

to return to his country. They were names of persons, and I repeated

this, they were names of persons to whom orders were issued prevent­

ing their leaving the U.S. during the Korean war for reasons of national

security. The fact that such orders were issued or that I gave him their

names here was not the slightest evidence that they desired to return. It

had no relation whatever to their desires. It was a purely preventative

measure and, as I told him at the outset of our talks here, those orders

have been entirely withdrawn. The fact that the orders were withdrawn

and the group was free to return any time it wanted to do so is estab­

lished by his own statement that eighty-two in fact have returned. With

regard to those in prison I outlined to him the measures which we had

taken to determine their desires after he rejected the first proposal that

I had made in this regard, and those who desired to return have done

so regardless of the length of their sentences.

4. I continued. These are the facts with regard to the return of

Chinese from my country to his country. They are not vague, unsup­

ported allegations; neither are they unilateral statements on my part.

They are facts known to all the world; they are facts established by

impartial evidence. If he continues to refuse to accept these facts, I can

only draw my own conclusions as to the reasons.

5. I continued. The facts with regard to Americans in his country are

equally clear. It is entirely clear and indisputable that of the 19 Americans

in his prisons at the time of our Agreed Announcement and concern­

ing which that Agreed Announcement said his authorities would adopt

measures for expediting their return, after over two years six still remain

in his prisons. It is a fact that since December 1955 not one American

has been returned prior to serving the full sentence imposed upon him.

It is the normal practice for every country of which I have knowledge

to remit substantial portions of sentences for normally good behaviour

of prisoners. Since having entered into the Agreement, these Americans

seem to have been deprived even of this privilege. Thus, apart from the

very serious and solemn question of obligation of his authorities under

the Agreed Announcement, the position of these prisoners seems mark­

edly to have worsened since the announcement of the Agreement. Apart

from their obligations under the Agreement, the action of his authorities

to continue to keep these persons in prisons is utterly in contradiction

to professions of desire for settling of questions and improvement of

relations between us. I and my government can only conclude this is a

deliberate policy.

6. Wang replied. He made a statement this morning with regard to

the tens of thousands of Chinese nationals residing in the U.S. including

5000 students, but this was not the same as saying that they wanted all

these to return or that all wanted to return. What he had specifically

made clear was that among these people, regardless of whether they were

ordinary residents or students who were in the U.S. to acquire knowl­

edge, many do desire to return to their homeland. That he had given me

a limited list of specified persons explained the fact that these persons

desired to return to their country. All these persons desired to return to

their country. All these persons have expressed a desire to return, but

have encountered difficulties in doing so. From the experiences of those

Chinese who succeeded in returning recently is explained the fact that

there exist various barriers and difficulties ­preventing their return. Some

of those who have returned complain that once they made known their

desire, they got in trouble with our authorities, who had them interro­

gated. There are cases in which my authorities tried to press persons

who made known their desire to go to his country to go to Taiwan

instead. There are cases in which persons whose desire to return to his

country were given such short notice they got into trouble in making

preparations to leave. There are cases of persons departing who have

had their property sequestered. These circumstances and the possibility

that they might encounter in departing some form of difficulty inhibited

their nationals from making up their minds to return to his country.

7. Wang continued. With regard to the 103 whose names I submit­

ted, the statement I gave this morning admitted the fact that those per­

sons were prohibited from returning to his country. The fact that my

authorities issued the order clearly explained the fact that there were

persons prevented from returning. It was still a fact that 21 still were

not able to return. Considering the points he had made this morning,

he therefore again requested me to impress on my government to take

measures necessary to remove all these obstacles so their nationals can

in fact exercise their right to return to their country without obstruction.

8. I replied. It seemed to me that on the one hand he was complain­

ing that we made persons go too quickly and on the other hand we

prevented them from going. All I was asking of Wang—all I ever asked

of Wang—is that Americans in prison who unquestionably desire to be

released and return be permitted to do so.

9. Wang indicated he had nothing more to say.

10. I said I had something more to discuss this morning. I then read

the following prepared statement:

“Mr. Ambassador, you will recall that at our 23rd and 24th meet­

ings I discussed with you the question of American military personnel

still missing from the Korean hostilities and concerning whom we had

solid grounds for believing that your side must have information. You

will recall that it was your position at the time that this matter should

be taken up in the Military Armistice Commission in Korea. I pointed

out that we were not concerned as to where the information was fur­

nished but only in obtaining the information.

“I was pleased and encouraged that when, in accordance with

your suggestion, the matter was again taken up by the United Nations

Command in the Military Armistice Commission, your side accepted

the lists of personnel which they had so long refused and promised to

investigate the matter. I and my Government hoped that at long last

your authorities had decided to liquidate this question by furnishing

the requested information. However, this hope was sorely disappointed

when at the 69th meeting of the Military Armistice Commission in

February of last year the lists were returned with simply the notation, in

the overwhelming majority of cases, of ‘no data’. In a lesser number of

cases your side finally admitted that the men had been prisoners of your

side but attempted to account for them by stating that they had escaped.

“Mr. Ambassador, as pointed out by the United Nations Command

representatives at the 79th meeting of the Military Armistice Commission

last month this information is simply not credible. Not a single one of

these men has ever returned to our side and if they had in fact at one

time escaped they must therefore have been recaptured or killed by

forces of your side. If such was the case, forces of your side must have

some record thereof and I cannot understand why they continue to

refuse to furnish it to us. I also find it astonishing that your side would

list as having escaped a man such as Capt. Harry Moreland who, as

I pointed out in our 64th meeting last January, had both legs amputated.

I find it incredible that your side would be able to say that it had no data

concerning a man such as Capt. Joseph S. Long, Jr. of the United States

Air Force, who, a broadcast from your side in April 1952 said, was alive

and a prisoner.

“However, when such facts were pointed out at the 79th Military

Armistice Commission meeting last month, representatives of your side

resorted to entirely irrelevant polemics rather than making any seri­

ous effort honestly to discuss the problem or to furnish the requested

information which they have recognized is their obligation under the

Korean Armistice Agreement.

“Mr. Ambassador, my purpose in again raising the question with

you here this morning is not to make accusations or to engage in polem­

ics, but rather to seek the cooperation of you and your authorities in

liquidating this problem.”

11. Wang replied. With regard to the question of missing personnel

in the Korean War that I had again brought up this morning, he had

made their attitude very clear in previous meetings. He did not consider

this subject within the terms of reference of our talks. He therefore did

not feel it was necessary to give a reply to me this morning.

12. I replied whether he considered it within the terms of reference

or not, it is a practical matter at issue between us. It is not a problem that

can be solved by sweeping it under the rug or doing nothing about it.

13. Wang said he had nothing more.

14. We agreed that our next meeting would be held on December 12.

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Letter No. 61

Geneva, November 14, 1957

Dear Ralph:

As you have seen Wang was today very mild and obviously just

marking time. There was no slightest mention of New Delhi or anything

Informal. Sent via air pouch. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

else. You will note that I made the tone of my statement on missing

military personnel somewhat milder than implied in the guidance tele­

gram. If our purpose is really to get information on these men I still

feel it is better with them and for the record to handle it, particularly

in a closed meeting such as this, in that manner rather than simply as a

propaganda blast. In any event the people in MAC seem fully capable

of exploiting the propaganda blast approach.

I cited the case of Long as the best additional case I could find. I am

somewhat confused on the now voluminous files on this subject here

which Dave had well in hand. If he has the time, I would appreciate

Dave dropping us a little note on any suggestions he may have based

on his memory of what we have on hand here.

I think you are right in issuing a passport to Wirin.

The correspondents issue seems to be completely dead on all sides.

I am sure that you are not, and I know that I am not, regretful that this

is the case. It certainly confirms that Peiping has no interest in letting in

American correspondents at this time. Incidentally, what has happened

with respect to the returning American students? I have seen nothing

whatever on it in recent weeks. You will have seen that I had the Tyler

couple in Prague.

I think your memo on Chinese in prisons is good.

Ed is working on the question of an instructor for Dexter and I will

let him tell you about that. I would be very glad if Dexter could arrive

here by the December meeting. I entirely agree that the best thing to do

is frankly to introduce him as Bob’s successor and will do so.

With respect to Bob I did not receive your letter of October 8 regard­

ing his travel orders until I arrived here this trip. I think that there may

be a little misunderstanding as to the problem. It is not one of giving him

State orders for travel within France, but rather of just having his State

orders read so that they cover travel from any place in France that he

may be to Geneva rather than just from Paris. As it now stands he is just

not able to collect anything for his August trip. He was at Roquebrune

on leave and instead of returning to Paris and originating his trip there,

he went directly from Roquebrune to Geneva which was also cheaper

for the Government. While the amount is not large he should be paid.

I was interested in talking to Ed and Dave Popper about the New

Delhi show. I had no idea that they had gone down there.

Thanks very much for Ken Young’s memo on his talk with the Pole.

I found it most interesting for its other points as well as the one on China.

Regards to all.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

842. Letter from Martin to Clough

London, November 19, 1957

Dear Ralph:

I am writing in response to the Department’s telegram 3375

instructing me to investigate instruction in Chinese available at l’Ecole

d’Interpretes at Geneva and Chinese tutors at Bern and Zurich, if any.

On Thursday afternoon, November 14, Bob Ekvall and I interviewed.

Mrs. Paul Chu, Chinese teacher at l’Ecole d’Interpretes, and on Friday

morning I talked to Madame Piguet at the school itself, which is part of

the University of Geneva. Late Friday afternoon I flew to Zurich hoping

to talk to Dr. Peng, the Chinese language teacher there. Though I was

disappointed to find that he had left town with his entire family for a

few days, I was able to discuss the problem with our Consul General,

who had been totally ignorant of what it was all about, and to suggest

certain questions be put to Dr. Peng by the Consulate General immedi­

ately upon his return to Zurich.

Both Ekvall and I were impressed with Mrs. Chu, the professor at

l’Ecole d’Interpretes. Her kuo yu is spoken with a genuine Peiping accent

and her English is fluent. Moreover, she claims to have had five years’

experience in teaching Chinese, two at Geneva and three at George

Washington University in Washington, D.C., where she received her

M.A. Mrs. Chu is very much interested in the problem of interpreting

and has a good opinion of her own abilities to teach it, which, I should

say on a first impression, is well-founded. She teaches two classes on

Saturday morning at l’Ecole d’Interpretes, one in interpreting and one

in advanced conversation. These are the only advanced Chinese courses

taught at the school. They cost only 12 francs per term.

Mrs. Chu would not commit herself to give private tutoring,

although Ekvall and I judged that she probably would if presented with

the actual opportunity. She felt that her two hours of instruction per week

at the University would be sufficient for a good student to maintain his

proficiency. While this may be somewhat optimistic, I personally doubt

that one hour a day would be necessary in addition to the two hours on

Saturday. If Dexter were to enroll in the two classes at the University,

two or three hours per week of supplementary tutoring from Mrs. Chu

would be more than adequate to meet his needs. Mrs. Chu indicated that

she would charge 10 francs per hour for private tutoring. If Mrs. Chu is

Official–­Informal. Martin signed the original “Ed.” A copy was sent to Johnson in Prague.

unwilling to give private tutoring, there are one or two other Chinese in

Geneva who could do so.

While I do not have the final answers on the situation in Zurich,

my feeling is that probably Dr. Peng would be able to give Dexter the

necessary practice, although I doubt very much that his professional

qualifications and capabilities in teaching interpreting approach those

of Mrs. Chu in Geneva. I hope that during this week you will receive a

telegraphic report from Zurich as to Dr. Peng’s capabilities and interest

in doing the job. As it looks now, from the standpoint of maintaining

and increasing his language and interpreting proficiency, Dexter should

be assigned to Geneva. As you are aware, Bern has not turned up any

potential instructors.

I feel that it is a mistake to assign Dexter to an already existing slot

either at Geneva or Zurich, and the officers in charge of these posts are

of like mind. The reasoning of the Consuls General is quite simple and,

to my mind, understandable. Their offices do not suffer from an excess

of slots to cover the work that has to be done. Thus they are not eager

to accept an officer for one of these slots who is from the outset going to

devote at best only 3/4 of his time to the job. In my own case, I can tell

you frankly, that the Minister and others here are not at all happy about

the amount of time I am away from my job at the Embassy. In effect, the

Geneva assignment takes about 1/4 of my time, and of course recently

the Delhi conference has taken me away for a much longer period. In

my case the Geneva assignment is at least related to the work I do here,

although, as I am sure CA is aware, I am supposed to be covering the

work here of 5 or 6 other geographic offices in the Department as well as

that of CA. In the case of Dexter, if he were to be assigned to Zurich, for

example, which is purely a consular post, his work would be entirely

unconnected with the Geneva meetings and the time spent on them and

on language training would be a dead loss to the Consulate. An assign­

ment like this would not be fair to the Consulate or to Dexter himself.

As for the Geneva assignment, I think it would be very unfortu­

nate to put Dexter in a general service officer’s slot. The only reason

for Dexter’s assignment and for his continued language training is that

at Geneva we are maintaining some sort of tenuous diplomatic contact

with the Chinese Communists. The history of the past 4–5 years has

demonstrated that the Peiping regime has to be dealt with, at least at

this minimum level, and I see no reason to believe that developments

in the future will make it any more possible to refrain from having

some dealings with the authorities who control some 1/2 billion of

the world’s population. Certainly our operation in Geneva is impor­

tant enough to stand on its own feet, at least to the extent of providing

the salary and perquisites of one full-time officer. I feel that develop­

ing Dexter and, I hope, several other language officers as first-class

interpreters-cum-negotiators will pay off in the long run regardless of

who controls China. We are certainly never going to get back to the

“Taipan” and “Legation quarter” days.

Thus I sincerely hope that another look can be taken at Dexter’s

assignment, as I do not think we should try to fit him into some pre-­

existing slot entirely unrelated to the real purpose of his assignment to

Switzerland, which would not allow him to contribute his best either

to the work of the local office or to our own operation. Why not frankly

assign him to Geneva for the purpose of our operation and let his spare

time be utilized for economic and political reporting, for cultivating

contacts with Asian delegations assigned to Geneva and in other ways

useful both to his own development and to the work of the Consulate

General. Both Gowen and Popper have told me they could find plenty

of useful work of this kind for him to do.

Sincerely,

Edwin W. Martin

First Secretary of Embassy

Washington, November 21, 1957

182. For Ambassador Only. Your tel 297.

We agree you should go ahead with December 12 meeting.

Would like your comment on following alternative methods con­

tinuing talks under consideration here: 1) Beam meet with Wang in

Warsaw, 2) Rankin commute Geneva from Belgrade following assign­

ment there, 3) talks be continued at lower level and conducted by Martin

commuting to Geneva.

Dulles

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Howe (S/S), Henderson (O), and

Elbrick (EUR). The time of transmission is illegible.

316. Deptel 182.

From substantive standpoint favor alternative which would des­

ignate another officer of ambassador rank for continuation talks at

Geneva. However, suggest CHICOMS may identify Rankin with GRC

to degree that would tend to prejudice his negotiations if and when

CHICOMS may shift from present attitude. Therefore, suggest possibil­

ity Bonbright commuting Geneva from Lisbon. If this not feasible favor

Beam meeting Wang in Warsaw. This would, of course, require Martin

commute London-Warsaw (this appears practicable from airline sched­

ules available here) and preferably assignment Dexter to Warsaw. If

this done, believe we should also suggest to CHICOMS alternative

of Martin meeting at Geneva with CHICOM representative on under­

standing consideration would be given again designating an ambassa­

dor if and when it appeared desirable.

Must anticipate Wang will require instructions before replying to me

on any alternative that lowers level talks or moves them from Geneva.

In this event Martin could remain at or return to Geneva to receive their

reply and make agreement, including public announcement, for next

meeting. In such case we could simply state following December 12 meet­

ing that date next meeting will subsequently be announced. In event I just

inform Wang of designation new ambassador for subsequent meetings,

this could be included in announcement following meeting without mak­

ing reference to my transfer from Prague unless that is ­otherwise publicly

known at time. (I would prefer to postpone announcement my transfer

from Prague until very shortly before my departure.)

In any event would appreciate December 12 meeting instructions

also covering publicity aspects.

Johnson

Limit Distribution.

Letter No. 77

Washington, November 26, 1957

Dear Alex:

I am enclosing an exchange of correspondence between Mrs. Downey

and Mr. Robertson. Mrs. Downey’s renewed request for permission to

visit her son caused us to reconsider our policy of denying passports to

relatives of prisoners for visits to Communist China. After weighing the

various considerations we have decided to recommend to the Secretary

that we authorize travel by those relatives of the six remaining prisoners

who may wish to make the trip.

We recognize, of course, that this action will attract a good deal

of publicity and will constitute another breach in our policy opposing

travel by Americans to Communist China, particularly coming so soon

after our approval of Wirin’s travel. However, we felt that those relatives

have a far stronger claim than could be put forward by any others who

may wish to visit Communist China and we feel we could defend our

policy against further encroachment. On the plus side there is the possi­

bility that one or more of the prisoners might be released on the occasion

of his relative’s visit. I am not optimistic that this will happen, but at

least we will have taken every possible step to bring about the release of

those unfortunate people.

It is possible that the Communists may not desire such visits at this

time or may seize upon our action to demand reciprocal rights for visits

by relatives of Chinese prisoners in this country. I think we would have

to oppose any such maneuver on their part and it would give us an

opportunity to retell the story of our offer to release Chinese prisoners

which leaves the Chinese Communists in a rather weak propaganda

position.

In order to minimize the possibility of giving the Communists any

pretext for accusing us of “inequality”, “one-sidedness”, “espionage”,

etc., we thought it would be best for the relatives to apply individually

to the Chinese Communist Red Cross rather than for us to take it up at

the Geneva talks.

In view of Hammarskjold’s interest in this subject we would notify

him before our action was made public.

I would appreciate receiving by telegram any comments you may

have on this proposed course of action.

­Informal. A copy was sent to Martin and to Geneva.

Judging from Wang’s behavior at the last meeting, the Chinese

Communists have run out of ideas for the time being. I am enclosing a

very interesting report from the British Embassy concerning a remark­

able lecture given by Chou En-lai to the assembled chiefs of mission in

Peiping. His statement that they are willing to go on talking at Geneva

for 10 or 20 years if necessary indicates we need have no fear of an early

break-off on their part.

We expect to have a decision from the Secretary soon on the method

of carrying on the talks after your transfer. I expect to write you further

on that before the next meeting.

Sincerely,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosures:

199. For Ambassador. Partial guidance for December 12 meeting:

1. Inform Wang you being transferred. State US desires continue

talks Geneva and will designate Martin represent US. FYI You would

not ask Wang designate another representative but we assume he

would not wish continue himself under these circumstances and repre­

sentative of appropriate rank would be appointed. END FYI

2. If Wang accepts you should propose limiting press announce­

ment following meeting to usual statement of date next meeting. If

Wang insists, announcement may also state “for administrative rea­

sons” next meeting to be held between Martin and Chinese Communist

representative. You may tell Wang you desire delay public announce­

ment impending transfer until new appointment officially confirmed.

Distribution. Drafted by Osborn and Clough; cleared by Jones. Also sent to Geneva for

Ambassdor Johnson as telegram 546 and repeated to London for Martin as telegram 4085.

3. If Wang states requires instructions before replying you should

inform him reply should be addressed Martin at Geneva who will be

empowered agree on date and public announcement regarding next

meeting.

4. If Wang refuses continue talks on proposed basis, insisting on

ambassadorial level, inform him we remain ready continue talks but

cannot designate ambassador for this purpose this time. You should

maintain this position even in unlikely event Wang threatens break. If

Wang suggests alternative basis for continuing talks, you may inform

him suggestion will be reported Department but that for number com­

pelling reasons only feasible basis at this time is one proposed by you.

FYI Department believes it unlikely Chinese Communists will break

off talks, especially in view Chou’s recent statement to foreign chiefs

mission Peiping they ready continue talking ten or twenty years if nec­

essary. In give and take you should be careful retain freedom action

for US to propose restoring talks to ambassadorial level at some future

time when this might be desirable END FYI.

5. Your announcement of change in US representation in talks

should follow strong statement of US disappointment at Chinese

Communist failure to live up to public commitment release all jailed

Americans and their failure renounce force so that Wang will perceive

connection between our disappointment at meager results of talks and

our unwillingness to continue at ambassadorial level.

Dulles

Announcements of next meeting customarily are to effect “two

ambassadors will meet again . . .”. As such statement would clearly be

inaccurate believe it may be preferable for me take initiative in propos­

ing announcement state “for administrative reasons” Martin will be US

representative next meeting handling question CHICOM representative

Distribution. Repeated to London for Martin only as telegram 17.

according to developments at meeting. In view of New York Times

December 1 Washington story Department “contemplating” my trans­

fer to Bangkok have received inquiries on future meetings with Wang

from press representatives at Geneva and must expect flat inquiries

after December 12 meeting even if question hedged or avoided in for­

mal announcement of next meeting. Therefore, while I would have

preferred further postpone news my departure from Prague, under cir­

cumstances believe it preferable for news Martin designation frankly

be announced following December 12 meeting and matter be inter­

preted in context and manner our choosing by statement subsequently

to be made by Department rather than permitting it leak out in piece­

meal and probably distorted form. In reply to press inquiries following

meeting would informally confirm I expected transfer from Prague but

had no firm information on new assignment. Any additional informa­

tion would have to come from Washington. If Wang does not accept

Martin designation, asks time to receive instruction or otherwise no

agreement is reached between us I will attempt obtain his agreement

to simple statement that announcement concerning next meeting will

subsequently be made or unilaterally make such announcement myself

giving no information to press on expectation my transfer from here

or our proposal for Martin’s designation. However, in this event must

anticipate considerable press speculation.

Johnson

848. Letter from Martin to Clough

London, December 6, 1957

Dear Ralph:

It was with mild surprise that I received Deptel 4085 yesterday.

While I was aware that Alex was being transferred, I had assumed that

the Department would be arranging for some other Mission Chief in the

area to carry on with the Geneva talks. I am, of course, flattered that the

Department should repose enough confidence in me to designate me to

continue them after Alex’s departure. However, I am somewhat dubi­

ous about the Chinese Communist willingness to carry on negotiations

Official–­Informal. A copy was sent to Johnson at Geneva.

at my level at least for some time to come. While I claim no special com­

petence in reading Chinese tea leaves, I thought I should communicate

my preliminary reaction to your telegram as soon as possible.

I think it virtually inconceivable that Wang will agree to negoti­

ate personally with me and unlikely that he will agree at the meeting

to designate another representative. While I concur in your judgment

that the Chinese Communists are unlikely to break off the talks, I think

they may be willing to see them suspended indefinitely on the issue of

the level at which they are to be conducted. They may argue that just

because the talks have bogged down is no reason to put them on a lower

level. Progress is less likely at a lower level (their line may run) than at

the Ambassadorial level, while if we are really sincere in our desire to

settle differences, we should agree to talks on the Foreign Minister level.

Thus the Chinese Communists may well take the occasion of Alex’s

departure to renew their propaganda for Foreign Minister level meet­

ing, though indicating willingness to continue at the Ambassadorial

level. My guess is that they may hold to this position for some time,

making clear that they are not breaking off the talks but simply waiting

until we have seen fit to appoint another Ambassador to carry them on.

My feeling that the Chinese Communists are likely to hold out for

Ambassadorial talks is based on the fact that I can see no great pressure

on Peiping to agree to talks at a lower level, which would be a move in

precisely the opposite direction to that advocated by them. While Chou

En-lai told the Mission Chiefs in Peiping recently that his regime would

be willing to carry on the talks for ten or twenty years, he did this,

I think, in the context of his discussion of the so-called two-China pol­

icy. He was indicating on the one hand, that the Chinese Communists

would not agree to such a policy even though negotiations at Geneva

were to go on for ten or twenty years, and, on the other hand, that the

Chinese Communists were very patient and would not be the ones to

break off negotiations. I recall, too, that he referred specifically to the

“Ambassadorial” talks and I can’t see that there was anything in his

remarks which indicated eagerness to carry these talks on at a lower

level.

To say that I doubt that the Chinese Communists will accept lower

level talks (at least for some time to come) is not to say that we should

not make the pitch outlined in the telegram under reference. Looking

back over the talks, I think it fair to say that they were quite produc­

tive for the first five months but not since them. While certainly some

purpose has been served even during the period since December,

usual protests at the negotiating table. Alex’s transfer provides us with

such an opportunity.

I think we should anticipate the possibility that the Chinese

Communists, having read the New York Times article of December 1,

will have foreseen that Alex will say his farewells at the Thursday meet­

ing and will have prepared their positions in advance to meet various

contingencies. Thus they may have already decided that they will not

consent to continue discussions at a lower level and will be prepared

to explain their position to the press immediately after the meeting.

While it is possible that they might even take this pretext to end the

talks entirely, my feeling is (as indicated above) that they are more

likely to stress their willingness to continue the talks but only at the

Ambassadorial level. I think we should be prepared for such a contin­

gency as this and have our reasons for designating me rather than an

Ambassador ready to give the press.

Another contingency for which to prepare a press explanation is

the one mentioned in paragraph three of the reference telegram. Under

these circumstances we would have to explain to the press why no date

was set for the next meeting, since absence of this information would

inevitably lead to speculation that the talks had been broken off.

In case the talks do continue without interruption, I wonder

whether I can carry them on effectively without assistance. Since I have

seen no indication that the Department is contemplating providing

me with an “advisor”, I take it that you do not feel that at the present

pace of the talks there is need for one. Certainly at the tempo of last

month’s meeting I think I could manage on my own but there would

be no assurance that the meetings would continue at such a low key.

Alex has apparently felt on the basis of his long experience that it was

essential to have an advisor.

One final item: Am I correct in assuming that paragraph three of

the reference telegram simply means that the Consulate General in

Geneva will act as a postbox for me and that it is not contemplated that

I will be staying on at Geneva?

I am sending a copy of this letter to Geneva so that I can discuss

it with Alex and get his reactions, and in case you wish to cable your

reactions to it there.

Sincerely yours,

Edwin W. Martin

First Secretary of Embassy

1. Concur your suggestion that you seek Wang’s agreement to

announcement Martin’s designation following meeting. You may

inform press informally you expect transfer from Prague but final deci­

sion next post not yet made. In response queries reasons for change in

level representation at talks you should state any comment would have

to come from Department.

2. In event Wang unwilling agree Martin designation at meeting seek

his agreement on announcement of date next meeting or, if he refuses,

propose statement that announcement as to date next meeting will be

made later. Concur your recommendation that in these circumstances no

repeat no comment be made to press concerning Martin designation or

your transfer.

3. Mark any messages which contain references your transfer Limit

Distribution for Henderson only.

Dulles

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Henderson and Jones.

557. For Johnson.

Guidance for December 12 meeting:

1. Express dissatisfaction Chinese Communist continued failure

permit return civilians desiring to do so. This question could have been

settled in first week or even first day of talks by simple word and act

their part. Should have been settled finally on September 10, 1955 when

Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by Robertson, the substance of paragraph 5 by

Becker (L), and in draft by Dulles.

they agreed take measures permit Americans expeditiously exercise

right to return. Yet six Americans remain in jail Communist China, 824

days later.

2. With regard question accounting for US military personnel miss­

ing unaccounted for from Korean hostilities, remind Wang he said at

last meeting did not feel it necessary reply that question that morning.

There been 50 meetings since question raised in talks. Surely on one

those mornings he could have offered request his authorities investi­

gate matter and furnish information.

3. On renunciation force, most fundamental practical matter at

issue, Chinese Communist attitude past year and half been one of

unwillingness even discuss seriously.

4. If Wang raises matter visits by relatives, state United States

decided issue passports for such visits in view prolonged tragic sepa­

ration six men from families and messages received by family members

from Chinese Communist Red Cross inviting them to make trip. Decision

whether or not apply for passports for such purpose up to individuals

concerned. Number if any of persons who will apply not known. Any

applying will be advised contact Chinese Communist Red Cross. If Wang

seeks reciprocity agreement, reject and point out US not preventing any

Chinese from departing US. If Wang refers to Chinese in jail in US remind

him our earlier offer permit all return who desired and allow Indian

Embassy confirm their wishes. Inform Wang that if Chinese Communists

truly interested in reciprocity they should show reciprocity by removing

all obstacles to departure remaining detained Americans as US did prior

to August 1, 1955 regarding Chinese in US.

5. If Wang proposes agreement on mutual judicial assistance in

connection projected visit Communist China by defense counsel in

Powell-Schumann case, advise him such agreement impossible and

unnecessary. If Chinese Communists choose withhold cooperation with

defense counsel in collection evidence for defense Powell-Schumann,

this their own responsibility. US Government has no responsibility this

regard.

6. With reference arrangements for succeeding meetings, follow

previous guidance (Department’s 199 to Prague and also 556 to Geneva).

Dulles

In absence of guidance to contrary I propose to handle press mat­

ters as follows:

In most likely event no agreement reached on next meeting, I will,

preferably in agreement with Wang, inform press that announcement

concerning next meeting will subsequently be made, that as I expect

transfer from Prague I will not further participate in talks, and US has

accordingly made proposal to Wang for conduct of future talks on

which we awaiting PRC reply. Would point out that accordance agree­

ment on confidential nature talks cannot give substance our proposal.

In event agreement reached on next meeting with Martin as pointed

out my reply from Prague to Deptel 546 it not rpt not possible for me

propose to Wang “usual statement” to effect that two of us will again

meet as this clearly not true. Therefore would propose announcement

along lines second sentence para two Deptel 546 informally confirming

to press after meeting that I will not again be meeting here because I

expect transfer from Prague.

In event Wang issues public statement accusing US of attempting

break off meetings or other such charges will promptly reply with state­

ment of facts consulting Dept as seems desirable and leaving to Dept

issuance of any extended reply.

In any above contingencies I will, of course, confine myself to

statement I expect be leaving Prague without making any reference to

possibility Bangkok appointment.

Gowen

Limit Distribution.

563. For Johnson. Your 506.

1. Presume you now have Deptel 556.

2. Concur your proposed tactics in event Wang issues accusatory

public statement following meeting.

3. In event no agreement on next meeting, Department believes

preferable announcement follow lines paragraph 2 Department’s 556.

Appreciate would cause speculation, but believe such speculation more

easily dealt with than that which would be stimulated by mention of

US “proposal,” and fact we awaiting reply.

4. Concur your proposed tactic in event agreement reached:

i.e., propose announcement along lines second sentence paragraph 2

Department’s 546, informally commenting to press as per last sentence

first substantive paragraph your 506.

5. Unless you deem necessary because of unforeseen circumstances,

see no need Martin remaining Geneva after meeting. Consulate General

should transmit him any communication from Chinese Communists.

Dulles

Limit Distribution. Drafted by Osborn; cleared in draft by Robertson.

510. From Johnson.

One hour fifty minute meeting this morning.

557, closing with statement on my transfer and designation of Martin.

Wang closely questioned me on designation Martin “as to whether

U.S. was purposely changing level of Ambassadorial talks” and

Limit Distribution.

therefore “nature” of talks. I replied along lines para 4 Deptel 546 and

Wang said would have to consult government. When, in reply my state­

ment answer should be addressed Martin, he insisted reply only to me,

I emphasized that as of close meeting today Martin was U.S. represent­

ative. He rejected my suggestion announcement be made concerning

date next meeting and we finally agreed on announcement, that we had

held 73rd meeting today and Ambassadors “stated an announcement

would subsequently be made concerning the next meeting”.

He made proposal for agreed announcement on judicial assist­

ance on basis “equality and reciprocity” and therefore “governments of

two countries decided to appoint experts to start negotiations on sub­

stance and concrete arrangements of an agreement on judicial assist­

ance between the two countries”. In original presentation and give and

take laid heavy emphasis on fact U.S. District Court an instrumentality

of U.S. Government had made request to PRC Ministry of Justice.

I, of course, rejected along lines paragraph 5 Deptel 557. He

­indicated they will issue public statement on this.

Full text draft agreed announcement on judicial assistance by

­separate telegram.

Full report of meeting being pouched Friday.

Gowen

854. Despatch unnumbered from Geneva

Geneva, December 12, 1957

SUBJECT

China Talks—73rd Meeting

1. I opened 73rd meeting with prepared statement:

(a) Mr. Ambassador, when we first met here in August, 1955 again

to discuss, among other things, the question of Americans in your coun­

try desiring to return to the United States but prevented from doing so,

I pointed out to you the fundamental importance of this question to

the future relations between our two peoples. I also pointed out to you

that the question could have been settled even on the first day of our

talks if your authorities had taken the simple and straightforward step

Distribution. Received on December 19.

of doing no more than matching the action that had been taken by my

government with respect to the Chinese in the United States—that is,

withdrawing all measures preventing their departure and permitting

them to return. This would have permitted us promptly to proceed to

the discussion of other questions in an atmosphere that would give

greater hope of constructive results. However, your authorities refused

to take this straightforward and reciprocal step and you insisted that

I enter into public agreement with you on the subject. Although I saw

no necessity for such an agreement, I concurred in your proposal, even

including your proposal on third party representation in the U.S. I did

this on the clear understanding, which was embodied in the specific

words of the agreement, that this would promptly resolve the prob­

lem of Americans detained in your country. The agreement into which

we entered on September 10, 1955 in fact specifically said that your

authorities agreed to take measures to permit Americans (not just some

Americans, but all Americans) expeditiously to exercise their right to

return. Yet eight hundred and twenty four days after we entered into

that agreement, Mr. Ambassador, six Americans still remain in your

prisons. I have, in the past, and must again today express to you as

solemnly as I can, the dissatisfaction of myself, my government and the

American people with this absurdly long delay of your authorities in

resolving this problem and in carrying out their pledged word in the

first agreement ever reached between us.

(b) At our twenty-third meeting on October 27, 1955, I raised with

you the question of the failure of your side to account for many U.S.

military personnel still missing from the Korean hostilities. I pointed

out to you that each of these men were last seen or heard from under

circumstances indicating that he was either captured or killed by forces

of your side and that your authorities should have information concern­

ing them. I also pointed out many specific cases in which your official

radio, as well as press, had specifically identified persons on the list as

being prisoners of your side. Yet they were never returned nor was any

report even received of their death. In the time that has elapsed during

the fifty meetings that have taken place since that period, no satisfac­

tory accounting of these men has been made in the Military Armistice

Commission in Korea or here. Surely at one of these meetings it would

have been very simple and straightforward for you to have offered to

request your authorities to investigate the matter and furnish us infor­

mation to which we are entitled not only on humanitarian grounds but

also by the specific terms of the Korean armistice agreement. Yet you

have not done so.

to you a proposal suggesting that we renounce in reciprocal terms

the use of force in the settlement of issues between us, that is, either we

were going to permit our disputes to lead to hostilities between us, or

we were going to express our joint determination to seek their settle­

ment by peaceful means only. I pointed out the importance of any such

declaration, especially with regard to the Taiwan area, and that such an

agreement need not in any way prejudice the position of either side or

the pursuit of its policies by peaceful means. Yet you have persisted in

misinterpreting and misrepresenting this simple proposal which is in

full accord with accepted standards of international conduct and for the

past year and a half have not even been willing seriously to discuss it.

Mr. Ambassador, this has also been a source of deep disappointment to

me and to my country.

(d) Mr. Ambassador, as this is my last meeting with you it is a

source of particularly keen disappointment to me this morning to have

to recount this record of the failure of your authorities to live up to the

first and only agreement reached between us as well as their failure to

take any steps to resolve these other outstanding issues. When I came

here almost two and one half years ago I had high hopes that your

government would be promptly responsive to these few fundamental

and mutually advantageous suggestions for the removal of obstacles to

the improvement of our relations and thus establish an atmosphere in

which other problems could profitably be discussed. I desire to inform

you that I am being transferred from Prague to a new post and it will

therefore not be possible for me further to carry on these talks with you.

However, my government persists in its determination and willing­

ness patiently to seek a settlement of our differences and accordingly

desires to continue these talks here. To this end Mr. Edwin Martin will

be ­designated as the United States representative.”

2. Wang replied. The record of our talks of more than two years

shows we have not done the duty given to us to settle the issues pend­

ing between our two countries. He came to these talks with me with

great hopes. It is a fact that there existed a number of practical issues

between our two countries. The existence of such issues between our

two countries not only exerts an influence on the relations between our

two countries, but also leads to the tense situation in the Far East. It was

with the desire of resolving the issues between our two countries as

well as to improve our relations that he had in the course of the entire

talks made various concrete proposals to bring about this end. Yet he

must point out that the Ambassador and the United States Government

have not given sufficient attention to proposals that he has made.

3. Wang continued. The progress of our talks has suffered due to

the policy of my government during the entire course of these talks to

obstruct and drag on deliberately what we have started here. For this

his side is extremely dissatisfied with the situation of these talks. And

the responsibility for this state of affairs is not on his side at all.

4. Wang continued. At this morning’s meeting he still would like

to bring up and discuss with me another matter that is relative to the

relations between our two countries. In view of the fact that an American

court has requested the Chinese Ministry of Justice for judicial assist­

ance in connection with the Powell case, he now proposed on behalf

of his government that our two countries conclude an agreement to

render each other judicial assistance. On September 3, 1957 the United

States District Court of Northern California corresponded directly with

the Ministry of Justice of his country and put forth a request for judicial

assistance for Mr. and Mrs. Powell and Mr. Schumann, all American

citizens and editors of the “China Monthly Review”. The Chinese

authorities are willing to meet the request of the U.S. Court. However,

in accordance with international practice, only after the two countries

have reached agreement on judicial assistance, can assistance be ren­

dered in specific cases in accordance with the provisions of the agree­

ment. As a matter of fact the U.S. Government has concluded bilateral

or multilateral agreements on judicial assistance with other countries.

It can readily be seen that the procedure referred to above by the U.S.

District Court is not in keeping with proper procedure. For this rea­

son the Chinese Ministry of Justice was obliged to return the origi­

nal request on October 30 of this year. Nevertheless, in its message of

reply the Ministry of Justice specifically stated that if the Chinese and

American governments reached agreement for judicial assistance the

request in the Powell case would be eligible for consideration. Since

the Chinese Ministry of Justice stated the aforesaid position, no step

has so far been taken by the American authorities to promote a judicial

agreement between our two countries. Yet on November 2 of this year

the American State Department issued a passport valid for travel to

China to Mr. Wirin, Powells’ defense attorney, for the purpose of taking

testimony. It is evident that in the absence of a judicial agreement, it

would be impossible for Mr. Wirin to accomplish the purpose of taking

testimony.

5. Wang continued. In order to resolve the question of judicial

assistance in the case of the Powells as well as other cases which may

be raised in either country in the future, he proposed that both sides

make the following agreed announcement so that cases can be taken

up speedily. It is hoped that I and my government would give careful

consideration to this proposal.

6. Wang then handed me the following text:

“Agreed Announcement of the Ambassadors of the People’s

Republic of China and the United States of America Concerning

Negotiations on Judicial Assistance. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan,

on behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of China, and

Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson, on behalf of the Government of the

United States of America, agree to announce:

In order to give each other judicial assistance on the basis of equal­

ity and reciprocity, the Government of the People’s Republic of China

and the Government of the United States of America deem it necessary

to reach an agreement on judicial assistance between the two countries.

The Governments of the two countries decide to appoint experts to

start negotiations on the substance and concrete arrangements of an

agreement on judicial assistance between the two countries.” End text.

7. I replied. As communications from his country to Mr. Wirin had

indicated their intention of making a proposal of this kind, this matter

has already been given careful consideration of my government. First let

me point out that it is Mr. Wirin as the defense attorney for the defend­

ants Powell who is seeking to obtain testimony in his country and not

the U.S. Government and that the court was simply acting on Wirin’s

behalf. A passport has now been issued to Mr. Wirin for the purpose of

taking the testimony he seeks on behalf of his clients. It is entirely up to

the authorities of his country whether or not they desire to cooperate

with Mr. Wirin in the collection of the evidence which he seeks. There is

no responsibility of the U.S. Government in this regard. It is clearly not

necessary to have a judicial assistance agreement such as he proposed

to permit Wirin to take the testimony that he seeks. Countries com­

monly permit the taking of such testimony without intergovernmental

agreements. I myself have often had experience in this regard. I was

therefore authorized to inform him that the U.S. Government does not

consider it possible to enter into such agreement and does not consider

such an agreement necessary for the taking of such testimony.

8. Wang replied. He considered the response made by me to this

question as not satisfactory. No matter who is going there to take tes­

timony, the case is not one of an individual applying to the Chinese

Ministry of Justice, but it is the District Court of Northern California

that has made the request to the Ministry of Justice. Clearly this court

is an institution of the United States and cannot be anything else. The

statement has been made to the effect that an individual person may

proceed to obtain testimony in a foreign country without the agreement

of the government concerned. Such a statement cannot be regarded as

correct. That statement does not conform even with the accords signed

by the United States itself with foreign countries.

9. Wang continued. He just would cite one case. At the 6th Inter-

American Conference held in Havana in 1928 a Bustamante code was

adopted at that conference at which the U.S. was represented. Article

388 of this code states that every judicial step which a country has to

take in another country will be carried out by letters consular or let­

ters rogatory submitted through diplomatic channels. If, as I said, the

possibility of judicial assistance existed without the necessity of agree­

ment between the governments concerned, then this article in the

Bustamante code in which U.S. has associated itself would appear to be

irrelevant. Now the fundamental fact is that an institution of the U.S.

has put forward such a request to his authorities and his authorities

have expressed willingness to meet this request so that it can be han­

dled by proper channels and procedures. Since I had made a remark

that it was not necessary for governments to reach agreement on the

handling of judicial assistance and if this is the considered opinion of

the U.S. does this mean that the U.S. no longer seeks such judicial assist­

ance. If so, the U.S. has reversed its position.

10. I replied. I happened to have had personally considerable expe­

rience in this field while serving as consular officer at various posts.

It is up to each country to determine for itself whether it will permit

the taking of testimony within its territory and under what circum­

stances it will permit the taking of such testimony. Letters rogatory are

merely one form for taking of such testimony. There are many other

forms. It is up to the country in which the testimony is to be taken to

determine in what form it may be taken and the courts in the coun­

try where the testimony is to be used to determine the acceptability

of that form. The  1928 Havana Convention which he cited certainly

has not ­supported the statement that testimony cannot be taken in the

absence of such agreement. It merely agrees that letters rogatory will

be the form. In the absence of agreements, it is up to each country to

decide for itself. Mr. Wirin has been issued a passport at his request for

the purpose of taking testimony in Wang’s country. Whether Wang’s

government permits Wirin to do so and in what form it permits him to

do so is entirely up to the decision of his authorities. It is not a matter in

which the U.S. Government has responsibility.

11. Wang replied. There exist two forms of judicial assistance

between two countries. One of the forms is to proceed in accordance

with international practice. The other is to proceed not in accord­

ance  with international practice; one of the forms shows respect for

the other country whereas the other form does not show such respect.

One of the sides has requested judicial assistance from the other while

at the same time it is not going to follow international practice in this

regard. This cannot be considered as showing respect for another coun­

try. Suppose an official institution in China approaches a court of the

U.S. Government. He would presume the U.S. Government would not

agree to this procedure. His side has already made clear that they are

ready and willing to consider the request made by the American court.

But this matter must be handled and settled in accordance with proper

procedures in this respect. Since I had made it clear that the U.S. will

not consider entering into an agreement to cooperate on this matter, it

appears that on the one hand the U.S. has made the request while on

the other it refuses the acceptance of this request and its satisfaction.

He much regretted the failure to reach an agreement on a matter on

which his authorities were first approached by an American institution.

It would appear that the U.S. Government has made up its mind not to

resolve any issues between our two countries. He cannot but express

regret and dissatisfaction. He wants to make clear that they will take

steps to make known their position in this matter.

12. Wang continued. I had just informed him of my transfer to a

new post. He recalled that the present series of talks between us was

started by the two of us and at one time was carried on by the Consuls

General of our two governments in Geneva. Then, on the initiative of

the U.S., the consular contacts were elevated to the present level of

Ambassadors. He regretted that he had not been able to accomplish the

tasks and hopes entrusted to us by our peoples and governments. One

thing on which he wanted to be clear following my transfer whether

my government is going to change nature talks at Ambassadorial rank.

13. I replied. There is no intent to change the nature of these talks.

As I told him it is the desire of my government that they continue.

However, compelling reasons do not make it possible for us to desig­

nate a person of Ambassadorial rank at this time for this purpose. As

he knows, Mr. Martin is a senior and experienced officer of our foreign

service who as he knew, except for a brief interval, has been connected

with these talks from the beginning. He has the full confidence of the

U.S. Government and it is the opinion of the U.S. Government that he is

best able to carry them on at this time.

14. Wang replied. The purpose of his asking the question was to

clarify the nature of the talks and not an expression of opinion on any

individual person. With regard to my information he was not in a posi­

tion to make a reply but he had to report back to his government. He

will consult with his government and when any reply was received he

would let me know.

15. I suggested that Mr. Lai or Mr. Chiu could address a letter to

Mr. Martin at the Consulate General here. I added that Mr. Martin is

authorized to agree to a time and place for the next meeting.

16. Wang replied that in any event he will communicate to me the

opinion of his government about arrangements for the next step.

17. I commented that it might delay this as I might be leaving

shortly.

18. Wang replied that they could communicate with me via

Mr. Martin.

19. I stated that at the close of the meeting I was no longer the U.S.

representative but that it was all right to address the letter to me if he

[illegible in the original] as long as Mr. Martin gets it.

20. Wang replied that the important thing is that arrangements for

these talks to continue is a matter to be decided by two not one party.

21. I stated that I was not arguing that point but that Martin is our

channel.

22. Wang replied. He wanted to make it clear that he was not express­

ing an opinion on a person but that these talks at Ambassadorial rank

had been raised from consular rank and were known as Ambassadorial

talks. Of course he welcomed Mr. Martin’s designation, but as he

understood it, Mr. Martin had not been given the rank of Ambassador.

In this respect it involves a change in their nature and thus the talks

cannot be considered as Ambassadorial talks. Again he wanted to state

it does not involve any personal opinion against Mr. Martin. He per­

sonally appreciates Mr. Martin’s ability and Mr. Martin certainly enjoys

the U.S. Government’s confidence. Mr. Martin is well informed on our

problems.

23. Wang continued that he wanted further clarification. We began

with Ambassadors who had their advisers. Each team was headed by

an Ambassador. Now that I was being transferred and Mr. Martin des­

ignated, the talks cannot be considered as Ambassadorial but between

advisers.

24. I asked whether we needed to raise the problem. The talks were

being continued between the representatives of the two governments.

As I told him previously, it was not possible to designate an Ambassador

at this time.

25. Wang replied. He recalled that our association began in 1954.

I  would recall that after the talks between us were instituted I was

unable to continue. I agreed to designate an administrative officer to

continue the contact. As I was aware the talks were on the same level.

If there is any change in the level, it involves a change in the nature of

talks and the nature of the problems to be settled will be influenced. The

nature or rank of diplomatic negotiations has a bearing on their ability

to resolve problems in negotiations. For instance, matters handled at

the supreme level between heads of government cannot be ­handled by

foreign ministers.

26. I stated that I thought it was up to each government as to the

authority and competence it gives to each representative. Mr. Martin

will be diplomatic representative.

27. Wang replied that he had to consult his government on this

matter and would give a reply when he had been informed.

28. I stated that the reply, however, should be addressed to

Mr. Martin at the Consulate. I added that there was the matter of a

press announcement. If we could give a date, there would be less press

speculation. We could give a date without discussing the level. I would

suggest “Representatives of the U.S. and the Peoples Republic of China

will meet on January 9th”. That is four weeks from today. If for any

­reason there is a change, that could subsequently be announced.

29. Wang replied, should we make announcement along this line,

“Ambassador Johnson has been given a new appointment. For this

­reason the present talks between the two countries are suspended. The

procedure for the future talks will subsequently be agreed between

the two sides”.

30. I stated that that presented a personal difficulty for me.

He  was the first to be told of my transfer. I had not yet informed

the Czechoslovak Government. I would prefer that a statement on the

future of the talks be made. What I had in mind was: “Ambassadors U.

Alexis Johnson and Wang Ping-nan held their 73rd meeting today. They

stated an announcement would subsequently be made as to the date of

the next meeting.”

31. When Wang appeared to demur at this, I suggested the substi­

tution of “concerning” for “as to the date of”.

32. Wang agreed.

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

Letter No. 62

Geneva, December 12, 1957

Dear Ralph:

This is my final letter from the Geneva Ambassadorial talks. I can­

not say that from a personal standpoint I am sad as the last year, in

particular, has been very sterile. However, I am sad that more has not

been accomplished.

As far as the future is concerned I feel that we may well be in for

a long hiatus with their reply being that they stand ready to resume

the talks at any time we appoint an Ambassador, but that they see no

purpose in meetings at a lower level. Frankly, I do not feel that they will

feel any pressure to take action along the lines of releasing additional

prisoners to persuade us to resume at the Ambassadorial level. I think

that their line will be that the sterility of our talks is an argument for the

Foreign Minister level meeting rather than for reducing the level below

Ambassadors.

You, of course, know that they are extremely sensitive on the sub­

ject of corresponding levels and we can be sure that even if they do

agree to resume with Martin they will be very careful also to appoint

a First Secretary, to correspond with Ed’s rank in London. This will, in

fact, mean that their man will be considerably below Ed in competence

Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”

and authority as Ed would normally be a Counselor in any post but one

such as London. Thus any meetings Ed may have will be on an even

more routine level than those I have been having. I think, for example,

that they will refuse even to enter into any discussion whatever of mat­

ters such as renunciation of force. This was foreshadowed by Wang’s

remarks today.

In any event it was clear that at today’s meeting Martin’s appoint­

ment was an eventuality for which they were in no way prepared. My

main satisfaction from the meeting was that for the first time in two

years I had the initiative with him.

I am sorry about the mix-up on the press guidance telegrams.

When I received 557 I thought that was all there was and that I had bet­

ter get our lines clear on press matters. Late that evening we received

556, long after I had sent out my message to you. It turned out 556 had

been badly garbled in transmission and that they had been working all

day to clear it. The press here are very unhappy with me but I am stick­

ing to the line of no comment. Of course, with the upcoming NATO

meeting in Paris and all the other news I don’t think that the matter is

going to make a very big splash any place.

I felt a little bit at a loss to expand on the theme of why a judicial

assistance agreement was “impossible and unnecessary” and hope that

I did not say any of the wrong things. I was also somewhat at a loss to

handle his emphasis on a U.S. Court having communicated with the

PRC and tried to shift it back to the subject of Wirin.

As a final note, my thanks and appreciation to you, Dave and the

others in CA who have borne the brunt of the work of giving me such

excellent backstopping. Give Walter Robertson my best and say that I

am looking forward to seeing him soon.

Now signing off from Geneva.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

P.S. We have arranged with the Consulate here promptly to tele­

graph to Ed and the Department anything the Chicoms send over. Ed

will write you directly about the future administrative matters men­

tioned in your last letter to me. Incidentally, Ekvall has never got paid

for that trip from France to here last summer. Can we not see that he

gets paid before he leaves?

UAJ

PPS. I keep thinking of things. When I came here I was given $300

(Frs. 1285.50) to be used for representation and any other such purposes.

This amount of francs was simply given to me through the Consulate

disbursing officer and it is my understanding that they required no

accounting. There are Frs. 750.- remaining. Rather than returning them

with perhaps the necessity of again requesting some such fund I am turn­

ing them over to Ed and if he doesn’t use them he can turn them over to

an Ambassador if one is again appointed. I have taken a receipt from Ed,

of which I am enclosing a copy. If the Department wants anything else

done with them he will, of course, do whatever he is instructed.

UAJ

Enclosure

Receipt from Martin

Geneva, December 12, 1957

RECEIPT

Received from U. Alexis Johnson the sum of Swiss Francs 750.-

representing official special funds of the United States Government for

disbursement for approved official purposes.

Edwin W. Martin

to express my high opinion of Col. Ekvall. I have most highly valued

him not only as an exceptionally able interpreter but also for his advice

on substantive matters. He has a keen and accurate sense of probable

Chinese Communist reactions and of their psychology which has been

very helpful to me. I greatly regret that he is required to retire from the

Army and will thus no longer be available for this duty.

Sincerely yours,

U. Alexis Johnson

American Ambassador

857. Letter from Martin to Clough

London, December 16, 1957

Dear Ralph:

An idea has occurred to me which I am sure has undoubtedly

occurred to you or Dave now that the “Johnson-Wang talks” have come

to an end after seventy-three meetings and almost 2½ years. This idea

is that some sort of official recognition or award should be given Alex

Johnson for a diplomatic feat which, if not unique in history, is hard

to parallel in the annals of our country’s diplomacy. The fact that Alex

was holding down a Chief of Mission job which had nothing to do with

the negotiations at Geneva makes his accomplishment the more note­

worthy. The trekking back and forth from Prague to Geneva with all

its attendant unsettling effects (which I have begun to appreciate hav­

ing now done six months’ commuting from London to Geneva) also

increased the difficulties of his more than ordinarily tough negotiating

assignment.

Of course I don’t need to describe to you the merits of this particu­

lar case. I do feel, however, that some sort of an award or other recogni­

tion is not only highly merited by Alex, but would be the kind of thing

which would boost esprit in the Service at large.

Sincerely yours,

Edwin W. Martin

First Secretary of Embassy

Official–Informal.

858. Letter from Martin to Clough

London, December 17, 1957

Dear Ralph:

We should probably wait to see what response comes from Peiping

on our latest move before deciding the question of “advisers” which

I raised in my last letter, and which you mentioned in your last letter

to Alex. Nevertheless, I will give you my preliminary thinking, since

I discussed it with Alex and he goes along with it.

In the event that the Chicoms agree to continue the talks with

me as the United States representative, I think they will do so only on

the basis of “equality,” meaning that they will appoint a person of First

Secretary rank to meet with me. As Wang made it clear in his reaction

last Thursday to our proposal (and as one would expect on the basis of

Chicom behaviour in general), any talks conducted on a First Secretary

level will be routine in the extreme. I can’t imagine the Communists

being willing to discuss any policy question (e.g. renunciation of force)

at that level; the best we could expect to get out of such talks would

be information as to prisoners and welfare, etc. and precious little of

that. In these circumstances, I would certainly question the need of

an “adviser” of the caliber and rank of Dave Popper or Bob Rinden.

Moreover, I feel (as does Alex) that assignment of Dave Popper would

put an undue strain on the Consulate General at Geneva.

Thus, if the Communists do agree to go on with the talks with me

and appoint someone of my level to carry this task out, I feel that, at

least for the first meeting, I might simply take Cameron LaClair with

me to shuffle documents and Sue Gross for the purpose of keeping the

record, and Dexter for interpreting—as well as Ekvall, if the meeting is

held in time. Alex agrees that the present system of having LaClair take

what approaches a verbatim transcript is a rather inefficient hangover

from the original idea of keeping the talks on an informal basis, and

there is no reason why Sue shouldn’t do it.

We were sorry not to have Dexter at the last meeting, since it

appears unlikely there will be another in which he can overlap with

Bob Ekvall. Bob will be available only until January 15. However, he

should have his present travel orders extended in case we do have a

meeting before then.

Sincerely,

Edwin W. Martin

First Secretary of Embassy

Official–­Informal. Martin signed the original “Ed.”

Letter No. 1

Washington, December 23, 1957

Dear Ed:

With Alex’s departure as the American protagonist in the Geneva

discussions, I decided it would only be fitting to start a new letter series

of which this is No. 1.

Judging from the length of time it is taking Peiping to reply to our

proposal to shift the talks down from the ambassadorial level, we must

have presented them with a difficult decision. They may react in one of

three possible ways: (1) break off the talks entirely with a violent blast

at us; (2) inform us they desire to continue the talks but only when

we appoint an ambassador to meet with them or (3) agree to continue

the meetings as proposed by us. The first alternative I consider very

unlikely. The second however is quite possible and appears to be Alex’s

choice as the most probable. We have prepared a draft press release for

use in this eventuality and I enclose a copy. I should appreciate any

comments or changes you may suggest. As you will see, the purpose of

the release is to imply that the downgrading of the talks resulted from

our dissatisfaction with the Chinese Communist response to our initia­

tives in the talks. At the same time we want to make clear that we are

not breaking off the talks. That we have appointed an experienced offi­

cer to continue them and by not explicitly relating our action to failure

of the Chinese Communists to do what we want them to, we leave the

way open to appoint an ambassador whenever we consider it desirable

to do so.

It is possible that the Chinese Communists may accept our pro­

posal and appoint someone to meet with you. It seems to me that

the likelihood of this happening diminishes as time passes without a

response from Peiping.

It is probably premature as you suggest in your letter of December

17 to decide the adviser question until we know what the Chinese

Communist response is. If you feel that you could manage with Cameron

LaClair and Sue Gross that would of course simplify matters administra­

tively. I suppose it is true that at a lower than ambassadorial level, the

Communist statements at the meetings are likely to be even more routine

and predictable than they have been in the past.

Orders are being written for Dexter to leave for Geneva the first

week in January. We hope by that time to know what Peiping intends to

do. It would be very awkward to have spent a year and a half training

Dexter as a Chinese interpreter just to have him assigned to Geneva

as a general service officer with no interpreting to do. We had such a

difficult time working out some way of assigning him to Geneva that

we are reluctant to suggest delay at this point for fear the arrangement

might break down.

I agree entirely with your suggestion that some sort of official rec­

ognition be extended to Alex for the unique contribution he has made

at Geneva to our diplomacy. I discussed the matter with Sam Gilstrap

of FE/EX who suggested a letter of commendation from the Secretary

to be followed by a recommendation to the Awards Committee for a

superior service award.

Whether or not the Chinese Communists decide to appoint some­

one to continue the Geneva talks with you, I am sure you will be pleased

to know that Mr. Robertson has great confidence in your ability to carry

on the discussions, and it was he who recommended to the Secretary

that you be selected for the job.

With best wishes for a happy New Year to you and Emma Rose

and the children,

Sincerely,

Ralph N. Clough

Enclosure

DRAFT PRESS RELEASE

At the meeting in Geneva with the Chinese Communist represent­

ative on December 12, Ambassador Johnson informed him that he was

being transferred and that the United States Government had desig­

nated his assistant, Mr. Edwin W. Martin, a senior Foreign Service Officer

assigned to the American Embassy in London, as the United States rep­

resentative in the talks. Mr. Martin is a Chinese language and area spe­

cialist with sixteen years’ service, who was a member of Ambassador

Dean’s staff in the negotiations with the Chinese Communists in

Korea in 1953–54. He took part in the conversations with the Chinese

Communists in Geneva in 1954 concerning the Americans imprisoned

in Communist China and was Ambassador Johnson’s advisor at the out­

set of the ambassadorial talks which began in Geneva, August 1, 1955.

He has served as Deputy Director of the Office of Chinese Affairs in the

Department of State and has acted as Ambassador Johnson’s assistant at

the meetings in Geneva since July, 1957.

The Chinese Communists have announced that they are unwill­

ing to continue the talks except at the ambassadorial level. The United

States is not prepared at this time to designate an ambassador for this

purpose. However, it should be emphasized that the United States is not

breaking off the talks. Mr. Martin will meet with a Chinese Communist

representative at any mutually agreeable time.

The ambassadorial level talks at Geneva convened an August 1,

1955, with the mission of settling, first, the question of the return of

civilians desiring to do so. What seemed to be a satisfactory solution

was reached on September 10, 1955, when the Chinese Communists

publicly announced that they would take appropriate measures to

permit Americans desiring to do so to return “expeditiously” to the

United States. Now, nearly two and a half years later, six Americans

are still held by the Chinese Communists. The next question the two

Ambassadors took up was the matter of a mutual renunciation of force.

The Chinese Communists, while stating that they accept the principle

of the renunciation of force, refused to agree that it is without preju­

dice to the right of individual and collective self defense and that it is

applicable to the Taiwan area. For the past year and a half, the Chinese

Communists have refused even to enter into a substantive discussion

looking toward a meaningful declaration of the renunciation of force.

The American Ambassador has also repeatedly attempted to obtain

from the Chinese Communist representative an accounting for the

United States military personnel missing and unaccounted for from the

Korean hostilities, as well as any other American personnel missing in

or near Chinese Communist territory of whom the Communists have

any knowledge. The Chinese Communist representative has not only

refused to provide such an accounting, but has rejected this matter as a

subject for discussion in these talks, insisting merely that his authorities

are not now holding any American military personnel.
