Chapter 4, February–April 1990 635 exhibitions and OSI. Wheeler explained that this was the rationale for establishing a reasonable quota of short-­notice inspections—­to see how a side actually was deploying its systems over the course of time. Wheeler pointed out that the U.S. side had made a major concession in Moscow by agreeing to OSI at designated weapons storage areas at bases for heavy bombers not equipped for nuclear ALCMs, so that the sides would have confidence that no prohibited systems were actually deployed; there would be procedures whereby inspectors could satisfy themselves that a cruise missile designated as conventional was not nuclear-­armed. Wheeler stressed that the U.S.-­proposed regime was not designed to demonstrate that a system was not capable of being converted for nuclear use, since it was not possible to achieve such certainty, but rather to provide confidence that systems were actually being deployed as declared. Peresypkin asked whether he had understood correctly that a side would have the right to pick a missile at random to see that no nuclear charge could be installed in it. Wheeler said this was not the U.S. concept. Under the U.S. approach, if inspectors saw a conventional missile at a weapon storage area, they could see at that time that it did not actually have a nuclear weapon installed in it. In the U.S. view there was no way to inspect the interior of a missile to see whether the missile was capable of carrying a nuclear weapon. In the U.S. view, he said, this regime of short-­notice inspections would be convincing because, over time, it would be possible to verify the operational activities of both sides. Soviet-­proposed FRODs Noting that, despite numerous queries in Geneva, the U.S. side had not yet received a concrete Soviet reply to its request for examples of the kinds of functionally-­related differences the Soviet side had in mind, Wheeler asked Peresypkin for specifics. Peresypkin said that external physical differences were not sufficient to ensure that a missile declared to be conventional could not be nuclear-­armed. He said the external differences cited by Wheeler would not provide the necessary certainty. The key to distinguishing nuclear from conventional missiles, he said, lay with the warhead; all other parts of the missile assembly could be essentially identical, but the warhead’s position in the missile could show whether it was nuclear or conventional. Wheeler asked whether Peresypkin was referring to the location of the nuclear warhead compartment. Peresypkin stated his understanding that the placement of the warhead was determined by the aerodynamic design features of the missile in general. For example, it could not be on the tail.
