1956 677 In a further effort to reach agreement, Ambassador Johnson, at the January 12 meeting, suggested two simple amendments to the ­Communist counter-­proposal. These were the insertion of the words “without prejudice to the inherent right of individual and collective self-­defense” and of the words “in the Taiwan Area or elsewhere”. This United States revision of the Chinese counter-­proposal is shown in Annex F. THE COMMUNIST PUBLIC STATEMENT This was the status of the discussions when the Communists released their public statement of January 18. The Communist statement apparently rejects the United States proposal. It states “Taiwan is Chinese territory: there can be no question of defense, as far as the United States is concerned. . . . Yet the United States has demanded the right of defense of the Taiwan Area. Is this not precisely a demand that China accept continued occupation of Taiwan and that the tension in the Taiwan Area be maintained forever.” And further, it states: “The American side continues to demand that our side accept that the United States has ‘the inherent right of individual and collective self-­defense’ in China’s Taiwan Area. This is what our side absolutely cannot accept.” THE UNITED STATES POSITION Two points must be made clear. First, the United States is not occu­ pying Taiwan, and Taiwan has never been a part of Communist China. The claims of Communist China and the contentions of the United States with respect to this area are well known and constitute a major dispute between them. It is specifically with respect to this dispute that the United States has proposed the principle of renunciation of force and the settlement of differences by peaceful means. This is the princi­ ple which the Communists say they have accepted. In this connection the United States has made completely clear that in renouncing the use of force neither side is relinquishing its objectives and policies, but only the use of force to attain them. Secondly, the United States has rights and responsibilities in the ­Taiwan Area; also it has a Mutual Defense Treaty. Accordingly, it is pres­ ent in the Taiwan Area. The Communist refusal to state that the renun­ ciation of force is without prejudice to the right of self-­defense against armed attack can only be interpreted as an attempt to induce the United States to agree that if attacked it will forego the right to defend its lawful presence in this area. The right of individual and collective self-­defense against armed attack is inherent; it is recognized in International Law: it is specifi­ cally affirmed in the Charter of the United Nations. No country can
