556
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
would be particularly appropriate for data to be made available to the
International Seismic Data Exchange, thereby enhancing its role and re-
ducing criticism of the exclusiveness of the SVA.
E. To offer less than ten NSS but including some stations with
arrays of seismometers, and therefore superior performance to simple
NSS, as compensation for the reduced number.
F. To offer NSS at sites of our choosing in UK and dependent terri-
tories. The paper I am giving you about all the possible locations sug-
gests that we could offer ten without unacceptable political or security
consequences. The big disadvantage of this option is that there is no
verification case for the very considerable effort and cost.
8. We are concerned about costs. Since many of the possible loca-
tions in UK dependent territories are isolated and lack the most basic
facilities, NSS would be particularly expensive to install and operate.
Costs might be divided in various ways under the SVA. The possibil-
ities include:
A. Each party pays all the costs of those NSS which it requires on
the territory of others. We should prefer this solution but the Russians
could be expected to resist it strongly, since they are seeking 20 NSS in
the west against ten in the Soviet Union.
B. Each side pays all the costs for NSS on its own territory. If the
UK agreed to accept an equal number of NSS, this course would be un-
favorable to the UK because of the higher cost of installing NSS in re-
mote places with bad communications and other facilities.
C. Each side pays one third of the total cost of all NSS. But all
parties might be unwilling to share in costs they could not control.
D. Some split arrangement, for instance—each party pays the real
estate cost of NSS on its territory plus maintenance and manning, and
the other two parties share the costs of the seismic equipment, its instal-
lation and data retrieval.
9. It would be helpful to have your estimate of the capital costs of
the equipment itself and its installation at a typical site in the United
States. This would help us to estimate how much more expenditure
would be required because of the remoteness and lack of facilities of
some of the sites in UK dependent territories.
10. We look forward to discussing the negotiating options and the
general principles underlying NSS in the UK and dependent territories
with you before our experts examine the technical issues involved. One
of the points on which we would welcome your views is how we
should keep up the pressure on the Russians to reveal more of their po-
sition on the technical characteristics and timetable for installation of
NSS, while discussion continues on numbers and locations in all three
countries.
