298
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
(a) The first wld be a settlement of the oil question somewhat along
the lines outlined by Mosadeq in his most recent approach to
Middleton;
(b) A gradual breakdown of the boycott on Iran oil shipments with
the quantities of oil purchased by independents around the world
gradually increasing and with the NIOC gradually obtaining in-
creasing technical assistance from various engineering consulting
firms. (While this course of development might eventually result in
Iran being persuaded that it cld neither sell or produce sufficient oil to
satisfy its financial requirements without a long term purchase ar-
rangement with AIOC and without more definite provisions for man-
agement and engineering advice, such an eventual outcome wld prob-
ably take a long time to develop); and
(c) a continuation of present trends without any easing of the oil
deadlock. It is hard to foresee how this wld end up but it wld appear
that the risk of a further trend to the Left and the eventual loss of Iran
wld be very great indeed.
In the light of this analysis we believe it wld be a great mistake to
reject Mosadeq’s overture. It seems to us plain that course (a) above is
unfortunately the best; that course (c) is quite unacceptable to the West;
and therefore that, if course (a) cannot be developed, course (b) be-
comes almost inevitable in spite of the disadvantages inherent in it.
Acheson
100.
Editorial Note
In telegram 422 from Tehran, July 28, 1952, Ambassador Hen-
derson reported on his first meeting with Prime Minister Mosadeq
since the latter’s return to power on July 22. Describing the conversa-
tion as “both exhausting and depressing,” Henderson endeavored to
explain to Mosadeq the nature of the Embassy’s relationship with
Qavam during the previous weeks. Henderson denied the charge the
United States had intervened illegitimately in Iran’s internal affairs.
Mosadeq nevertheless concluded from Henderson’s account that the
United States had pressured Qavam to accept British conditions for a
solution to the oil dispute, that the United States had shown a “more
friendly attitude to Qavam than it had Mosadeq,” and that the United
States “had given encouragement to Qavam by showing friendliness to
him.” Henderson questioned all three conclusions. Mosadeq then en-
