44  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
before commitments were made. He concluded that if the United States 
contributed all or nearly all of the money to this institution it would cre-
ate troublesome precedents in the case of other regional institutions.
The Chairman said that as a matter of principle a sound bank 
required sound loans with repayments in the currency lent. However, 
if the Department of State believed that on this basis it would not be 
possible for the institution to be established, then the soft loan possi-
bility could not be ruled out. The problem then would be to get the 
soundest possible institution in such a framework. This would require 
participation in contributions by all the members. The DLF should 
deal with borrowers bilaterally rather than through the Inter-American 
Bank, and any soft loan capital contributed by the United States should 
be provided by direct appropriation by the Congress.
Mr. Martin expressed agreement with the views of Mr. Waugh. 
He felt that a 50/50 capital contribution basis was inappropriate for an 
international institution and that soft loans were really more like grants 
than loans and that repayment would in effect be made by printing 
money. He felt that the best long run politics was to make the insti-
tution successful, and that the United States should not retreat from 
the principle that the institution was expected to make its way as an 
earning institution. He did not insist that loans be solely for projects or 
rule out social overhead loans, and he felt that if there were to be soft 
loans, they should be so financed that the capitalization of the institu-
tion would not be increased.
Mr. McIntosh expressed a preference for a maximum United 
States contribution of 1/3 and felt that it would be preferable for the 
Development Loan Fund to deal directly with Latin American borrow-
ers rather than delegating control over its operations in Latin America. 
Governor Szymczak commented that the Latin Americans appeared to 
be talking about two different things, a bank and an aid program.
Mr. Dillon said that the Latin Americans have avoided the word 
“bank” in talking about the new institution, and he referred to an OAS 
publication on financing of economic development in Latin America. 
He thought the Latin Americans would now be satisfied with project 
loans, including social overhead projects, and loans to local develop-
ment banks. He agreed that in a financial institution on a hard loan 
basis the United States share should not exceed 1/3, but he felt this 
would not satisfy the Latin Americans. Therefore, State felt the United 
States should go to a 50/50 basis for hard loan capital, plus additional 
soft loan capital on a loan basis. This would leave the United States in 
the position of not having more than a majority of the voting power. 
The Latin Americans might match our soft loan contribution with their 
own currencies. To the extent that the institution would lend for social 
overhead projects, it would not compete with the Export-Import Bank,
