National Security Policy 141 appropriate tests by actual occupancy for realistic periods of time to be conducted after completion (total cost not to exceed $6 million). (3) A nation-­wide survey along the lines recommended in subpara­ graph 2–­a of NSC 5807. (4) Initiation of a program of public education along the lines rec­ ommended in paragraph 3 of NSC 5807, as modified by FCDA in the light of NSC discussion and as outlined in the Annex hereto (cost esti­ mated at not over $12.5 million for FY 1959; subsequent annual appro­ priations to be determined on the basis of experience). (5) The elements of a base for rapid acceleration along the lines recommended in paragraph 4 of NSC 5807. (6) The incorporation of fallout shelter in the construction of new Federal civilian buildings, of suitable size, designed after this date, along the lines recommended in paragraph 5–­a of NSC 5807. (Supple­ mental appropriations for such shelter in buildings for which funds have already been appropriated will not be sought.) c. Requested that the studies recommended by the NSC Planning Board and referred to in b–(1)–(b) above, and a report by the Federal Civil Defense Administrator on the status of plans and actions to carry out the other measures described in b above, be submitted to the Coun­ cil by July 1, 1958. d. Deferred action on the measures recommended in paragraphs 1–­b (except the limited program in b–2) above), 2–­b, 2-­c, 5–­b, and 6–­a and –­b of NSC 5807; pending consideration by the Council of the reports requested in c above. NOTE: The actions in b and c above, as approved by the President, subsequently transmitted for implementation as follows: b (except b–(1)–(b)) and c to the Federal Civil Defense Administrator. b–(1)–(b) and c to the Special Assistant to the President for ­Science and Technology, the Chairman, AEC, the Director, ODM, and the ­Federal Civil Defense Administrator. [Omitted here is agenda item 2.] 3. PROPOSED REORGANIZATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (NSC 5724; NSC 5724/1) Secretary McElroy said that the presentation of the Defense Department’s proposals for reorganization would be given by Mr. Charles A. Coolidge, of Boston, who was in charge of this project at the Pentagon. In anticipation of presenting these proposals to the President, and in order to obtain the best available advice, the Defense Department had employed a large group of consultants, quarterbacked by Mr. Coolidge and including Admiral Redford, General Twining, General Bradley, General Gruenther, Mr. Nelson Rockefeller, former Deputy Secretary of Defense William Foster and, on occasion (because of ill health), former Secretary of Defense Robert Lovett. As the Council would perceive, continued Secretary McElroy, we have moved in four direc­ tions in these recommended improvements in the organization of the
