Afghanistan 169 Gailani asked that U.S. urge Saudi Arabia to provide major material assistance to Front as rebel force favored by U.S. He was informed we play no favorites in current civil war. End summary. 3. August 15, Louis Dupree, American universities field staff/ Lahore, requested appointment with ConGen and without indicating he was bringing guest, appeared with Syed Ahmad Gailani, leader National Front for Islamic Revolution of Afghanistan (reftel). To avoid offense to an important rebel religious leader, ConGen had no alternative but to receive him. As expected, he asked for U.S. support but only indirectly, to encourage Saudi Arabia to provide material assistance. Request was duly declined. 4. Gailani reported that his forces, operating from Pakistan and in Afghanistan, now number 70,000 and could be swelled to 200,000 (cf. Afghan army strength of reportedly up to 100,000). Gailani claimed his men now total 90 percent of all rebel fighting contingents. At present, they have adequate equipment but need ammunition and want financial support. 5. In contrast, various ultra-conservative religious rebel elements are getting funds. An unidentified Arab recently appeared in Peshawar with $3 million, to be distributed through Jamaat-I-Islami. Money to ultra-conservatives attracts peripheral groups to their side, while “liberal” Gailani forces are getting only minor contributions from abroad. Yet former doing hardly any of fighting. 6. Gailani said he had recently met with Prince Fahd, “main power” in Saudi Arabia, and had been assured Saudis support NFIRA over ultra-conservative groups. However, Saudis hesitant to initiate major flow of aid to Front unless U.S. indicates latter is its favorite among dissident forces. Gailani also has met with ex-King Zahir Shah, who similarly favors NFIRA. (Zahir wants to return to Kabul but “not as King”; relatives are more ambitious, Gailani said.) 7. Both Gailani and Dupree emphasized that now was critical period for support for NFIRA, as liberal vs. ultra-conservative confrontation growing. It was important that former win out because if latter does, USSR will move into Afghanistan in force. Moscow not willing to stand idly by as a “Khomeini-like” movement takes over Afghanistan and spreads anti-Communist, ultra-conservative Islamic influence into Soviet-Muslim border areas. On other hand, USSR might be willing to countenance a “liberal” takeover, returning Afghanistan to status quo ante—nonaligned, with necessary tilt toward traditional friend to north. Gailani urged that U.S. should move now, indicate preference for NFIRA and encourage Saudis to make substantial contribution to cause. In this way, Front would be strengthened against ultra-conservatives, and after overthrow of Taraki regime, Afghanistan would be spared a further war (between liberals and conservatives).
