304 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement replied that Chileans were used to hardship and to facing their own troubles. He added: “We are not a banana republic”. The President said he had been pleased to read recently that two of the large United States copper companies, Anaconda and Kennecott, had been completing plans for heavy new investments in Chile. The Ambassador said that this was a fine development that had been underway for some time. In response to the President’s specific question the Ambassador declared: “The emergency is over; now it is a question of rebuilding”. He said specifically that his Government needed barges for logistical work along the coast in the damaged area. He added, however, that in order to determine the best type of ship for the purpose it would be helpful if the United States Navy could send to Chile an officer trained in amphibious operations who could analyze the problem in terms of his knowledge of available ships. The President said this could easily be done. Mr. Merriam mentioned to the President that Mr. Jorge Schneider had been sent to Washington by the Chilean Government specifically to assist in initiating plans for the basic work of economic reconstruction. The President commented that now the greatest need is for sound planning.3 3 In telegram 971 to Santiago, June 23, 1960, the Department informed the Embassy that the White House had called President Eisenhower in Honolulu the contents of a draft press release announcing a proposed grant of $20 million and the loan of 12 landing craft to the Chilean Government for its long-­term disaster rehabilitation program, subject the availability of funds under the Mutual Security Appropriation Act for FY 1961. The telegram also stated that the Department would apprise the Embassy about the date and timing of the release at the earliest possible time. (725–5–MSP/6–2360) CH–39. Editorial Note June 29, 1960 By an exchange of notes at Washington, June 29, 1960, entered into force on the same date, representatives of the United States and Chile signed an agreement providing for emergency relief assistance necessitated by the recent disasters in Chile. For text of the agreement, see 11 UST (pt. 2) 1777.
