found to be irreconcilable. There followed an interval in which the matter was not pressed by either government, the reasons for which were set forth in a joint memorandum of August 14, 1897, in which also each government expressed its desire to have a definite solution. Thereafter Señor Billinghurst, Vice President of Peru, was sent on special mission to Santiago to negotiate the protocol. As a result the so-called Billinghurst-Latorre protocol was signed on April 16, 1898. The Executives of the two countries thus reached an agreement upon all points except two, namely, the qualifications of the voters at the plebiscite and whether the voting should be public or secret, and it was agreed that these questions should be left to the arbitration of the Queen of Spain. In Peru, the protocol was approved. In Chile, the Committee of Foreign Affairs of the Senate reported on the Protocol unfavorably by a divided vote, but the Senate nevertheless approved it on August 1, 1898. A majority of the Committee of Foreign Relations of the Chilean Chamber of Deputies first voted in favor of the Protocol but later reported adversely and the Chamber of Deputies failed to give its approval. The ground especially asserted was that the points proposed to be left to arbitration should be settled directly between the two governments and the records were returned to the Executive so that new negotiations might be had “for the purpose of carrying into effect Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon.” While there was extreme disappointment in Peru at this result, neither Peru nor Chile regarded the rejection of the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol as a justification for terminating the negotiations under the treaty. Meanwhile a serious dispute had arisen over the methods of Chilean administration in Tacna and Arica. Peru’s vigorous complaints led to a diplomatic debate which reached an impasse and Senor Chacaltana, Peru’s Minister to Chile, was recalled in March, 1901. The representation was not renewed until 1905. In February of that year, the Minister of Foreign Relations of Peru addressed a direct diplomatic communication to the Chilean Minister of Foreign Relations protesting against the Treaty of 1905 between Chile and Bolivia providing among other things for the construction of a railway at Chile’s expense from Arica to La Paz, and giving Bolivia commercial privileges. Peru protested against this treaty as an infringement of her sovereign rights, Chile responded giving the Chilean theory in justification and concluded by inviting Peru to resume negotiations. In his reply of April 25, 1905, the Peruvian Foreign Minister said that his Government was “highly pleased to accept Your Excellency’s invitation to negotiate the fulfillment of the Treaty of Ancon in respect of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.” Ministers were accredited but the record does not disclose the negotiations had.

On March 25, 1908, the Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs, Senor Puga Borne, in an elaborate note addressed to the Peruvian Minister at Santiago, proposed a series of five conventions relating respectively to commerce, merchant marine, a connecting railroad,
