986 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Strauss said that there could be a quick fact-finding trip, including Israel. Ambassador Habib said that this is an idea for himself; he will not draw as much fire. Ambassador Strauss suggested that Ambassador Habib go to Israel. Ambassador Habib agreed. If he goes to Syria, he must go to Israel anyway. Ambassador Strauss said it would be ok for Ambassador Habib to go to Begin. This would be better than himself. Would it be possible for him to go to three or four countries, and end up in Israel? If it looks like success, then he (Ambassador Strauss) could join him, and bring Eppy. Ambassador Habib noted that Eppy is sympathetic. Secretary Vance said that if this is fact-finding, what do we have in mind? What would Ambassador Habib look for? Ambassador Habib said it would be to see whether the Lebanese have guts. Will Syria back them? The UN in New York will do so. Secretary Vance asked if he would go to Syria to ask them to pull out of Lebanon. Ambassador Habib said that Syria can’t do that. Secretary Vance said that if he (Ambassador Habib) could talk with Syria on reducing its presence. That would be a real selling point in Israel. Ambassador Strauss agreed. Secretary Vance said that this is the one thing Israel wants to see. Then we have a chance of Israel’s encouraging this effort. Ambassador Strauss said that we have to structure it. For Begin, we can expect nothing from the PLO. But maybe we can get something from Syria. We could say that this is a non-risk gamble: for Israel and us this is no risk. Ambassador Habib said that therefore this changes nothing on the Israeli-Lebanese border. Ambassador Strauss said that Syria would be first. Therefore this is the plus for the Israelis. Secretary Vance said that he raised with the Syrians the question of withdrawing from downtown Beirut and the airport. They said that this depends on the Lebanese. If they say they will do it, and can provide security, the Syrians will talk. Ambassador Habib said that the Syrians don’t believe this. They are devious in dealing with Lebanon. Secretary Vance said that at least we can talk about it. Ambassador Strauss asked about the way to structure it.
