324
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
For these reasons State, Treasury and Defense recommend you de-
termine relief is not in the national economic interest.7
Views of Other Agencies
Three agencies outside the TPSC structure have expressed an in-
terest in this case. CEA and OMB support Option 2 (No Relief). FPA
supports import relief.
Implementation
Attached are drafts of the necessary documents you would need to
direct the Secretary of the Treasury to initiate a national security inves-
tigation (Attachment 2);8 and to report your decision to the Congress
and in the Federal Register should you choose the tariff rate quota option
(Attachments 3 and 4).9 We have prepared documentation for option 2
should you choose it.
If you decide to grant relief we will prepare the necessary Presi-
dential Proclamation for your signature within 15 days of your
decision.
Also attached for your staff is the TPSC report on this case.10
7 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to the recommendation. On
February 10, however, he notified Strauss, Blumenthal, and Congress of his decision
against the provision of import relief on economic grounds. He also directed the
launching of an investigation into U.S. fastener imports from the point of view of national
security. For the texts of Carter’s memorandum to Strauss and letters to Blumenthal, the
Speaker of the House, and the President of the Senate on his decision, see Public Papers of
the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 299–302.
8 Attachment 2, attached but not printed, is an undated and unsigned draft letter to
the Secretary of the Treasury.
9 Attachments 3 and 4 are attached but not printed. Attachment 3 consists of two
undated and unsigned draft letters, one to the Senate and one to the House of Repre-
sentatives, submitting the President’s report on “Import Relief Action.” Attachment 4 is
an undated and unsigned draft memorandum to the Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations.
10 Attached but not printed is a February 6 Trade Policy Staff Committee Action
Record, Document 78–10, on the “Review of the USITC Section 201 Report on Bolts, Nuts
and Large Screws of Iron or Steel,” which covers a 39-page report.
