Romania 741 lizing effect. Bogdan agreed and said Romania wished to do what it could to keep the conflict in the Middle East and between Iraq and Iran from widening into a broader conflict which could ultimately involve a US-Soviet confrontation, which Romania always wishes to avoid. CSCE 9. Ambassador Bogdan expressed satisfaction with the first session of the Madrid Conference. He reiterated Romania’s desire for a generally balanced discussion of all three Baskets. He stressed the importance Romania places on its proposal to host the next follow-on conference. Bogdan asked the U.S. to keep an open mind on the invitation and make no decision until the second session at Madrid is under way. Bogdan also proposed holding bilateral consultations on CSCE during the first week of February. 10. The Counselor expressed the US awareness of the importance Romania attaches to hosting the next follow-on conference. She assured Bogdan that no decision would be made until after the new administration has come into office. She took Bogdan’s request for bilateral consultation under advisement. 11. Speaking “unofficially”, Bogdan saw no possibility for agreement on new proposals during the second session at Madrid. He hoped for agreement on follow-on meetings by expert groups, however. 12. The Counselor raised with Bogdan the question of participation by observers from non-government organizations (NGO) and private individuals and groups at a CSCE follow-on meeting were it to be held in Bucharest. Yugoslavia’s refusal to allow observers from these groups had led to considerable difficulty in the United States. The NGO’s and individuals concerned with the CSCE process became highly critical of the United States engaging in a process (i.e. Helsinki) in which freedom of expression was severely curtailed. As a further consequence, the press had been very critical of the Belgrade meeting and popular support in the US for the entire CSCE process had suffered. The situation at Madrid, however, was quite different, the Counselor observed. The Spanish had set aside space for the various groups to caucus and demonstrate, consequently they have not been frustrated but have remained in Madrid or returned to their home countries, including the US, believing the Madrid Conference has provided them a forum to air their grievances. Our impression has been that the entire CSCE process has gained support in the US as a result. 13. Bogdan listened carefully & thought for a moment before responding that there would of course be some difficulties because it would not be possible for Romania to agree to permit every individual or group to enter the country in an observer status. On the other hand, he said, his government had taken this point into consideration before
