446  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
real objection, as under the Agreed Announcement there is no obliga­
tion on their part to inform me here (nor to inform O’Neill, for that 
matter), but it is hardly in the spirit of relationship which I have been 
trying to establish with Wang. Of course he was under instructions, 
and it is clear that their objective is to make clear that these releases 
are their unilateral act and that any credit in the matter will go only 
to the British. They are not going to let me obtain any credit by giving 
out the announcement here.
What I am disturbed by and am sending you a telegram on is that 
from Hong Kong’s 84, sent Department 883, it appears O’Neill was 
informed of these releases on October 26, but I had no word here until 
Hong Kong’s 84 was received today.
The missing military personnel item went about as I expected. I was 
sorely tempted to put it off as it was late, we had already exchanged 
many recriminations on our occupation of Taiwan and implementa­
tion, and the atmosphere was poor. However I decided to get it over 
with and, as it turned out and was to be expected, he was under clear 
instructions and no matter when or how I did it, the result was going to 
be the same. I felt that I was able to back him into a corner for whatever 
satisfaction there was to be derived from that. I don’t think we should 
drop the subject too quickly or easily, but feel that we are not going to 
get any real satisfaction. I should think that, in light of our discussion at 
yesterday’s meeting, we might consider again also pushing the matter 
in the MAC.
Herman Phleger has just been in while I have been dictating this 
letter. We have been having some preliminary discussion of Wang’s 
draft agreed statement of yesterday. He talked with the Secretary a lit­
tle about it during the course of yesterday’s Foreign Ministers’ meeting. 
We are seeing the Secretary this afternoon. I will save any comments, 
as I presume the Secretary will want to send you a message during the 
course of the day on the subject.
Sincerely,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
