332
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
to save himself and whatever he stands for, from Kashani and the
Tudeh forces.
In any event the decision as to whether Mossedegh would remain
as Prime Minister or be replaced, must depend upon his importance as
a leader at the time of the Shah’s action, and upon his own readiness to
support the Shah’s program. It is readily conceivable that Mossedegh
might accept such a course as a way out with honor, perhaps remaining
as Prime Minister only long enough to insure that his own personal fol-
lowers will support the Shah, initially at least.
In the event that Mossedegh neither disappears as Prime Minister
nor can be relied upon with certainty to collaborate with the Shah,
when other circumstances furnish a favorable opportunity for the Shah
to take over, he and his principal lieutenants would have to be re-
garded as in the same category with other “leaders” whose actions
threaten the national security.
For the Shah’s success the first requirement is that he have his own
resolution to succeed fortified by our assurances, and preferably those
of the British, that we will approve and defend the propriety and neces-
sity of his actions before world opinion, and that we are prepared to as-
sist his new government economically and technically in carrying out
agreed upon reforms.
These assurances on our part should be supplemented, in private
and realistic conversations, with any helpful advice that we can give
both as to the initial conduct of his program and as to the probable con-
sequences if he should fail to establish responsible rule within his
country.
Our part would be limited to our private contact with the Shah
prior to the establishment of his government, and normal channels
thereafter.
The steps which the Shah might and probably would have to take
within the first twenty four hours of his program are as follows:
(1) Declare martial law, subject to his orders. (This would include
use not only of the army but also the National Police and the Gendar-
me´rie, which are in effect part of the country’s armed forces.)
(2) Arrest and hold in safe confinement a certain list of group
leaders and others of subversive influence, subject to trial in appro-
priate courts.
(3) Dissolve the Majlis and exercise his right to rule by Royal De-
cree pending the installation of a new Majlis, in due course, elected
under new (decreed) election laws.
(4) Forbid and prevent subversive mass meetings.
(5) Close subversive newspapers and arrest their editors.
(6) Appoint Ministers to essential cabinet posts.
