mean that they should be brushed aside, leaving a vacuum. What he wished,
he said, was the substitution of a bilateral treaty for a unilateral one and
that, as he understood Sir Ronald’s remarks, Great Britain was agreeable in
principle to granting China tariff autonomy, but new treaties were necessary
and had to be discussed. The wording of the Chinese proposal was further
discussed, with the result that the British attitude could only be made clear
by the submission of a formal statement reading as follows:
“The British Delegation, recognizing the inherent right of all
independent and sovereign states to tariff autonomy, and
considering that the fulfilment of the provision of the Treaty of
Washington of February 6th, 1922, will constitute a step towards
the attainment by China of such autonomy, formally declare that
in addition to the carrying out of the terms of that Treaty, they are
willing to submit to the ratification of their Government such
further measures as may be devised and agreed upon at this
Conference, with a view to ensuring within a reasonable period
the full realization of China’s claim to complete liberty of action
in matters relating to her tariff.”
The Swedish Delegate, Mr. Rwerlof, agreed with Sir Ronald’s statement
and Mr. Hioki of the Japanese Delegation then presented a formal statement
of the Japanese view89 (See pp. 9 and 10 of the Minutes of November 3,
1925). Mr. MacMurray of the American Delegation then presented the
American proposals,90 which had been worked out more in detail than any
of the other proposals (See pp. 10, 11 and 12 of the Minutes of November 3,
1925). Sir Ronald Macleay said that on general outlines the American
proposals seemed to be based very largely on China’s own idea, which was
the abolition of likin, and seemed to be one to which the British Delegation
could commit itself, at least in principle. Sir Ronald also said that the
Japanese and American schemes seemed in effect to be very similar. The
Chairman declined to commit himself to the American plan because he had
not had time to study it, although he remarked that it contained a number of
things which had already been mentioned in the Chinese proposals. Count
de Martel reserved the right to discuss fully the matter of the readjustment
of the special relations which have been in force between China and French
Indo-China since 1886, with regard to the Customs tariff. Mr. Oudendijk
