The United Nations Special Session on
Disarmament
471.
Telegram From the Department of State to All North Atlantic
Treaty Organization Capitals1
Washington, February 5, 1977, 2312Z
26795. Subject: UN Special Session on Disarmament.
1. Begin summary: The 31st United Nations General Assembly
(UNGA) adopted a resolution calling for a Special Session of the Gen-
eral Assembly devoted to disarmament (SSOD) to be held in 1978;2
SSOD Preparatory Conferences (PrepCons) are scheduled for March,
May and September, 1977. We have concluded that US interests would
best be served tactically by adopting a positive posture towards the
SSOD and plan to participate constructively in the SSOD PrepCons.
2. This message (A) provides background information on the
SSOD and (B) solicits reporting from addressees in order to identify
those issues which we might want to examine more closely prior to and
during the upcoming SSOD Preparatory Conferences.
3. We believe that action addressees (except India, Sri Lanka, and
Yugoslavia, see para 11 B and C), which include the NATO allies, are
likely to share many of our interests. We would anticipate a greater di-
vergence of views on disarmament issues between US and most info
addressees. At the discretion of each Embassy, action addressees may
take soundings of host governments on their views regarding the
SSOD PrepCons and the SSOD itself. While no approach to host gov-
ernments should be made at this time by info addressees, the Depart-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770042–0647.
Confidential. Sent also to USUN, USNATO, Canberra, Vienna, Madrid, Stockholm,
Tehran, Tokyo, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Cairo, Monrovia, Rabat, Kinshasa, Buenos Aires,
Nassau, Brasilia, Bogota, Caracas, New Delhi, Colombo, and Belgrade. Sent for informa-
tion to Dacca, the Interests Section in Baghdad, Kathmandu, Algiers, Cotonou, Bujum-
bura, Tripoli, Port Louis, Lagos, Khartoum, Tunis, Lusaka, Sofia, Berlin, Budapest,
Warsaw, Bucharest, Moscow, Prague, Georgetown, Mexico, Panama, Lima, the Mission
to the IAEA, Islamabad, and Addis Ababa, and the Mission in Geneva. Drafted by David
Macuk (IO/UNP); cleared by Gerald Helman (IO/UNP), William Stearman (ACDA),
Bartholomew, Thomas Hirschfeld (S/P), Martin Goldstein (DOD/ISA), Allen Holmes
(EUR/RPM), Wesley Kriebel (IO/ML), Jon Glassman (EUR/SOV), Stephanie Perry
(NEA/RA), Louise McNutt (EA/RA), John Whiting (AF/RA), John King (ARA/RRP),
Jack, Seymour (EUR/EE), and Robert Homme (EUR/RPE); and approved by Donald
Toussaint (IO).
2 “General Assembly 31/189: General and Complete Disarmament,” December 21,
1976, in Documents on Disarmament, 1976, pp. 945–952.
1158
