August 8–September 17, 1978 111 and the rejectionists such as Libya. Kamel also reiterated his view that any success at Camp David will attract other Arabs at a later stage. The Secretary stressed that President Carter is hopeful that something can be achieved. President Carter will outline to President Sadat in the course of their morning meeting what his ideas are. The President has set his sights high. Kamel emphasized that Egypt is concerned that the close U.S.-Egyptian relationship continue even if nothing is achieved at Camp David. Egypt will keep trying for peace and will need U.S. assistance. The Secretary recalled that we have often spoken of presenting our suggestions when the time comes. He thought President Carter will do so at this meeting. [Omitted here is discussion of the political situations in Somalia, Eritrea, Libya, and Chad.] Lebanon The Secretary noted our concern about the periodic flare-ups in Lebanon. We have been in touch on a daily basis with Lebanese Foreign Minister Boutros, with other Lebanese, with the Syrians and with the Israelis. He had sent cables last Wednesday to Assad5 and to the Saudis,6 at a time when the fighting was heavy, urging (a) the Syrians to agree to a ceasefire and a standfast and (b) the Saudis to try to influence the Syrians along these lines. As yet, there has been no reply. Hence, President Carter had earlier today sent another message7 to Assad again urging restraint. The U.S. has also urged restraint on the Israelis. The Israelis have been deploying reconnaissance aircraft over Lebanon. The Syrians have recently deployed anti-aircraft artillery to Lebanon, but thus far no missiles. If the Lebanese situation should explode, the Secretary noted, it could blow everything up. The Egyptians agreed. Kamel thought that the Syrians would be only too happy to have a ceasefire. In his view, the Israelis need to be influenced and pressed. He opined that the Israelis are keeping the situation in Lebanon heated, perhaps even in connection with the Camp David talks. The Israelis withdrew their forces, but left behind Haddad and the Christian forces. The Secretary said we have been in touch on a daily basis with the Israelis. Vice President Mondale had also talked to the Pope8 urging the Vatican to get in touch with the Christians in order to urge restraint. Kamel agreed that the Vatican is trying, and commented that the 5 See Document 20. 6 Ibid. 7 See Document 29. 8 Mondale attended the Papal Inaugural ceremony for Pope John Paul II on behalf of the United States September 2–4.
