112 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII have been the most important factor.2 In his first months in office, Taraki appeared to be dealing successfully with the religious communities by avoiding policies offensive to them. When criticism of the government became more open last fall—perhaps encouraged by events in Iran and by exiled religious leaders in Pakistan—Taraki cracked down.3 The arrest in January and February of a number of clerics apparently exacerbated the situation. ([classification marking not declassified]) Even if the armed forces succeed in suppressing the current rebellions, insurgencies inspired by the Islamic opposition will almost certainly recur, placing further strains on the loyalty of the Muslim soldiers. Rebellion in the tribal areas along the Pakistani border broke out almost as soon as Taraki came to power. The tribes cannot campaign effectively outside their home areas but are holding their own in the mountains. Probably more than half of the Army’s combat units are now in tribal areas, and morale is declining because of casualties, tribal loyalties, and the dim prospects for victory. ([classification marking not declassified]) So far—despite the defection of a large part of the Army garrison in Herat and reports of daily desertions in the tribal areas—the bulk of the military remains loyal to the government. Widespread arrests and dismissals have prevented any successful move against Taraki by disgruntled officers. At the same time, however, the purges clearly reveal the continuing decline in the number of officers the government is willing to trust and, along with the similar removal of suspected opponents in the bureaucracy, have forced the government to rely more and more on inexperienced party members. The few capable senior officials—for example Foreign Minister Amin—seem to have more to do than they can handle. ([classification marking not declassified]) The economic situation is deteriorating. Poor weather has sharply reduced agricultural production, foodgrain import requirements have increased, and Kabul is shopping in world markets for early delivery of at least 400,000 tons of wheat. The government estimates that the shortfall in wheat production this year will be between 700,000 to 800,000 tons. Foreign exchange reserves are sufficient to pay for wheat imports, but Kabul still faces problems in arranging for delivery. The Afghans have asked Pakistan to expedite wheat shipments through the port of Karachi, but Islamabad has not yet responded. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) 2 The uprising in Herat began on March 15 by civilian insurgents, who were joined by resident Afghan Army troops who had mutinied. The revolt ended on March 20 when Afghan Army troops loyal to the Taraki regime entered the city. 3 A reference to the Iranian revolution and the collapse of the Shah’s government in February 1979.
