868ÔÇâ Foreign Relations, 1958ÔÇô1960, Volume III, Supplement
where people would say ÔÇťThis is the American Government speaking 
and therefore what is said is correct, is true.ÔÇŁ We should concentrate 
more and more on creating an atmosphere where we would not be 
ashamed, but would actually be proud, of USIA. This atmosphere, he 
indicated, already exists in some places. For example, he pointed out 
that a newspaper publisher in Bombay had indicated to him that he 
considered material more, rather than less, reliable when it bore the 
USIS label. If we took this course, Mr. Allen suggested, it would tend 
to get USIA increasingly out of gray or covert operations. USIA would 
then not have to be continually withdrawing from positions or having 
to explain embarrassing situations. Other agencies of the government, 
he felt, could handle covert activities.
Mr. Allen said that the business community was becoming more 
interested in building a better impression overseas and that Mr. 
Clarence Randall as well as Mr. White of Republic Steel had been very 
helpful in this respect. However, there was still considerable resistance 
in the business community based upon the view that business should 
not become involved in working hand-┬şin-┬şglove with the government 
overseas. For example, Mr. Humphrey of U.S. Rubber argued that 
American business overseas was highly regarded and that if the gov┬ş
ernment got us into trouble overseas, it was up to the government to 
get us out of trouble. Mr. Humphrey did not want business tarnished 
with anything looking like government propaganda. However, some 
business leaders were working to get the business community to rec┬ş
ognize that their overseas operations sink or swim with the U.S. pos┬ş
ture overseas. The business Council for International Understanding, 
which was to meet on Friday, had been helpful in developing people-┬ş
to-┬şpeople projects.
Mr. Allen then referred to Voice of America construction activi┬ş
ties. He stated that the principal construction underway was the big 
facility being built on the East Coast of the U.S. When this facility was 
completed, we would be able to send a strong signal abroad even if 
our installations abroad were knocked out. Next in importance to this 
East Coast facility was the important relay base we were building on 
the West Coast of Africa in Liberia. Liberia actually welcomed this 
facility. Mr. Allen noted that in some areas of the world listening to 
short-┬şwave broadcasts was on the decline as local stations were devel┬ş
oped, but in an area like Africa, where people were just acquiring 
enough money to be able to afford to buy radios, short-┬şwave broad┬ş
casting was of increasing importance. In this connection he pointed 
out that Phillips had sold three thousand radio sets during the month 
of July in the Belgian Congo and that 90 per cent of these had been 
bought by Africans.
Finally, Mr. Allen stated that those who were engaged in the USIA 
type of activity realize that sometimes the best policy is to keep quiet.
