Chapter 5, May–June 1990 679 — The Soviets may be signaling even more flexibility. In recent weeks they have spoken less often of the need for agreed statements on START-ABM linkage, and for a permitted-­prohibitted deal on the narrow interpretation of the ABM treaty. (Not until October 1989 did the Soviets accept U.S. narrow language, but they still refuse to say how it would be applied in practice, which is key.) We should expect to hear more about these matters, however, for they are not yet put to rest. — Is is now clear that the Soviets want an early, separate, and “neutral” predictability accord. They acknowledge that it will help START ratification and probably think it will enable them to keep a finger on the pulse of SDI and bring technological insights. Soviet ABM advocates probably also see an accord as helping them to sustain budget support (just as Soviet space bureaucrats like U.S. space cooperation). The Soviet predictability proposal has an ABM treaty focus the U.S. cannot accept. But the Soviets appear ready to make an accommodation, although they still will not accept our provision on the broad interpretation. — As for their fundamental position, the Soviets maintain that START will be put at risk if SDI goes beyond the ABM Treaty. Soviet leaders appear to need START, however, far more than U.S. leaders, so we may have considerable leverage if we remain unintimidated. Future internal changes in the USSR could change this calculus, but it seems that no “grand compromise” is needed to get START. For some years we may be able to have our START cake without having to eat SDI. — This said, it is difficult to make predictions about immediate Soviet behavior. Many factors are at stake, some beyond our control. If we stick to our current DST and delinkage positions and take advantage of the real opportunity for progress on predictability measures, however, we may emerge generally unscathed from the START ratification process. If SDI continues to make technological progress (which it can do even with a tight budget), the Soviets will in a few years face a more difficult set of decisions about strategic arms control and the strategic balance. They seem to know this and do not expect SDI to go away. Smith
