128
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
in 1950 along with his friend. Dr. Mosadeq. Both attribute all of Iran’s
shortcomings and misfortunes to British interference in Iran. When
Razmara became Prime Minister, Kashani did not find it difficult to
support National Front policies, particularly in attacking the man
whom both he and Mosadeq believed to be subservient to British influ-
ence and who had been instrumental in bringing about his most recent
exile.
Recent Events:
In the meantime the British oil concession dispute flared up into a
popular movement into which were released all the aggressive en-
ergies of the Iranian people generated by decades of frustration. The
British, through the Oil Company, were identified as the sole cause for
all the difficulties in which collectively and individually the Iranians
found themselves. The nation-wide hysteria over oil nationalization
created an atmosphere tailor-made for a reactionary religious leader
with a flare for political intrigue. He has tried to take full advantage of
it. It should be pointed out, however, that contrary to anything he may
say at the present time, at least until June of last year he had not op-
posed the supplementary oil agreement offered by the AIOC and
under discussion at that time.2
Nevertheless, events moved on and he moved with them. With the
unwitting aid of the foreign press in combination with the aroused and
unrequited passions of the Iranian people, Kashani was elevated, and
cleverly helped elevate himself, to an influential position in Iranian po-
litical affairs. Dr. Mosadeq was careful to call on him as soon as he be-
came Prime Minister, and has kept in regular contact with him ever
since. Kashani in turn has supported the Prime Minister. He has at all
critical moments issued messages to the people affirming the necessity
of Dr. Mosadeq’s leadership in the vital oil nationalization issue.
Several months ago Ayatollah Kashani decided not to appear in
public. He has refused to take his seat in the Majlis claiming that to do
so would lower his prestige. He never calls on anyone, but receives ev-
erybody in private audience—in his own surroundings. His messages
to public gatherings are recorded and played back to the audience.
With regard to his Majlis seat, Kashani said that he would go to the
Majlis only in case of an emergency. Perhaps he is waiting for a propi-
tious occasion. In the prevailing tense atmosphere, and over the oil na-
tionalization issue, should Kashani decide to make a public appearance
he would undoubtedly draw together an impressive mass of people.
2 Embassy Despatch No. 382 of June 22, 1950. [Footnote is in the original. Despatch
382 from Tehran is ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/6–2250.]
