3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 256 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI Geneva conference, to work out the details. Dobrynin objected that this would be a pre-determined framework, already established before a Geneva meeting were convened. The Secretary answered that these questions cannot be determined without the involvement of the Palestinians. Dobrynin objected and asked what kind of a framework would be established if there were only three parties negotiating it. The Secretary said, in further explanation, that these principles would cover: —the nature of peace, not only an end of the war but the establishment of normal relations; —the withdrawal from occupied territories and the establishment of secure and recognized borders; —the Palestinian question must be resolved in all of its aspects, with the Palestinians themselves as full participants in the solution, taking account of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The Secretary said that this was essentially what the US and the USSR had agreed in the joint statement, and if we could get Israel to accept these points it would be a step forward. Dobrynin said, with regard to the Palestinian question, that there was a difference between the “interim” and the “ultimate” solutions. (There was a bit of by-play at this point about the Aswan dam. The Secretary observed that it was a fine dam and Dobrynin acknowledged that it was because he knew the chief engineer who built it.) Dobrynin repeated his concern about the Palestinian representation issue, and the Secretary again repeated that this was why the Geneva conference was needed, to work out these details. Dobrynin referred to two statements, by the President and by Begin, opposed to the Palestinian state. He said this prejudged the issue. The Secretary replied that the President said his preference was that there should not be an independent Palestinian state, but if the parties decided otherwise, we would accept it. He added that he did not believe the people there believed in an independent state. Dobrynin asked what parties—the Palestinians? The Secretary replied that some Palestinians don’t want an independent state; they prefer one that would be affiliated with Jordan. Dobrynin asked if the Secretary would stop in Cairo and the Secretary replied that he probably would. In reply to a further question, he said that he expected to be back either Wednesday or Thursday. The Secretary added that he wanted to see the negotiations broadened as soon as possible to bring in all parties, including the Soviet Union. Dobrynin replied that the Soviet Union was prepared now to participate fully, that it did not like to have one of the co-chairmen determining the future. Dobrynin asked what the position of the Syrians was. The Secretary replied that the Syrians would sit on the sidelines and see what
