World Hunger and Food Policy 777 This recommendation has been considered by the Working Group and supported by all members present. DECISION10 Third, I recommend that, at the upcoming negotiations, the U.S. propose a new provision for a “callable food aid commitment” which would set rules for sharing responsibility among all food aid donors for increasing food aid during periods of special need by low-income developing countries. In times of production shortfalls, a sharp increase in food aid may be required by the poorest developing countries. Historically, the U.S. and other exporters have been expected to respond to such special needs. I believe that the new Convention should establish rules for sharing responsibility for such increased food aid. In general, the U.S. would propose that, whenever foodgrain production in the low-income developing countries is more than an agreed percentage below trend, all donor countries would meet to consider jointly increasing food aid by up to an agreed percentage of each country’s basic contribution under the Convention. Specific guidelines for such a proposal have been developed by the Working Group on Food and Agricultural Policy. The potential budget impact of such a proposal depends on the maximum size of the U.S. callable food aid commitment and the probability that the criteria for calling up this additional food aid would be met. I recommend that the U.S. negotiator be authorized to accept a callable food aid commitment for the U.S. up to 1.0 million tons—that is, up to 20% of 5 million tons—provided that the percentage shortfall from production trend which would trigger consideration of such additional food aid would have an estimated probability of less than one-fourth in any one year. Thus, the potential budget exposure of the U.S. would have an upper limit. This recommendation has been considered by the Working Group and is supported by all members present. DECISION11 Bob Bergland 10 The President checked his approval and initialed this recommendation. 11 The President checked his approval and initialed this recommendation. On March 3, the White House announced that the President had instructed the U.S. officials attending UNCTAD to pledge 4.47 million tons of grain annually to the FAC. For the text of the announcement, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 455–456.
