Yugoslavia 239. Letter From President Carter to Yugoslav President Tito1 Washington, August 5, 1977 Dear Mr. President: Vice President Mondale has told me about the warmth of your hospitality during his recent trip to Yugoslavia, and has given me a full report on his talks with you. Your insights are very helpful to me. I understand that you will soon be travelling to Moscow, Pyongyang, and Peking—a trip which will be of great importance to everyone who seeks greater international understanding. I would welcome hearing from you after your trip, to gain your own assessment of the situation in the three countries you are visiting, and to learn of their leaders’ views on world problems. This is a particularly important time in U.S.-Soviet relations. Despite the tenor of much public commentary in recent months, I am encouraged by the progress we have made in bilateral discussions with Soviet officials in a number of areas, including the limiting of military forces in the Indian Ocean and the ending of nuclear testing. I am committed to building on what has been done so far, in order to reduce the risks of war, place firm limits on the nuclear arms race, and create an enduring basis for U.S.-Soviet relations. I hope you will assure Soviet leaders of my commitment. We are prepared to move forward with the Soviet Union on a broad front, on the basis of mutual interest, reciprocal action, and a common commitment to strengthening peace. Clearly, gaining a new SALT agreement is of great importance. Many difficulties remain; but I am prepared to work closely with Soviet leaders to reach an agreement that will truly provide greater security in the years ahead. The forthcoming conference to review the Helsinki agreement, which you are hosting this fall, is also of major importance. We want to make this a constructive meeting, in order to strengthen the basis for security and cooperation in Europe. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 21, Yugoslavia: President Josip Broz Tito,
