Yugoslavia
765
239.
Letter From President Carter to Yugoslav President Tito1
Washington, August 5, 1977
Dear Mr. President:
Vice President Mondale has told me about the warmth of your
hospitality during his recent trip to Yugoslavia, and has given me a
full report on his talks with you. Your insights are very helpful to me.
I understand that you will soon be travelling to Moscow, Pyong-
yang, and Peking—a trip which will be of great importance to everyone
who seeks greater international understanding. I would welcome hear-
ing from you after your trip, to gain your own assessment of the
situation in the three countries you are visiting, and to learn of their
leaders’ views on world problems.
This is a particularly important time in U.S.-Soviet relations.
Despite the tenor of much public commentary in recent months, I am
encouraged by the progress we have made in bilateral discussions with
Soviet officials in a number of areas, including the limiting of military
forces in the Indian Ocean and the ending of nuclear testing. I am
committed to building on what has been done so far, in order to reduce
the risks of war, place firm limits on the nuclear arms race, and create
an enduring basis for U.S.-Soviet relations. I hope you will assure Soviet
leaders of my commitment. We are prepared to move forward with
the Soviet Union on a broad front, on the basis of mutual interest,
reciprocal action, and a common commitment to strengthening peace.
Clearly, gaining a new SALT agreement is of great importance.
Many difficulties remain; but I am prepared to work closely with Soviet
leaders to reach an agreement that will truly provide greater security
in the years ahead. The forthcoming conference to review the Helsinki
agreement, which you are hosting this fall, is also of major importance.
We want to make this a constructive meeting, in order to strengthen
the basis for security and cooperation in Europe.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 21, Yugoslavia: President Josip Broz Tito,
5/77–5/79. No classification marking. The initial draft was prepared in the Department
of State and sent to the White House by Tarnoff on July 29. Treverton and Hunter
reworked the draft at Brzezinski’s request. (Ibid.) Brzezinski forwarded the letter for
signature to the President on August 5, noting that he and Vance thought a letter to
Tito “in advance of his trip to Moscow, Pyongyang, and Peking” would be “useful.” (Ibid.)
The letter was transmitted to Belgrade in telegram 184567, August 6, with instructions
to deliver it to Tito. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770282–
0270) Eagleburger delivered the letter to Minic on August 9. (Telegram 5378 from Bel-
grade, August 9; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770286–0413)
