3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
867
very poor Soviet harvest should coincide with a tightening of interna-
tional markets. Although such a nightmare for Moscow is now only a
possibility, the consequences would be so disastrous that it undoubt-
edly affects Soviet calculations even though Soviet leaders cover up
any such concerns.
—U.S. limitations on high technology exports and the freeze on
large projects are also significant, both symbolically and in terms of un-
certainties in the planning process. They will be more difficult to main-
tain in the face of inevitable sliding away by other industrialized coun-
tries, but it seems possible that the U.S. can continue to have a
dampening effect if we adhere strictly to our own policy and are not
stampeded by isolated examples of West European or Japanese
backsliding.
—The U.S. freeze on high visibility cultural, educational and scien-
tific exchanges will, if it continues, cause these staples of the relation-
ship to wither away. That is a pity, because these opportunities for es-
tablishing long-term direct contacts with individuals and institutions in
the Soviet Union have useful potential for eroding the isolation and sin-
glemindedness of this society. But they are not essential to the U.S. in
any immediate sense and are symbolically important to the Soviets.
Therefore we should resolutely resist any temptation to relax our re-
strictions on the high visibility exchanges prematurely. In the Em-
bassy’s view, a return to normalcy in high visibility exchanges should
not be one of the first steps toward a normal relationship with the
USSR, but should be held back until the Afghanistan situation has
changed to U.S. satisfaction.
D. A final and important element of U.S. strategy is the delinking
of certain key issues and negotiations from Afghanistan as we are
doing in the case of the test ban negotiations, MBFR, the Committee on
Disarmament, and LRTNF. CSCE should be considered as another ac-
ceptable area for preliminary talks with the Soviets; CSCE itself is valu-
able as an ongoing forum to demonstrate the ideological dividing line
between democracy and totalitarianism, but in order for it to be effec-
tive we have to keep in close harmony with the West European de-
mocracies. We should therefore show the way, by consulting with the
Soviets and telling them that we will sound off at Madrid nonpolemi-
cally but firmly on aggression in Afghanistan as well as human rights.
10. In sum, the U.S. should be in the forefront of efforts to demon-
strate to the world how to cope with Soviet aggression when circum-
stances prevent a direct military response: by principled and long-
lasting sanctions, readiness to show flexibility in negotiating an end to
the aggression, and clearmindedness in defining key issues to be dealt
with separately. How to carry this out in practice is not so easy to
specify, but the way may become clearer in the process. We should not
