Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1109
The Department of State appreciates the Embassy’s consideration
in advising the Government of the Federal Republic of United States’
concern in this matter and looks forward to continued cooperation on
the non-proliferation issue. End text.
2. Von Staden promised that expression of U.S. concerns would
reach highest levels of his government adding that he was sure that
Rouget (Ref A) had already seen to it.
Christopher
446.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
the United Kingdom and France1
Washington, December 1, 1978, 2125Z
304639. USMission IAEA. Subject: U.S. Response to Soviet State-
ment on Protocol II to the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
1. On May 18, 1978, the Soviet Union signed Protocol II to the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, also
known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco.2 Protocol II is open for adherence to
nuclear weapon states only and requires them to respect the nuclear
weapon-free zone established by the Treaty and to refrain from using
or threatening to use nuclear weapons against the parties to the Treaty.
The U.S., UK, France and People’s Republic of China have previously
signed and ratified Protocol II.
2. We welcome Soviet signature of Protocol II. However, their sig-
nature was accompanied by a declaration which, inter alia, stated that:
“The final act of the preparatory commission for the denucleariza-
tion of Latin America interprets the Treaty in the sense that the
granting of transit authorization for nuclear weapons requested by
States that are not party to the Treaty shall lie within the jurisdiction of
each State party to the Treaty. In this regard, the Soviet Union reaffirms
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy Files, D780496–1184.
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to Moscow, Mexico City, USUN,
Vienna, and Panama City. Drafted by Margot Mazeau (ACDA/GA) and Michael
Matheson (L/PM); cleared by Louis Nosenzo (OES/NET), Lorna Watson (ACDA/NP),
Charles Steiner (PM/NPP), George Jones (ARA), Kent Brown (EUR/SOV), Pastor (NSC),
Susan Flood (OSD/ISA), Mark Lissfelt, and Peter Reams (EUR/NE); and approved by
James Michel (L).
2 See Document 437.
