right of self-defense, it is not in the interest of peace that a treaty
should stipulate a juristic conception of self-defense since it is far
too easy for the unscrupulous to mold events to accord with an
agreed definition.
(2) The League Covenant. The Covenant imposes no affirmative
primary obligation to go to war. The obligation, if any, is
secondary and attaches only when deliberately accepted by a
state. Article ten of the Covenant has, for example, been
interpreted by a resolution submitted to the Fourth Assembly but
not formally adopted owing to one adverse vote to mean that “it is
for the constitutional authorities of each member to decide, in
reference to the obligation of preserving the independence and the
integrity of the territory of members, in what degree the member
is bound to assure the execution of this obligation by employment
of its military forces.” There is, in my opinion, no necessary
inconsistency between the covenant and the idea of an unqualified
renunciation of war. The covenant can, it is true, be construed as
authorizing war in certain circumstances but it is an authorization
and not a positive requirement. The German Government,
moreover, which is a member of the League of Nations does not
regard itself as barred thereby from becoming a party to the form
of anti-war treaty which the United States has proposed.
(3) The Treaties of Locarno. If the parties to the treaties of
Locarno are under any positive obligation to go to war, such
obligation certainly would not attach until one of the parties has
resorted to war in violation of its solemn pledges thereunder. It is
therefore obvious that if all the parties to the Locarno treaties
become parties to the multilateral anti-war treaty proposed by the
United States, there would be a double assurance that the Locarno
treaties would not be violated by recourse to arms. In such event
it would follow that resort to war by any state in violation of the
Locarno treaties would also be a breach of the multilateral anti-
war treaty and the other parties to the anti-war treaty would thus
as a matter of law be automatically released from their obligations
thereunder and free to fulfil their Locarno commitments. The
