512 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 2. Condominium, based on a balance of power to preserve the status quo (e.g., Nixon/Kissinger): This approach is based on the essentially pessimistic view that the West is in decline and that the best we can do is to prevent change in the central areas, while letting the Soviets win in the less important peripheries. The key weakness of this approach is that the world is too dynamic to sustain an essentially reactionary balance-of-power policy, while the “condominium” would be bitterly resented by everyone else, and thus would backfire strongly against our own alliance relationships. (S) 3. Simply a Partnership as the centerpiece of U.S. foreign policy (e.g., McGovern): According to this view, a U.S.-Soviet partnership on a broad front, starting with SALT, will be the basis for world peace, and hence it ought to be the centerpiece of U.S. foreign policy. The key weakness of this approach, much as of the one above, is that it frightens our friends and allies, be they the West Europeans, Japanese, and lately the Chinese, and it can be easily translated into appeasement. Indeed, typical of this approach is its concomitant unwillingness even to criticize the Soviets either for their militant intrusion into Africa or for their excessive strategic build-up; as well as its willingness to give gratis assurances on the Chinese, asking nothing in return. In effect, alternatives 2 and 3 elevate the USSR into a global partner of the United States, while giving the Soviets a hunting license to exploit global turbulence to their advantage. (S) Your policy, if I understand it correctly, seeks: (S) 4. Reciprocal Accommodation, which means (1) containment, (2) resistance to indirect expansion, (3) ideological competition, and, most important and above all, (4) creation of a framework within which the Soviet Union can accommodate with us, or face the prospect of isolating itself globally. This offers the best hope for the United States and for our values, and it avoids the risks inherent in the three other approaches mentioned above because it seeks to fit the U.S.-Soviet relationship into a cooperative context of U.S.-European-Japanese, and now also Chinese, relations. (S) What does the fourth approach mean in practice? (S) 1. It means keeping open the option to the Soviets for genuine global cooperation with the United States, but doing so in a patient fashion. I think that we have made a mistake in putting so many deadlines on SALT and on Brezhnev’s visit here; that simply conveys overanxiousness, the Soviets can exploit that against us, and we hurt ourselves domestically. We should stress to the Soviets that we are prepared to be patient, that there is a constructive place for them in a wider framework of international cooperation, that there are many global issues on which we could cooperate, and that we are prepared to seek detente and cooperation on the basis of genuine reciprocity, as in-
