512
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
2. Condominium, based on a balance of power to preserve the status
quo (e.g., Nixon/Kissinger): This approach is based on the essentially
pessimistic view that the West is in decline and that the best we can do
is to prevent change in the central areas, while letting the Soviets win in
the less important peripheries. The key weakness of this approach is
that the world is too dynamic to sustain an essentially reactionary
balance-of-power policy, while the “condominium” would be bitterly
resented by everyone else, and thus would backfire strongly against
our own alliance relationships. (S)
3. Simply a Partnership as the centerpiece of U.S. foreign policy (e.g.,
McGovern): According to this view, a U.S.-Soviet partnership on a
broad front, starting with SALT, will be the basis for world peace, and
hence it ought to be the centerpiece of U.S. foreign policy. The key
weakness of this approach, much as of the one above, is that it frightens
our friends and allies, be they the West Europeans, Japanese, and lately
the Chinese, and it can be easily translated into appeasement. Indeed,
typical of this approach is its concomitant unwillingness even to criti-
cize the Soviets either for their militant intrusion into Africa or for their
excessive strategic build-up; as well as its willingness to give gratis as-
surances on the Chinese, asking nothing in return. In effect, alternatives
2 and 3 elevate the USSR into a global partner of the United States,
while giving the Soviets a hunting license to exploit global turbulence
to their advantage. (S)
Your policy, if I understand it correctly, seeks: (S)
4. Reciprocal Accommodation, which means (1) containment, (2) re-
sistance to indirect expansion, (3) ideological competition, and, most
important and above all, (4) creation of a framework within which the
Soviet Union can accommodate with us, or face the prospect of iso-
lating itself globally. This offers the best hope for the United States and
for our values, and it avoids the risks inherent in the three other ap-
proaches mentioned above because it seeks to fit the U.S.-Soviet rela-
tionship into a cooperative context of U.S.-European-Japanese, and
now also Chinese, relations. (S)
What does the fourth approach mean in practice? (S)
1. It means keeping open the option to the Soviets for genuine
global cooperation with the United States, but doing so in a patient
fashion. I think that we have made a mistake in putting so many dead-
lines on SALT and on Brezhnev’s visit here; that simply conveys over-
anxiousness, the Soviets can exploit that against us, and we hurt our-
selves domestically. We should stress to the Soviets that we are
prepared to be patient, that there is a constructive place for them in a
wider framework of international cooperation, that there are many
global issues on which we could cooperate, and that we are prepared to
seek detente and cooperation on the basis of genuine reciprocity, as in-
