Human Rights
331
Recommendation:
That you authorize me to work with Jim Fallows in preparing a
short speech draft for delivery during Human Rights Week.7
5. Ratification of the Genocide Treaty
The Administration’s first public human rights goal was the ratifi-
cation of the Genocide Treaty which has been stuck in the Senate for
nearly 30 years. We have not achieved it mostly through lack of effort.
The NGOs waited for a sign from the White House, and the Adminis-
tration waited for the NGOs to produce the votes. The result was inac-
tion. Recently, my staff, working with NGO representatives and Frank
Moore’s office, produced a solid vote count based on written answers of
the Senators. For cloture, where 60 votes are needed, we have 54 solidly
committed in favor, with 15 undecided or leaning in favor. On final
passage where 66 votes are needed (or fewer if some members can be
convinced to take a walk) we have 56 solidly committed, and 13 unde-
cided or leaning in favor. We are beginning to get criticism for the lack
of effort on Genocide, particularly because we have signed three more
human rights treaties this year,8 and so there is now a total of five
treaties waiting to be ratified. There has also been criticism from
abroad, to the effect that the US will sign anything but then not ratify.
Ratification of the Genocide Treaty must of course wait until after
Panama is resolved,9 but it should be attempted as soon as possible
thereafter.
Recommendation:
That you request the Vice President to review the feasibility of
making the ratification of the Genocide Treaty a high Administration
priority immediately following resolution of the Panama Canal.10
6. Issuance of a Human Rights PD
Attached at Tab A is a draft human rights PD. It formalizes our
human rights policy as it now stands, including the positive targeting
of foreign assistance to countries with good records on human rights. It
also directs a detailed study of the problems connected with implemen-
tation of the Harkin amendment in the IFIs, and the problems and reac-
7 The President approved and initialed this recommendation. At the beginning of
his December 15 news conference, Carter highlighted Human Rights Week, noting that
the administration was “working to advance a full range of human rights, economic and
social, as well as civil and political.” See Document 99. For the complete text of Carter’s
statement and the transcript of the news conference, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book
II, pp. 2115–2124.
8 See Documents 47 and 79.
9 Presumable reference to the Panama Canal treaties.
10 The President approved this recommendation.
