860 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III financial contributions made directly to it by national governments. Many of them also want the fund to finance non-stabilization measures—diversification, infrastructure investment, research and development, product improvement and market promotion. Inclusion of “other measures” is basic to LDC cohesion because it offers benefits to LDCs who would not gain from buffer stocking. We and most other industrialized countries believe these non-stabilization needs are in large part already being addressed or could be addressed through existing financial institutions (IBRD, UNDP, regional banks), bilateral assistance programs, and ICAs themselves. Finally, the LDCs want the fund to be a new international institution with its own resources under their control. We seek to limit the scope of the fund’s activities, prevent control by the LDCs as a bloc, and preserve the autonomy of ICAs. 4. We cannot be sure how the LDCs will react to our current proposal in November. In view of the distance we have come, in the last year, the LDC moderates may be willing to work with our approach and attempt to move us along in November and further negotiating sessions next year. On the other hand, given the fundamental differences between our concept of a common fund and that demanded by the LDCs, we must be prepared for a contentious and politicized session that could end in a stalemate and sour the general negotiating environment on North/South issues. The common fund negotiations occur at an important moment in the dialogue, being the first major “economic” event after CIEC; preceding an upcoming series of difficult North/South negotiations; and coming before and during the President’s trip.8 The Group of 77 developing countries (G–77) are likely to use the opportunity provided by the trip to increase pressure on the US. The U.S. Proposal 5. We have argued in the OECD that our proposal would offer the following benefits: a. it would provide economies from the pooling of substantial cash resources; b. it would substantially reduce the financial outlays of government for each ICA by relying on commercial borrowing to enable participating ICAs to obtain financing up to 100% of their negotiated financial requirements; c. it would be able to borrow more effectively and at lower costs than individual ICAs by consolidating their financial operations; 8 Carter was scheduled to travel to nine countries November 22–December 3, but the trip was postponed in early November. (Charles Mohr, “Carter Postpones Foreign Tour To Deal With Energy Legislation,” The New York Times, November 5, 1977, p. 1)
