893.5045/90: Telegram
[Document 585]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 15, 1925—10 a.m.
[Received June 15—11:27 a.m.]
228. My 217, June 12, 6 p.m.48
1. Continued demonstrations in Peking and other agitation regarding
Shanghai incident especially distribution of pamphlets and pictures
calculated to incite extreme antiforeign feeling. Heads of Legation through
senior minister have sought ineffectually past few days to cause Chinese
Government either to put a stop to the above or make necessary arrangement
to prevent demonstrations from coming into direct contact with Legation
Quarter as has twice occurred when effort made by bodies of students to rush
gates of Quarter. Chinese Government acknowledges unable to prevent
contact between Legation guards and demonstrators.
2. Senior minister at meeting of Heads of Legation yesterday afternoon stated
he was informed on most reliable authority that group of extremists would
attack Foreign Office on 15th, establish people’s commissar for foreign
affairs, and incite mob to assault Legation Quarter. Japanese Minister had
same information and chief of police also. General sense of meeting that
Soviet and Communist activities in Peking greatly increased to the end that
some incident involving foreigners should take place and that Feng Yu-
hsiang’s troops now in Peking not to be relied on in the circumstances.
3. [Paraphrase.] Chang Tso-lin caused a message to be sent to the senior
minister confidentially and privately that if desired he would send 10,000
soldiers to Peking to obtain order. This message the senior minister placed for
action before the Heads of Legation. Most diplomatic representatives
believed that a grave and menacing situation confronted foreigners in the
capital because of Communistic activities, the paralysis of the government of
Tuan Chi-jui, the reaction to the riots at Hankow and Kiukiang and the
general condition of disturbance throughout China. With this situation in
view they believed it imperative that the Heads of Legation, in reply to
Chang Tso-lin, welcome any aid in maintaining law and order here.
