1955 47 I told Wang I would like make few remarks of preliminary nature on what he had said. In first place throughout his remarks he had repeatedly referred to matter of Chinese in US applying for permission to leave. I told him I might not have expressed myself sufficiently clearly at last meeting but I had tried to explain that in US alien ordinarily does not need to make application to leave. We have no such thing as exit permit. In effect if alien wants to leave US he simply buys boat tickets and leaves. It is for this reason restraining orders had to be issued against some students in past. As I had said repeatedly, these orders now lifted. To best my knowledge no Chinese now being prevented from leaving US for China. Referring case of Dr. Tsien I said statement that US not pre­ venting any Chinese from leaving country also applied to him. If he still desires proceed China US would not prevent. I said most of what Wang said regarding him was past history which it would not be fruitful to go into. I pointed out Wang had referred to many news articles and I sug­ gested that they not be taken as too authoritative since we had both seen recently that the press frequently makes mistakes. I added I would want point out that question whether Tsien tried violate US espionage laws by attempting take with him US classified documents is of course question of fact. Whether he did or did not, I stated I could not refrain from con­ trasting fact he still free with status our citizens in China charged with similar offenses. However said I did not want to debate his case but only repeat my original statement that if he wants to go he can. I said in half-serious tone it seemed that Wang on one hand com­ plained we prevented people from leaving and on other that they must leave too quickly. Said he had referred to cases of some who may wish to apply under Refugee Relief Act for permanent residence and that he had asked in future such persons should be permitted to leave if desire to do so. I said as I had told him before they can do so. Regard­ ing question forcing people leave before they ready, I repeated each case sympathetically considered on own merits and if extension justi­ fied Immigration Service would grant. No one forced to apply for per­ manent residence. This purely voluntary. Immigration Service merely points out if persons do not apply they no longer entitled to status as students when have ceased to be students. Referring to Wang’s statement concerning interrogating people on their political opinions, I said this becomes pertinent only if per­ son applies for permanent residence. It is necessary under our law to inquire into a person’s loyalties to determine whether such person enti­ tled permanent residence. It is normal and natural procedure applied to all aliens. Referring to 44 names given by Wang I said I wished point out again original 76 were those against whom restraining order lifted. Individ­ uals were informed orders lifted and they free to depart. This did not
