September 18–December 16, 1978 339 David agreement. The final status of Gaza might be settled according to the Camp David agreement. Barak suggested language on “without prejudice to the status of Gaza, which will be settled in accordance with the framework agreement”. The President said he felt that Israel was trying to assert its own claim to sovereignty over Gaza. Dayan said that they just wanted to tie this to the Camp David agreement. He suggested the following language: “the issue of the final status of Gaza, which will be decided in accordance with the Camp David framework agreements.” The President said that Israel cannot lay a claim to Gaza on this basis. The President said he was wondering what Israel’s intentions were in not accepting the language as it presently was written. He suggested that we stick to the Camp David language and show a map with a line at the border and around Gaza. The President turned to the letter8 that the Egyptians were planning to write referring to the general framework agreement. He said that he had urged them to cut down dramatically the specific references from the Camp David agreement. He asked the Israelis if there were anything they would like to have in that letter. Dayan said that they knew what they did not want in the letter. The President urged them to be in a constructive mood and to leave something in the letter for the Egyptians. Barak said that the main problem with the letter was that it could be seen as implying some legal link between the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the broader framework agreement. The letter should not be binding on Israel. The President said that this would not be the case. The Egyptian and Israeli letters did not have to be identical. Barak said that if Israel can write whatever it wants in the letter, then Israel does not care what the Egyptians write in their letter. He had thought that a common letter was envisaged. Messrs. Hansell and Rosenne returned to the room at this point after having worked on the priority of obligations language. They suggested some new language, which Barak said he could accept. The President suggested that we try this language with the Egyptians. Turning to the exchange of letters, The President argued for a single joint letter on the beginning of negotiations on the West Bank/Gaza issue within one month, to which the text of the Camp David agreements would be appended. In addition, there would be mention in the preamble of the treaty of the Camp David framework agreement. Barak said that this raised the question of linkage. Barak said that the Israeli commitment to the framework agreement is a fact, but that it should not be mentioned in the treaty itself. If it were, it could be seen as the foundation stone for the Egyptian-Israeli treaty, and could call into 8 See footnote 3, Document 96.
