270
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
While granting Sofia MFN is clearly out of the question in the
immediate future, we should give serious consideration to what else
we might do to encourage Bulgaria’s interest in improved relations.
Despite Bulgaria’s close ties to the Soviet Union, the prospects for some
change over the long run may not be as dismal as often assumed. The
rejuvenation in the Bulgarian leadership which has taken place since
1976 combined with a prolonged succession crisis in the Soviet Union
could induce Bulgaria to pursue a moderately more flexible policy in
areas where this does not fundamentally contradict Soviet interests.
This was the case in 1964 at the time of Khrushchev’s ouster (when
Bulgaria came close to normalizing relations with Bonn and took a
number of other uncharacteristically independent initiatives in the Bal-
kans) and it is not inconceivable that a similar development could
occur in the immediate post-Brezhnev period. (C)
In short, while we should have no illusions about the degree of
Bulgaria’s dependence on the Soviet Union, we should not write off
Bulgaria entirely. We should do what we can to encourage Bulgaria
to broaden its ties with the West and test Sofia’s willingness to improve
relations with the United States (perhaps by including Bulgaria in a
trip by a Cabinet official at some point). (C)
Attachment
Memorandum of Conversation3
Washington, October 26, 1979, 11–11:50 a.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of Meeting with Lyuben Gotsev (U)
PARTICIPANTS
Marshall Brement
Stephen Larrabee
Lyuben Gotsev, Head, North American Section, Bulgarian MFA
Krassin Himmirsky, First Secretary, Bulgarian Embassy
Elena Bobtodorova, Interpreter
Gotsev opened the meeting by stating he wished to concentrate
on bilateral relations. He proceeded to review the state of US-Bulgarian
relations, pointing to progress in the resolution of 20 of the 35 pending
family reunification cases in the last several months and progress in
3 Confidential. The meeting took place in Brement’s office.
