466 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement the interest of stable, responsible non-Communist government. In Haiti, Trujillo has given comfort and encouragement to General Kebreau, despite the fact that the latter has brought pressure on the Haitian Government not to settle the Talamas matter which is of so much concern to our Government. In Puerto Rico, Governor Muñoz Marin was forced to ask for the recall of a Dominican Consul because of improprieties. Dominican attacks on Governor Muñoz Marin have been vicious, distorted and unjustified, and public accusations tending to smear the Governor as the tool of a Communist conspiracy are neither warranted by the facts or in keeping with propriety. If the Dominican Government has evidence of Communist activities in Puerto Rico or in the United States, we shall appreciate receiving such information through customary diplomatic channels and we shall take appropriate action to investigate and curb such illegal activities. 4. Law of the Sea Conference On January 16 the Dominican Foreign Minister told the Ambassador that the Dominican Republic would not attend this conference because it “has no problem” with any country on this question. We interpret this as foreshadowing Trujillo’s possible future non-­cooperative attitude. If Ambassador Farland finds his discussion with Trujillo satisfactory on the first three points above, he will then press for a favorable decision on Dominican attendance at this conference. RPA is drafting an instruction. 5. Technical Cooperation The Department has recommended that the ICA program in the Dominican Republic not be terminated as the Director of ICA10 has proposed in December, and that the FY 1959 program remain as presently agreed upon. We believe that the approach to technical assistance in the Dominican Republic should be as follows: (1) Presently-­operating programs should follow their normal, presently planned course; (2) No new fields of activities should be approved for the present; (3) Individual requests for specific assistance should be considered on their merits (an example is a recent request for short-­term services of a technician in connection with airport construction); (4) This approach would be reviewed from time to time in the light of our over-­all relations with the Dominican Republic and in the light of how effectively the Dominicans are cooperating in those programs already in operation. 10 James H. Smith, Jr.
