734
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—We are pleased that Romania and the United States have devel-
oped, in a gradual and prudent fashion, a military relationship that
includes high-level military visits, ship visits, and other interchanges.
—We are willing to consider making strictly limited exports of US
military equipment to Romania on a case-by-case basis. While we are
not prepared to consider sales of military equipment on a government-
to-government basis (that is, under the US “foreign military sales”
program) we could approve exports of some commercially-available
US-manufactured munitions list items exclusive of major defense
equipment or sensitive military technologies.
—These limitations would mean that most if not all items on the
list provided to us in 1975 would be unavailable. The US might, how-
ever, be prepared to entertain specific license requests for some items
under such headings as, for example, certain radars, communications
equipment, light cargo-personnel vehicles, light aircraft, selected non-
weapons components for the Jurom jet fighter, and other non-sensitive
military equipment. US approval of export licenses would be subject
to COCOM concurrence.
—Exports from the US of weapons or sensitive military technolo-
gies will not be possible for the foreseeable future. No US Government
credits would be available for such exports to Romania.
—Exports to Romania of commercially-available munitions list
items would not involve the conclusion of agreements between Roma-
nia and the United States.
—As a condition of export approval, we would require assurances
from Romania that equipment sold to it not be transferred or otherwise
made available to third parties.
—Our willingness to consider such exports to Romania despite its
membership in the Warsaw Pact reflects the positive trends in US-
Romanian relations and would depend on the continuance of such
trends.
—Before proceeding further on this matter, we would appreciate
receiving your government’s views on the approach we have outlined.
We are particularly concerned that both our governments have similar
perceptions of what is possible and what is not.
—If you inform us that Romania is interested in this approach, we
will then carefully assess all factors and inform you of our final decision.
In the meantime we would be prepared, as indicated in the July 1
meeting, to receive specific requests from Romania.
—If exports are approved, the US would plan no formal announce-
ments, but you should expect eventual public disclosure of Romanian
purchases of US equipment. The administration would also need to
inform appropriate congressional leaders before sales were made.
