878 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 16. Pending the time when Iran shall receive substantial revenues from her natural petroleum resources, provide emergency economic aid, preferably in the form of loans, as necessary to the Government of Iran, provided that it remains friendly to the U.S. 17. Continue limited technical and economic aid to Iran. Where appropriate utilize such private institutions and international organizations as may provide technical assistance more effectively. 18. In carrying out the courses of action in paras. 15, 16 and 17 above, the United States should: a. Maintain full consultation with the United Kingdom. b. Avoid unduly impairing United States–United Kingdom relations. c. Not permit the United Kingdom to veto any United States actions which the United States considers essential to the achievement of the objectives set forth above. d. Continue efforts to have the United Kingdom and Iran agree to a practical and equitable solution of the oil problem at the earliest possible moment and, at the same time, have the United Kingdom give full support to the Zahedi Government. e. Be prepared to avail itself of the authority of the President to approve voluntary agreements and programs under Section 708 (a) and (b) of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended. 19. Provide United States grant military aid for Iran designed to: a. Improve the ability of the Iranian armed forces to maintain internal security and provide some resistance to external aggression. b. Enhance the prestige of the monarchy and the morale of the Iranian Government and military services. 20. The amount and rate of such military aid to Iran should take into account: a. The attitude of Iran with regard to this aid and with regard to political, economic and military cooperation with the free world, including Turkey, Pakistan, and possibly Iraq. b. Iran’s ability satisfactorily to absorb military equipment and training, and its willingness at an appropriate time to formalize necessary contracts for military aid and training. 21. Encourage Iran to enter into military cooperation with its neighbors as feasible, and to participate in any regional defense arrangement which may be developed for the Middle East. 22. Recognize the strength of Iranian nationalist feeling; try to direct it into constructive channels and be ready to exploit any opportunity to do so, bearing in mind the desirability of strengthening in Iran
