878
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
16. Pending the time when Iran shall receive substantial revenues
from her natural petroleum resources, provide emergency economic
aid, preferably in the form of loans, as necessary to the Government of
Iran, provided that it remains friendly to the U.S.
17. Continue limited technical and economic aid to Iran. Where ap-
propriate utilize such private institutions and international organiza-
tions as may provide technical assistance more effectively.
18. In carrying out the courses of action in paras. 15, 16 and 17
above, the United States should:
a. Maintain full consultation with the United Kingdom.
b. Avoid unduly impairing United States–United Kingdom
relations.
c. Not permit the United Kingdom to veto any United States ac-
tions which the United States considers essential to the achievement of
the objectives set forth above.
d. Continue efforts to have the United Kingdom and Iran agree to a
practical and equitable solution of the oil problem at the earliest pos-
sible moment and, at the same time, have the United Kingdom give full
support to the Zahedi Government.
e. Be prepared to avail itself of the authority of the President to ap-
prove voluntary agreements and programs under Section 708 (a) and
(b) of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended.
19. Provide United States grant military aid for Iran designed to:
a. Improve the ability of the Iranian armed forces to maintain in-
ternal security and provide some resistance to external aggression.
b. Enhance the prestige of the monarchy and the morale of the Ira-
nian Government and military services.
20. The amount and rate of such military aid to Iran should take
into account:
a. The attitude of Iran with regard to this aid and with regard to
political, economic and military cooperation with the free world, in-
cluding Turkey, Pakistan, and possibly Iraq.
b. Iran’s ability satisfactorily to absorb military equipment and
training, and its willingness at an appropriate time to formalize neces-
sary contracts for military aid and training.
21. Encourage Iran to enter into military cooperation with its
neighbors as feasible, and to participate in any regional defense ar-
rangement which may be developed for the Middle East.
22. Recognize the strength of Iranian nationalist feeling; try to di-
rect it into constructive channels and be ready to exploit any opportu-
nity to do so, bearing in mind the desirability of strengthening in Iran
