1977 157 an earlier version of his report pending the outcome of PRM–10, and this second response is his revision in light of PRM–10 and PD–18. (A copy of PD–18 is at Tab H.)2 The answers to the three original questions are succinctly stated at Tabs C, D, and E. The JCS separate answers are at Tab F. —Procedures. You will quickly note that the procedure for a limited nuclear operation, [2 lines not declassified], is not very realistic, especially in view of the Soviet stated preference for targeting command and control at the beginning of a conflict. —Command and Control. Communications for a retaliatory strike order may be very secure, but the survivability of the NCA for conducting the war over several days or weeks and for coping with the domestic civil front is not addressed. —Limited Nuclear Options. The discussion of LNOs is less useful than the appended list of presently approved LNOs which our forces could execute. To sum up, we have a limited nuclear war doctrine and targeting capability, but we seem to lack some of the defensive capabilities that would make it practical. The longer report, “Current Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy,” is an excellent essay explaining the historical process by which we arrived at our present condition, a doctrine but with only part of the capability to implement it. In particular, it recounts our changing views on what constitutes “deterrence” and how to “control escalation,” if deterrence fails. As Harold Brown points out in this memorandum, NSDM–242 specified a number of actions that have not been carried out effectively, and he recommends that we reemphasize them. (A copy of NSDM 242 is at Tab G).3 He invites you to hear a briefing on LNOs by the JCS and to visit SAC Headquarters in Omaha. I encourage you to accept these invitations because: —As the report argues, and as NSDM 242 specified, LNOs and the SIOP require repeated interaction between the NCA and the planning process if our nuclear force planning is to reflect the policy preference of the NCA. —The experience will improve your familiarity with the context in which our White House Emergency Procedures and IVORY ITEMS drills must fit. Recent press reporting on the subject of your readiness for handling a nuclear war emergency (Orr Kelly’s piece in U.S. News 2 Not found attached; see Document 31. 3 Not found attached; see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXV, National Security Policy, 1973–1976, Document 31.
