3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
532
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
verification.” It is perfectly clear indeed that such an assertion obvi-
ously contradicts the text of the very formulation which speaks of the
right to encrypt telemetric information except for those cases when it im-
pedes verification of compliance with the provisions of the agreement.
Ambiguous, to say the least, is also the point contained in the said
statement to the effect that the use in future of “such for example, en-
cryption” of telemetric information which was used by the Soviet side
in some tests in the past would contradict the agreement. Such state-
ment can be interpreted in such a way as if all encryption which was
used in the cases in question would be illegal as applicable to the agree-
ment. This would again put in doubt the right of the sides, embodied in
the earlier agreed formulation, to encrypt telemetric information about
those parameters which are not regulated by the agreement and thus
are not related to the verification of compliance with the provisions of
the agreement.
Therefore it is quite natural that the Soviet delegation could not
pass in silence over the unilateral statement made by the US delegation
at the inclusion of the formulation on telemetric information worked
out by the Ministers in the agreement. On its part, it stated at once that
this formulation does not require additional interpretations.
Thus, Mr. President, if there is someone who undermines the
achieved agreement on telemetric information the guilty ones should
certainly be looked for among representatives not of the Soviet but of
the US side. Evidently, it would not take you much effort to find them.
We confirm our readiness to consider the question of telemetric in-
formation resolved having in view the inclusion in the agreement of the
formulation on this subject worked out earlier with the understanding
that in case of any ambiguities in future regarding telemetric informa-
tion they will be referred to the Standing Consultative Commission.
The Soviet delegation in Geneva is instructed to proceed exactly from
this.
I hope, Mr. President, that you will also give appropriate instruc-
tions on this matter to the US delegation.
Sincerely,
L. Brezhnev6
6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
