National Security Policy 235 appeared to have a somewhat conflicting emphasis. It seemed quite possible to Secretary Dulles that the discussions authorized by the first paragraph could lead to a commodity agreement in which other nations than the U.S. would participate. A current example is that of coffee. Under existing world economic conditions, Secretary Dulles felt that we would want to be sure that the first paragraph of this policy was literally interpreted when it was implemented, although of course we would not agree to actual U.S. participation in any commodity agreement. Mr. Randall said he not only understood Secretary Dulles’s point but agreed with him. Indeed this specific matter had been discussed at great length by the CFEP. The general view in the CFEP was that the U.S. should go ahead and discuss commodity problems with other nations as much as they desired but not to the point of sticking our necks out too far and being committed to participation in an interna­ tional commodity agreement. Mr. Randall thought it was extremely difficult to express in words the sensitive emphases that both he and Secretary Dulles were agreed upon. It was hard to draw so fine a line. Secretary Dulles said he believed that Mr. Randall was on the right track. Under current conditions the U.S. simply could not hold itself aloof from these problems of commodity price and market instability as we had been in a position to do when our policy on this subject had first been adopted and when commodity prices were relatively high. The National Security Council: a. Concurred in the recommendation by the Council on Foreign Economic Policy, prepared pursuant to NSC Action No. 1903–­b–(5) and transmitted by the reference memorandum of May 26, 1958, that exist­ ing policy or international commodity agreements is satisfactory and should be continued. b. Noted a statement by the Secretary of State that, in the imple­ mentation of U.S. policy on international commodity agreements, a lib­ eral interpretation should be given to that portion of the policy which states that the United States is prepared to discuss and explore with other governments possible approaches to problems arising from com­ modity price and market instability; while adhering to that portion of the policy which states that the United States will not participate in any discussion or meeting with respect to an international commod­ ity agreement and will make no commitment as to U.S. participation in such an agreement until approved at the interagency policy level within the Executive Branch. NOTE: The above actions, as approved by the President, subse­ quently transmitted to the Chairman, CFEP. [Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.] S. Everett Gleason
