726
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the industry areas in which we feel you may ask for their cooperation.
(We have withheld discussing the package with the UAW until you
have made your trade decision.) Most industry representatives have
reacted favorably to our suggestions. The areas we have discussed are:
A. Wage-Price Restraint. If you are willing to consider new steps to
deal with Japanese imports, there will be concern with the possible in-
flationary impacts of any restraints. We have indicated to each of the
companies that under the circumstances you are likely to seek new
commitments from them to restrain prices. All have agreed to re-
commit themselves to our existing price guidelines. These guidelines
do not, however, significantly restrain price increases, both for tech-
nical reasons, and because industry profits are low. While a restate-
ment from the industry of their commitment to the wage-price guide-
lines may be symbolically useful, it may not be perceived publicly as a
significant action.
B. Participation in the Auto Industry Committee. The usefulness of the
auto industry committee will only be as great as the commitment by all
parties to participate openly and supportively. General Motors,
Chrysler and VW all have indicated their willingness to do so. Ford and
AMC have reservations, primarily regarding the loss of flexibility they
fear from prenotification and open discussion of economic decisions to
close plants. We believe that all parties would be willing to sit down to
discuss how a group would be structured and to begin to set its agenda.
C. Fuel Economy. There is considerable public concern that, despite
our regulations and industry investments, the U.S. auto industry will
still remain far behind the Japanese in the fuel economy of its fleet. We
have indicated to the companies that it is important for them to indicate
publicly to you their commitment to push ahead as fast as possible in
downsizing their fleets, and their confidence that their cars would soon
be competitive from a fuel economy standpoint in world markets. All
companies agreed to make firm statements on this subject.
D. Productivity and Product Quality. If our manufacturers are to re-
main competitive in world markets, it is important for them to improve
the efficiency of their operations and the quality of their products. This
will require a concerted effort by management and labor to introduce
improved production techniques. Many of these changes may require
sacrifices on the part of labor and extraordinary investment and risks
by management. Chrysler and the UAW have already agreed to work
together on this issue, and discussions between Ford and the UAW are
under way. We are optimistic that their representatives will have posi-
tive statements to make concerning their future cooperation on the
