Comprehensive Test Ban 497 Jim Schlesinger argued that if kiloton-level testing was not permitted the real cutting edge in retaining capabilities would be in whether the duration was three or five years. David Aaron said this could be put to the President to see if he wanted to reopen the issue. In discussing the seismic network options there was agreement that due to their high cost, time required for installation, and remaining uncertainty, large numbers of arrays were not desirable. A consensus was reached in favor of proposing 12–15 single stations with the right to convert perhaps one or two of these to arrays subsequently (the conclusion was a little imprecise as to how many would be converted). Since the basic network could be installed within two years, there appeared to be agreement after some discussion that we should not attempt to delay entry into force pending completion of the installation. At the conclusion of the meeting, Schlesinger commented that considering the remaining negotiating problems, CCD involvement and Senate ratification, it would probably be 18–24 months before the treaty entered into force. 206. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, June 13, 1978, 2:05–3:30 p.m. SUBJECT Summary of Meeting with the President on CTB Issues PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger, Secretary of Energy David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Stuart Eisenstat, Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs (first 10 minutes) Dr. Frank Press, Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy John Marcum, Senior Adviser, Office of Science and Technology Policy Harold Agnew, Director, Los Alamos Nuclear Laboratory Roger Batzel, Director, Livermore Nuclear Laboratory Harold Agnew began by saying that he understood that it might be good if he or Roger Batzel ran through a brief explanation of how nu- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 95, SCC 084, CTB Verification, Seismic Station Network: 6/12/78. Secret. The meeting took place in the White House Cabinet Room.
