Chemical and Biological Weapons
259
issues such as adequacy of verification and complaint procedures and
the flow of information and assistance in the area of peaceful research
in biological agents and toxins. These issues as well as treatment of Ar-
ticle IX of the Convention calling for efforts toward a chemical weapons
ban are treated in more detail below.
4. The impact of the Sverdlovsk incident on the outcome of the
Revcon seemed to be relatively slight with most delegations (including
some allies) bemused by the curious timing of our approach to the So-
viets and the subsequent press play. However, these same participants
also recognized the seriousness of the inquiry and the importance of
our obtaining a satisfactory response from the Soviets. In general they
appreciated our low-key handling of the issue within the Revcon.
Sverdlovsk did have the effect of making it more difficult for U.S. Del to
take a direct role in negotiating the final declaration, which involved
finding a median position between the Soviet line that all was well with
the Treaty and Swedish pressure to amend the Convention to provide
for a permanent consultative committee which the U.S. and most West-
ern delegations opposed as being unworkable in view of Soviet opposi-
tion and as setting a bad precedent for the NPT.
5. Sverdlovsk, coupled with recent events in Southwest Asia, of
course minimized substantially co-depositary cooperation which had
characterized earlier Treaty Review Conferences. Until the Soviet Del
was informed of the incident they were expressing dismay over our
conspicuous failure to support them on such issues as compliance and
on the adequacy of verification and complaint procedures. Our bilat-
eral difficulties with the Soviets provided an opportunity for the UK
Del, as representatives of the third depositary power, to play an ex-
tremely active role in developing a final declaration through their pro-
posal, with our encouragement, to establish an informal “non-group”
with representatives from various political and geographic groups.
Their role in negotiating language in Article V was particularly note-
worthy and is detailed in para 9 below.
6. Cooperation within the Western group, whose informal meet-
ings were chaired by the U.S., was generally close and harmonious. A
number of our allies, most notably Canada, Australia, and New Zea-
land, were vocal in their early support of the Swedish proposal to
amend Article V (see para 9); however, they soon became skeptical of
chances for its success and began working closely with UK on compro-
mise formulations. It should be noted that these delegations were quite
supportive of U.S. positions on issues such as CW and increasing coop-
eration to developing countries in the area of peaceful biological
research.
7. Oscar Vaerno, the Revcon’s President, put in a solid, if not spec-
tacular, performance, and was largely responsible for the generally
