Peru  1129
Commanding General Armed Forces and Chief of Staff.5 Was informed 
Army, aware Cubans attempting disaffect non-­commissioned personnel, 
was therefore watching their activities and has Cuban Embassy under 
surveillance. There has been no known infiltration among the troops by 
Fidelistas. Army solid against Castro and has standing order there be no 
fraternization with Cuban dignitaries (EMBTELS 1031 and 1037).6
Naval and air attaches report these branches also strongly anti-­
Castro and no known infiltrations.7
Embassy aware and has reported attempts Cuban Ambassador 
foment trouble in student, sugar, mining and other labor matters but 
his effectiveness has been limited and recently rebounded in that 
National Committee for Defence of Democracy publicly denounced 
Ambassador July 14 for meddling in local politics and requested 
President and Foreign Minister to put him in his place”. Frigid official 
reception President Dorticos received during visit here last month is 
also indication of GOP annoyance over Cuban policies and over Cuban 
Ambassador’s activities. Particularly noted was absence Peruvian mil-
itary officers at functions related to visit.
Local Communists and other Leftist, pro-Cuban extremists includ-
ing APRA Rebelde8 have become more vigorous in fomenting trouble in 
last few months and in uniting with other opposition parties and groups 
to attempt bring about downfall of Beltran Cabinet. Funds disbursed by 
Cuban Ambassador to such groups have undoubtedly facilitated these 
activities. At same time, however, these activities have in recent weeks 
brought government and certain other influential public and private sec-
tors to realization of extent of Communist influence, particularly in labor 
and student fields, and have contributed to feeling that something should 
be done to curb this influence. According to [text not declassified] (WEEKA 
28 July 14), even APRA leadership now favors anti-Communist legislation.9
Without wishing unduly to minimize extent of Cuban role in 
assisting Communists and other extremists to foment trouble in Peru, 
Embassy does not believe their influence played any significant part in 
5 General Alejandro Cuadra Rabines.
6 Telegram 1031 from Lima, June 6, reported that Lima news media, except APRA 
newspaper Tribuna contained unfriendly accounts of the visit by Cuban President 
Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado to Peru, June 4–6. (737.11/6–660) Telegram 1037 from Lima, 
June 6, reported that President Dorticós had received a “cool, correct official reception 
during his visit to Peru.” (737.11/6–660)
7 The reports by Commander Jay W. Land, Naval Attaché and Naval Attaché for Air, 
and by Lieutenant Colonel Vernon J. Lyle, Air Attaché, Embassy in Peru, were not found 
in Department of State files.
8 Reference is to a splinter party which broke away from APRA and supported the 
revolutionary regime of Fidel Castro in Cuba.
9 Reference is to despatch 20 from Lima, July 14, which reported that APRA 
Secretary-General Ramiro Prialé had suggested that special legislation was required to 
curb communism. (723.00(W)7–1460)
