1956 669 54. I said it should be clear to him and his government that, from manner in which this question of individual and collective self defense had been handled by him in these meetings as well as in public state­ ment made by govt., any failure to mention this in any draft we might issue would inevitably be represented as renunciation on part of US of its legitimate rights of self defense. It should be equally clear that this was demand which it entirely impossible for US accept. 55. Wang said wanted make clear position his government this regard. That was, they would not accept any draft which included phrase dealing with so called right to individual and collective self defense in Taiwan area. If they did accept such phrase, would be tan­ tamount recognition on their part of occupation of Taiwan by US. This why this (rpt this) phrase absolutely unacceptable to them. 56. I said I had nothing further on this. Did he have anything else? 57. Wang said, with reference to seven Chinese mentioned his pre­ vious letter to me, as well as list of three handed me last meeting, won­ dered if I had any information? He had further list of four Chinese in US who want return and who either been prevented or who have not been heard from for long time by families. Would like to hand me list (names in fol tel) and requested my govt investigate. Should note that in list had entered full details concerning them. He only wanted say that Chinese not satisfied with situation encountered these persons and fact they not able return. 58. I asked what was his allegation concerning these persons? Was it that they wanted return but were being prevented? 59. Wang said families of some have not heard from them for long period, others desire return but unable do so. 60. I asked if allegation was they obstructed? 61. Wang said yes. 62. I said if they felt they encountering obstruction they could freely contact Indian Embassy. Is allegation that they being prevented communicate Indian Embassy? 63. Wang said there were various circumstances. Some these peo­ ple not informed concerning agreed announcement and therefore not informed of specific measures in agreed announcement and had no knowledge about communication with Indian Embassy. 64. I said it not credible to me that any Chinese in US who decided return had not heard of agreed announcement. I had outlined to him at time issuance of agreed announcement exceptional measures taken to bring it to attention of every Chinese in US. Since that time, as I had mentioned previous meeting, 70,000 copies full text posted in each of 36,000 post offices in US. Inevitable that it would be brought their attention some manner. Also like mention, if he had not noticed, press
