2. The whole status of the Provisional Government remains indeterminate pending an outcome of political intrigues and military operations now in progress. It is credibly reported that there are internal dissensions within both Fengtien and Kuominchun ranks which complicate still further the process of mutual bargaining by all parties for the loyalty of one and another element. So-called Fengtien-Shantung allies have for some days been making a concentrated attack upon the Kuominchun defenders of Peking along an arc stretching from southwest to northeast at a distance of from 10 to 30 miles from the city. There are today some indications that the Kuominchun forces are beginning a general retreat towards Nankow. At the instance of prominent Chinese residents and commercial organizations there has been formed an unofficial committee of public safety comprising 10 members (most of them former Prime Ministers including Wang Shih-chen and W. W. Yen) to assume responsibility for order in the city in the event of interregnum. 3. Kail communication with Hankow [Nankow?] has been closed since March 6th and with Tientsin since March 24th. Limited passenger and postal service with Tientsin was maintained by motor until 5 days ago since which time Fengtien forces beyond Tungchow have been firing on all cars attempting to pass. A party of Americans in a motor bearing an American flag was yesterday turned back by machine-gun fire, fortunately harmless. 4. While some degree of progress in work of Customs Conference continues to be made through informal discussions and through consultations among the experts, no regular meetings permitted in the absence of any actual governmental [apparent omission] and C. T. Wang (who has taken refuge in one of the foreign concessions in Tientsin) and all the other Chinese delegates and commissioners, with the exception of Yen and Tsai, have in fact disappeared. Apart from the fact that it has been notified that such investigations would not be welcome in the territory giving adherence to so-called Canton Government, Extraterritoriality Commission has thus far found it impossible to visit any other
