(4) Ocean going submarines over 600 tons.
As the Washington Treaty regulates the first two classes, that is,
capital ships and aircraft carriers, the Preparatory Commission
will have to consider only the last two categories so far as the
signatories of that treaty are concerned.
From the foregoing summary of the agreement it appears that the
only classes of naval vessels which it is proposed to limit under
the Franco–British draft agreement are cruisers of or below
10,000 tons, armed with guns of more than six inch and up to
eight inch calibre, and submarines of over 600 tons. The position
of the Government of the United States has been and now is that
any limitation of naval armament to be effective should apply to
all classes of combatant vessels. The Franco-British agreement
provides no limitation whatsoever on six inch gun cruisers, or
destroyers, or submarines of 600 tons or less. It could not be
claimed that the types of vessels thus left without limitation are
not highly efficient fighting ships. No one would deny that
modern cruisers armed with six inch guns, or destroyers similarly
armed, have a very high offensive value, especially to any nation
possessing well distributed bases in various parts of the world. In
fact, such cruisers constitute the largest number of fighting ships
now existing in the world. The limitation of only such surface
vessels as are restricted in Class 3 of the draft agreement, that is,
cruisers of or below 10,000 tons, armed with guns of more than
six inch and up to eight inch calibre, would be the imposition of
restrictions only on types peculiarly suited to the needs of the
United States. The United States can not accept as a distinct class
surface combatant vessels of or below 10,000 tons armed with
guns of more than six inch and up to eight inch calibre. It is
further clearly apparent that limitation of this type only would add
enormously to the comparative offensive power of a nation
possessing a large merchant tonnage on which preparation may be
made in times of peace for mounting six inch guns.
