National Security Policy 1109 SCOPE OF STUDY 4. National policy, as set forth in NSC policy papers, will be used as guidance in the consideration of probable U.S. political and military response to the situations examined by the study. These studies should not be inconsistent with national policy. 5. Because they are the most likely situations which might develop and which could involve the United States in limited military oper­ ations, the study will consider the following areas: (a) Korea; (b) Quemoy/Matsu/Taiwan; (c) Iran; (d) Berlin; (e) Laos/Cambodia/ Vietnam. 6. However, the situations examined pursuant to NSC Action 1842g(4) may be re-­examined and updated as appropriate in light of existing conditions and the National Intelligence Estimates. 7. Examination of each situation will include consideration of: a. U.S. national objectives, to include deterring Communist limited military aggression or, if necessary, to defeat such aggression in a man­ ner and on a scale best calculated to keep hostilities from broadening into general war, b. U.S. and foreign political backgrounds and implications, c. Enemy objectives and capabilities, both nuclear and non-­nuclear, d. U.S. and Allied capabilities, both nuclear and non-­nuclear, to include logistic capabilities, e. Effect on U.S. and Allied posture for general war, and, f. Special political and military problems involved in the use or non-­use of nuclear weapons. 8. The study shall be prepared in sufficient detail so as to super­ sede, rather than augment, the previous study. 9. The study will not extend to the preparation of detailed plans to deal with each situation. 10. Should a situation reach the point of general war, further exam­ ination of that situation will be beyond the scope of the study, except that the considerations under paragraph 7 e shall be assessed. 11. Conclusions will be drawn for: a. Each situation relating to: (1) Adequacy of U.S. and Allied military capabilities to deal with that situation. (2) Foreign policy implications. (3) Other national security implications revealed by the examination. b. The over-­all study relating to: (1) Adequacy of U.S. and Allied Military capabilities for limited military operations. (2) Foreign policy implications. (3) Other national security implications revealed by the examination.
