3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
607
Brezhnev wanted to begin his discussion of international problems
by making several general observations. The Soviet Union approached
very seriously the matter of reaching some common understanding
and even a degree of cooperation with the U.S. in world affairs. The So-
viet Union attached major significance to this and was prepared to act
in the appropriate spirit. This made it all the more important to make
note of the factors which were preventing this. He already had occasion
to note that mutual understanding and, to an even greater degree, co-
operation between our two states, including cooperation in interna-
tional affairs, was greatly hampered when one of the sides was attrib-
uting changes in the world, movements for national liberation and
independence, as well as for social progress, to the malevolent will of
one of the sides. Brezhnev had been told that a rather strange theory
had gained currency in the United States, a theory known as the arc of
crisis, according to which the Soviet Union was allegedly reaching from
Western Africa to Southern Asia, seeking to surround the Middle East,
to the detriment of the United States and western countries in general.
Brezhnev wanted to say that this entire theory was an absolute fairy
tale. Given such an approach to international events, it was hardly pos-
sible to make progress in international relations, including the settle-
ment of world problems in which our two countries certainly could
cooperate. Frankly, the Soviet Union was quite amazed at how light-
heartedly some corners of the world were being declared spheres of
vital interests of the U.S. This was not only contrary to elementary
norms of international law, but also complicated the international situ-
ation even more when there were sufficient complications as it was.
Brezhnev said that the Soviet Union was sure that the U.S. and the
USSR were able to make a major contribution to present international
developments, not by sowing fear and by suspecting the intentions of
the other side, but by strengthening understanding and businesslike
cooperation. That would help to resolve pressing international
problems. In this connection, it was always necessary—not in words
but in deeds—to respect the independence and sovereign rights of
every state and not to permit a manifestation of great power politics
nor interfere in the affairs of other states. The Soviet Union wanted to
interact with the U.S. in international affairs and if relevant under-
standings were reached and carried out—without an attempt to gain at
the expense of others—Brezhnev was sure that there would be no lack
of areas of cooperation of regional and worldwide importance.
Brezhnev said that the Soviet Union attached particular importance
to European affairs. This was understandable, of course, because a
large part of the Soviet Union was located in Europe and because its
destiny was linked to Europe. Moreover, the situation in Europe has
always exerted a major, at times a decisive, influence on the situation in
