Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 419 approach plausible (mobile NDMs could pose the biggest breakout and reconstitution a threat) but we have indications that the Soviets would go along. — Another benefit: NDM limits on mobiles would fit nicely with our proposal for perimeter-­portal monitoring for Soviet and U.S. mobiles. These missiles could also be candidates for missile “tagging.” — The biggest benefit, however, would be to the negotiating process: By solving NDMs we would move the negotiations forward while at the same time strengthen mobile verification. Telemetry: We have made good progress on defining a data-­denial agreement that would cover missile telemetry. We need such an agreement for ratification—­the Senate will want to be sure that we can monitor new missile development. — But several questions remain: should it be an indefinite agreement? How do we handle SDI or black programs? How broadly or narrowly should “data denial” be defined? And finally, if there are disputes over data denial how will they be resolved? — At the nub of this issue is the familiar question of whether we are prepared to accept the same restrictive regime on protecting missile information that we want to impose on Moscow. — This is highly complex and sensitive area. We should be able to resolve it in the near future if both governments are prepared to bite the bullet. In order to lay the groundwork for a solution in your meeting in Moscow, I may need to meet with Nazarkin on the subject in mid-­ January in Geneva. Heavy ICBMs: Soviet acceptance of further limits on the SS–18 would give us a big boost for ratification. The Soviets have accepted a 50% cut (down to 154), but their new version of the SS–18 (the Mod 5) is more lethal, already causing conservatives to complain. — In many, many conversations with Nazarkin, I have pushed for either further SS–18 reductions or a limit on SS–18 testing (which would reduce its reliability). His response: Let’s talk about further SS–18 limits in START II. — The President raised this in Malta and you should follow up in Moscow. Our message is simple: Their continued modernization of this first-­strike missile is not consistent with their new “military sufficiency” rhetoric and could jeopardize the ratification effort. Our goal: Further SS–18 cuts in return for allowing modernization. The Soviet Agenda Shevardnadze will clearly have his own laundry list but some of his items, like SLCMs, may offer opportunities. Defense and Space/ABM Treaty: You’ll get complaints about our lack of response on their Jackson Hole ABM move. Don’t take it too seriously: Nazarkin has been told that this is an end-­game issue and I think Moscow understands this.
