64
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
and the habit of the past has been to intervene in these ways in the af-
fairs of other lands, even when the objective was purely technical.
“Now I would like your own view on this. If method is the essence
of whether or not we do adhere to our professed values as a nation,
what are your views and what will be your policy as Secretary of State
when it comes to decisions with respect to secret interventions in the af-
fairs of other lands?
“Mr. Vance. I am very happy to give my views on this.
“Let me say by way of background that these kinds of covert ac-
tions have been going on for a long time. They were going on when I
was in the Government, and I was part of the oversight committee at
one point in connection with them. So I have thought long and care-
fully about the subject.
“I have come to the conclusion that covert actions—and I distin-
guish between covert collection of intelligence on the one part and co-
vert actions against other countries, and I am talking about the latter—I
am convinced that covert action against other countries should be car-
ried out only in the most extraordinary circumstances. I believe that
procedures should be established so that if there is a proposal to carry
out a covert action, that it first has to be passed upon by a committee of
the senior Cabinet officers, to include the Secretary of State, the Secre-
tary of Defense, the National Security Adviser, and importantly in my
judgment, the Attorney General of the United States.
“I feel very strongly that the Attorney General of the United States
should participate in the decisionmaking process by which the deci-
sion is arrived at which goes to the President of the United States. I
think then that the President of the United States should personally ap-
prove in writing saying that he believes this to be vital to the national
security and so endorse the carrying forward of this extraordinary
circumstance.
“I then feel that notice should be given in advance to the appro-
priate committee or committees of the Congress so that they can pro-
vide their views to the President if they disagree with the proposal.
“I do not believe that the Congress should have a veto in that re-
gard because I think that splits the responsibility. But I think that it is
very likely that if the congressional committee said to the President,
‘We want to come in to see you as we have great concern for what is
being proposed here,’ this would have great weight with any President
as to whether he would then go forward with the operation.
“Finally, I believe there should be an adequate monitoring system
so that once a covert action is approved, one keeps on top of it to deter-
mine what is happening, how it is proceeding, and whether it should
be terminated.
