1142
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(At that point, copies were passed—see attachment—and the
Egyptians read them from 3:16–3:19).
The President said that one Iranian diplomat, scheduled to be de-
ported, has had a nervous breakdown, and wants to stay in the hospital
for 24 hours.
The Vice President said that he was fired last night by the Iranians,
and fears for his life.
The President said he doesn’t doubt it, but he can go to a third
country.
Assistant Secretary Saunders said that the diplomat had been our bet
as the best man to handle the transition.
The President said he would not go to the American people and
make excuses about a diplomat’s not leaving. He can stay in the hos-
pital for 24 hours, under custody.
President Sadat said that he would be pleased to offer this man
asylum in Egypt. Any Iranian could come, openly before the whole
world. They have recently taken two Iranian military officers.
The President said that 9000 Iranians have entered the country since
the hostages were taken; and we have a total of about 70,000 Iranian
students here. He asked Osama el-Baz whether the points in the paper
suited him.
Mr. el-Baz joked that anything the President presents is acceptable!
President Sadat said that he and his team would chat together this
evening.
The President said that on another issue, we may have problems
with Begin on anything agreed here. (President Sadat said right). First,
on the U.S.’ being a member of the Continuing Committee, he doesn’t
know why, but often Begin would hold out on something like this as a
bargaining point. That’s his privilege.
Mr. el-Baz said that this can be seen in the context of the United
States’s being a full partner under Camp David. Therefore it can join
any committee.
Ambassador Linowitz asked whether this means that, if Israel ob-
jects, the U.S. could still be a “full partner” on the Continuing
Committee.
Mr. el-Baz said that this is not the point: “full partner” means that
the U.S. can join all committee.
Ambassador Linowitz asked whether we can make the Camp David
distinction as a “full partner”, but not as a “party.”
President Sadat said yes.
The President asked what the difference was.
