484 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI serious matter. The Soviets thought that their draft declaration would be suitable, and in the U.S. as well as the Soviet interest. The Secretary said there were two major problems with the Soviet proposal. First, it would require us to agree to verification measures that we did not believe were feasible. Second, it offered no flexibility regarding our production of SLCMs for the next 15 years. The rest of the Soviet declaration, the Secretary added, did not seem particularly objectionable. Perhaps we could take another look, but the last sentence of the Soviet draft was a hill we could not climb. Burt said there were, as the Secretary had said, many things on which we could not agree. But there were constructive ideas in the Soviet draft. We hoped we could meld these into a common approach. The Secretary suggested that the working group get back to work. Shevardnadze said he had no objection to this. The Secretary said we should try to at least narrow our differences in this area. It would be a good way for Burt and Nazarkin to spend the evening. Shevardnadze agreed. He suggested moving to another subject. The ALCMists could leave and we could turn to the chemists. [Omitted here is discussion not related to START.] START: Telemetry Encryption Shevardnadze asked whether they could return to START and the question of telemetry encryption. Deputy Foreign Minister Karpov said he would like to report on the status of the discussions. A lot of provisions had been agreed or were in the process of being agreed. There would be a need for some technical elaboration and development of legal language to complete the discussions. The U.S. had made a proposal on one point, namely, encapsulation of information, that would require further study by the Soviets. The Soviets agreed that encapsulation should be allowed primarily on warheads in the plasma-­forming segment of flight. There seemed to be a common understanding, but additional efforts would be needed to establish technical language. Overall, Karpov said, the trend of the discussions was toward convergence of the sides’ positions. Bartholomew said he thought the sides were down to two basic issues that had been covered by Karpov. He would emphasize that these exchanges would have real political consequences for ratification. Our technical people needed to be instructed accordingly so that Ambassadors Burt and Nazarkin could close out the issue in Geneva. The Secretary asked whether the sides might not be able to resolve the remaining technical questions in the next 24 hours. Karpov replied that he feared this was not the case. There was a serious question of how to ensure confidence that encapsulation would not affect measurements along the entire flight path of a missile. For
