National Security Policy  1191
the decision-making machinery and a means of communicating with 
our retaliatory forces on land, at sea, and in the air, in case of such an 
attack—with recognition of the necessity for an effective and flexible 
response not necessarily dependent upon survival of the seat of gov­
ernment and other command and control centers.
j. In singling out research and development areas of particular 
importance, there is included the detection, surveillance, identification 
and destruction of satellites and space vehicles (with a footnote reflect­
ing existing policy to the effect that tests involving destruction shall be 
made only with the specific approval of the President.) (Par. 17, p. 13).
k. [illegible in the original] of policy regarding plans and facilities 
to ensure continuity of essential Government functions are subject to 
future NSC review upon completion of the pending [illegible in the 
original] by OCDM and the Special Assistant referred to in the footnote 
to Par. 18, p. 14.
l. In the area of Internal Security, Par. 28 of the proposed policy 
calls for certified efforts to provide deterrents against the clandestine 
introduction of nuclear weapons. As revised, the policy no long con­
templates the use of active devices on the person and pouches of Soviet 
bloc diplomatic personnel entering the U.S.—because of the State 
Department position that Bloc officials might detect radiation eminat­
ing from the covert device and claim violation of diplomatic immunity 
(with possible retaliation against U.S. diplomatic pouches and ship­
ments). Such a detection device is under development and a prototype 
will be completed by AEC and tested early in 1961. As indicated in 
the footnote on p. 19, production and use of the device would be for 
Presidential decision at that time.
m. Port Security Policy, stated in Par. 33 was separately considered 
by the NSC and previously approved by the President on 6/29/60 
(NSC Action [illegible in the original]).
POLICY ISSUES
4. The Council may now wish to turn to these paragraphs of the 
proposed policy statement which reflect divergent views of a policy 
nature which emerged in the PB:
Par. 4, p. 2, last sentence: The JCS [illegible in the original] its posi­
tion on this language which questions the U.S. capability to develop 
and deploy an adequate anti-ICBM system during the 1960’s, bar­
ring technological breakthrough. It appears that this JCS reservation 
applies equally to subsequent parts of the paper dealing with Relative 
Emphasis (Par. 7) and Civil Defense (Par. 20). Accordingly, at this point 
the Council might hear the comments of JCS concerning its reserva­
tion, before moving on to a consideration of succeeding “splits” which 
involve the same JCS position. (CALL ON: JCS, for comment on the 
bracketed last sentence of Par. 4).
Par. 7, p. [illegible in the original]: At this point in the paper there 
appears a split on the question of Relative Emphasis which should be 
applied as between active and passive measures to defend our retalia­
tory capability and our civilian population (a definition of “active” and 
“passive” defenses appears in the footnote on p. 2). The issue involved 
here begins with the agreed statement in Par. 6 that predominant empha­
sis should continue to be placed on measures (i.e., whether “active” or
