1230  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
2. The Chicoms permitted McCarthy to request an interview with 
the UK Charge, and they O.K.’d the UK arrangements for the interview, 
because they wanted to provide an illustration of Chicom compliance 
with the Agreed Announcement—as they interpret it.
3. In the meantime, spunky, outspoken Fr. McCarthy precipi­
tates the contradicitions inherent in the Chicom interpretation of the 
Announcement by telling his jailers what he plans to say to Addis. He 
makes it clear he is going to tell Addis just how unjust his imprisonment 
has been, and is going to ask that the UK Charge make representations, 
not merely asking for his, McCarthy’s release, but also setting forth in full 
detail the injustice of the “obstruction” that has been offered in his case. 
The jailers pass these remarks on to Peiping and request instructions.
4. Peiping cannot accept McCarthy’s right to request this kind of 
representation without by implication acknowledging: (a) that imprison­
ment constitutes obstruction, and (b) that the justice/injustice of charges, 
treatment of prisoners, etc., are legitimate subjects of concern under the 
Agreed Announcement. Therefore Peiping advises the Shanghai jail­
ers that McCarthy has no right to ask for the kind of representations he 
wants. When this word is given to McCarthy, he takes everybody com­
pletely by surprise with his refusal to see Addis.
5. Given the above background, and the Chicom inerpretation of 
the Agreed Announcement, their decision to let McCarthy’s October 
6 letter pass is not surprising. They realize how suspicious this affair 
has looked to Addis and will look to the world; they welcome this 
confirmation that McCarthy had indeed refused to see Addis. To the 
Chicoms, in the light of their interpretation of the Announcement, 
McCarthy’s October 6 letter illustrates, not their infraction of the terms 
of the Announcement, but their consistency in abiding by these terms, 
as they have been construed in Peiping.
All this is mere guesswork, of course, but it seems to me the most 
probable explanation of what has happened. The one encouraging 
thing about the affair, to my mind, is that Peiping still feels constrained 
to maintain the pretense of compliance with the Announcement, and 
there is thus still some hope for further releases in the not-­too-­distant 
future.
Please excuse the hasty drafting, necessitated by the fact our 
weekly pouch is closing in about half an hour.
Hope to see you all one of these days. Regards to all, from the both 
of us
Sincerely,
David L. Osborn
P.S. I appreciated the September monthly notes very much. Hope 
to receive October’s also. Thanks, Irene and Doug.
