National Security Policy 847 c. Agreed to recommend to the President that the following be pre­ sented to the Council at the earliest practicable date: A report by the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization presenting a general descrip­ tion of the anticipated effect on the current mobilization base program of the policy on the “Civilian Readiness Base” contained in the above-­ mentioned paragraph 59–­b of NSC 5906/1. NOTE: The actions in b and c above subsequently submitted to the President for consideration. The revisions of paragraphs 59 and 64–­f of NSC 5906/1, as approved by the President, subsequently circulated to all holders of that paper. The recommendation in c above, as approved by the President, subsequently transmitted to the Director, OCDM, for appropriate implementation. [Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.] Marion W. Boggs 204. Memorandum of Meeting Between Eisenhower and Gray1 Washington, October 12, 1959, 10 a.m. 1. I first discussed the Record of Actions of the NSC meeting of 1 October. I reported to the President that Secretary of State Herter presided in the absence of the Vice President. I discussed the action on the new mobilization base paragraph which had been agreed upon in the Council and recommended for his approval. I pointed out to him that the new paragraph is divided into two sections: one is what is called “Military Logistics Base” and one on what is called the “Civilian Readiness Base.” As far as the Military Logistics Base was concerned, the M-6 months concept has been abandoned and the period will be something shorter. Also, the military section involves the addition of a directive on nuclear damage. Finally, the new language, although not explicit, reflects the fact that Defense and JCS have accepted a new approach and will make separate analyses of general war needs and local war needs. I reminded the President that in the past the JCS had taken the position that preparation for general war would serve also to meet the needs of local war. With respect to Civilian Readiness, I pointed out to the President that the policy now would require a high state of readiness of measures 1 Source: Mobilization base, Service roles and missions, international information activities report, long-­range planning, VOA broadcasting, organization for space activi­ ties, future NSC activities, and Berlin. Top Secret. 7 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Meetings With the President. Drafted October 14.
