156  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Mr. Hinojosa showed that YFPB’s production has declined in the 
past few years because its investment expenditures have decreased for 
lack of funds, and that if additional funds are not forthcoming Bolivia 
may soon find itself again in the position of being a petroleum import-
ing country. He asked if a loan might not be obtained from United 
States institutions.
The Vice President said he understood that YFPB was an efficient 
organization and he recognized YFPB’s needs; however, the U.S. policy 
was not to lend in fields, such as petroleum, where private capital was 
willing and able to operate. Mr. Hinojosa explained that YFPB was dif-
ferent from oil monopolies in other countries in that it did not monop-
olize the industry but allowed private firms to operate also. However, 
the Vice President said that if an exception could be made, YFPB would 
indeed appear to deserve such exception, but that unfortunately this 
was not possible.
In answer to the Vice President’s question whether YFPB had tried 
to obtain capital from private sources, Mr. Hinojosa said that he had 
tried several times but unsuccessfully.
The Vice President then directed Mr. Rubottom to see in what 
ways the U.S. could further assist the general Bolivian budget so that 
the [illegible in the original] could find itself better able to assign funds 
to YPFB. He also directed Mr. Waugh to see if he could interest private 
sources in the U.S. to help YFPB (a suggestion advanced by Mr. Waugh.)
BL–7. 	
Letter from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs 
(Rubottom)1

La Paz, May 12, 1958.
Dear Dick:
The Vice President’s visit here was a great success from all points 
of view, including the Bolivian. President Siles is very happy. He antic-
ipates substantial additional aid in the very near future through the 
DLF mechanism. This would (a) relieve the pressure on the balance of 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/REA Files, Lot 63 D 210, “DLF Project—Bolivia.” 
Confidential; Official-Informal. The source text is a carbon copy bearing Ambassador 
Bonsal’s typed name.
