930 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Fourth, the failure to use the [less than 1 line not declassified] and its JTF concept should be blamed on the Chiefs and General Jones. Interservice rivalry and the sacred cow, the Unified Command Plan, prevented the emergence of an effective JTF in 1977. Precisely these same obstructions are now blocking our recommendation for a Mid East Command. Fifth, although the Report gives the NCA link high marks, when fault is considered, the Secretary of Defense cannot be blameless. The weak JTF structure was ultimately Brown’s responsibility. What Are the Implications for Follow-up? The President could easily use this report for a number of changes: a. A Mid East Command is imperative if this Report is accurate. The RDJTF will fail miserably as the JCS now has REDCOM/RDJTF/ PACOM/EUCOM linked to paralyze planning, training, and deployment. Nor is there a Navy component commander. Nor is there a “joint” training evaluation scheme. b. An outside review group of retired officers, a proposal by the Holloway group, is not a bad idea. One could be set up. c. Practice transitions from peacetime to wartime operations for the Intelligence Community are imperative. PD–586 exercises offer this potential, but other things should also be practiced, particularly within the DOD and DIA. A longer run implication of this Report is found in the necessities it shows for a major change in our Defense Department organization. The JCS is too weak vis-à-vis the services. And DIA is too weak vis- à-vis CIA. The recommended special operations JTF is actually of doubtful legality because it would operate under the NCA and JCS directly, not through a CINC as required by the 1947 National Security Act.7 More and more we have the need for a national level military operations staff with directive authority over CINCs and services. The same requirement is dictated by the new PD–598 staffing capability as well as the PD–58 COG/C3I capabilities for the President to control the military forces. 6 PD–58, “Continuity of Government,” June 30, 1980, is in Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 23. 7 The National Security Act of 1947 reorganized the armed forces, foreign policy, and intelligence apparatus to meet Cold War demands. The act merged the Departments of War and Navy into the Department of Defense, created a Department of the Air Force, and established three service secretaries. It also established the National Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency. 8 PD–59, “Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy,” July 25, 1980, is in Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 23.
