Afghanistan 349 127. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, January 2, 1980 SUBJECT Relevance of the Truman Doctrine to Current Situation (U) As you consider options regarding the situation in Southwest Asia, I would like to recall for you an earlier crisis which in my judgment has some striking parallels with the present challenge we face in Afghanistan, in that region and globally. I have in mind the events which led up to the promulgation of the Truman Doctrine, announced by Truman in his message to Congress on March 12, 1947.2 (C) Truman’s message responded to what he perceived to be a clear and present danger. It was the threatened collapse under Soviet pressure of two countries which at the time were at the outer limits of American consciousness—Greece and Turkey. Communist governments had been established with the aid of Soviet troops throughout the Balkans. Greece was in the midst of a civil war, instigated in the main by communist-led insurgents. Concurrently, Moscow was putting pressure on Ankara to revise the Montreaux Convention to prevent access of non-Black Sea powers into the Black Sea, and had raised claims of sovereignty against two areas in Turkey. (C) All this in a region which prior to 1947 had been a British sphere of influence of little or no strategic interest to the United States. Within this country there was strong sentiment for a rapid U.S. disengagement from all of Europe and a return to isolationism. Truman was also under considerable pressure from a number of politicians, especially Henry Wallace, who argued that the U.S. should undertake more strenuous efforts to cooperate with Moscow. (C) Against this background, the United States received an urgent message in late February 1947 that the British intended to cease aid to Greece and Turkey within six weeks.3 The issue, as Truman, Acheson 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File, Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1980. Confidential. Sent for information. Carter initialed “C” in the top right corner. The memorandum was attached as Tab I to a January 2 memorandum from Blackwill and Larrabee to Brzezinski recommending that Brzezinski sign the memorandum to Carter. An unknown hand wrote “1–2–80 ZB signed memo to Pres,” at the bottom of the page. 2 For the text of Truman’s address to Congress, see Public Papers: Truman, 1947, pp. 176–180. 3 See Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. V, The Near East and Africa, Documents 24 and 34.
