German Democratic Republic 357 Conversely, we would be prepared to receive an appropriate GDR official in Washington for such discussions. As of now, we have heard nothing about this suggestion. Fischer replied that the absence of any mention of claims in their aide memoire did not mean that they had intended to exclude the subject; but it was a matter of their “physical capacity” since they were involved in negotiating claims settlements with a number of countries. They remain interested in being in contact with us, Fischer said, and he would ask a responsible officer to talk with us about “preparations for negotiations.” Charge said he thought this could be a useful step. 12. Charge went on to note that, since the Foreign Minister had mentioned the matter of journalists, he had a comment to make. As the Foreign Minister knew, US journalists had expressed an interest in being accredited to the GDR as well as to other countries where they might be resident. Until now, there had been no movement in this area. 13. Fischer responded, saying that the GDR wanted to facilitate the activities of journalists, but he wondered whether it would be right to grant double accreditation. The present arrangement, with accreditation for an AP correspondent in Copenhagen, is better than giving double accreditation to American journalists in Bonn or West Berlin. Were the GDR to do so, he was afraid that some FRG politicians would take it as a demonstration of the “Old Germany”, and the GDR was not prepared to give anyone such an idea. They were ready to accredit US journalists who are in Western Europe but not those in Bonn or West Berlin. Perhaps the time will come one day when US correspondents in the FRG might also be accredited to the GDR, but both Fischer and the Charge would probably be older and grayer by then. 14. On humanitarian cases, Charge noted we were pleased by progress we had noted recently. It was a good step forward, as a result of Amb. Sieber’s statement to Mr. Habib that all outstanding cases have been satisfactorily resolved, we had checked our files and our records were somewhat different and Charge had asked our Consular section to be in touch with the MFA’s Consular section on the matter, and therefore Charge would not bother the Foreign Minister with the details. We would, at the same time, hope that cases involving emergency family reunification will also be resolved satisfactorily. Fischer made no comment on emergency family reunification cases and said that, as long as Embassy and MFA Consular section officers were in touch on other cases he saw no need to respond. 15. Meeting closed with Charge reiterating we would be in touch as appropriate with MFA once we had had opportunity to study “nonpaper” thoroughly.
