396
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Furthermore, the timely conclusion of a SALT treaty will have a
useful effect on our management of the relationship with the Soviet
Union. The ratification process in the United States will provide an in-
centive for responsible Soviet behavior that does not now exist.
Another aspect of our direct relations—human rights—deserves
review.
The Soviets seem to be engaged in a draconian effort to reduce the
dissident movement by trials, harsh sentences, additional arrests and
detentions, and a severance of contacts between dissidents and
Western newsmen. It seems probable that the Orlov trial will be fol-
lowed in June by the trials of Ginsburg and Shcharanskiy.4 It now ap-
pears that after some indecision the Soviet authorities concluded,
mid-point in the Belgrade Conference, that they would no longer seek
to conciliate Western pressures on the human rights issue, and would
try to reduce their vulnerability on these issues by rigorous police
measures.5
The one favorable development in this area is that the level of
Jewish emigration has continued to increase in recent months.
I believe it would be useful for us now to study the experience of
the past 16 months in order to refine the forms and intensity of pressure
that seem to be most productive, as well as the most effective combina-
tion of governmental and private forms of pressure. We need to form a
judgment on how best to use our influence to give some measure of
protection to prominent dissidents, and to encourage longer-term
movement toward greater constraints on the Soviet political police.
From our experience thus far, it seems clear that public attention can af-
ford only a measure of protection to prominent dissidents. There is a
critical point beyond which the effect of public pressure has been to
stiffen Soviet determination not to capitulate, and to encourage harsher
measures.
Our ability to influence Soviet behavior on this and other issues
would be stronger if there were the prospect of improved trade rela-
tions, which now appear remote.
4 The trials were scheduled to begin on July 10.
5 On July 8, Goldberg released a statement through the Department of State: “I
sought for 6 months, as head of the U.S. delegation at the recently concluded Belgrade
conference, to work for better understanding on the part of the Soviet Union of Western
concern for the fulfillment of the human rights pledges of the Helsinki Final Act. The an-
nouncement that Anatoli Shcharanskiy and Aleksandr Ginzburg are to be brought to trial
July 10, therefore, causes me great personal distress. I hope that the Soviet authorities, as
they conduct these trials, will be aware that Western public opinion will be drawing its
own conclusions about Soviet respect for the Helsinki agreement and about the nature of
future U.S.-Soviet relations. All of us, in the East and West, will be the losers if the Soviet
authorities ignore their Helsinki commitments.” (Department of State Bulletin, August
1978, p. 28)
