March 27–December 31, 1979
1037
harbor would require some dredging in order to berth destroyers and
frigate-sized ships at the single dock. On the other hand, a collocated
port and airfield (less than three miles apart) on the Red Sea would
offer some attractive operational possibilities. Moreover, the remote lo-
cation (140 miles from the nearest significant population concentration
at Aswan) would serve both US and Egyptian political interests.
(TS) It would be premature to define a concept of operations for
the use of Ras Banas at this time. We will have to weigh the costs versus
the benefits of two options. One is a substantial investment of money
for base development at this austere airdrome. The other is a more
modest investment of funds to improve existing facilities at a less re-
mote, but more developed air facility such as Wadi Kena. I will be able
to give you a more definitive recommendation in this regard after we
have analyzed the findings of the facilities survey team which I recently
sent to Egypt with Vice President Mubarak’s concurrence.
(TS) Further, we should recognize that there are likely to be signifi-
cant political limits on our use of Egyptian bases which we will need to
weigh against the costs of making those bases useful to us. My conver-
sations earlier this year with President Sadat and Vice President Mu-
barak lead me to believe that they wish to avoid the permanent pres-
ence of US personnel. They have emphasized to me the political
liabilities associated with foreign presence and their desire not to re-
peat the experience with the Soviets, who sent a large number of mili-
tary personnel to Egypt. Their concept has been that the US would im-
prove Ras Banas for Egyptian use in normal times and US use in an
“emergency”. We will need further to explore whether these limits to
their political tolerance for our presence still apply.
(TS) In the near future, I will provide in cooperation with the De-
partment of State a detailed proposal for how we should respond to the
Egyptian suggestion.
Harold Brown
