952  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
the Geneva talks probably prompted the postponement request. The 
only development we can think of which might have a relationship is 
the Chinese Communist request for a Conference on Korea. Peiping 
undoubtedly is closely watching the reaction to its note of April 9. It is 
just possible that their tactics in pressing for a high level conference at 
Geneva are related to the reaction to their request for the multilateral 
conference on Korea. However they could hardly expect to get a reply 
from the 16 before the next meeting and I doubt that this is the real 
explanation for the delay. Incidentally Bob Murphy met with represent­
atives of the 16 last Friday the 4th. At that time he gave them a copy of 
our draft note and asked for the reactions of their Governments. It was 
agreed that the British should present a concerted reply on behalf of 
the 16. The next meeting of the representatives of the 16 is to take place 
on Wednesday the 9th. We hope to have reactions of the Governments 
then. There is general agreement that no new conference should be 
agreed to in the present circumstances. But there is less certainty about 
how the handling of the NNSC problem will come out. We are sending 
you a copy of our draft note.
We have a single copy of the William L. White report on the treat­
ment of American POW’s. We are trying to get another copy which we 
can send to you. What we have received seems rather fragmentary. 
It deals almost exclusively with the contrast in physical treatment of 
POW’s by the UN Command and by the Communists. There is little 
or no examination of germ warfare confessions brain washing in the 
­Communist POW camps or the Communist subversive organization 
in the UN POW camps. Nor is there any adequate treatment of the 
exchange of prisoners following the Armistice Agreement or the illegal 
detention by the Communists of UNC personnel inside China after the 
prisoner exchange.
It is our feeling that your instructions for the meeting of last week 
which was never held will still be good for the meeting of May 11, bar­
ring unforeseen developments. However we will consider today and 
tomorrow whether any slight revision is called for.
There is enclosed a copy of a letter received by [text not declassified] 
the well known Chinese foreign trader and expert on tungsten, from 
[text not declassified] lives in New York and is now a naturalized Ameri­
can citizen. [text not declassified] wrote the letter from Stockholm where 
he was attending a Communist “International Peace Conference”. [text 
not declassified] is a leading industrial engineering specialist in alkalies 
especially caustic soda. [text not declassified] says he is not a Communist 
and he is satisfied that the letter was written under duress. This is a part 
of the general Communist campaign to induce the return of nationals, 
especially those who have something to contribute to the industrial and 
technological development plans.
