338
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The United States approaches these challenges with extraordinary
human and physical resources. Our unparalleled strength has its roots
deep in the character and nature of our country:
—The inherent strength and resiliency of our society;
—Our deep-seated respect for the rights and potential of the indi-
vidual regardless of circumstances of birth;
—Our economic power and resources;
—A superior technological and industrial base;
—A military capability second to none;
—A tradition of inventive diplomacy and a willingness to assume
the responsibilities of leadership.
Our strengths as a nation are amplified by our long-standing alli-
ances with other nations. We confront our challenges together.
Together, we also face a new pattern of international relations in
the late 1970’s. For close to three decades, the Cold War dominated our
view of the world; today, we must deal with a pluralistic international
setting of several major dimensions:
—First are our ties to the democratic, industrial nations of Western
Europe, Canada, and Japan. These ties serve the central political, eco-
nomic, and military interests of the United States. They have proven
their durability and their continuing value. The cohesion and strength
of these relationships remain an essential precondition to progress in
our other relations.
—There is the evolving East-West relationship, marked by contin-
uing competitive elements, and yet promising in its opportunities for
cooperation.
—Relations between the industrial societies and the developing
nations now touch every major issue before us. Increasingly, nations
both North and South recognize the need to seek common ground.
—Modern technology, while it has brought great benefits, has also
created a new set of challenges which are global in scope and in the nec-
essary dimensions of their resolution, developing and allocating scarce
resources, protecting the world environment, confronting the dangers
of nuclear proliferation, encouraging the free flow of information, ap-
plying medical and agricultural knowledge to the enhancement of
human life.
—The widening pattern of international associations, the eco-
nomic, political, technical and cultural bodies—public and private—
plays an increasingly important role in facilitating the cooperative ef-
forts necessary to deal effectively with international problems.
These elements interact to create a new pattern of international life
and new demands for diplomatic skill and creativity. Shifting coali-
