180  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
with the Fund, we have been withholding payments to the GOB. The 
last payment was made on February 4.
It has long been our policy to stand behind the Fund on matters of 
these kinds so as to avoid placing ourselves in the position of dictating 
economic terms which have major domestic political implications in 
foreign countries. We have supported the Fund on this issue because 
we have felt it crucial to the success of the stabilization program this 
year. Nevertheless, the situation has changed drastically because of 
recent developments in Bolivia and as of today, the possibility that the 
GOB would be able to obtain agreement with the miners on terms sat-
isfactory to the Fund appears remote indeed. The Government is not 
only facing a miners’ strike but the possibility of a general strike in 
sympathy with the miners. This whole situation is fraught with danger 
and could very well jeopardize the lives of Americans in Bolivia.
It is my firm belief that the GOB has made a maximum reason-
able effort to obtain terms acceptable to the Fund and that we cannot 
expect it to do more than this. I think, therefore, we should endeavour 
to induce the Fund to agree to accept the last offer made by the GOB 
(20% wage increase plus phasing out of commissary subsidies over 
120 days), if this is attainable, or the best possible terms on which the 
GOB can achieve a settlement with the miners. This should reduce the 
tension in the country and allow us opportunity for a calm evaluation 
of the effects of such a settlement on the stabilization effort and on the 
future conduct of our program. Needless to say, it might also allow a 
breathing space in which we could make personnel adjustments so as 
to reduce U.S. exposure in the country. I believe, therefore, that it would 
be highly advisable for you to counsel the Fund to take action along 
these lines and not to throw in the sponge and withdraw their associa-
tion with the Bolivian Government.
The withdrawal of IMF participation in the over-­all Bolivian pro-
gram would have repercussions far beyond the boundaries of that coun-
try and might, especially if the United States decides that it must continue 
the aid program, encourage other countries to take a harder line with the 
IMF (and the United States) every time a financial crisis occurs, hoping to 
by-­pass the IMF and deal with the United States directly.3
3 On March 13, the Bolivian Government promulgated a Supreme Resolution incor-
porating IMF terms, which called for unfreezing of mineral commissary prices. Renewal of 
the Stand-by Agreement and U.S. cash grant aid was dependent upon the Government’s 
ability to force the striking miners to accept the Supreme Resolution. By mid-May, the 
Government was successful; it put the miners back to work and announced the renewal of 
the Stand-by Agreement. Additional documentation is in files 724.00 and 824.10.
