January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1149 President Sadat said yes, the treaty was implemented very scrupulously. Obligations were honored. Mt. Sinai was turned over early.6 General Ali joked that everything had been painted. President Sadat said that the Israelis used to plow before turning over. Now all was in good condition. The President asked whether the settlers were still in Sinai. President Sadat said that they were. The land had not yet been turned over. The President asked whether they would stay until the end. President Sadat said the fear of the Israeli government is that public opinion will be shocked the day they turn over Amit, the largest settlement, on the sea. But we have to face it. The President said it was agreed. General Ali said that the Israelis were doing two new settlements nearby in Israel. The reason that Weizman did not want to advance the withdrawal is that he was worried that the U.S. would not finish the air bases on time, and that the Amit people would wait until the end. These are problems. President Sadat said that in the settlements near Arish, they burned everything. The President asked whether the Egyptians had oceanographers working near Sharm-el-Sheikh. President Sadat said they had them at Ras Mohammed. They are able scientists; but they had not had an opportunity to act. The President asked whether President Sadat had instructed the oceanographers to maintain the environment. President Sadat said he had given strict orders. The President suggested that General Ali could check. Some scientists are concerned that there is damage. President Sadat said he has asked a lady U.S. doctor to come to join him in April in Ras Mohammed. (He instructed General Ali to contact the governor). The President said this would not happen by itself; hotels, for example, dump into the water. President Sadat may not know about it until too late. Ambassador Linowitz asked President Sadat, as a philosopher, why Begin had been helpful on the peace treaty, but was harder now on full autonomy. The President said he didn’t remember Begin’s being helpful before! 6 See footnote 6, Document 312.
