1266  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
those Americans breaking their law. It these Americans who to blame for 
breaking Chinese law. People who committed offenses must be punished 
in accordance with law. On other hand he had pointed out many cases 
and examples obstruction to return of Chinese in America. Absence of 
representation to my govt did not mean obstructions did not exist.
34. I said seemed awfully good proof to me.
35. Wang replied if all obstructions had been removed then they 
could say this proof. Was my govt prepared remove requirement for 
Chinese nationals get Taiwan entry permit. This was long-­standing 
question he had raised for long time and still unresolved. Was it alleged 
that my govt never made such requirement on Chinese nationals US.
36. I thought a little late to go over all the ground I had previously 
so carefully gone over with him in regard that matter. I had pointed 
out to him in any event requirements our immigration laws concern­
ing applications by people who there on temporary status to show 
they able proceed another destination at end their temporary stay had 
nothing to do with ability Chinese in US who desire return to do so. 
However, important fact was no Chinese in US had alleged that in this 
or any other manner my govt had obstructed his departure from US if 
he desired do so through channel established that purpose. On other 
hand, Americans in his country, including most notably Mr. McCarthy, 
had alleged this. His govt not only refused accept but also refused act 
upon representations made through channels established in agreement.
37. Wang replied no matter how I explained this matter, so long 
as requirement for Taiwan entry permit not removed, we could not be 
regarded as acting in accordance agreement. Other hand no matter how 
I explained away this matter, I could not confuse question obstruction 
with question persons who committed crimes.
38. I asked who were we talking about when made agreement? 
He perfectly well knew then Fr. McCarthy in prison. In fact he for­
mally informed me of that. Not said then agreement was not to apply 
to Fr. McCarthy. In those weeks of discussion I wasn’t talking of 
abstract Americans. Both us talking about very specific Americans—­
those Americans in prisons.
39. Wang said we did not then discuss matter in terms of regarding 
holding of American offenders as obstruction their return. Had they 
not resolutely fought against and refused my demand for release these 
prisoners in definite time? When had he ever agreed persons in this 
category would be released within given time? Case Charles McCarthy 
included therein. Did he not make it quite clear at the time cases these 
persons would have to be dealt with in accordance with substance and 
nature offenses and also allowances for good behavior? Fact Charles 
McCarthy not yet released, indicates not yet fulfilled conditions for ear­
lier release.
