March 1952–February 1953
355
(f) An oil settlement should be negotiated secretly and imple-
mented only after reform and development programs (as outlined by
Mr. Thornburg) were well under way.
John H. Leavitt
123.
Memorandum for the Record by Donald Wilber of the Iran
Branch, Near East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans,
Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, September 23, 1952.
1. Let me get the negative comments out of the way first.2 As
follows, they are so numerous and important as to cast serious doubt
on the practicality of the program:
a. Shah’s reaction to proposals that he be built up and that he even-
tually take some decisive steps.
The Shah’s record for indecision, then deciding to take a positive
stand and at the last minute failing to go thru with it, has a stronger im-
pact to observers in the field than those here. I believe the field feels
that he cannot be counted on in any positive way. If headquarters
agrees with this position then the program is out before it is started.
b. Assumption that eventually Iran and the U.K. will reach an
agreement on the oil issue.
Your program requires this assumption and I wonder if this is cor-
rect. Will there ever be a negotiated solution? Will not Iran simply
make an arrangement with Jones or others and not really care whether
any solution is reached?
c. Assumption that the Army may be used in support of the Shah’s
efforts or in an actual coup.
Certainly up to a few months ago there were highly placed ele-
ments in the Army who would support the Shah and—given the op-
portunity—oppose extreme nationalism. These were largely generals
who had been the mainstay of the Army under Razmara and who had
been removed from their positions after his murder. However, al-
though we seem to lack the facts, it is most probable that the current
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Intelligence, Job
80B01676R, Box 41, Folder 20, Shah of Iran Operations. Secret; Security Information.
2 Wilber is commenting on Document 122.
