426
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
our imports of oil, to expand our exports, and otherwise increase the in-
flow of foreign exchange. But these actions would require a reordering
of our national priorities.
To prepare to take such measures, I propose to start talking to
people around town about a draft tasking memo (Tab B).4 There prob-
ably will be opposition. Nonetheless, I think it essential that the Ad-
ministration move in this direction. But before doing battle, I want to
make sure I have your support.5
4 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an unsigned draft memorandum from Brzez-
inski to the Secretaries of State, the Treasury, the Interior, Commerce, Transportation,
and Energy, the OMB Director, the CEA Chairman, and the President’s Assistant for Do-
mestic Affairs and Policy on the “US Current Account Deficit and National Security Re-
percussions.” The memorandum, citing the need to “take prompt steps to reduce sub-
stantially the deficit,” called for the intensification of the development of a national
export policy; establishment of an interagency task force on ways to reduce oil imports;
and IMG recommendations on additional measures “to increase the inflow of foreign
exchange.”
5 Brzezinski indicated his approval of this recommendation, writing in the adjacent
margin: “if both you & HO think it a good way to generate the needed response. ZB.”
140.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, July 3, 1978
SUBJECT
Summit Strategy
1. The essential US goal at Bonn is to strengthen world economy.
More specifically we want:
a. German and Japanese economic expansion, which will help
other European countries and the US.
b. European and Japanese MTN concessions, which will benefit
the US and other industrial and developing countries.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 13, President, Germany, 7/13–17/78: Economic Summit [I]. Confidential. Sent for in-
formation. Sent to Carter as Tab A of Owen’s July 3 cover memorandum forwarding
briefing materials for the Bonn G–7 Summit. (Ibid.) Owen sent additional Summit
briefing materials to Carter under cover of a July 11 memorandum. (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 13, President, Germany,
7/13–17/78: Economic Summit [II])
