650 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I pared to take steps they do not like, and after two and a half years of making that point we should actually take some such steps (as suggested above). Moreover, I really wonder whether State can convey credibly to the Soviets the proposition that we are prepared to retaliate. 7. There are also other things we could do—e.g., Afghanistan, etc.—but the above indicates a range of possible reactions. I know that the above is going to trouble you, and perhaps even irritate you. However, the need to review our approach is now particularly timely because of the Cuban problem. I do not see the issue of the Soviet brigade in Cuba as posing a challenge of the 1962 type, and therefore I do not advocate extreme solutions for it. But failure to cope with it firmly can have the effect of vitiating your foreign accomplishments and conclusively stamping this Administration as weak, and that is why I feel that in general the time has come to adopt a more assertive posture.7 Adopting such a posture will require some specific decisions, thereby prodding those parts of the government which have contributed so much to the image of an acquiescent Administration. You may wish to use one of the Friday morning breakfasts to discuss this larger issue. We all want to follow as closely as possible the direction and the tone that you set, and now may be the moment for a review and for some appropriate signals. Finally, there is no doubt in my mind that the country will rally behind the President as he responds firmly to a foreign challenge. Truman gained enormously from being perceived as tough and assertive—and undercutting a President engaged in a vigorous assertion of national security is usually seen as unpatriotic and divisive. [Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.] 7 I also feel uneasy about how and with what determination the brigade issue is now being negotiated. Only last Tuesday we presented our position to the Soviets, indicating that the best outcome would be withdrawal, though hinting that perhaps some other outcome could eventually be considered; by Thursday the State Department was leaking that the Soviet force may be in fact on a training mission and suggesting that withdrawal was no longer an issue (see the authoritative leaks on Thursday morning in both The Washington Post and The New York Times), hardly a way of indicating to the Soviets that the issue is of grave concern to us and that we are approaching the matter with resolve! [Footnote in the original. Presumable references to Don Oberdorfer, “U.S. Probes Soviet Unit’s Role in Cuba,” The Washington Post, pp. A–1, A–17 and Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Weighing View That Soviet Force is Training Cubans,” The New York Times, pp. A–1, A–17, both September 13, 1979.]
