650
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
pared to take steps they do not like, and after two and a half years of
making that point we should actually take some such steps (as sug-
gested above). Moreover, I really wonder whether State can convey
credibly to the Soviets the proposition that we are prepared to retaliate.
7. There are also other things we could do—e.g., Afghanistan,
etc.—but the above indicates a range of possible reactions.
I know that the above is going to trouble you, and perhaps even ir-
ritate you. However, the need to review our approach is now particu-
larly timely because of the Cuban problem. I do not see the issue of the
Soviet brigade in Cuba as posing a challenge of the 1962 type, and
therefore I do not advocate extreme solutions for it. But failure to cope
with it firmly can have the effect of vitiating your foreign accomplish-
ments and conclusively stamping this Administration as weak, and
that is why I feel that in general the time has come to adopt a more as-
sertive posture.7
Adopting such a posture will require some specific decisions,
thereby prodding those parts of the government which have contrib-
uted so much to the image of an acquiescent Administration. You may
wish to use one of the Friday morning breakfasts to discuss this larger
issue. We all want to follow as closely as possible the direction and the
tone that you set, and now may be the moment for a review and for
some appropriate signals.
Finally, there is no doubt in my mind that the country will rally be-
hind the President as he responds firmly to a foreign challenge.
Truman gained enormously from being perceived as tough and as-
sertive—and undercutting a President engaged in a vigorous assertion
of national security is usually seen as unpatriotic and divisive.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
7 I also feel uneasy about how and with what determination the brigade issue is
now being negotiated. Only last Tuesday we presented our position to the Soviets, indi-
cating that the best outcome would be withdrawal, though hinting that perhaps some
other outcome could eventually be considered; by Thursday the State Department was
leaking that the Soviet force may be in fact on a training mission and suggesting that
withdrawal was no longer an issue (see the authoritative leaks on Thursday morning in
both The Washington Post and The New York Times), hardly a way of indicating to the So-
viets that the issue is of grave concern to us and that we are approaching the matter with
resolve! [Footnote in the original. Presumable references to Don Oberdorfer, “U.S. Probes
Soviet Unit’s Role in Cuba,” The Washington Post, pp. A–1, A–17 and Bernard Gwertzman,
“U.S. Weighing View That Soviet Force is Training Cubans,” The New York Times, pp.
A–1, A–17, both September 13, 1979.]
