The Foreign Office gives notice of its intention to notify me, with reference
to the wording of sub-paragraph (c), that under Austrian law, commercial
travelers are not allowed to sell to consumers. This is indirectly said in sub-
paragraph (f) of Article XI.
Article XV. Criminal and civil jurisdiction over consular officers. I have
already reported upon this article in my despatch No. 1372 of April 30.
There will be no change in it, though in plenary session Schüller’s
associates were disposed to press the objection that consular officers could
only be called upon to testify as to matters of fact. The argument embodied
on page 5 of Instruction 552 of February 11 reassured them, however.
Article XVI. Exemptions of consular officers and government property from
taxation. There was some difficulty here in persuading Schüller’s
colleagues to agree to the provision as revised on page 9 of Instructions 552
of February 11. The objection was chiefly to the language: “except taxes
levied on account of the possession or ownership of immovable property
situated in, or income derived from sources within the territories of the
State within which they exercise their functions”. The Austrian negotiators
desired this language: “except taxes levied on account of income derived
from any property situated within the territories of the State within which
they exercise their functions, according to the laws of that State, upon all
foreigners who have no domicile or residence within that State”. The
American language was, however, ultimately accepted.
Article XX. Competency of consular officers to take charge of property of
deceased nationals, qualify as administrator, etc. The Austrian amendments
as recited on page 11 of Department’s Instruction 552 were quite vigorously
pressed. It appears that there have been various complaints filed with the
Foreign Office, either from the Austrian Legation in Washington or from
Austrian consuls in the United States with respect to the restricted
competency of Austrian consular officers in this regard. I developed at
some length the argument that this was a matter wholly within the
jurisdiction of the States, and the Federal Government did not feel at liberty
to encroach further upon State prerogatives. The American draft was
accepted.
