January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1223 Ambassador Linowitz asked whether the President had seen the papers.11 Mr. Hunter said no. Ambassador Linowitz said that he can leave copies with the President. Here is one on water, land, security, the Continuing Committee, jurisdiction over Israeli nationals, and legislative power. There are suggestions on fundamentals, with some details. There is one he will not use: on East Jerusalem voting rights. These are just ideas. The President asked Deputy Secretary Christopher and Mr. Hunter if the papers were all right. Mr. Hunter replied that they are very good. Ambassador Linowitz said he thought the President had seen them. This is a real course that we are on. He thinks that now there should be more U.S. initiative. Egypt will welcome it. The President said that he would, too. There will be a debacle on May 26 if the negotiations have not produced a document. Sadat will accommodate him without any real effort. But the Europeans will become active if Sadat and he do not get somewhere. The Egyptians will even try to get the Saudis involved, at the UN or otherwise. Also, if Burg, maybe Ehrlich, and Peres and Weizman—and Dayan would give his vote—are prepared to see matters brought to a head, and if we are seen as playing in Begin’s camp, this will give our concurrence to delay. That will be seen in Israel, too. He feels strongly that we should bring the negotiations to a head. He doesn’t know how accurate Peres is on politics. He (Peres) is almost as unpopular as Begin as a leader. Weizman is the most popular in Israel, and would work with Peres— though the question would be who is on top; Peres would want to be. Ambassador Linowitz said that Weizman said that he would serve as defense minister under Peres. The President said that Peres had told him that Burg had been planning to decide in May whether to stay with Begin and go down, or to try to stay alive. Ambassador Linowitz said that Burg had told him this. The President said that therefore Peres was accurate. He (the President) would be better off politically if the negotiations are brought to a 11 Reference is to a series of position papers, dated April 22–23, that were produced by Linowitz on the “most important issues we will face over the next few weeks:” East Jerusalem voting rights, land, water, security, jurisdiction over Israeli nationals, the size of the SGA, and the Continuing Committee. Each paper sets forth objectives and proposed draft language for the Heads of Agreement. The papers, forwarded to Brzezinski under an April 24 covering memorandum from Hunter, along with two Department of State papers on overall negotiating strategy and strategy for engaging the Palestinians, are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 79, Sensitive X: 4/80)
