1634 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement thought all in the meeting were agreed on this point. However, the word­ ing of the sentence of your letter as noted above gives me concern that some might feel that the testing during the period of experimentation would be limited to shots made solely and exclusively for the purpose of developing the detection system. Mr. Farley tells me this was not the intent of this sentence in paragraph 3 but, nevertheless, I felt you should be advised of the AEC position which we feel must be maintained by our negotiators because of the very important weapons developments that will accrue to either side from tests during the two or three year period set aside for experimentation and research. Your item 4 at the top of page 2 concerns us. It seems to establish the principle of accepting a very inadequate monitoring system on the theory that, because the system may detect a forbidden explosion, a party to the treaty will be deterred from violation. If you will recall, I said at the meeting, and several others agreed, that it seemed to me it would be a major departure if we were to accept a system having just sufficient capability to act as merely a “deterrent” in lieu of an effective monitoring and inspection system. This idea departs from authoritative statements, all of which have supported the idea that we shall accept the suspension of such tests as can be policed by an effective monitor­ ing system that would have a high probability of proving any violation. If we are now to accept the “deterrent” theory, we are talking about something very different which will call for a change in our public posi­ tion as well as our representation to Congress. The Commission feels that such a move would be a serious mis­ take and we urge that our negotiators in Geneva be instructed not to accept an arrangement based on the theory of “deterrence” rather than adequate policing. Our notes on the meeting listed as inconclusive discussions covering the following topics: a treaty based upon “an effective inspection system” as compared to one that was deemed to be “an effective deterrent”. — From these notes you can see that we did not feel there was agreement in the meeting on the so-­called “deterrent theory”. We consider these two matters I have discussed above to be of the utmost importance. We recommend, therefore, that your letter to the President of March 28 be supplemented to reflect these points. Sincerely, John A. McCone
