892 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement and the Foreign Minister commented upon the satisfaction expressed by his colleagues during the opening sessions of UNGA in New York over the Secretary’s remarks in Washington to the Foreign Ministers. The Ambassador then reverted to the problem of the Canal Zone and raised the question on the wage rate paid Panamanian employees of the Zone. The Secretary stated that he thought that this matter had been settled by the recent legislation enacted by the United States Congress implementing the single-­wage provisions of the 1955 Treaty. The Ambassador replied that it was true that the legislation in question had established a given wage for a given job, regardless of whether the job was filled by a Panamanian or an American, and that he hoped that the Executive Order putting this into effect would be promulgated shortly. The broader question which remained unsolved, he said, was not the question of base pay but the difference in the total amount actually paid Americans and Panamanians working side by side and doing the same kind of job. He did not see how the United States could indefinitely maintain one real wage scale for its people in one part of the world and another scale elsewhere. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that, in order to recruit employees for work in the Zone, it was necessary to offer them certain financial incentives. He also pointed out that were we to raise base wages in the Canal Zone to U.S. levels for all employees, regardless of citizenship, the resulting contrast with the relatively low wage-­scale level in the republic would bring tremendous pressure on the Government of Panama for wage increases which it could not possibly grant. Mr. Rubottom reminded the Foreign Minister that we had, at the Panamanian Government’s request, withdrawn commissary privileges from Panamanian employees of the Zone. While that action had benefited Panamanian industry and commerce, it had also the effect of reducing the purchasing power of the Panamanians working in the Zone. We were very conscious of Panama’s financial and economic problems, Mr. Rubottom continued, and were giving careful and serious consideration to the development projects outlined in the Memorandum presented to Dr. Milton Eisenhower6 during his visit to Panama. Mr. Rubottom also mentioned a recent conference in which he, Assistant Secretary of Army George H. Roderick, Governor Potter, and Ambassador Harrington had discussed Panama’s problems. Finally, he stated that Mr. Robert Burroughs and Mr. Ralph Cake, members of the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal Company, together with Governor Potter, had called on the Under Secretary last week to present their views on Panama’s need for economic and social betterment. It was 6 Not printed; 611.1913/10–2958.
