350
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
116.
Telegram From the Embassy in Czechoslovakia to the
Department of State1
Prague, November 26, 1980, 1404Z
4344.
USCINCEUR,
CINCUSAFE,
and
CINCUSAREUR
for
POLADs. Subject: Czechoslovakia at the End of 1980—An Overview.
1. (C-entire text.)
2. This is a background report which may be useful in briefing the
transition team. For more extensive discussion of certain areas we
recommend reference to Prague A–4, “Czechoslovakia Isn’t Working,”
and Prague A–16, “Czechoslovak Looks Inward.”
3. The outstanding impression of Czechoslovakia today as it has
been for a decade, is of an apathetic, disengaged population ruled by
a nervous, unselfconfident regime. The regime, imposed by Soviet
pressure in 1969, has never been able to convince the people, the outside
world or, seemingly, itself of its legitimacy. The trauma caused by the
crushing of the Prague Spring of 1968 has kept the regime fearful of
innovation and unwilling to take any step that might cause Moscow
to raise an ideological eyebrow. This attitude has contributed heavily
to the stagnation which now afflicts the economy.
4. After the brief orgy of liberalization in 1968 the people have
retreated into mass apathy, appearing to concern themselves entirely
with consumer spending, recreation, and work avoidance. Politics,
including the small manifestations of intellectual dissidence, leaves the
masses cold and Party membership is seen by most simply as a means of
advancing careers. The regime, fearing outbursts of popular resistance
a la Poland, has been reluctant to raise the currently subsidized prices
to world levels and has so far kept action on improving work discipline
to exhortation. It has since the Polish disturbances chosen to give in
to workers’ demands in unpublicized local labor disputes rather than
risk confrontation.
5. The Czechoslovak economy is sick. The strong industrial plant
with which Czechoslovakia emerged from World War II is now by
any standards obsolete and energy inefficient. Dependent almost
entirely on imports for raw materials and energy, it has had to adjust
to sharp rises in prices, even for goods supplied by the USSR, supplier
of almost all of Czechoslovakia’s oil and much of its other raw materials.
At the same time its industrial products have become steadily less
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800566–1066.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Belgrade, East Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest,
Moscow, Sofia, Warsaw, and USCINCEUR, CINCUSAFE, and CINCUSAREUR.
