680 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Arabia through planes and pilots, but it is important for the U.S. not to exaggerate the Saudi role. The Saudis are indecisive and incapable of action. 14. With regard to Syria, he sees the internal situation as rapidly deteriorating, and he expects a major and violent change this year. He believes that the Syrians would be interested in discreet arrangements with the U.S. 15. With regard to Iraq, he reiterated the point that discreet arrangements with the U.S. are timely and that the U.S. has much more in common with Iraq than Iraq has with the Soviet Union. He encouraged us to move towards a relationship. 16. He was scathing and contempuous of King Hussein. He accused him of already now trying to undermine the Camp David Accords, and he urged that we dismiss him altogether. He emphasized the strong position he has in Egypt, which he believes is based on the fact that the Egyptian people no longer have a complex over Israel. That complex was shed during the 1973 war. 17. In talking of the Arabian Gulf, he stressed that he enjoys a great deal of support in Bahrain, Abu Dhabi, Qatar, and Oman. That support cannot be openly expressed but the fact is that there is sympathy for his policies. Turning to other regions, he asserted that he will shortly be transferring 200 tanks to Somalia, and he would wish them replaced by us. He expressed the view that the situation is deteriorating in Libya and may soon get out of hand. In his view Algeria will henceforth pursue more genuinely neutral policies, and considers that to our collective advantage. 18. Finally, at the very end of the conversation he floated the idea that Egypt might propose, after the Israeli withdrawals from the Sinai have been completed, that U.S. forces be made part of the UN Sinai force. He thought that this might provide an international cover for the introduction of an U.S. military presence in the Sinai. At the same time, he expressed reservation regarding Begin’s idea that Etzion be made into an U.S. airbase. 19. Throughout the discussion he emphasized his desire to work closely with you either in reaching accommodation with Begin or in working together in spite of him. He also responded favorably to my strategic overview of your policies.
