302 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 91. Letter From Senator Symington to Eisenhower1 Washington, August 29, 1958 Dear Mr. President: Allen Dulles, Director of CIA, briefed me in his office in late July re the current position of the Soviet in the long-­range missile field, inter­ mediate range ballistic missiles and intercontinental ballistic missiles. I subsequently received information that would appear to show that Mr. Dulles heavily underrated Soviet missile development to date, as well as planned capabilities. Upon receiving this information I analyzed our own missile pro­ grams and thereupon became convinced the latter are inadequate to meet the growing danger. This conclusion would seem obvious if our planning has been based on incorrect information—and that is why I am presenting this paper to you. More specifically, if the information contained is correct, we believe the planning incident to our weapons system, primarily mis­ siles, beginning now and lasting at least into 1964, is so insufficient in this area as to leave ourselves and our allies subject to overt political, if not actual military aggression from the Sino-Soviet alliance—with a relatively slight chance of effective retaliation against such aggression between 1960 and 1962. On August 6, therefore, I again saw Mr. Dulles with Mr. Thomas G. Lanphier, Jr. We pointed out to Mr. Dulles in some detail our reasons for believing that his estimates were inaccurate. In each case where there was disagreement, the figures presented to Mr. Dulles were much greater as to Soviet accomplishment than the figures he had presented me a few days previously. When Mr. Dulles inquired where we had obtained our informa­ tion, we replied: “From your own and other elements of the national intelligence system.” Two days later, August 8, when Mr. Dulles briefed the Senate Subcommittee to which the CIA reports, the figures he gave that com­ mittee were the same as the figures he had originally given me. The estimates he presented the Senate on August 8th are as follows: The Soviets have fired many missiles up to 700 miles in range also many up to 1,000 miles. The total firings in these two categories are estimated to be some 300. 1 Source: Question of a missile gap. Top Secret. 6 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Administration Series.
