88
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
added that the Soviets had also tried to use the language of the outer
space treaty.5 As points of reference, he cited Article I, Paragraph B, of
the 1975 Registration Convention and Article I, Paragraph D, of the Lia-
bility Convention.6 Khlestov expressed the view that it would be easier
to use a formulation already internationally tested and based upon lan-
guage in legal instruments which both sides have signed.
9. (S) After first recalling the Soviet side’s preference for language
characterizing certain acts as incompatible with peaceful relations be-
tween states rather than as hostile acts, Khlestov suggested in a prelimi-
nary way the following definition of which acts would be regarded as
“hostile acts”: a hostile act is an act which the sides regard as a delib-
erate action upon a space object by any system or means, either in space
or on the ground, which can lead to the destruction of a space object, its
displacement from orbit, damage to it, or rendering unserviceable its
onboard equipment.
10. (S) Khlestov repeated several times that these two definitions
were purely preliminary attempts and not the final position of the So-
viet side, and said that the sides together can arrive at more precisely
formulated definitions. He suggested that U.S. Delegation formulate its
own versions of definitions, and also requested Buchheim’s prelimi-
nary views on those Khlestov had just read. Buchheim stated that he
would not address Khlestov’s preliminary formulations today but
agreed that a productive way to begin these talks would be to pursue a
clearer understanding of these two terms and, in the process, expose
areas of early agreement, as well as areas the sides will have to argue
about a little more. Buchheim and Khlestov agreed that next meeting
would include discussion of those two terms.
11. (S) (A) Immediately following the plenary, Buchheim and
Khlestov met, with Bradburn, Desimone, Mayorskiy, and interpreters
present. It was agreed that the second plenary meeting would be on
Friday, January 26, 1979, at 3:00 pm, at Soviet Embassy.
(B) Referring to the definitions discussed during the plenary
meeting, Buchheim informed Khlestov that the U.S. side has studied
5 The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union signed the Treaty
on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, on January 27, 1967, and it entered
into force on October 10, 1967. The Treaty prohibited the placement of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction on the moon and other celestial bodies, in orbit
around the earth, or otherwise stationing them in outer space. Testing of such weapons
on the moon and in outer space was also prohibited. The text of the Treaty is in Depart-
ment of State Bulletin, December 26, 1966, pp. 953–954.
6 UN Resolution 2777 (XXVI) creating the Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects was adopted by the General Assembly on March 29,
1972.
