Honduras 821 was widely known in Miami, and for this reason it became clear that if President Villeda were induced to refuse the invitation, his refusal would be seriously damaging to our relations with Honduras. Accordingly, our Ambassador was authorized to convey the Department‘s approval of the Miami visit. Also, for similar reasons, our Ambassador has been authorized to agree to the addition of New Orleans to President Villeda’s itinerary, emphasizing in both instances that his trip must be completely private and informal and that no question of official attention or a visit to Washington is to be raised. President Villeda understands this condition and accepts it.2 Although the duration of President Villeda’s visit is still somewhat indefinite, it is estimated that he will be in the United States about a week. Our Ambassador to Honduras, Ambassador Robert Newbegin, will accompany him on the entire trip, and Mr. C. Allan Stewart, Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs of the Department of State, will go to Miami to meet the group. While President Villeda does not expect any official attention, I believe it would be desirable for you to send him a short letter to be delivered personally by Mr. Stewart upon his arrival. Enclosed is suggested letter which, if you approve, we will be glad to transmit.3 It is recommended that this message, if approved, be released only on the initiative or President Villeda.4 DOUGLAS DILLON Acting Secretary 2 President Villeda arrived in Miami on May 30 and proceeded with his visit as planned. Documentation concerning Villeda’s visit to the United States is in Department of State file 715.11. 3 In the draft of this letter to President Villeda, President Eisenhower conveyed his greetings and welcomed Villeda to the United States; praised Villeda’s efforts to strengthen and defend Honduras’ democratic institutions and to improve the well-­being of the Honduran people; and expressed the hope that the close and friendly relations that existed between the United States and Honduras would continue to grow and prosper. 4 According to two handwritten notations on the source text, the signed original of this letter was received from the White House on May 27 and was given to Gawf for transmission to President Villeda Morales.
