362 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 It is felt that the formal presentation of the program in question should leave no doubts in the minds of higher authority that it should be undertaken solely as an exploratory operation offering little assurance of success, in view of the many intangibles and the absence of flexible instrumentalities which could be utilized in support of the program. [name not declassified] 127. Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence Agency1 Tehran, October 2, 1952, 0824Z. TEHE 170. Source: [1 line not declassified]. Eval: C–3. Date Info: Last week September. Dissem: [less than 1 line not declassified]. 1. It is being rumored Tehran that an agreement has been reached between Kashani and Tudeh to bring in Kashani or Kashani puppet as premier in place Mohammed Mossadegh possibly within next 30 days.2 2. Mossadegh fully aware above but to date has taken no measure to forestall. 3. Faced with threat Kashani Tudeh coalition, Baqai’s newspaper Shahed has taken unequivocal stand support Mossadegh which represents reversal Baqai policy which in past several weeks has been closer aligned with Kashani than with Mossadegh. 4. [less than 1 line not declassified] believes rumor para 1 well founded and is seriously concerned. However also believes other 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 89–00176R, Box 1, Folder 15, Political Activities—Iran. Secret; Security Information. 2 In telegram TEHE 167, September 29, but transmitted on October 2, the Station commented that “Growing wave of rumors on replacement Mossadeq all link Kashani as prime mover in ouster Mossadeq. While Zahedi most frequently cited as Kashani choice for Prime Minister, Busheri, Kazemi and Baghai also mentioned. While Station not discounting possibility military junta might ultimately make unconstitutional bid seize power it still considered highly unlikely such an attempt would succeed.” It went on to say: “(A) Shah would not cooperate, in fact would work prevent coup and (B) None of present military leaders are considered to have courage to try or stature to rally enough support. . . . Station believes Mossadeq may not be on the way out. Mossadeq is still the most powerful political figure in Iran.” (Ibid.)
