Human Rights 113 Within the last few weeks, Bob Pastor was responsible for the initiative in adding the Inter-American Treaty to the original four and this has been announced as policy in the OAS speech.8 Work is now proceeding on the specific reservations required. 4. Security Assistance—The issue of cuts in security assistance because of human rights violations came up during the early budget review. Within the State Department cuts were considered for such major violators as Indonesia, Iran, South Korea, and a few African nations. However, the formal department position recommended cuts only for Uruguay (which Congress had already cut by law) Argentina, and a small cut for Ethiopia.9 OMB favored additional cuts, and you and the President were involved in the decision not to propose additional cuts, both because of a disinclination to shoot from the hip, and because this Administration had not yet protested human rights violations to any of the other governments. Pursuant to other requirements of the same law, country-bycountry reports on the human rights status in 82 nations have been prepared and submitted to Congress.10 Both the preparation (which is done largely through Embassy channels) and publication of these reports has caused substantial consternation and resentment in many of the violating nations. They object to US unilateral judgments on their behavior. 8 In an April 13 memorandum to the President, Brzezinski indicated that the Department of State, Lipshutz, and the NSC Staff had all recommended that Carter announce in his Pan-American Day speech his intention to sign and seek ratification of the American Convention on Human Rights, negotiated in 1969. Carter approved this recommendation. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North–South Pastor Files, Subject File, Box 55, Human Rights: 1–5/77) An undated draft of Brzezinski’s memorandum to Carter and an April 8 memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski setting out the Department’s rationale are ibid. The President announced in his April 14 address that he would sign the Convention, and he signed it on June 1. (Public Papers: Carter, 1977: Book I, pp. 614 and 1050–1051) See also Document 47. 9 In response to a question raised by Subcommittee Chairman Inouye during Vance’s February 24 testimony before the Subcommittee on Foreign Operations of the Senate Appropriations Committee (see footnote 5, Document 17), Vance indicated that the Department had reduced aid to Argentina, Ethiopia, and Uruguay within the context of the proposed FY 1978 foreign military and security assistance legislation. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Security Links Cited,” The New York Times, February 25, 1977, p. A–1) The House International Relations Committee subsequently reported the security assistance bill (H.R. 6884) on May 9 after reducing the amount of security assistance for several nations, including Ethiopia, Argentina, Brazil, El Salvador, and Guatemala, according to guidelines codified in the 1976 International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act (P.L. 94–329). (Congress and the Nation, Volume V, 1977–1980, p. 39) Carter signed the International Security Assistance Act of 1977 into law on August 4. (H.R. 6884; P.L. 95–92) 10 See footnote 6, Document 17.
