904 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI off the plants in a completely assembled form. Moreover, for the entire life of the ICBMs rocket engines are not replaced. By contrast, the US proposal on introducing continuous monitoring at the solid fuel rocket engines facilities making two first stages for the MIRVed mobile ICBMs fails to take this practice into account. In addition, the introduction of the continuous monitoring system at the solid fuel engines facilities would not resolve the principal task of verification, that of counting mobile ICBMs, or their stages produced by each side. The point is that the number of solid fuel engines produced, as I was told by our experts, always exceeds that of the missiles produced. This is because some of the manufactured engines are used for testing and for technology operation, and reliability improvement. I was also assured that the same practice, in principle, is used in the United States, although the proportion between the number of engines and ICBMs produced, as a rule, differs substantially. Thus, counting the number of rocket engines produced would not make it possible to monitor the number of missiles actually produced and thereby ensure verification of compliance with the ceilings on non-­deployed mobile ICBMs provided for by the treaty. These points were taken care of in drafting the INF treaty and they, I believe, fully satisfied both sides. I understand your desire to find an effective solution to the problem of verification of mobile ICBMs production. However, I propose that we deal with it without losing sight of the fact that continuous monitoring of production facilities is but one element in the by and large virtually agreed-­upon detailed system of START verification, including mobile ICBMs. At the same time, we are prepared to take into account your concern with regard to the solid fuel rocket engines in order to assure the sides’ complete confidence that the treaty-­limited missiles, which may have a mobile basing mode, cannot be secretly produced in violation of the treaty. The main elements of our approach are as follows. For each side continuous monitoring would be set up at two production facilities: for the USSR, at the SS–25 ICBM producing plant in Votkinsk and SS–24 ICBM plant in Pavlograd; for the US side, at the facilities producing accountable stages of MX and Midgetman ICBMs or such assembled missiles. There would be limitations on the locations of solid fuel rocket engines for the largest stages of SS–24, SS–25, MX and Midgetman ICBMs. Those would be the facilities for the production and storage, assembly of respective stages or missiles as well as test sites for both solid fuel rocket engines and stages to them. In addition, a provision would be agreed upon to the effect that solid fuel rocket engines may be in transit. Presence of solid fuel rocket engines at all such sites would be permitted and would not be subject to inspection.
