Chapter 4, February–April 1990  559
Shevardnadze: We are ready to accept anything that you suggest. 
Whatever you say is fine with us.
Baker: Well, I think it might be agreeable to us to announce this 
tomorrow or Friday. If we announce this tomorrow, we could do 
it simultaneously with an announcement in both Washington and 
Moscow. That would leave much less of a chance of a leak.
Shevardnadze: That could be. Maybe we might want to announce it 
right after the meeting with the President or before.
Baker: Whatever. Again, I think the important point is that we 
would want a simultaneous announcement.
Shevardnadze: That is fine with us. Really whatever you say is going 
to be fine with us and if you want to do it before the meeting with the 
President, that is fine.
Baker: I just want to be sure that we agree that this should be a 
simultaneous announcement coming out of both Washington and 
Moscow.
Shevardnadze: Yes, that’s the most desirable.
Baker: Why don’t I ask the President. I do worry about a leak.
Shevardnadze: Fine. Let’s leave it to the President. Whatever he says 
will also be the opinion of the Soviet President. You know you have a 
big advantage. You can just pick up the phone and consult with him. It 
is a lot harder for me.
Baker: That is the way it is for me when I am in Moscow.
Shevardnadze: Well, it is good that the dates are set. The most 
important thing is to set the dates.
Now, as for the negotiations themselves, and what’s going to be 
involved with them, and what’s going to be involved with the results 
of the Summit, we have a lot to do and a lot is going to depend upon 
the talks that you and I have. Of course, a lot will also depend upon the 
specific results that emerge from Vienna and Geneva. We have every rea-
son to hope by the end of May that we are going to have important and 
major agreements. As I discussed with you, we are going to have a lot to 
do in advance of that to prepare the documents that will be signed at the 
Summit and to prepare well for the Summit and that is one of the reasons 
I said we are going to need another meeting between the two of us.
I have studied very carefully the status of the talks and I must say 
that our readiness to have the Summit is not high at this point.
Baker: I agree with that. We might also just finalize what the other 
dates of the ministerial are going to be. The May 16-19 is acceptable 
for us.
Shevardnadze: That’s very good.
