January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1373
tinued sharing of intelligence information between our countries.
There is need to restrain the spread of nuclear weapons—to countries
like Libya, Iraq, and Pakistan. The U.S. has taken the lead on this issue,
so far. When he sees Governor Reagan next week, he will impress upon
him the importance of this issue.
On the question of a possible summit, this has been left in a tenta-
tive state. The Prime Minister is willing to proceed if it is advisable. He
(the President) wants to see what both Sadat and Reagan think. We
should proceed cautiously here. It is important to see the peace process
go on. His overall sense is one of gratification and gratitude. The Prime
Minister is a courageous leader, who worked with him (the President)
in achieving much.
The Prime Minister said thank you very much indeed. He says as a
friend, as he did in the Oval Office, that he feels deeply impressed with
the spirit of democracy here, and that in such a way the President had
accepted the decision of the people. American democracy is an ex-
ample to others. He has deep appreciation for it—and it has been an ex-
ample for a long time, for the U.S. and for the world. There is beauty in
democracy, and it shows civil courage.
He wants to express the gratitude of Israel, that in President
Carter’s tenure, Israel’s national security has been strengthened; there
were the Camp David Accords, and the Egypt-Israel treaty. These are
great achievements. The Camp David Accords have two parts—and
are in effect an international treaty. The President of the United States
witnessed the signing—all three leaders signed them. One part has
come to fruition, in the peace treaty reached with the President’s help.
Now normalization is taking place. There are some difficulties; but in
the near future there will be another meeting in Cairo on the autonomy
process. Maybe there will be a summit. He and the President have
agreed that, as the transition period goes on, he (the Prime Minister)
will accept any decision of the President on a summit. If the President
wants to have a summit in these ten weeks, and if Sadat agrees, then
this is all right, but it is the President’s decision. There are voices here
that consider the Camp David Accords a document to be discarded,
and look elsewhere for ideas. Where are these ideas? This sets a bad ex-
ample for other nations. What value therefore would there be in a
treaty? This would be injurious for all; and he (the Prime Minister) be-
lieves that Sadat agrees. Israel stands behind the Camp David Accords,
and wants to bring them to fruition. There will be differences—and
these will be important sometimes. Each party sees that it is taking the
right approach. This is natural. But we can clarify the issues. And we
have proved we can reach further agreement. When it appeared we
were losing agreement, it was caught in mid-air, we brought it to earth
and signed an agreement. Israel stands by the Camp David Accords,
