3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
275
sentation, and that the Sinai settlements issue was being handled in the
Military Committee, in which we were not involved.
SALT Ratification: Dobrynin observed that during the meetings be-
tween the Ponomarev delegation and the Congress, there had been
some mention that SALT might be referred to both Houses of Congress
for a simple majority vote. The Secretary said that this procedure, while
it would relieve the necessity of having a two-thirds vote in the Senate,
would raise other risks in involving the House.
Belgrade: Dobrynin asked the Secretary to take under consideration
the situation at Belgrade, where he felt the draft text submitted by the
Soviet Union, although admittedly imperfect, had not received fair at-
tention. He expressed concern that the situation at Belgrade had degen-
erated into polemical exchanges, and that the opportunity for construc-
tive agreement was being lost. The Secretary agreed to examine the
various draft proposals.
The Horn: The Secretary referred to the principles he had discussed
with Ponomarev, in the hope that the Soviet side would examine them
and present any ideas it might have for moving toward a negotiated so-
lution to the problem. Dobrynin said that he would be discussing the
subject with Ponomarev in New York on February 1. The Secretary
then went on to make the point that the increase in Soviet ships in the
Red Sea, including landing ships, and the Indian Ocean, was having a
negative effect, would make negotiations and a solution to the problem
more difficult, and would have a provocative effect. He stressed the se-
riousness with which such steps were regarded here, and said we
ought to be moving in the other direction, toward establishing the con-
ditions for a negotiated solution. Dobrynin said he understood, and
would pass on the message.
At a subsequent point, the discussion returned to this subject, and
Dobrynin said a crucial consideration for the start of negotiations was
to get Somali withdrawal from the Ogaden. The Secretary said he
agreed, but it was necessary to work out the timing of the withdrawal,
and an agreement on what should take place after the withdrawal,
leading to some form of self-determination and autonomy.
SALT and Miscellany: Dobrynin observed that Brezhnev was back
on the job, and that Gromyko was now away on a two-week vacation,
although not far from Moscow. He thought that ultimately a meeting
between Gromyko and the Secretary might be required to work out the
final unresolved issues in the SALT negotiations. In this connection, the
Secretary said that he would soon be giving Dobrynin a list of matters
concerning Backfire which remained to be worked out. Dobrynin said:
“Fair enough.”
