1978  321
a marked difference in the potential survivability of US and Soviet lead-
ership and population might also lead them to doubt the credibility 
of the nuclear deterrent. Equivalent survivability as a policy does not 
necessarily imply similar or equivalent programs since survivability is 
also a function of the nature of the society and of the attack directed 
against it.
4. Equivalent Programs: This policy is based on the assumption that 
US civil defense can assure adequate security and contribute effec-
tively to deterrence and crisis management only if it is substantially 
similar to and equal to the Soviet civil defense program. While it is 
essential to have equivalent survivability in terms of outcome indices, 
it is equally important, given the uncertainty about exactly how offset-
ting US advantages might be perceived, to have equivalent programs 
in terms of input indices. A marked unfavorable discrepancy in pro-
grams would lead the Soviet and others to question the credibility of 
our nuclear deterrent.
IV. US CIVIL DEFENSE PROGRAM OPTIONS
The following represent five alternative civil defense programs 
(one with two variations) ranging from the very austere to the very 
comprehensive. Material on the relation between these programs and 
the policy options, the costs of these programs, and their effectiveness 
is provided in Tables S–4, S–5, and S–6.7
Alternative 1: Minimal Civil Defense. Maintain little or no civil 
defense (e.g., warning only) for population protection, and combine 
and curtail other civil defense activities
Alternative 2a: Current Level and Program. Maintain a modest base 
of civil defense activities with dual use applications. Continue current 
modest start on evacuation planning, with plans to be developed by 
the mid- to latter 1980s. Supporting systems needed for effective evac-
uation operations would not be enhanced, and a “surge” period of one 
year would be required to implement plans.
Alternative 2b: Current Level with Emphasis on Evacuation Planning. 
Maintain a modest base of civil defense activities with dual use applica-
tions. Reorient program, within current ceiling, to complete evacuation 
plans by the mid-1980s, with a surge period of one year still required to 
implement plans.
Alternative 3: Enhanced Population Evacuation/Continuity of Gov-
ernment Capability. Increase capabilities for crisis relocation and for 
continuity of government so as to expand substantially protection of 
population and leadership and so as to be able to implement plans 
7 Attached but not printed.
