1132
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the peacemaker for Israel, and to insure its security for the future. In-
side this there might be a way to find a way to movement, but it will be
excruciatingly tough. His sense—shared by Sam Lewis—is that Begin
will give nothing to the Ambassador on this trip; anything he might
give he will give to the President here. Therefore it will be useful for
him (the Ambassador) to sound out Begin. But he is also having
meetings with Peres, Dayan, Weizman and others.
The President said that this is good, and that the Ambassador
should also use Hedley Donovan for this purpose.
Ambassador Linowitz said that it would be useful to have Hedley
along. He can take soundings; he will be helpful. He (the Ambassador)
hopes he can come back from this trip with a better sense of where
there is room for give with Begin. Is he beyond moving? His (the Am-
bassador’s) guess is that Begin will want to do something—for ex-
ample, the establishment of a security committee. Why? Because he
(the Ambassador) had been tough with Sharon here.6 Sharon liked it—
and had called to say so—and that they should meet alone in Israel.
There must be some masochism there. He had told Sharon that the
President was personally concerned about the security issue. Sharon
said that they should discuss this. The Ambassador had said that
Sharon should tell Begin, and Sharon said he would. We should let
Egypt know we are pressing on this.
The President asked what Egypt wants.
Ambassador Linowitz said that it has an understandable position. Is-
rael says that everything touches on security—health, welfare (the
President added “schools”). Therefore, with the lists of coordinated
powers, they had agreed at the Hague7 that security was not in the first
list of 18 transferred powers, and he had thought they (the Israelis?)
were off the security kick on the first list. Khalil said he had tried to
move them, and couldn’t do it. He said that we should try to get the Is-
raelis to define their security needs and tell them, and they will try to
work around it. This concerns Khalil. We may be able to get something.
He (the Ambassador) had told Begin that adding to the ring of settle-
ments around Jerusalem was an affront to the President. This shook
Begin; he does not want to be in the President’s bad graces.
The President said that Begin had kicked him when he was down on
this one. He was causing him the greatest hurt when he was vulnerable.
But he (the President) survived!
6 A summary of Linowitz’s March 13 conversation with Sharon was transmitted in
telegram 71062 to Tel Aviv, March 17. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800136–0948)
7 See footnote 3, Document 346.
