328 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement translating newspapers to persons in prison and that they would thus learn of terms of agreed announcement. I asked simply for confirmation that this had been done. My concern this regard had increased because learned most Americans recently released either did not hear about or received only fragmentary account of terms agreed announcement. One American recently released who had heard of agreed announce­ ment was refused his request see full text. Therefore, framing matter in terms he had suggested this morning, I wished suggest his govern­ ment confirm to me whether or not in fact each individual American in prison had been fully and specifically informed of terms agreed announcement. 11. I said another question I had raised was simply whether Amer­ icans would be permitted to communicate with or otherwise have access to UK Charge, and particularly if he would be able interview them in accordance with terms agreed announcement if my govern­ ment wanted facts in case investigated. Again framing this question as specific suggestion in accordance his proposal, I wanted specifically ask that this be done. I had hoped at this meeting he would give me specific answers to these two questions which were perfectly simple and straightforward. 12. I said most important of all I wished ask again what steps his government taken to enable remaining 19 imprisoned Americans expeditiously exercise their right return. He had said his government would not be forced into taking action by means of threats. I did not understand why he interpreted my statement on this matter as threat. I had not during these talks ever made any threat and I did not intend to do so. Certain statements had been made in agreed announcement and I was merely asking for information on how they were being implemented. Equally, he could be certain that I would not respond to threats. I had made clear and wanted to repeat, I was not willing trade fate these persons in prison for political concessions on our part. I wanted make entirely clear that any thought on part his government of delaying release these prisoners in order obtain political concessions was doomed to failure. 13. I added that I had never said that only when all Americans were released would I enter into discussion agenda item two; I merely asked how agreed announcement was being implemented. It seemed to me that delay by his government in implementing agreed announce­ ment with respect release these Americans was inevitably entangling these two subjects. There certainly was no intent or desire on my part to entangle them. Nearly three weeks had passed since announcement issued and not one of remaining 19 persons had been released. It was perfectly natural my government’s concern increased with passage of time and no information on this vital point.
