240
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
furnish more money new govt wld probably not (rpt not) be able pay
govt salaries and other current expenses.
It seemed now quite clear US cld not (rpt not) help Iran overcome
its financial difficulties except with advance approval of Brit Govt. That
approval not (rpt not) likely be given until Iran had met such condition
as UK may prescribe for oil settlement. It wld take considerable amount
of time for agreement to be concluded even if both govts take concilia-
tory attitude. But Iran had no (rpt no) knowledge which wld cause it to
believe Brit wld take conciliatory attitude. It not (rpt not) impossible
UK seeing that Iran’s situation was desperate might stiffen its demands
to such extent that new govt finding itself unable meet them wld col-
lapse. Even if US Govt wld be willing come to rescue new Iranian Govt
financially without awaiting settlement oil question there no (rpt no)
reason believe it had funds readily available for such purpose. Perhaps
Congressional action wld be required. Ala said he wld be grateful for
such advice and suggestions as I might be able give him on confidential
personal basis.
2. We are convinced in view unyielding attitude assumed by Mo-
sadeq and by Brit Govt no (rpt no) settlement oil problem possible so
long as Mosadeq remains as PriMin. Mosadeq’s retirement therefore
seems condition precedent to reaching oil settlement. Nevertheless hes-
itate in view lack of knowledge of Brit intentions give Ala advice. I as-
sume Brit prefer that we do not (rpt not) know their intentions and that
we give no (rpt no) advice. It seems to me that some of Ala’s worries are
justified. I cld not (rpt not) therefore brush them lightly aside and sug-
gest he tell Shah he shld get rid of Mosadeq now. I therefore told Ala I
could appreciate his perplexities and was sorry I had no (rpt no) ready
answer for all of them. Before venturing offer any advice I wld like give
whole matter careful thought. Ala said he wld talk to me again in day
or two. He afraid however it already too late for Shah take any decisive
action before date set for Mosadeq’s departure.
3. I asked Ala who in his opinion seemed likely at this juncture to
succeed Mosadeq. He said number of candidates. Among old line poli-
ticians there were Qavam, Mansour and Hakimi. He did not (rpt not)
seem enthusiastic about these three. He said Entezam’s name was also
cropping up again. He spoke of Entezam in somewhat warmer tones.
Busheri was anxious for job. Maki also had been talking like a candi-
date to Shah. Ala seemed doubtful that either of these men had neces-
sary prestige. He said among Natl Front group Shah was particularly
impressed with Saleh. Shah liked Saleh’s courage and determination in
dealing with Kashani. Saleh seemed to have integrity as well as
strength. I expressed doubt re Saleh. I said I understood he was even
more stubborn than Mosadeq in matter oil dispute. It my under-
standing in past had displayed appeasement tendencies in dealing
