March 27–December 31, 1979
937
States to take the whole matter into its hands; he and his people were
ready to work with us.
6. In response to my probing, Sadat did not reveal any specific
ideas about how to move the negotiations forward. He reiterated his
earlier concept that there should be agreement on full autonomy for the
West Bank and Gaza and on Jerusalem, but that implementation in the
West Bank should be postponed because of its sensitivity for the Is-
raelis, while going forward in Gaza and Jerusalem. He acknowledged
that Jerusalem is also a sensitive issue but stressed its importance for
winning support of the Muslim world. Sadat also repeated his familiar
position that Israel wants King Hussein to take the West Bank and that
Israel and Hussein together could work this out, but that it must be
done in a way which permits the Palestinians to make their choice.
Somewhat contradictorily, Sadat said at another point that he had told
Begin that self-determination and an independent Palestinian state in
the West Bank and Gaza were inevitable but that this could be pat-
terned on the Austrian treaty providing for full neutrality and need not
be a threat to Israel. When I asked how Hussein might be brought into
the negotiations, Sadat said it was up to us to find a way but, in his
view, the key to Hussein was Saudi Arabia.
7. In view of Sadat’s emphasis on the need for the United States to
“take over,” I thought I should inject at the end a note of caution that,
while we must continue the effort, we had not found the answer to
making a breakthrough on the autonomy talks. I said I did not believe
anyone could convince Begin to modify his position at the present time.
I also took the occasion to emphasize strongly your full commitment to
the peace process and my commitment to continue my efforts unabated
as your representative, and to put to rest reports of any problems in the
personal and working relations between Cy Vance and myself.
8. While the bulk of our meeting was devoted to the subjects out-
lined above, Sadat also described the agreement reached with Begin on
forces in the Sinai,6 which differs in important respects from the version
we have had from General Ali but seems to accord with Begin’s ac-
count. On the other hand, Sadat’s description of the agreement reached
with Begin on the supply of oil to Israel7 conforms to what we have al-
ready heard on this subject from other Egyptian sources and from the
6 In telegram 18504, from Cairo, September 11, Atherton relayed Sadat’s account of
the agreement struck with Begin on observer forces in the Sinai. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 43, Robert Strauss, Middle East,
9/9–15/79)
7 In telegram 18503 from Cairo, September 11, Atherton relayed Sadat’s account of
his agreement with Begin on Egypt’s supply of oil to Israel. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790415–0160)
