894 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV up to a whole new requirement—­one and two “half-­wars” instead of one and one-­half.4 D. The “Simultaneity” Problem. Though DoD is doing its best to meet an added PG/IO requirement, even currently programmed RDF capabilities cannot cope with a Soviet threat at levels they could surely mount. Moreover, the forces, lift, and support we would have to employ against this PG/IO lift, and support we would have to employ against this PG/IO threat would be largely at the expense of our NATO and Far East capabilities, at least for the next several years. This raises the question of “simultaneity.” We must prudently hedge against the possibility that a direct US/Soviet clash in the PG/IO would escalate into a global conflict, whether or not we chose to escalate. There is a real question about the likelihood—­or attractiveness to the Soviets—­of mounting simultaneous attacks, as opposed to threats. If they did attack however, currently programmed US and allied resources would not permit adequate defense of three widely separated theaters simultaneously. We would have to go on the strategic defensive somewhere and perhaps sacrifice territory, as we had to do initially in WW II. Thus we must find strategic avenues for reducing the risks that regional conflict would expand into global war—­at times and under circumstances adverse to our vital interests. E. Serious economic constraints, including the impact of the energy crunch and other inflationary/slow growth pressures, severely constrict our ability to generate adequate defense growth—­despite growing popular perceptions that such growth is essential. F. Differing perceptions of the “threat” also create serious difficulties for us. Most of our friends simply don’t see the magnitude of the threat as we do, or if they do, quail at confronting it. The political consensus in most of them for greater defense efforts and a more assertive policy is weaker than in the US, particularly-­among the rising generation. Moreover, much of the world seems to think we’re still as strong as ever, but questions US leadership, while many others think we’ve sunk to second place. In both cases we confront a pervasive “image of the US” problem.5 What about the longer term? If we can deter conflict and restrict Soviet expansionism for another decade or so, there is reason to believe that internal Soviet contradictions will progressively limit Soviet ability to keep building up military power. Hence we probably do not face an unending arms race; rather our problem is how to get through a 4 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this sentence and an arrow pointing to it. 5 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to this and the previous sentence.
