Non-Proliferation
837
essing; Secondly, we intended to restructure our breeder reactor pro-
gram in such a way as to stress designs other than plutonium-related;
Third, we would redirect the funding of nuclear research and develop-
ment programs in such a way as to concentrate on alternative nuclear
fuel cycles that would not involve materials that could be used for
weapons purposes; Fourth, we planned to increase US production of
nuclear fuels. We believed that these steps will be constructive and that
they should be discussed in international fora, to see whether interna-
tional action could be taken to strengthen control on sensitive tech-
nology with the objective of stopping further proliferation. That in brief
was where we stood today. We would, of course, continue to urge
those who had not signed the NPT to sign and ratify the treaty in view
of its great importance. We would continue to encourage widest pos-
sible use and adherence to the treaty and urge strengthening and im-
proving safeguards for enforcing sanctions against violators of such a
treaty.
Gromyko said that he had listened to the Secretary’s communica-
tion on this issue with interest, and so had his colleagues. Soviet views
on this issue were as follows: the task of preventing nuclear war de-
manded most insistently that insuperable obstacles be placed in the
path of the spread of nuclear weapons. Above all, this was the task of
making the NPT, already in effect, truly all-embracing and universal. It
was well-known fact that countries such as the Peoples Republic of
China and France were outside the treaty; so were a significant number
of other countries. The Secretary knew this well and also surely knew
that there were some countries that were very close to starting the
building of their own nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union was pre-
pared, together with the United States, to continue efforts aimed at in-
suring that these and all other states so far outside the treaty become
parties to the treaty. Why could not our two countries think of some
new forms of influencing them, perhaps even on a trilateral basis (i.e.,
the US, the USSR, and UK) or on a bilateral basis only, with the Soviet
and US governments approaching the governments of non-participating
countries to speed up adherence to the treaty. Speaking quite frankly,
Gromyko would say that the Soviet side had not yet observed any ener-
getic measures on the part of the United States to exert its influence in
the right direction. It was quite true that occasionally some statements
were made urging adherence, but this was only a small part of what
could be done. He would not say that the United States had acted
wholeheartedly in this matter so far. The danger remained that non-
nuclear countries which received nuclear materials from other coun-
tries would utilize such materials for purposes of weapons develop-
ment. The Soviet Union was resolved to make sure that international
cooperation in this field and in the field of peaceful nuclear explosions
not become another channel for nuclear weapons proliferation. He was
