Afghanistan
883
334.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, November 19, 1980, 0615Z
3003. Subject: Situation in Afghanistan. Ref: Kabul 2962.2
1. (C—Entire text.)
2. Summary: The skies above Kabul have again been filled with
helicopters and other aircraft for the past few days as Soviet and Afghan
forces launched offensives against Mujaheddin in several parts of the
country. Some of this activity within 80 kilometers of Kabul has been
billed by the DRA as Afghan military maneuvers, but travelers report
that it is no exercise. The Shia day of deep mourning passed in Kabul
without major incident but the week witnessed several violent incidents
in and around the city, including the killing of an Afghan family by
marauding Soviet troops. Bus drivers on the route north of Mazar-i-
Sharif went on strike to protest the shooting of one of their number
by Soviet troops last week, and there have been attacks on convoys
along other major highways. Fragmentary reports from Herat and
Kandahar indicate that a Soviet offensive is also underway in those
large cities, where some knowledgeable diplomats claim Cuban troops
are stationed. The regime has dispatched party volunteers to mine coal
and collect firewood for delivery to Kabul for the approaching winter.
The party held its fourth plenum on November 11, followed by a series
of rather hysterical meetings urging support for the regime. The DRA
propaganda mill has stepped up its activities, especially against the
US, China and Pakistan, often using slanted or false material. Low-
level harassment of Mission personnel continues, and we still find it
difficult to obtain visas for new arrivals. End summary.
New Soviet offensive
3. The Soviets may have shifted their tactics in trying to crush the
ubiquitous but elusive Mujaheddin. On November 15 the DRA Ministry
of National Defense announced joint ground and air maneuvers in
Kabul, Parwan, Ghazni and Nangrahar Provinces beginning the next
day. Dozens of Soviet helicopters took to the air heading in those
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800553–0906.
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Islamabad, Moscow, and
New Delhi (also for RSS). Also sent for information to Ankara, Beijing, Bonn, Canberra,
Dacca, London, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, USUN, USNATO, CINCEUR, CINCPAC, and
CINCUSAREUR (military addressees also for POLADs). A copy of this cable was also
found in the Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 2, Afghan Sitreps 1980.
2 Telegram 2962 from Kabul, November 10, is an earlier situation report from the
Embassy. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800539–0495)
