Preface
XI
Carter’s nuclear non-proliferation initiatives, including his con-
cern that nuclear facilities and materials ostensibly meant for “peace-
ful” purposes could be diverted into weapons programs, worried U.S.
allies, in particularly Japan, who wanted to decrease their dependence
on oil imports by using nuclear energy. In Latin America, meanwhile,
Carter engaged allies in an attempt to prevent the proliferation of nu-
clear weapons. In the first three months of his administration, Carter’s
opposition to the Federal Republic of Germany’s (FRG) 1975 sale of a
nuclear reactor and plutonium technology to Brazil threatened to dis-
rupt U.S.–FRG and U.S.-Brazilian relations. Carter also followed
Mexico’s lead and spent much of his administration trying to convince
Brazil, Argentina, and Cuba to sign and/or ratify the 1968 Treaty of
Tlatelolco, which banned nuclear weapons throughout Latin America.
After much pressure from its European allies and developing nations,
the administration also devoted significant attention to the 1978 UN
Special Session on Disarmament
The majority of communication and policy making was done at the
Secretary of State/Foreign Minister or Ambassadorial levels. Cables
and memoranda of conversation thoroughly document these interac-
tions. Much of the correspondence was transmitted as cables through
embassies, not through the hotline that had become popular under
Nixon. Although Secretary of State Cyrus Vance met with Soviet offi-
cials both in Washington, D.C. and abroad, National Security Adviser
Zbigniew Brzezinski, a Soviet expert, clearly carved out a space for
himself and sought greater influence through his meetings with Soviet
officials and his communications with Carter as the administration pro-
gressed. Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, Secretary of Energy James
Schlesinger, and Carter’s Special Assistant for Non-Proliferation, Am-
bassador Gerard Smith (who had been Nixon’s Representative during
the SALT I talks) also emerged as significant players in the many inter-
agency arms control meetings. As a result, the hierarchy that was clear
during the Nixon administration was more complex during the Carter
years, in part because Carter sought to be receptive to and inclusive of a
variety of ideas and people.
Acknowledgments
The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the
Jimmy Carter Library, especially Ceri McCarron, Brittany Parris, and
James Yancey. Thanks are also due to Nancy Smith, then Director of the
Presidential Materials Staff at the National Archives and Records Ad-
ministration, and to the Central Intelligence Agency for arranging
access to the Carter Library materials scanned for the Remote Archive
Capture project. Special thanks are due to Ernest Emrich, who helped
facilitate access to the Harold Brown and James Schlesinger Papers at
the Library of Congress.
