540
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
avoid entanglement in the political arena, but on 11 April 1953 Zahedi
reported that Kashani, Borujerdi and Behbehani were reaching an un-
derstanding on the need to bolster the Shah in resistance to Mossadeq.6
About this same time two clerics who are also deputies in the Majlis
from Tabriz informed Borujerdi that the people of Azerbaijan were de-
manding that they leave the National Front because of Mossadeq’s atti-
tude toward the Shah. Borujerdi is alleged to have instructed them to
form a religious faction within the Majlis.
While it is extremely unlikely that he could be persuaded to take
such a step, were Borujerdi to call for the active support of the Shah his
spiritual associates could assemble a very large force of demonstrators
and influence public opinion to a very high degree.
c. Fedayan Islam
This group of fanatics, with a record of political assassinations, is
unfavorably disposed to Mossadeq and bitterly opposed to certain
members of his government. This small group is currently cool toward
Kashani, who is allegedly trying to establish good relations with them.
Quiet at present, this group may break out at any time. However, it is
not known how its leader, Navvab Safavi, may be influenced in any
specific direction.
6. Tribes
a. Qashqai
Two of the leaders of this most powerful of the Iranian tribes are
deputies in the Majlis. They have consistently given their support to
Mossadeq, largely because of their antipathy to the present Shah which
stems from the severe repression of the tribe by Reza Shah. At the same
time these leaders are reported to be on good terms with Zahedi. If of-
fered substantial political and economic benefits by Zahedi they might
remain passive in the event of the replacement of Mossadeq. Otherwise
they might resort to armed action—as in 1946—and so disrupt the in-
ternal security of southwestern Iran.
b. Other tribes
The Bakhtiari leaders would probably support Zahedi, as would
the Lur, Shahsevan, Khamseh and Zolfaghari tribal elements. The
Kurds would probably not take sides. It is unlikely that any of these
groups would take up arms, either in support of Mossadeq or of the
Shah.
6 See Document 193.
