Edwards has submitted motion to Commission to fix election date, and now
he is insistently demanding action under circumstances which give the
president of the Plebiscitary Commission no excuse for further delay.
Ambassador Cruchaga reported to me last evening that he had received
instructions from his Government to request postponement until Thursday
of meeting of the Plenipotentiaries which is scheduled for this afternoon. …
Request to postpone today’s meeting here until Thursday was evidently
made with full knowledge that decision in Arica was to be taken on
Wednesday. Chile apparently has no intention of negotiating for a
settlement. At meeting of Plenipotentiaries here on June 4 (Friday) I
obtained Chile’s formal rejection of my two general propositions: (1)
neutralization, (2) conveyance of entire territory to a third party. I also
obtained Peru’s acceptance in principle of corridor to Bolivia, territory
north of corridor to go to Peru and territory south of corridor to go to Chile,
without defining limits. Cruchaga declined to accept in principle, as
boundaries were not sufficiently defined, and also declined to make any
other proposition. Both Peruvian and Chilean Plenipotentiaries agreed to
consult their respective Governments and to present more specific
propositions on Monday; both specifically affirmed their desire to continue
negotiations. I have but slight hope that I can get Peru to accept any
proposition that will be presented.
At Ambassador Cruchaga’s request I had two and a half hour conference
with ex-President Alessandri, who asseverated that no settlement of any
kind could ever be put through Chilean Congress. When I explained in
detail that the proposition of good offices was suggested by Chile even to
details of settlement, Alessandri admitted it and said he had been unaware
of it until you had communicated facts to Foreign Office. I then showed him
Chilean Government’s last notes which I understood had been sent with
authority of Cabinet. He expressed much amazement and said that even that
settlement could never be put through Congress. … I said that it was for
General Lassiter in the first instance to make any decision as to what should
be done; that of course it could come to the Arbitrator by appeal; and that
all information I had received from Pershing, Lassiter, and their advisers
made it seem impossible that they could hold a unilateral election. I called
his attention to 16 separate assaults and outrages committed on Peruvians
