September 18–December 16, 1978 269 President Carter: We want to move as rapidly as possible after October 10th. If you have any messages send them directly to me. I hope we can resolve the place for the negotiations. President Sadat: I have no preference at all. I will leave that to you. 74. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, September 29, 1978 SUBJECT Consultations on Lebanon At his press conference on September 28, the President referred to the possibility of “a conference of those who are involved” in Lebanon, “primarily the people who live in Lebanon, the different factions there.” He also mentioned a “new charter” for Lebanon and some form of UN action, presumably in promoting a conference of interested parties. (See the attached portions of the press conference.)2 In response to questions, we have been saying that the President’s statement does not constitute a formal proposal. We will be consulting with the Lebanese government and others on possible next steps to alleviate the crisis in Lebanon.3 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Chron File, Box 135, Quandt: 9/78. Secret. Sent for information. 2 Attached but not printed are the portions of Carter’s press conference related to Lebanon, in which he responded to a question regarding the situation in Lebanon by suggesting the convening of a multinational conference to resolve the crisis. According to Quandt, Carter’s response was an “offhand reference.” (Quandt, Camp David, p. 267) The complete transcript of the press conference is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 1653–1663. 3 On the evening of September 27, heavy fighting, including artillery fire, erupted in East Beirut between Christian militia and Syrian forces, killing six and wounding 50. Militia officials blamed the Syrians for the skirmish, which they described as the worst since the July 1978 bombardment of East Beirut, stating the move was intended to disrupt the Camp David Accords. This charge was countered by a communique´ from the largely Syrian Arab League peacekeeping force faulting the militia for the violence, adding that it “cannot go too far in its toleration” and “will regretfully find itself forced to silence sources of fire effectively and quickly wherever they are found.” (“Beirut Erupts; Syrians Accused of Attempting to Wreck Accords,” Los Angeles Times, September 29, 1978, p. 11)
