1980 897 Issue #3—How can we best fill the PG/IO power vacuum? If this is our top priority need through the mid-80s, we must develop a more credible surge capability. Given the political and military constraints on deployable Allied power, this has to be primarily a US task—­with only modest help from our European or FE Allies. But within current budget guidelines we could not deploy sufficient force rapidly enough, and support it adequately, to offer much confidence of credible defense if deterrence failed. For example, even under present program guidelines the 31⁄3 division, 4 tacair wing, RDF currently programmed will still lack important elements, especially sufficient lift, support, and munitions—­and the basing structure programmed would be marginal. Moreover, DoD believes an adequately supported force of at least 61⁄3 divisions plus seven air wings is needed to pose a credible US ability to counter Soviet intervention should it in fact take place.11 There is also a critical lack of the fast air and sealift needed to surge to the PG in timely enough fashion to maximize deterrence or minimize Soviet gains. Are we willing to pay this price? Moreover, even if we develop such capabilities, they cannot be used effectively without forward bases in the area. This is the weakest single element of our emerging PG/IO strategy. Because the area countries are so strongly opposed to US bases, we are compelled to build ungarrisoned facilities which they presumably would allow us to use once they perceived an imminent threat.12 Saudi Arabia is key in this respect—­both as the largest oil producer and the geographic locale from which we could most effectively deter or defend against a Soviet move into Iran/Iraq. Since the Gulf states may not let us deploy until the last moment, we also need staging bases in the region (which can serve as less vulnerable rear logistic bases too). Egypt looks like the best bet.13 But this uncomfortable dependence on PG/IO states with whom we lack a firm alliance relationship dictates a major effort to improve our relations with them. Here the lack of an Arab-Israeli settlement makes our task more difficult. Israel’s efforts to strengthen her own security position risk exacerbating the Arab/Israeli dispute at the very time when we seek to get the Arab states to focus on the Soviet threat. DoD believes it may be necessary to provide such firm security assurances (and sufficient aid) to Israel as to calm her legitimate fears (and 11 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right margin next to the portion of this sentence beginning with “believes” and ending with “credible” and an arrow pointing to it. 12 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence. 13 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this sentence and a checkmark in the right margin.
