1254
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Sadat had made the second announcement about a further
postponement or suspension of the autonomy negotiations.3 Both an-
nouncements came to all of us as a complete surprise.
You will recall that at the end of the last round of talks4 in Herzliya
on May 7 the three delegations affirmed that the intensified negotia-
tions, as agreed upon in the wake of your conversations with President
Sadat and myself, would continue in Cairo on May 12. A day later,
without prior consultation, President Sadat decided to postpone the
date of the continuing talks to which we had all agreed.
In his speech to the Egyptian Parliament on May 14,5 President
Sadat declared that in response to your personal request he had de-
cided to renew the negotiations. However, on the following day, he
again surprisingly announced yet a further postponement.
On Sunday afternoon, May 18, I received from our Ambassador in
Cairo President Sadat’s personal message6 to me in which he listed
three main complaints: The private Member’s Bill in the Knesset per-
taining to Jerusalem as the Capital of Israel which elicited the almost
universal consensus of the House,7 a statement made by our Minister of
Agriculture8 in one of the negotiating sessions concerning the settle-
ments in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District, and the latest measures
in Judea and Samaria. I assume, Mr. President, that the Egyptians pro-
vided you with the contents of that message so I will not go into its
details.
In my reply to President Sadat, dispatched today, I conveyed to
him the following. I wrote that the aforementioned Jerusalem Bill does
not differ whatsoever in its contents from the letter I communicated to
you on September 17, 1978, at Camp David. I, likewise, drew his atten-
tion to the Resolution on Jerusalem adopted on April 1, 1980 by the
Egyptian Parliament which completely contradicts our innermost be-
liefs. Israel did not, however, because of that Resolution, interrupt the
negotiations.
On the matter relating to Minister Sharon, he legitimately made a
statement in the course of the talks regarding our settlements. The
Egyptian delegation voiced objections as did our delegation over Gen-
eral Ali’s statement on security issues which we found to be totally
unacceptable.
3 See footnote 2, Document 372.
4 For a summary of the talks, see Document 368.
5 See footnote 3, Document 369.
6 See Document 373.
7 Carter underlined “which elicited the almost universal consensus of the House”
and wrote “!” in the right-hand margin next to this phrase.
8 Ariel Sharon.
