International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
185
exports, this “decline” in “competitiveness” may presently be having
some adverse effect on manufacturing exports and may continue to do
so for the next year or so.
However, Treasury points out that since early 1976 U.S. inflation
has been lower than the average inflation rates experienced by our
major trading partners and, therefore, in terms of relative prices the
U.S. has probably made some small gains in “competitiveness” re-
cently. Commerce also notes that most foreign governments do consid-
erably more to promote and even subsidize exports than does the U.S.
The U.S. share of world manufacturing exports was 20.3% in 1976,
down from 21.2% in the cyclically high year of 1975 but up from the
19.1% historic low point of 1972.
IMPLICATIONS OF THE TRADE DEFICIT
1. Economic Implications. Lagging exports have an obvious adverse
effect on economic growth, jobs, and Federal tax revenues. To the ex-
tent that the sharp increase in imports (at a time when U.S. unemploy-
ment and excess capacity are high) is due to unfair competition from
abroad, U.S. industry is being hurt and domestic production impaired.
Beyond these truisms, there is general agreement that it is appropriate in-
ternational economic policy for the U.S. to be running a current account def-
icit at this time. The questions relate to the causes, size, and persistence
of the deficit and our ability to sustain it over time, if necessary,
without adverse economic or political fallout.
Commerce believes that “persistent, excessive” U.S. trade deficits
would tend to create uncertainty and instability in the world and U.S.
economies, with attendant political risks.
Treasury notes that the ratio of the present current account deficit
to U.S. GNP is about the same as that for the OECD as a whole (about
1% in each case) and that the U.S., with its strong economy and capital
markets and stable political system, is better able to finance and
manage a deficit than almost all other countries. Treasury believes that
our focus should be on reducing the oil problem and urging the other
“strong” countries to expand their economies, that the U.S. competitive
position remains strong, and that the U.S. should not take measures
which would attempt to improve our trade balance at the expense of
our trading partners.
2. Political-Psychological Implications. To some, a trade deficit and a
depreciating dollar are inherent signs of weakness. To others, they are
potent arguments for import restraints (which, in turn, could severely
jeopardize our efforts to control inflation). Although these views may
have to be met in the political arena with public education, they are
without economic merit. Short run “fixes” for the trade deficit (e.g., im-
port restrictions or slowing down economic growth through monetary
