186  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
attributable to laxity on this score. The arguments for not hastening 
either side into a tightly frozen position, and for avoiding aggravations 
which might lead to the rupture which we must constantly strive to 
avoid, are extremely cogent. The feeling now is that perhaps at this 
stage we should not have three meetings a week. The tempo of devel­
opments is not sufficiently rapid to justify such frequent meetings. It 
may be that meetings should be held no more frequently than twice a 
week. It would be useful to have your reaction to this. We recognize it 
is a delicate business. We must avoid giving the impression that we are 
stalling, as well as the impression that we are not pressing to the maxi­
mum on Americans. At the same time we must balance this against the 
danger of too frequent sessions leading up to a situation which might 
become somewhat comparable to that which Dean ran into at Panmun­
jom in November and early December, 1953.
You will have noted O’Neill’s misgivings from Peiping. It is signif­
icant that the British are almost more skeptical of Chinese Communist 
“performance” than we are. O’Neill thinks there would be a strong pos­
sibility of bad faith on the part of the Chinese Communists when only a 
few Chinese express a desire to return to the mainland.
The loopholes which we have necessarily left in the announcement 
in order to protect Chinese in this country would make it easy for the 
Chinese Communists to prevent some Americans from informing the 
British Embassy of a desire to return to this country. Undoubtedly he 
wishes his Embassy could be given authority to get in touch with the 
Americans on its own initiative. We wish it could be done too. But how, 
without departing from our basic principle on Chinese in this country?
Your reporting is giving us the best possible visualization of 
what you are up against. We feel that your reports and analyses have 
imparted to us a good understanding of the Chinese Communist strat­
egy as well as tactics. There is nothing but praise for your handling of 
the appalling difficulties, along with a keen desire to uphold your hand 
in every way we can.
Your letter of August 19 came through promptly and was most 
helpful. The appropriate portions got the needed circulation to the 
interested parties.
Walter Robertson will be out all of next week too. He is still in Rich­
mond, bothered with bronchitis. Bill Sebald is nobly carrying a heavy 
load on Geneva, the Shigemitsu visit, and a myriad of other things. He 
sends his best to you.
Regards and all the best,
Sincerely,
