690
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
The USSR’s growing military and security involvement has been
necessitated by the continued disintegration of the Afghan forces. The
Afghan army currently has little more than 30,000 men; it is question-
able whether it could field more than 10,000 at any one time. Soviet
military officials in Afghanistan have reportedly complained about
the Afghan army’s disarray and have expressed grave doubts about
its loyalty.
No Change in Sight
The current situation in Afghanistan—and the likelihood that it
will continue for some time—raises the question of whether the Soviets
are approaching the point at which they will have to decide to increase
substantially their military commitment in order to eradicate the insur-
gency once and for all or pursue some sort of political solution that
would allow them to extricate themselves from what is quickly becom-
ing the Afghan quagmire. While there are indications that at least
individual officials in the Soviet ministry of foreign affairs and military
have grave doubts about the wisdom of the present Soviet course, there
are no signs that Moscow is now seriously rethinking its policy. Indeed,
the present situation in Afghanistan may well have confirmed the
Soviet leadership in the wisdom of its decision to intervene in the first
place on the grounds that if the USSR had not, the situation would be
far worse.
Despite Moscow’s insistence that it is in favor of a political solution
to the Afghan problem, the Soviets have rebuffed any initiatives requir-
ing compromises on their part and have meanwhile stiffened their
own maximalist position. In discussions in March with the French and
British, for example, the Soviets insisted that the US and Afghanistan’s
neighbors must “guarantee” that all outside interference in Afghanistan
has ceased, and would not resume, before Moscow would even con-
sider withdrawing its troops. Lately, they hinted that any solution must
include the entire region and that “guarantees” of non-intervention
must also include Iran.
Over the last two months, the Soviets have made it clear that the
Afghan Marxist revolution is an historical fact and must be preserved
and protected. Their public support for the Babrak Karmal regime as
the only legitimate government of Afghanistan has been complete,
though rumors abound that they are seeking a more effective Afghan
puppet than Babrak. In reply to Western and Iranian proposals to
discuss the “neutralization” of Afghanistan, Moscow has insisted that
neither the “socialist” nature of the Afghan government nor its interna-
tional status can be open for outsiders to negotiate.
At the same time, the Soviets are attempting to portray the Karmal
regime as the effective government if Afghanistan capable of carrying
