Covert and Overt Operations
761
4. CIA Testimony. Admiral Turner is to testify tomorrow at 11:00
a.m. on the rescue mission before the Oversight Committee.4 The Com-
mittee is outraged at efforts to keep them from learning about covert
actions taken (and money spent) on support of the later phases of the
rescue operation. They insist they have a statutory right to be informed,
and retaliation by cutting off or reducing the Reserve Fund is a likely
consequence of refusing information. [5 lines not declassified]
This question raised the entire issue of whether or not we could
or should continue to hold to the line of not discussing any aspects of
the operation after Phase I.5 Mr. Claytor noted that the Defense wit-
nesses were getting very tough treatment in the Congress on their
refusal to discuss anything after Phase I. We are being seriously dam-
aged by the torrent of press leaks, which give the impression that
everyone is learning of the operation except the Congress. There is
great pressure to confirm or deny information appearing in the press.
Evans and Novak intend to publish a column tomorrow indicating
that the Administration is out of control and damaging U.S. security
by lack of discipline on leaks.6 It is impossible for the DCI to discuss
aspects of the operation after Phase I while denying comparable treat-
ment to the Armed Services Committees. There is also the question of
whether the Iranians have access to compromised information that we
are unwilling to share with the Congress. (S)
The SCC agreed to go back to the President with a request that he
reconsider his instructions not to discuss activities of the post-Phase I
operation. Massive leaks are destroying the credibility of this approach,
and we are being seriously hurt in Congress where it appears we have
something to hide. Press interest has died down, but the pressure in
Congress is growing stronger. All recognized that, once the point is
breached, it will be difficult if not impossible to prevent additional
details of the operation from leaking out. There are several specific
aspects which could and should be protected, however: (1) the use of
foreign facilities, [less than 1 line not declassified]; (2) identification and
location of airfields to be used inside Iran; (3) specific details about
4 Turner’s prepared testimony before the Senate and House Intelligence Committees
is in Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job
82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 14, Folder 1. The declassified JCS report on the
hostage rescue operation was submitted to the Senate Armed Services Committee under
a May 6 covering memorandum from Brown. (Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of
Staff Records, RG 218–07–0002, Records of J–3 DDSO, Box 11, Iranian Hostage Crisis
1979–1984, [unfoldered material]) Vaught’s prepared remarks before the Senate Armed
Services Committee, May 7, are ibid.
5 Phase I was that part of the mission up to and including Desert One.
6 “The New Leakers” by Rowland Evans and Robert Novak who wrote the widely
syndicated political column “Inside Report.” (Washington Post, May 7, 1980, p. A19)
