Human Rights —Cooperation with Human Rights Lobby. Since there is an increasingly active, vocal, and influential human rights lobby operating on the Hill, the Department should complement its efforts with the Congress with efforts to meet and talk with representatives of the more important human rights organizations in town: the new Washington office of Amnesty International (AI), the Washington Office for Latin America (WOLA), the National Catholic Conference, B’nai B’rith, and the Coalition for a New Foreign Military Policy. —Use of Fellowship Program: Encourage State Department recipients of Congressional Fellowships to work with known Congressional advocates of human rights such as Fraser, Koch, Harkin, Reuss, Cranston, Kennedy, etc. —Two Caveats. First, no strategy of consultations will be effective unless we have a consistent policy to explain. Second, we must stress promotion of human rights as a joint Executive-Legislative Branch enterprise. Since there may well be short-term costs (at home and abroad) for this policy, we will want Congress aware of potential costs, ready to share responsibility with us during rough periods, and thus able to provide the most enduring consensus for our human rights policy. Action Being Taken —H—assisted by D/HA, L, and S/P—following up on the above outline with a six-month plan for working with the Congress to promote human rights. (Due to the Deputy Secretary by April 10.) 6. Multilateral Diplomacy The US should put increased effort into working with other nations and using multilateral mechanisms to further human rights. Dealing through multilateral channels has the advantages of reducing the image of the US as the moralistic mother-in-law of the world and enlisting the force/leverage of international opinion behind the cause. At the United Nations, our general approach should include: —Factoring human rights into all US activities at the United Nations, not just for those occasions (such as meetings of the Human Rights Commission—HRC) when it is specifically on the agenda. —Determining before both the convening of a new session of the General Assembly and each major UN conference, a few priority human rights issues for special US attention—ones either important to us or ripe for forward movement. —Consulting early and often with close allies and, when possible, with non-aligned nations, to identify issues of shared concern and forge appropriate coalitions.
