8  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
petroleum loan policy (Tab C), and financial assistance (Tab D) are 
transmitted herewith. A supporting paper on coffee is being revised 
and will be ready in two days. It will be Tab E.3
3. Early in March we obtained approval from all geographic 
bureaus on the draft then submitted. Changes since then have been 
so minor that I think it need not be resubmitted. The Planning Staff 
and Ambassador Randall also approved. Ambassador Dreier approved 
but commented that the changes from existing policy mean little more 
than a “willingness to study these problems”. He hoped we could gain 
credit for a positive decision by announcing a new policy.
4. The Task Force does not presume to say how the new policy 
should be announced if the Secretary approves thereof. It is my hope 
that there will be no announcements of policy change but that we will 
forge ahead with action bit by bit until, a few months hence, Latin 
America will wake up to the realization that a somewhat changed spirit 
animates our relationship. I should hope that we would then say that 
we have always had this sense of solidarity: it only seems to be greater 
now when the worsened economic situation of our neighbors requires 
greater efforts by the United States to help them.
Attachment
Review of U.S. Economic Policies Toward Latin America4
Washington, undated.
Problem
What changes should be made in U.S. economic policies toward 
Latin America as a result of the decline in commodity prices, the open-
ing of a Soviet economic offensive in this area, and the rise of protec-
tionist sentiment in the U.S.?
Summary
This memorandum deals with financial assistance, commodity 
and trade problems, and policy toward Latin American trade with the 
Sino-Soviet Bloc.
With respect to commodity and trade problems, the most signifi-
cant recommendations are the following, which place increased empha-
sis on possible commodity study groups or stabilization arrangements: 
(1) adopt, if possible, measures other than tariff increases to provide 
3 None of the supporting papers mentioned here are printed, except Tab C.
4 The source text is marked “Final Draft.”
