Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 285 against perestroika in the Soviet Union. I’m convinced that there is no such organization here. Lt Gen Scowcroft: No, there’s not. There is, however, still a natural caution. There’s still much suspicion on both sides. Marshal Akhromeyev: There are still bilateral areas to work hard on. We can’t eliminate them all right away. Lt Gen Scowcroft: I was very encouraged by your approach to the conventional arms race. If we can implement the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) agreement, this will be a major step towards removing mutual suspicion. Marshal Akhromeyev: On the START Talks, we both have made major progress, but there are still unresolved issues. They impact on critical interests. The easy ones concerning principal are all taken care of. The U.S. has one set of questions while we have another set. What is the best way to resolve outstanding issues? We need tradeoffs to make progress at START. Lt Gen Scowcroft: I don’t disagree at all. The remaining issues are: 1) SLCMs 2) SDI program. Marshal Akhromeyev: No, we say SDI is purely a U.S. problem. We are only concerned about territorial ABM concerns. Lt Gen Scowcroft: The other issue is 3) Bomber counting problems. Do you see any others? Marshal Akhromeyev: These are major outstanding issues. A future agreement will depend on resolution of these three major issues. Lt Gen Scowcroft: It will not be easy. Marshal Akhromeyev: That’s right. These are not minor questions. We’ve spent much money. There are also cynics—­some simply don’t want weapons eliminated or reduced and others are the producers of the weapons. Admiral Crowe: There were comments made at the House Armed Services Committee hearings about mobile missiles and the elimination of all nuclear SLCMs. Marshal Akhromeyev: You heard these questions from the earliest stages. You know the full history. Those two issues were never resolved by SALT II. We left the negotiating table and put on boxing gloves. Now, mobiles and cruise missiles are no longer limited as had been designated by the SALT II protocols. These are now the weapons systems causing us trouble. Both of us have these systems deployed. We have mobile missiles and you don’t, while you have cruise missiles deployed. A trade off may be possible along these lines. Lt Gen Scowcroft: I assume all that we say is personal, not official. Marshal Akhromeyev: That’s right, we’re simply exploring.
