1134 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI gentina would not meet its commitments, and believed that their controls (which Bindschedler spelled out) excluded Argentina’s capitalizing on Swiss technology to produce unsafeguarded special nuclear material. Swiss were strongly of the view that Argentina could build a heavy water plant itself, and thus escape all controls, if Switzerland went too far with its conditions. Weitnauer noted that if there is press discussion in the US on this point, Switzerland can regard itself on safe ground. He noted that the Swiss have done their “utmost.” 9. Smith emphasized that the US was not suggesting an embargo on the sale of Swiss heavy water technology to Argentina. He urged that, as we work on development of a more comprehensive post- INFCE regime we not prejudice future negotiations by permitting Argentina to develop an unsafeguarded capability. He noted that Argentina is prepared to pay a half billion dollars more to buy reactors from the FRG in order to avoid the ful-scope safeguard required by Canada for the same transaction. (Von Arx noted Argentines had experienced huge overrun in earlier Canadian reactor sale, and that this had been reason they gave little credence to low Canadian bid.) 10. Swiss pointed out that Pakistan is clearly a special case where there is near term danger. They do not see Argentina as in the same category. Von Arx indicated that Switzerland had urged Argentina to ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco but does not believe it will do so until Cuba does and the US ratifies Protocol I. He noted that Argentina has expressed concern that supplementary inspection rights held by OPANAL could threaten commercial secrets. Van Doren later returned to this subject and urged that Swiss make clear that they are proceeding on the understanding that Argentines will fulfill their public and private commitments to ratify Tlatelolco and promptly complete the safeguards agreement called for on that Treaty. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Argentina.] 12. Comment: [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Argentina.] As to renegotiating their exchange of letters with Argentina, Swiss appeared immovable. They do not share US assessment regarding Argentina’s intentions and feel they have taken every step required of them to prevent misuse of technology they supply. But they did say they would continue to urge Tlatelolco ratification and would consult with FRG and compare notes on these respective safeguards approaches. They are, moreover, prepared to work with the US and others to develop a comprehensive system in which full-scope safeguards will be the future norm. Vine. unqte. Vance
