1134
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
gentina would not meet its commitments, and believed that their con-
trols (which Bindschedler spelled out) excluded Argentina’s capi-
talizing on Swiss technology to produce unsafeguarded special nuclear
material. Swiss were strongly of the view that Argentina could build a
heavy water plant itself, and thus escape all controls, if Switzerland
went too far with its conditions. Weitnauer noted that if there is press
discussion in the US on this point, Switzerland can regard itself on safe
ground. He noted that the Swiss have done their “utmost.”
9. Smith emphasized that the US was not suggesting an embargo
on the sale of Swiss heavy water technology to Argentina. He urged
that, as we work on development of a more comprehensive post-
INFCE regime we not prejudice future negotiations by permitting Ar-
gentina to develop an unsafeguarded capability. He noted that Argen-
tina is prepared to pay a half billion dollars more to buy reactors from
the FRG in order to avoid the ful-scope safeguard required by Canada
for the same transaction. (Von Arx noted Argentines had experienced
huge overrun in earlier Canadian reactor sale, and that this had been
reason they gave little credence to low Canadian bid.)
10. Swiss pointed out that Pakistan is clearly a special case where
there is near term danger. They do not see Argentina as in the same cat-
egory. Von Arx indicated that Switzerland had urged Argentina to
ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco but does not believe it will do so until
Cuba does and the US ratifies Protocol I. He noted that Argentina has
expressed concern that supplementary inspection rights held by
OPANAL could threaten commercial secrets. Van Doren later returned
to this subject and urged that Swiss make clear that they are proceeding
on the understanding that Argentines will fulfill their public and pri-
vate commitments to ratify Tlatelolco and promptly complete the safe-
guards agreement called for on that Treaty.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Argentina.]
12. Comment:
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Argentina.] As to renego-
tiating their exchange of letters with Argentina, Swiss appeared im-
movable. They do not share US assessment regarding Argentina’s in-
tentions and feel they have taken every step required of them to
prevent misuse of technology they supply. But they did say they would
continue to urge Tlatelolco ratification and would consult with FRG
and compare notes on these respective safeguards approaches. They
are, moreover, prepared to work with the US and others to develop a
comprehensive system in which full-scope safeguards will be the fu-
ture norm. Vine. unqte.
Vance
