1238  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
gone directly from a three-­hour meeting with Mr. Mann to the White 
Palace to participate in a ceremony announcing the income tax reform, 
without having even mentioned to Mr. Mann the reason for his depar-
ture from the meeting.
An additional reason why consultation would have been expected 
is the fact that the action of the Venezuelan Government could have 
far-­reaching repercussions in other areas of the world, Mr. Rubottom 
stated. He asked that the Ambassador report to his Government the 
serious concern of the United States over the action it had taken.
The Venezuelan Ambassador declared that he had no expla-
nation of the lack of advance discussion with the United States of 
the action taken by his Government. He said he was certain that his 
Government’s action, and its failure to consult with us, did not imply 
that his Government did not value highly the friendship and good will 
of the United States. He assured Mr. Rubottom that the Government’s 
action did not mean that his Government did not appreciate the impor-
tance of consultation. He thought that the reason the tax reform was 
announced without consultation or other advance notification was that 
it was considered a matter of extreme urgency. He referred to the eco-
nomic problems and unpaid debts inherited from the Pérez Jiménez 
Government and the unbalanced budget for the current fiscal year. He 
said Venezuela’s need for additional funds was imperative and that 
action before the end of this calendar year was considered necessary in 
order to obtain the benefits of the higher tax rates on 1958 income. He 
mentioned also the fact that the foreign loan of $225 million approved 
by the Provisional Government had been delayed until Congress con-
vened in January.
The Ambassador called attention to the statements by the Ministers 
of Mines and Treasury concerning the income tax reform, and repeated 
the most significant points made in the statements. He reiterated his 
Government’s position that the tax revision was an internal matter and 
entirely within the sovereign power of Venezuela. He characterized the 
statement issued on December 22 by Mr. H. W. Haight, President of the 
Creole Petroleum Corporation, as somewhat violent (“una poca vio-
lenta”) and as unfortunate. He attempted to refute the claim made by 
Mr. Haight that the new tax rates would affect the costs of the oil com-
panies or impair Venezuela’s competitive position in the world petro-
leum market.
The Ambassador repeated Mr. Rubottom’s expression of serious 
concern several times in order to make certain that he would interpret to 
his Government precisely the attitude of the United States. In response 
to Mr. Rubottom’s request, he promised to ask his Government for 
additional information on the background and meaning of the action 
it had taken.
