Romania 701 220. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, January 22, 1980 SUBJECT Designation of David Newsom as a Presidential Emissary to Romania (C) State recommends that David Newsom be designated as Presidential Emissary to Romania2 and that he stop-off in Bucharest on his return from London to deliver a Presidential Message to Ceausescu. The message is at Tab A.3 It has been cleared with the speechwriters. (C) I support this recommendation. Ceausescu has condemned the invasion of Afghanistan in several recent speeches, and Romania was the only Warsaw Pact country not to vote against the Resolution in the General Assembly condemning the invasion. At the same time Ceausescu is understandably nervous about the implications of Soviet actions in Afghanistan, particularly in light of Tito’s deteriorating health, and he has requested a high-level U.S. visit as soon as possible.4 (C) A visit by Newsom as Presidential Emissary would quietly demonstrate our support for Romania in a low-key, non-provocative manner and would provide an opportunity for us to present our views on Iran and Afghanistan directly to Ceausescu. It would also serve as an indirect signal to Yugoslavia of our continued interest in stability and security in the Balkans generally. (C) RECOMMENDATION: That you sign the Presidential message at Tab A.5 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nicolae Ceausescu, 1/79–6/80. Confidential. Sent for action. 2 The recommendation was made in a memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski dated January 19 and forwarded to Brzezinski by Larrabee on January 21. (Ibid.) 3 Attached but not printed. 4 In telegram 253 from Bucharest, January 12, the Embassy reported that the Romanian Government hoped to welcome a visit by a high-level U.S. official to Bucharest in light of the international situation. The Embassy reported: “President Ceausescu and especially Andrei feel let down by the postponement of the Secretary’s visit in December and the abortion of Counselor Nimetz’s visit last week. Although they appreciate the sound reasons for these changes, these do not compensate for the psychological loss of support a high-level US mission to Bucharest at a time of strained relations with the USSR. They remember the success of former Treasury Secretary Blumenthal’s visit here in December 1978.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800021–0413) 5 Carter signed the letter on January 24. See footnote 3, Document 221. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nicolae Ceausescu, 1/79–6/80)
