August 8–September 17, 1978
161
unity of Lebanon and the continued existence of the Lebanese state. He
pledged that Syrian forces would practice a maximum degree of self-
control while efforts are being exerted to help the Lebanese reach a
solution. The remainder of the letter is a catalogue of the Syrian in-
volvement in the Lebanese crisis, highlighting the activities of the
Chamounists and Phalangists in blocking reconciliation or rebuilding
the national army. Assad called attention to the Israeli role in encour-
aging these two groups, and urged the US to exert pressure on Israel to
stop interfering in Lebanon. In delivering the text the presidency high-
lighted Assad’s public statements on Syria’s Lebanon policy in German
interview (septel),4 including Syria’s intention to withdraw the minute
they are requested to by the Lebanese Government. End summary.
1. President’s Private Secretary, Mohammed Dabboul, delivered to
me September 11 President Assad’s response to President Carter’s Sep-
tember 7 letter on Lebanon. The response is forthcoming. Text of letter
follows.
[Begin] text.
His Excellency Mr. Jimmy Carter
President of the United States of America
Dear Mr. President
I have received your letter dated September 7, and while I share
your concern over the sad events that are taking place in the sister
country of Lebanon, I would point out the following:
1. Since the very start of civil fighting in Lebanon in April 1975 and
until the beginning of June 1976, we exerted great political efforts to
stop acts of violence and to restore calm and stability to the sister
country of Lebanon. However, those political efforts in which other
parties—Arab and foreign—sometimes participated failed and the civil
war continued: hundreds of people were killed daily, villages and city
quarters were destroyed, the state of Lebanon collapsed, the army and
the security forces disintegrated and partition became a factual thing
and the talk of all parties. Indeed, some of these parties made practical
arrangements for the setting up of petty sectarian states and Syria re-
ceived one million Lebanese refugees.
2. Together these events produced grave results which threatened
the unity and independence of Lebanon and the integrity of its terri-
tory. The sovereignty of the State was shattered into fragments that fell
into the hands of various parties. In those difficult circumstances and
while the fighting was favoring one party, we realized that the continu-
ation of the fighting, the imbalance of forces and a victory by one party
4 See telegram 5334 from Damascus, September 11. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D780369–1067)
