of propaganda, are permitted to influence the withdrawal of their property
from taxation, we shall have a law that is unbalanced and unjust, bad for
business, bad for the country, probably resulting in a deficit, with disastrous
financial consequences. The Constitution has given the Members of the
Congress sole authority to decide what tax measures shall be presented for
approval. While welcoming information from any quarter, the Congress
should continue to exercise its own judgment in a matter so vital and
important to all the interests of the country as taxation.
NATIONAL DEFENSE
Being a nation relying not on force, but on fair dealing and good will, to
maintain peace with others, we have provided a moderate military force in a
form adapted solely to defense. It should be continued with a very generous
supply of officers and with the present base of personnel, subject to
fluctuations which may be temporarily desirable.
The five-year program for our air forces is in keeping with this same policy
and commensurate with the notable contributions of America to the science
of aeronautics. The provisions of the law lately enacted are being executed
as fast as the practical difficulties of an orderly and stable development
permit.
While our Army is small, prudence requires that it should be kept in a high
state of efficiency and provided with such supplies as would permit of its
immediate expansion. The garrison ration has lately been increased.
Recommendations for an appropriation of $6,166,000 for new housing
made to the previous Congress failed to pass. While most of the Army is
well housed, some of it which is quartered in war-time training camps is
becoming poorly housed. In the past three years $12,533,000 have been
appropriated for reconstruction and repairs, and an authorization has been
approved of $22,301,000 for new housing, under which $8,070,000 has
already been appropriated. A law has also been passed, complying with the
request of the War Department, allocating funds received from the sale of
buildings and land for housing purposes. The work, however, is not
completed, so that other appropriations are being recommended.
