Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX would bring the parties more closely together. Yugoslavia feared that if the present stagnation persisted the policy of the Rejectionist Front6 would take a negative direction and find support on the other side. This could lead to a very serious problem in a part of the world that was very vulnerable. In Yugoslavia’s opinion, it would be worthwhile if the United States showed patience in order to build up confidence and trust within the Rejectionist Front. He suggested that the U.S. should listen to the suggestions of the Rejectionist Front, at least as a sort of gesture. At some point, this might pay off. (C) President Carter replied that there were two key points to any resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict: —Commitment to Israel’s security and —Resolution of Palestinian rights. He noted that it would be helpful if the PLO would change its avowed position on the destruction of Israel and accept UN Resolution 242. Their failure to do this was an important obstacle to any settlement. He again stressed that the United States would welcome and appreciate any help Yugoslavia could give to help it improve relations with countries of the Rejectionist Front, especially Iraq. In this connection, he mentioned Dr. Brzezinski’s visit to Algeria which had been aimed at improving relations with that country.7 In conclusion, he noted that U.S. and Yugoslav views coincided but that the PLO had to accept UN Resolution 242. (C) Foreign Minister Vrhovec interjected that Yugoslavia had already discussed these matters with Iraq. In principle, Iraq was ready to normalize relations but they posed some restrictions. He also noted that President Qadhafi had recently contacted Yugoslavia and expressed his interest in meeting with President Carter to resolve U.S.-Libyan problems and had signaled his desire for a normalization of U.S.-Libyan relations. (C) President Mijatovic then turned to the question of Iran. He noted that Yugoslavia didn’t agree with the holding of the hostages. The leadership was aware that this was a sensitive problem for the American people and others, and they had made this clear to Iran. He stressed, however, that actions which made Iran nervous could have the opposite effect. The forces in Iran were not united and any action which increased 6 Front of the Palestinian Forces Rejecting Solutions of Surrender. The group formed in 1974 and rejected the Palestinian Liberation Organization “Ten Point” Program adopted that year, which called for the establishment of a Palestinian state over any piece of Palestinian territory under PLO control.
