860
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
problems. First and foremost, it could have a negative impact on the
manufacture of aircraft, the development of sophisticated anti-tank
missiles and our drive to introduce a higher degree of modern tech-
nology and know-how. I believe that you do not want to see this hap-
pening. I also believe that the United States can step in and take part
with us in this operation in one form or the other. To contain the nega-
tive impact of such reckless move on their part, we have turned the Or-
ganization into an Egyptian institution. Joint U.S.-Egyptian companies
could be founded to boost our strategic industries and build the techno-
logical base we have committed ourselves to establish in the context of
the post-war reconstruction. If this proves difficult at this stage, Amer-
ican companies could be encouraged to cooperate with our Organiza-
tion one way or the other.
I trust that you agree with me on the necessity of demonstrating to
our armed forces that our partnership in the peace process is mutually
beneficial and that there will be no weakening of our defense capabil-
ities whatsoever. This is so in the light of their realization of their role in
the coming few years as an element of peace and stability in the region.
Such faith in the future requires reassuring all our armed services that
their weapons system is going to improve rather than deteriorate as a
result of our bolstered friendship with the United States. It is equally
important to reassure the Egyptian people of the state of their armed
forces and their ability to bear their awesome responsibilities.
Needless to say that the absence of a genuine effort to remedy this
situation promptly would give rise to misinterpretations and adverse
reaction in the Arab World too. It will lend credence to the false allega-
tion that the signing of Peace Treaty will signal a weakening of Egypt’s
defense capability. Certain circles are fond of making comparisons be-
tween the Soviet readiness to saturate its allies with military equipment
and the United States more hesitant and cautious attitude with its
friends. We want to dispel these notions.
Vice President Mubarak will also discuss with you a few points re-
lated to our economic cooperation. I have no doubt that you will lend
our requests with regard to the “Carter Plan”7 your enthusiastic sup-
7 A term used by Sadat to describe an intermittently repeated proposal for a multi-
national aid and development program for Egypt. Described in an interview with jour-
nalist Joseph Kraft in November 1978 as an Egyptian equivalent of the Marshall Plan, the
plan initially called for the provision of $10–15 billion in U.S. aid to Egypt over a five year
period. (Telegram 24572 from Cairo, November 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D780461–0578) Speaking with a congressional delegation in Cairo on
January 6, Sadat stated that the United States, Japan, and West Germany should be the
“principal participants” in the plan, in order to “bring needed economic development to
Egypt and strengthen Egypt’s role as a stabilizing factor” in the Middle East and Africa.
(Telegram 397 from Cairo, January 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790010–0116)
