704
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
example, on 3 April 1980, the DRA 14th Division in Ghazni noted
the destruction of two APC’s by rebel rocket attack inside the city of
Ghazni—a new rebel tactic. On 15 April 1980 the DRA 17th Division
in Herat reported its first rebel anti-tank rocket attack; and two days
later seven armored vehicles struck by anti-tank rockets were seen in
the Herat area. [less than 1 line not declassified] traffic has not been
scanned for reports of anti-tank rockets used against Soviet armor, but
we suspect that the rebels are also using these weapons against the
Soviets. By 26 February 1980 127 launchers and 1,404 RPG–7 rounds
had been passed to the rebels, with 33 launchers and 1,000 rockets
scheduled for current shipments.
4. Proof of Arms/Ammo Infiltration Success: Two detailed reports by
a source with Gailani’s Peshawar exile group on weapons he actually
saw being funnelled from the Paks to Gailani closely match with reports
from Pakistan liaison on weapons and ammunition passed to Gailani.
5. Combined Soviet/DRA Armor: The Soviet and DRA armies in
Afghanistan now have over 4,000 tanks and other armored vehicles,
plus approximately 20,000 trucks and other vehicles.
6. A senior NSA analyst on 24 April 1980 noted “both a qualitative
and a quantitative increase in rebel capabilities during the past five
weeks,” thus adding some credence to our preliminary analysis.
261.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
[paper number not declassified]
Washington, May 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and
cover page.]
China and Southwest Asia: The Challenge of Afghanistan
([classification marking not declassified])
Overview
China sees the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as both a threat and
an opportunity. It is concerned that Moscow has embarked on a new,
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
Services, Job 81T00208R: Production Case Files, Box 4, China and Southwest Asia: The
Challenge of Afghanistan. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
A statement on the cover page reads: “The author of this paper is [name not declassified]
Office of Political Analysis. This paper has been coordinated with the Offices of Economic
Research and Strategic Research and with the National Intelligence Officer for China/
East Asia and Pacific and for the Near East and South Asia.”
