560
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
is still true that the Soviets, when they think their backs are to the wall,
will pursue what they see as their vital interests without regard to
world opinion. But it is also true that they have gradually come to
place increased weight on their acceptance by the rest of the world.
This is a positive development and it is obvious that we should exploit
it to the fullest. Without trying to spell out specifics, I would merely
comment that it is important that while organizing the power to resist
Soviet aggression we also continue the effort to persuade the neutral
and non-aligned countries to put political pressure on the Soviets. India
and the Islamic countries are obviously important in this regard. How
we approach the Third World as a whole is outside my competence,
but even from here it seems obvious that simply appealing to them to
be anti-Soviet may strike them as self-serving. One of our Western
friends here, with much Third World experience, has urged that we
approach the developing nations in terms of helping them achieve
their own goals and aspirations.
10. Recommendations on mechanics and timing.
A. It is important that we continue to take a tough stance, not
appearing to have second thoughts about our present course, even
while leaving openings for the Soviets to signal willingness to start
talking about some of the most serious issues. This will not be easy
but deserves our best efforts.
B. Obviously a key element will be continued dialogue between
you and Gromyko through both me and Dobrynin. As we have seen
in the most recent exchanges, Dobrynin has begun offering “personal
ideas” for a solution of the Afghanistan problem itself; the tactic is to
get Washington to venture out on a limb on the basis of Dobrynin’s
suggestions. You might wish to respond by feeding me some ideas to
give Gromyko, also on a “personal” basis. That way we get some
reaction from Gromyko first hand without committing you and the
President to anything. This could be done even more unofficially by
using Arbatov (who is expected to be back to work soon). I am frankly
not optimistic that we could find any basis for an early Soviet with-
drawal, but I see an advantage in dangling some ideas for letting the
Soviets extract themselves gracefully if they are so inclined. At least
we could find out for sure whether they are so inclined. Movement
toward an internal regime of “national reconciliation” together with
some sort of effort to repatriate the refugees back from Pakistan and
pacify the border seems unlikely at this stage, but there would be no
harm in exploring it if it could be done unofficially. Perhaps some UN
involvement would be feasible. Conceivably we could also discuss
some sort of “hands off” agreement regarding Iran.
C. We need to follow up quickly on SALT I and SALT II interim
observance (Gromyko did not respond to that portion of my démarche)
