August 8–September 17, 1978 51 —Although Egypt continues to have serious economic problems, its prospects have improved measurably since 1976, largely because of massive aid infusions from the U.S. and the Arab oil states. World Bank, IMF, and USG analyses all project a steady decrease in aid requirements in the future. While total new U.S. aid commitments have been running at about $1 billion annually, disbursements will reach $800 million in 1978 after two low years as the program gathered momentum. The “pipeline” of undisbursed AID prior commitments will thus be nearly $1 billion by the end of this fiscal year. It now appears that new AID supporting assistance of $600 million rather than the current level of $750 million, when combined with outlays from the pipeline and food aid ($200 million annually), will be sufficient to maintain flows of at least $1 billion through 1981 or 1982. This would more than meet your commitment to President Sadat to maintain aid levels (in disbursement terms) over the next few years. A continuation of new U.S. commitments at the 1979 level would likely permit the wealthy Arab oil producers to reduce their aid. —Aid levels for Jordan and Syria are primarily determined by levels for Egypt and Israel. Nevertheless, both of these smaller confrontation states are sufficiently strong economically that they could withstand a reduction in U.S. aid in the context of an overall cut-back of aid to the Middle East. The disparity between recipient needs and U.S. support levels in the Middle East could be particularly important in making 1980 budget decisions as we consider heavy demands for funds to meet U.S. security interests elsewhere in the world. To meet new demands for assistance to Africa (especially southern Africa), Portugal, Turkey, and Latin America, we expect State to recommend a 1980 security assistance program well in excess of the planning ceiling. This in turn will force difficult tradeoffs with other areas if overall budget objectives are to be met.
