Company. It has, however, now become manifest that any longer delay in the
adjustment of the controversy will serve no useful purpose, either for the contending
parties themselves or for China which is primarily responsible for this situation.
Holding to the principle of international co-operation instead of international
competition, and desiring to help China out of her present difficulty, the Japanese
Government are willing to approach the question from a new angle that may lead to a
speedy and practical settlement of the dispute.
5. Accordingly, without prejudice to the legal merits of the case, the Japanese
Government now desire to propose that the principles governing the Consortium be
applied to the contracts secured by the Mitsui Company and the Federal Telegraph
Company.
These contracts are thus to be pooled and superseded by a loan agreement for wireless
enterprise in China of the same nature as ordinary railway loans that may be
undertaken by the Consortium.
 
The parties to the proposed loan agreement shall be, on the one side, the Chinese
Government and, on the other, a financial group representing American, British, French
and Japanese interests. The financial group is to consist of the Federal Telegraph
Company, the Marconi Company, the French General Wireless Telegraph Company
and the Mitsui Company, and is to be constituted upon full communication and
understanding with the Consortium.
The operation of wireless telegraphy in question shall be placed under the exclusive
control of the Chinese Government, while the financial group is to supply the services
of engineers and accountants, in order to assist China in the enterprise.
6. The proposed solution is believed to be in line with the known policy of the
American Government to promote international co-operation, and with all basic
principles embodied in the Nine-Power Treaty of Washington. It provides, at the same
time, for a lightening of China’s indebtedness, as much desirable for herself as for all
nations interested in the stabilization of that country. If, as is confidently hoped, the
plan outlined is found acceptable, the Japanese Government will be happy to suggest
further particulars of the measures for making it effective. They are also prepared to
give serious and friendly consideration to any counter proposals that may be advanced
by the American Government in order to compose the pending differences. In any case,
they attach great importance to an early settlement of the question, which so long as it
remains unadjusted, tends to disturb the relations of solidarity and mutual confidence
among all the Powers concerned.
WASHINGTON , December 24, 1924.
