August 8–September 17, 1978
61
3. Sadat will define success in terms of substance, and in particular an
Israeli commitment to the principle of withdrawal on all fronts. Begin
will define success largely in terms of procedural arrangements and will be
very resistant to pressures for substantive concessions.
4. You will have to persuade Begin to make some substantive con-
cessions, while convincing Sadat to settle for less than an explicit Israeli
commitment to full withdrawal and Palestinian self-determination.
5. Your most important meetings will be with each leader individually,
not with both together. You cannot expect Sadat and Begin to reveal their
fall-back positions in front of each other, but in private you may be able
to move them toward greater flexibility.
6. During the first round of meetings, you will want to reestablish a
personal relationship with each leader, expressing your understanding
of their concerns and appealing to their statesmanship. During the
second and third days, you will want to be frank and direct in dis-
cussing substantive points. Begin in particular will need time to reflect
on what you say. There will be a natural break in the talks on Saturday,4
and Begin should understand that you will be pressing for decisions on
Sunday.
7. Both Sadat and Begin must starkly see the consequences of success and
failure if they are to make hard choices.
—Failure brought on by Sadat’s intransigence would bring to an
end the special US-Egyptian relationship. Even if Sadat is not held re-
sponsible for the collapse of negotiations, we would find it increasingly
difficult to maintain the close ties of the past few years and the Soviet
Union would find opportunities to strengthen its position in the area at
Sadat’s expense as well as our own. Sadat must be told that we cannot
afford more surprise moves by him if we are to work together effec-
tively for a peace agreement. We expect to be consulted before Sadat
takes new initiatives.
—Begin must see that US-Israeli relations are based on reciprocity.
Our commitment to Israel’s security and well-being must be met by an
Israeli understanding of our national interests. If Israel is responsible for
blocking progress toward peace in the Middle East, Begin should be told clearly
peace, as well as biographical sketches of Begin and Sadat. In the covering memorandum,
Turner stated that the briefing book was produced in response to a request Carter made
during his “recent visit” to the CIA. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Country File, Box 54, Middle East: Camp David Summit, 8/78) According to the
President’s Daily Diary, Carter visited CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia between
2:03 p.m. and 3:15 p.m. on August 16, where he addressed CIA employees and attended a
briefing on CIA operations and intelligence procedures. (Carter Library, Presidential
Materials)
4 September 9.
