816
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
liberalize, and expand world food trade, and urges national gov-
ernments and international agencies to give higher priority to nutrition
and rural development in development plans. It also recommends that
governments and international agencies support the basic human
needs approach to foreign aid.3
The generally constructive pattern of the 1977 meeting in Manila,
the tone and substance of the Manila Communique´, and the election of
a potentially strong Council president from a developing country (Ar-
turo Tanco of the Philippines) raised hopes that the organization would
be able to function as the world food security agency that the World
Food Conference had envisaged. Basic structural problems which be-
came especially evident at the June 1978 meeting, however, now inhibit
the agency from performing a command function. In particular, the
Council was not given direct authority on food policy matters over
other UN entities or members, as the Conference had recommended.
Although a number of UN agencies are requested to make periodic re-
ports to it, many comply only minimally.
The fourth ministerial session of the Council was held in Mexico
City from 12 to 15 June of this year. The meeting was devoted almost
entirely to the line-by-line drafting of the “Mexico Declaration,” to the
intense dissatisfaction of some high-level participants.4 In informal dis-
cussions in Mexico City, the ministerial and plenipotentiary-level dele-
gates demanded fuller participation in substantive preparations for the
Council’s Ministerial meetings by governments of developing coun-
tries and by regional bodies, as well as the World Bank, the UN Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and the UN Development Pro-
gram. They emphasized the need to develop information on internal
resource commitments to increased food and agriculture production
and on plans to reduce food losses due to inadequate storage facilities.
They suggested that future meetings of the Council would be more
productive if they concentrated on recording varying country view-
points rather than producing a fully agreed text. If these recommenda-
tions are not implemented, it is likely that a drop in the level of repre-
sentation at Council meetings will occur, thus reducing its usefulness.
Nonetheless, although there is some legitimate concern about the
Council’s bureaucratic viability, and though the results of the Mexico
meeting are not expected to affect directly the production, consump-
3 [2 lines not declassified] [Footnote in the original.]
4 The Mexico Declaration is a long, innocuous document that reproduces most of
the substance of the Manila Communique´, but with increased emphasis on the diffi-
culties of increasing food production in developing countries and in formulating national
food plans. [Footnote in the original. The Department transmitted the final draft text of
the Mexico Declaration to Mexico City and USUN in telegram 164039, June 28. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780268–0008)]
