explained his present position as merely a temporary means of bridging over an interval and stated that while not desirous of returning to political life after his withdrawal therefrom in 1920 he had thought it his duty to sacrifice himself in order to unify the country. I took care to make it clear to an officer of the Wai Chiao Pu that my action in calling upon Marshal Tuan was in no sense to be interpreted as implying de jure recognition. I was informed that this was well understood. Admiral Tsai Ting-kan informed me most emphatically and in a manner which compels my belief in the sincerity of his statement that Marshal Tuan was much opposed to Soviet activities. 4. I submit following comment on the Cabinet supplementing China Tear Book: An official of the Foreign Office informed me that it is practically certain Tang Shao-yi will not take up post of Minister for Foreign Affairs and that W. W. Yen is probable next appointee. Following Ministers are of Anfu Party: Finance, Interior, War. Minister of the Navy has been associated with Lu Yunghsiang and has Anfu affiliations. Appointment of Minister of Education seems designed to please Tang Chi-yao, Military Governor of Yunnan. Minister of Justice is reported to have been closely associated with Tuan lately and to have assisted in drafting his political announcements. Minister of Agriculture represents Kuomintang and Minister of Communications old Communications clique. Latter is privately considered representative of Chang Tso-lin but Chang denied any desire for representation in the Cabinet. Ministers Interior, War, Justice and Communications have assumed office. 5. Feng Yu-hsiang has for the past few days apparently been trying to resign from the command of his troops and his other official duties. Mandate issued by Tuan November 27th while announcing this desire on Feng’s part, urges him in laudatory terms to retain his various posts. Difficult to know whether this is a question of face and whether Tuan and Chang Tso-lin really desire Feng to resign or whether Tuan and Chang are somewhat apprehensive of situation which would be created by resignation
