1956 775 or theoretical about those Americans. There nothing hypothetical or theoretical about who is interfering with their return. 87. I said in only one case that he had thus far brought my atten­ tion did there appear be any substantial allegation that US could be obstructing his return. That was case of Mr. Yuan Jui-­hsiang, which I had told him I was looking into, and whose name he had given me January 12. Wang’s statement regarding him was to effect he been sum­ moned by immigration authorities, interrogated in July 1954, and taken into custody. 88. I said I had had very thorough check made of all our immi­ gration offices and had not been able confirm he been taken into cus­ tody at any time, nor been able positively identify that he had had any business with immigration authorities. However, I would be glad try to go further into this if Wang would furnish me further details. Wang’s statement said he summoned in July 1954. If Wang could give me exact date it would be helpful. It would also be particularly helpful if Wang could give me particular place where this took place. I should presume this information should be available from sources Wang had used. It would also be helpful if Wang could give me any information on how he spelled his name in English letters. We had looked into pos­ sible alternate spellings under various dialects that might be given to his Chinese characters, but had been unable to identify him. As Wang also knew, it entirely possible he might have adopted a personalized spelling of name—a spelling of his own for his name. Or he might have partially anglicized his name. Any information Wang could give me in this regard would be helpful in looking into this matter. 90. Wang said I had said I came here to discuss and resolve ques­ tion of civilians both sides who desire return. I had referred to decla­ ration by US that all those Chinese who desire return free do so. I had said there no obstruction whatever on part US against their return. It one thing to say this in announcement, but it important to look into facts. They had always welcomed any news given him regarding return of certain batch Chinese and whenever they also had knowledge any return Chinese they always expressed welcome. 91. Wang said however on other hand, their attention repeatedly been called to fact many Chinese desire return but in fact unable do so. That concerns names those people he had given me and request I look into those cases. 92. Wang said with regard Yuan, their hope was US authorities would continue look into this matter. When his side received further information, he would certainly be glad inform me. 93. Wang said he next wanted call my attention to question of Chinese in US prisons. These people who desire return have not been informed of agreed announcement between US and their side very
