Honduras 801 of Honduras; it did not enter the capital or reach to the Caribbean coast. A good road from the capital to the north coast was definitely required. The Secretary spoke of the benefits which would accrue from a road system capable of attracting American tourists from the north, coming down through Mexico and Guatemala. The Minister agreed but indicated that his Government’s main attention at this time was centered on the development of Puerto Castilla, situated on the Caribbean shore, as a tourist resort. It was formerly a United Fruit Company port but had been abandoned by the Company. It could be reached by air, the flying time between that port and Miami being three hours or less. His Government was treating with Pan American Airways to see if an airport, hotel accommodations, and other facilities might be financed and developed there by that Company. The Minister also commented on the fact that Ambassador Willauer, at the inauguration of President Villeda last December, had announced the decision of the U.S. Government to assist technically and financially in developing an engineering unit in the Honduran Army which could be employed in building and maintaining highways. His Government was keenly interested in this and hoped that the project would move forward rapidly. (This is an ICA project.) Another of his country’s needs was money, by which he meant bank credit, available to small farmers and small industry. The Honduran banks had ample knowledge of the local situation but lacked the funds for such a loan program. His Government hoped to be able to borrow enough money abroad to make up for this lack. The Minister spoke of President Villeda’s contemplated trip through South America. He had been invited by President Ibañez to visit Chile in May and, when the other South American governments heard of this, they also had extended invitations. As a result Dr. Villeda planned to visit them all and to deliver lectures at leading universities, etc., lecturing being one of his fortes. At the conclusion, the Secretary expressed his pleasure at having had the opportunity to meet the Foreign Minister as well as to receive the new Ambassador, whom he wished to assure of a cordial welcome at any time during his tenure of office.
