656
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
The President said if people are truly suffering, yes they should
be let in. But if they are living comfortably in Europe or elsewhere, let
them stay there. The guidance needs to be rewritten.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that we needed to discuss employment of
measures beyond those adopted to date.
Mr. Christopher asked about timing of the announcement.
The President said he hoped he was not going to be informed that
the Revolutionary Council was meeting to reconsider the whole issue.
Mr. Christopher said he would not be that brave. He did want to
report that the Iranian Embassy was indeed closed today. Since the
danger of a confrontation was primarily a Washington problem, he
thought that an announcement as soon as possible after the meeting
would be desirable.
The President said that we should forbid any demonstrations to
go near the Embassy.
The Attorney General said they needed a little time to mobilize.
Not just an hour or so.
Mr. Aaron said the demonstrators were probably assembling now.
The President said that we should notify the Allies in strict and
cogent terms that the situation is intolerable and that we will take more
forceful action unless the hostages are released. We should call on them
to impose sanctions, break diplomatic relations, and use all available
means to release the hostages. Our words should not be equivocal.
This must not keep dragging on.
Admiral Turner noted one phrase in Khomeini’s statement was
noteworthy.
Dr. Brzezinski said that Khomeini had mentioned visitation rights.8
Admiral Turner said that the hostages’ wives would wonder
whether we will try to get someone in. We could also use visits to get
more information about who is where.
Mr. Powell wondered if we should look to the UN for that.
The President said he did not attach too much significance to that
statement. He had read it and it was equivocal.
Mr. Christopher said that the latest message from Ambassador
Lang in Tehran said that the militants made Capucci promise not to
reveal how many hostages he had seen and that he was to come back
8 In a statement made on April 7, prior to the announcement of U.S. sanctions (see
Document 246), Khomeini reiterated that the hostages would remain in the hands of
the militant students until Parliament met and determined their fate. He noted that the
“condition of the hostages and their place is good from every point of view.” (William
Branigan, “Khomeini Bars Hostage Transfer Until Parliament Decides Issue,” Washington
Post, April 8, 1980, p. A1)
