1120 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX viet arms were not the answer and Soviet economic aid showed little understanding of the development process. In 1973 Sadat went to war not to win a military victory but to get the United States involved diplomatically. American diplomatic power is not—as the Arabs see it—our ability to force Israel to make concessions but rather our ability to bring about a viable solution for all parties. It will serve Israel’s interests far better to have a strong U.S. as the predominant extra-regional influence than to have Soviet-supported radical movements with no moderate counter. 3. The Palestinian issue is a security issue for the Saudis and Gulf Arabs. The Saudis and Gulf Arabs are increasingly blunt in telling us that their ability to stand with us on security issues in Southwestern Asia will depend on our ability to deal honorably with the Palestinian issue. The same point will be increasingly heard about oil production and prices. The Arab point is not simple blackmail for an ideological political purpose. Some parts of the Palestinian movement have roots in radical political philosophies and movements dedicated to the overthrow of traditional regimes. The Palestinians in the traditional societies of the Peninsula and Gulf are one of their principal security problems. The regimes there feel unable to identify with us on security issues when we do not appear to their sources of political support to be dealing with one of their main security issues. 4. A significant part of persuading those Arabs will be persuading them that we take the Palestinians seriously. That brings us to one of the toughest propositions of all—the question of how to deal with the PLO. I am not one of those who argues that a direct dialogue with the PLO would by itself resolve our problems. My long-term strategy towards the PLO would be to try to win their support for the autonomy in the transitional period and then to use that period to bring forward moderate leadership in the West Bank and Gaza so that the moderates in the Palestinian movement would ultimately have the capacity to isolate the radical elements. The PLO will probably split in that process, and that could be all to the good. But there has to be a subtly designed strategy for giving the PLO a sense—one way or another—that we regard them as part of the picture. Recognizing the Israeli side of this problem and the fact that a serious dialogue with the PLO is not on in 1980, I believe there are ways of doing just enough this year without the big splash of open meetings with Arafat’s lieutenants. But doing something on this front will be almost essential at some point when we have decided on our strategy. 5. We do not have to give the Arabs everything they want. Although the Arabs will continue to insist publicly on an independent Palestinian
