1979 605 before the first MPS system is deployed; that while cooperative measures will be an improvement, MPS makes it essential that we get such measures, and thus we may end up using our bargaining leverage to achieve rules on paper rather than real reductions; that a security breakdown could occur for MPS without our knowing it, and that cooperative measures could increase such concerns. OSD responded that SSBN locations might also become known without our realizing it, and that the cooperative measures developed for MPS could concentrate on the missile production process rather than sampling existing missile locations. (S) Option 3 got little attention beyond the original comment that it could be destroyed on its bases if attacked while in a day-­to-­day alert posture. Mr. Aaron noted that such a system might appeal to the Soviet mentality. OSD commented that it would probably work to our overall net advantage if the Soviets were to adopt a mobile system—­the cost to deploy and operate such systems is 2–3 times as great per EMT or RV deployed as a silo-­based system, and the reduced payload the Soviets might have to adopt would probably offset the uncertainties involved in determining the capabilities of such a system. The JCS noted that, without cooperative measures, a truck mobile system would pose larger verification problems than MPS. (S) Option 4 got even less attention—OSTP asked what might happen if it made use of a common missile and was told that some savings might result. (S) The JCS argued that while Option 5 puts the Soviets at risk, which they must be if we are, it is simply a postponement of the ICBM vulnerability problem. They also argued that adoption of Option 5 would have a bad effect on SALT II ratification because it will raise some very contentious issues, such as the advisability of putting new missiles in silos, an idea that is strongly opposed on the Hill. Finally, they noted that the background material presented for Option 5 underestimates the severity of the problems associated with it. (S) Dr. Brzezinski noted that there is considerable political value in deploying the largest missile allowed under SALT II and suggested that a variant of Option 5 that deploys M–X in silos be examined. Mr. Aaron noted that while Option 5 may not solve the ICBM vulnerability problem, it could eliminate the asymmetry in strike options that is developing, and that while the silo deployment portion of Option 5 might decrease crisis stability to some extent, neither side could expect more than limited success if it attempted a disarming first strike. (S) OSD commented that the missile proposed under Option 5 for silo deployment can be called an M–X if necessary, and that the Trident II design they had in mind would have as much hard-­target capability as the SS–19. They further noted that the silo deployment portion of
