1026 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II This Report (especially Section II) is more country-specific than the First Annual Report, drawing on responses to a circular telegram sent to our Embassies in major population growth countries. This Report, like its predecessor, deals exclusively with the population problems of developing nations. While it is true that all countries, including the United States, face population problems, population growth rates in the developing world are far higher and pose a different range of issues. We do not re-state the many adverse environmental, social, economic, and security effects of developing country population growth rates. What has been said in last year’s Report remains valid, although we believe greater emphasis needs to be placed on how high population growth rates (1) aggravate unemployment and underemployment (see Section I); and (2) adversely affect the health of women and children, contribute to high mortality rates, especially amongst those under 12 years of age, and limit prospects for a better life for the children of large families. With regard to (2), excessive population growth contributes in a major way to the suffering, poverty, and early death of countless millions of poor people. To anyone concerned with the human condition, this must be a compelling argument for far more effective measures to alleviate tragedy on such a vast scale. Moreover, high rates of population growth also increase pressures for internal and international migration, creating severe problems in terms of deteriorating conditions of life in burgeoning urban areas of developing countries as well as in terms of relations between countries affected by the current patterns of large international migration. The United States’ approach to world population issues is based on concern for the well-being of all people, many of whom are now in dire need, and on respect for the rights and responsibilities of each government in determining its policies and programs. We recognize, however, that a sound population policy and program is an important and integral part of the development process for many of these countries. Population stabilization is not a goal in itself. The real goal is improving conditions of life for vast numbers of people, especially in the poorer nations; and this involves a wide range of measures, broadly distributed, of which family planning must be seen as a basic part. In the course of his Environment Message to Congress on May 23, 1977, President Carter stated: “Rapid population growth is a major environmental problem of world dimensions. World population increased from three to four billion in the last 15 years, substantially cancelling out expansion in world food production and economic growth for the same period.
