Human Rights 641 2. Economic Assistance and Human Rights —Continue the systematic review of economic assistance and human rights by the Inter-Agency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance, chaired by the Deputy Secretary.4 This Committee and its Working Group regularly review bilateral economic assistance, IFI loans, Ex-Im and OPIC transactions with a view to ensuring that human rights concerns are fully taken into account in decisions made, as required by U.S. law and policy.5 3. Arms Transfers and Human Rights —Improve the mechanism in the Department of State for reaching decisions on6 arms transfers and human rights7 through the creation of a special body to systematically review such decisions, including the sale of police equipment, and ensure that human rights criteria are fully taken into account, as required by our law and policy. 4. Pending Decisions on Sales of Police Equipment and Lethal Military Equipment —Decide on pending sales of police equipment to the following countries with serious human rights problems: the People’s Republic of China, Taiwan, Ethiopia, the Philippines, Yugoslavia, Israel (West Bank). —Decide on pending sales of lethal military equipment and expanded military sales to the following countries with serious human rights problems: Haiti, El Salvador, Paraguay.8 5. Multilateral Initiatives —Insist on full review of implementation of Basket III (human rights and humanitarian) issues at the Madrid CSCE Conference and promote the establishment of more effective machinery to implement the Helsinki Final Act.9 4 Walker bracketed the portion of this sentence that begins with “Continue” and ends with “by” and substituted the phrase “Operation and mandate for.” She also placed a check mark next to this insertion. 5 Walker bracketed this sentence. 6 Walker bracketed the portion of this sentence that begins with “Improve” and ends with “on” and substituted the phrase “Policy on.” 7 Walker added “and key pending issues” following “human rights.” She also drew a slash through the entire bulleted point. 8 Walker drew a slash through this and the previous bulleted point. 9 Walker wrote “handled in CSCE paper” and an “x” in the left-hand margin next to this bulleted point.
