1026  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
635.	 Letter 45 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 45
Washington, June 1, 1956
Dear Alex:
I plan to wait until Monday the 4th to write the regular weekly let­
ter. That letter should reach you well before the next meeting on June 8. 
This is merely a short note to transmit a copy of the ­Aide-­memoire we 
delivered to the Indian Embassy yesterday, together with the full list of 
Chinese alien prisoners. We have just received your 1965 and we feel 
you should have this list in any event. If it should be decided that you 
should transmit this list to Wang at the next meeting (and this ques­
tion will probably be decided on Monday), you should have this list in 
advance in order to be prepared. It would be difficult and expensive to 
transmit this list by cable, and the incidence of garbles would probably 
be high. Unless this pouch is delayed you will be all set for whatever 
course may be decided upon next week.
Indian Ambassador Mehta seemed highly pleased at our decision. 
He told Dudley Withers after he left Mr. Robertson’s office that he felt 
this was a constructive move which should lead to some progress. He 
seemed to feel definitely optimistic. He obviously thinks it will be up to 
the Chinese Communists to make a reciprocating move now. I believe 
we have at least the local Indian representatives on our side on the pris­
oner question now, and we have high hopes that they will exert what­
ever influence they may have in the right direction. We will send you 
a memorandum of the Robertson-­Mehta conversation on Monday. The 
Indians intend to arrange the interviews with the prisoners as soon as 
they receive word that we have delivered notifications and copies of 
the Agreed Announcement to the prisoners. We hope to get the draft 
circular letter to the prisoners cleared today. You will also get a copy 
of this.
Minister Tan was quite unhappy when I gave him the news half 
an hour before Mehta came in. He feels that both the propriety and 
the consistency of our action are questionable. Obviously he feels that 
the  position of the GRC as the sole representative and protector of 
­Chinese interests in this country is somewhat compromised. He wants 
a list of the prisoners, and Mr. Robertson and I both feel that we should 
give it to him. However, it has not been done yet. Tan believes the 
­Indians will try to bring pressure to bear on the prisoners to elect return 
to the mainland. He thought we might have the same sort of tug-­of-­war 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Drafted by McConaughy.
