Eastern Europe Region
7
known to or suspected by friend and foe alike. Nevertheless, cover mechanisms
of private sponsorship are necessary fig leaves which permit other Western
governments to tolerate the activity of these instruments on their soil. Accusa-
tions of CIA sponsorship have often been made by the East and have had a
negligible effect on the effectiveness of the operations. Official U.S. Government
acknowledgement of such sponsorship or authoritative leaks, however, would
be embarrassing to our Western European allies and could well force disman-
tling of some of the publishing and distribution operations.
—The impact of these operations on bilateral relations between the U.S.
and the USSR is negligible. As noted, the USSR already knows about most
of them. More important, ideological warfare is consistent with the Soviet
Union’s perception of detente.
—Operational activity intended to coordinate and sustain publicity and
protests on human rights violations is much more discreet and selective. In
this area, exposure of the role played by CIA assets could involve the loss of
support from some segments of the Western public.
—Some of the publications and human rights publicity generated in West
Europe filter back to the United States and are picked up by U.S. media. We
see no impropriety here, since no false propaganda or deception is involved.
COSTS:
—The total budget for FY 1977 is $2,650,000. Of this amount, book
distribution receives over [number not declassified] of the budget. Pub-
lishing accounts for approximately [number not declassified], and human
rights publicity approximately [number not declassified]. In terms of
targeting, approximately [number not declassified] of the funds go to the
operations against the USSR, with the remaining [number not declassified]
directed primarily to the Czech and Polish operations.
—In the past few years there has been a reduction in the resources
available to this program (in FY 1974 the budget for essentially the same
operations was almost $4,000,000). Despite cost economies, inflation is
taking an inevitable toll on the level of activity possible on a fixed
budget.
ALTERNATIVES:
—Some of the book distribution effort could be funded and admin-
istered openly by the U.S. Government, perhaps in the same manner
as the radios. That should work well in the United States, and could
be tried on a pilot basis to supplement the existing covert program.
However, it would probably not be possible to continue or adequately
replace the present covert distribution mechanism in Europe, which
involves discreet contact with Soviet, EE, and foreign nationals, and
the contravention of customs regulations in the East.
—The periodicals in Czech and Ukrainian which we publish or
subsidize could receive overt U.S. Government funding. In such a case,
