emphasized in my last message, the Government should assume no
responsibility in normal times for crop surplus clearly due to overextended
acreage. The Government should, however, provide reliable information as
a guide to private effort; and in this connection fundamental research on
prospective supply and demand, as a guide to production and marketing,
should be encouraged. Expenditure of public funds to bring in more new
land should have most searching scrutiny, so long as our farmers face
unsatisfactory prices for crops and livestock produced on land already
under cultivation.
Every proper effort should be made to put land to uses for which it is
adapted. The reforestation of land best suited for timber production is
progressing and should be encouraged, and to this end the forest taxation
inquiry was instituted to afford a practical guide for public policy.
Improvement has been made in grazing regulation in the forest reserves, not
only to protect the ranges, but to preserve the soil from erosion. Similar
action is urgently needed to protect other public lands which are now
overgrazed and rapidly eroding.
Temporary expedients, though sometimes capable of appeasing the
demands of the moment, can not permanently solve the surplus problem
and might seriously aggravate it. Hence putting the Government directly
into business, subsidies, and price fixing, and the alluring promises of
political action as a substitute for private initiative, should be avoided.
The Government should aid in promoting orderly marketing and in
handling surpluses clearly due to weather and seasonal conditions. As a
beginning there should be created a Federal farm board consisting of able
and experienced men empowered to advise producers’ associations in
establishing central agencies or stabilization corporations to handle
surpluses, to seek more economical means of merchandising, and to aid the
producer in securing returns according to the quality of his product. A
revolving loan fund should be provided for the necessary financing until
these agencies shall have developed means of financing their operations
through regularly constituted credit institutions. Such a bill should carry
authority for raising the money, by loans or otherwise, necessary to meet
the expense, as the Treasury has no surplus.
