1956 635 regard. I think it well to recall exactly what I said at that time. (I then repeated my introductory statement October 8 on renunciation of force and continued with prepared statement as follows:) D. That statement took full account of issues between us and posi­ tions of your government with regard thereto. I was hopeful we would be able promptly to reach full understanding on substance thereof which would permit us to draft and issue suggested declarations. It was only three weeks later on October 27 you introduced draft which not only fell far short of specific proposal I had made October 8 but also introduced extraneous elements. I discussed this matter in detail with you at subsequent meetings and only two weeks later at meet­ ing November 10 introduced draft which incorporated essential points which I had hoped in light of our discussions we were agreed upon. (I then went over my November 10 draft point by point.) If there were genuine substantive agreement on part of your gov­ ernment with views of my government concerning vital importance of not permitting differences between us, including those in Taiwan area, to lead to war, I cannot understand why my draft Nov. 10 should not have been acceptable. However, your side not only refused to agree to this draft but took extreme position of rejecting it even as basis for discussion. E. After another three week interval, on Dec. 1, you presented your counterdraft. As I indicated at the time, I felt this counterdraft repre­ sented some improvement over first proposal of your side. However, as I also pointed out at the time, your counterproposal failed to make it clear that announcement applied to Taiwan area as well as elsewhere. In light of statements you had made here, as well as public position of your government, it thus appeared your counterdraft might carry concealed reservation with respect to Taiwan area under which your government could, it it later so chose to do, initiate hostilities in Taiwan area on grounds situation there was purely domestic matter. Your draft also failed to provide for legitimate self-­defense. F. However, in further effort to reach agreement on this funda­ mental subject, (see attached) agreement we are willing to accept your counterproposal December 1 as basis for discussion. Subject to slight amendment to bring English text of second paragraph more fully into conformity with our understanding of Chinese text and an addition to cover question of self-­defense, as well as question of whether declara­ tion is considered to be applicable to Taiwan area, we are also prepared to accept all of language as well as form your December 1 counterdraft. In order make our suggestions clear I have prepared draft incorpo­ rating our amendments and additions to second paragraph. You will note that first and third paragraphs are identical with your December 1 counterdraft.
