1170 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 475. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1 Washington, May 7, 1977, 0101Z 104340. Subject: Second Meeting of PrepCom of UN Special Session on Disarmament: Guidance for US Delegation. 1. Begin summary: This message provides guidance on key issues expected to arise at the second meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the Special UNGA on Disarmament. It supplements the position paper prepared for the first meeting2 as well as the general statement of US views contained in our response to the SYG’s request for views (State 90685).3 Specific guidance is set out below on (A) the agenda of the Special Session, (B) role of the Secretariat, (C) non-governmental organizations, and (D) scheduling of further PrepCom work and intersessional working arrangements (May through August). Additional guidance will be provided as needed. End summary. 2. Guidance for second meeting of PrepCom of UN Special Session on Disarmament: I. Introduction: The first meeting of the PrepCom was concerned largely with the election of a Chairman and Bureau, participation, rules of procedure, and the role of the Secretariat and other questions regarding support. We expect the second PrepCom meeting to devote its attention to: A. Development of the agenda of the Special Session, B. Role of the Secretariat, C. Role of non-governmental organizations (NGOS), D. Scheduling of further PrepCom work and intersessional working arrangements (May through August), and E. Creation of subcommittees or working groups. This paper provides general guidance for the US Delegation on these issues. Additional guidance will be provided as needed, taking into account the Delegation’s reporting and recommendations. II. A General Approach and Objectives: Our general appoach to the Special Session on Disarmament is that contained in the US letter of April 22, 1977, to the Secretary General, 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770160–0899. Limited Official Use; Immediate. Sent for information to USNATO and the Mission in Geneva. Drafted by David Thompson (ACDA/MA/IR) and David Macuk (IO/UNP); cleared by Flowerree, Lyall Breckon (PM/DCA), Gerald Helman (IO/UNP), Martin Goldstein (DOD/ISA), and Thomas Hirschfeld (S/P); and approved by Charles Maynes (IO). 2 Not found. 3 See footnote 3, Document 474.
