National Security Policy  271
politically the US use of nuclear weapons, but we regard it as more 
likely that the Chinese Communists and North Koreans would reply 
with nuclear weapons obtained from the USSR.
26. If US use of nuclear weapons were restricted to North Korean 
targets, the Communists would probably use nuclear weapons only 
against targets in South Korea. However, we cannot exclude the 
possibility that if the attacks were launched from outside Korea, the 
Communists might also launch nuclear attacks against US bases selected 
so as to minimize the additional risk of general war even though the US 
strikes had been confined to Korean territory. If a stalemate developed 
on the ground, a new armistice would be sought.
27. The likelihood of Communist nuclear reaction would be great­
est in the event that US nuclear attacks were directed against targets 
in China itself. The Chinese Communists would probably attack with 
nuclear weapons selected US bases and naval forces in the West Pacific. 
If ballistic missiles capable of reaching these targets had been deployed 
in China prior to the aggression, they would also be used.
B. Free World Reactions
28. Assuming Bloc aggression appears clear-­cut, the general atti­
tude of the Free World, probably even including India and other neu­
trals, would initially be sympathetic toward the ROK and the United 
States. A large measure of diplomatic support would be forthcoming 
and some of our allies would be inclined to offer some token military 
assistance, though the US could not count on any significant Free World 
military support.
29. Free World sympathy would be overshadowed generally by 
fear that the conflict would expand since the US had used nuclear 
weapons, particularly if the US attacked targets outside of Korea. Our 
principal NATO allies would probably seek to restrain the United 
States from continuing nuclear attacks. The neutralist countries 
would almost certainly have backed away from any initial approval. 
Conversely, if the Communists did not launch nuclear attacks, or if the 
conflict were effectively localized, concern over the spread of hostili­
ties would diminish, and initial Free World approval of the US action 
would probably be strengthened. Even so, if heavy civilian casualties 
were inflicted, it would probably cause a feeling of revulsion, particu­
larly in Asia, against the US.
30. From the outset, the Japanese reaction would constitute one of 
the greatest problems for the US. While the government and much of 
the public would be sympathetic to the US–ROK cause, fear of Japan’s 
involvement would create great pressures to deny the United States the 
use of Japanese bases. US use of nuclear weapons, whatever the targets, 
would inflame Japanese reactions, public and official, almost certainly
