Comprehensive Test Ban
439
By providing explicitly for bringing the matter to the Security
Council, the Soviet Union would be put on notice that it can turn down
a reasonable U.S. OSI request only at considerable political cost. Given
the Soviet Union’s veto, we would not, of course, ask the Security
Council to take corrective action. However, the threat that its arbitrary
behavior could be exposed publicly in a forum that commands wide in-
ternational attention would strengthen the overall value of the provi-
sion as a deterrent against arbitrary rejection of an OSI request.
Recommendation. Although I believe that OSIs, in general, have
very limited utility as a CTB verification measure, I am confident that
the approach outlined above for initiating OSIs, together with prear-
ranged rights and functions of inspection teams that would be trig-
gered when an OSI request is accepted, would give us as much value as
could be derived from any OSI provision, including the idea of a man-
datory quota. I therefore recommend that you authorize us to propose
that approach when the CTB negotiations resume.
I have already sent copies of this memorandum to State, Defense,
JCS, Energy and CIA, and they all agree with the basic approach re-
garding challenge OSIs that I have outlined. OSD, JCS, and Energy
have commented to me that we should use our move on OSI in a
manner that enables us to obtain Soviet concessions on matters of im-
portance to us, especially on duration of the PNE ban and internal
seismic stations. JCS suggests the approach be explored, but not tabled
at this time. If you approve my recommendation, I will present our new
position in the way I believe will best maximize our pressure on the So-
viets to move our way on the critical remaining issues. I would make
clear that our willingness to accept the challenge OSI approach is con-
tingent on reaching a satisfactory solution on the entire treaty.
Paul C. Warnke6
6 Printed from a copy that indicates Warnke signed the memorandum.
