1132 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 694. Telegram 129 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 9, 1956, 3 p.m. 129. From Johnson. 1. Two hour twenty minute meeting today. Wang opened with statement that ten months have been spent on discussion renunciation of force suggested by US and in spite three PRC drafts submitted US still “stubbornly clinging unacceptable demands.” While I had indicated willingness hear PRC views on trade, my statements had indicated I did not intend to carry on businesslike discussion and settle this mat­ ter. This was “unfair and unequal” and hoped this was not my intent. Therefore formally proposed we agree discuss question embargo seek practical settlement. 2. In reply I made long statement reiterating renunciation as first essential step in seeking peaceful settlement disputes, therefore could not agree we abandon efforts reach agreement on this subject. Reviewed history negotiations on this stressing retrogression May 11 draft PRC attempt confuse with other issues and establish preconditions for renunciation. Also reasserted inseparable relationship between renun­ ciation and trade but reminded him I had previously agreed inclusion subject trade our discussions therefore willing to hear his views. Also reiterated invitation amplify aspects they had in mind in accordance questions asked my Nov 3 statement as well as reiterated statement made last meeting that no advantage to US in trade where goods received can be used support use of force. 3. In reply he agreed renunciation force declaraion “is at the heart of the disputes between us” as attested by their patience ten months negotiations on this and three successive drafts. I still failed put forward any views which eliminate obstacles to agreement and no progress could be made by repeating old arguments. He then made statement we should strive step by step to resolve disputes, embargo was against interest both countries, violated accepted international principles trade, prejudiced interests other countries and provoked extreme dissatisfac­ tion people other countries, lifting would be first step in improvement of relations as well as in interest American people, etc., etc. Wanted to hear my views with regard to first steps for lifting embargo. Should not entangle with other subjects or establish preconditions. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–956. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.
