Arms Control and Disarmament  1443
to further tests in order not to be left at a disadvantage by intensive 
Western testing this summer. It may also estimate that popular anxie­
ties concerning the effects of testing would be further stimulated in this 
way and that hence pressures on the West to accept Soviet terms for 
immediate and permanent cessation would mount.
Khrushchev did not deal with the question of “peaceful” nuclear 
explosions. There has been only one Soviet comment since August 22 
criticizing the Western position on this point. The reference to ending 
tests of nuclear weapons of all kinds would appear to leave the Soviet 
position flexible.
In sum, the USSR appears ready to undertake negotiations with 
the West but appears intent by diplomatic means, through popular 
pressure and UN action to put the West under maximum pressure to 
meet Soviet terms in such negotiations.
A similar memorandum has been prepared for the Under Secretary.
380.	 Letter From Acting AEC Chairman to Eisenhower1
Washington, September 4, 1958
Dear Mr. President:
On August 19, 1958 a joint letter, which was signed by Deputy Sec­
retary of Defense and by Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, was 
sent to you recommending an initial exchange of information with the 
United Kingdom for the promotion of weapons research, design and 
fabrication. This exchange was to be effected under the authority of the 
new Section 144c(1) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and 
the new bilateral agreement with the United Kingdom. The letter pro­
posed to you the scope of the information to be exchanged in the initial 
meetings and requested your determination that the communication of 
the proposed Restricted Data would promote and would not constitute 
an unreasonable risk to the common defense and security.
I wish to report to you that the initial exchange meetings with the 
United Kingdom were held in Washington on August 27, 28 and 29, 1958.
1 Source: Initial U.S.–U.K. information exchanges. Secret; Restricted Data. 2 pp. Eisen­
hower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Presidential Actions–Atomic.
