Paraguay  1001
it was to the interest of the entire hemisphere that the malignancy be 
speedily removed. Should Bolivia be permitted to fall into chaos and its 
evil effects spread, as they most surely would, Paraguay would probably 
be the first of Bolivia’s neighbors to suffer. Mr. Rubottom suggested that 
Bolivia was to be pitied, rather than envied, by Paraguay. The Minister 
was in agreement with both observations. He went on, nevertheless, to 
note that following the Paraguayan-Bolivian war over the Chaco, the 
various nations participating in the settlement had agreed to help toward 
the economic recovery of both countries; but those which had actually 
contributed anything had given much more to Bolivia. He said the 
United States had been particularly generous to Bolivia, to the discom-
fiture of Paraguay. The Minister emphasized that Paraguayan-Bolivian 
relations are good at present. There remained, however, the question of a 
border settlement on the northwest boundary. The Paraguayans fear the 
Bolivians will cause trouble if oil is discovered in the Chaco. Therefore, 
the United States should try to understand Paraguayan alarm when the 
United States grants large-­scale assistance to Bolivia—­including arms.
Mr. Rubottom said that he was under the impression that the 
subject of arms to Bolivia was cleared up when Paraguayan officials 
mentioned it to him and other U.S. officials who accompanied Vice 
President Nixon on his South American tour last spring. Mr. Rubottom 
recalled that earlier this year the United States had given Bolivia an 
insignificant amount of military assistance, solely for internal security, 
and consisting only of technical advice and a handful of weapons for 
the Palace Guard. He said he would be glad to provide the Minister 
with precise data in the matter if he wanted it. The Minister declared 
that he himself believed what he had been told, and had only wanted 
to point out that the Paraguayan masses, who are not acquainted with 
the facts, are naturally disturbed when they hear of U.S. arms and large 
sums of money going into Bolivia. The thought of U.S. arms and money 
falling into the hands of irresponsible Bolivians such as Juan Lechin, 
the leftist labor leader, was particularly disturbing to Paraguayans.
Mr. Rubottom returned to the idea that Paraguay is not, and would 
not want to be, in the same position in which Bolivia finds herself. A for 
Bolivia’s Lechin,3 he said he understood that his influence in Bolivian 
affairs had been on the wane for some time [and amounted to practi-
cally nothing at present.] Mr. Rubottom stressed that U.S. activities in 
behalf of Bolivia are solely for the purpose of helping a member of the 
Latin American community that has fallen into dire distress, and that 
to bring that country back to economic health and self-­respect would 
mean strengthening the hemisphere, and indeed the free world, as a 
whole. With regard to any Paraguayan fears of an armed attack by 
3 [illegible in the original].
