1978 281 attack (trying to protect against a bolt-Вӯout-Вӯof-Вӯthe-Вӯblue attack would be immensely expensive). Whether such evacuations are really practical we cannot tell, but since they may occur spontaneously in a deep crisis, I believe some planning along those lines would be a wise precaution in any event. Accordingly, the CG directs the start of such a modest program in FY80. Its extra costвҖ”Вӯbeyond the roughly $100 million we now spend annuallyвҖ”Вӯwould start at about $50 million, rising to about $200 million a year by FY84. These strategic issues, and more, are covered in the first of the two attached excerpts (Section B) from the CG. The second excerpt (Section C) covers the next general issue I would like to discussвҖ”Вӯour military participation in the NATO alliance. My memorandum of December 10th to you (вҖңNATO Initiatives and ImprovementsвҖқ) covers a good deal of the background, and I will not repeat that here. But the CG contains some important decisions of which you should be aware. NATO Planning for NATO in the last administration was based primarily on a scenario in which a) the Warsaw Pact would mobilize for 30 days prior to an attack on NATO, and b) NATO would detect and react to the Pact mobilization a week after it started, and thus have 23 days to mobilize before war breaks out in Europe. Though we might quarrel with some of the details of such a scenario, we do not question its underlying plausibility. What we do question, however, is the concept of basing so much of our planning on that single scenario, since it is but one of many equally plausible scenarios. Therefore, we now plan instead on being able to meet a Warsaw Pact attack under a variety of scenarios under the following assumptions. We believe (and thus assume) that we would be able to detect any full-Вӯscale Warsaw Pact mobilization in one day after it starts. We next assume that, within one day thereafter, the NATO nations would begin to act on that intelligence in at least limited ways, such as increasing readiness, deploying some forces forward, etc., but not necessarily mobilizing. Obviously, mobilizing at that point would be very much to NATOвҖҷs advantage, but we recognize that coming to such a momentous decision might take time. (In Europe, mobilization traditionally bears even more ominous connotations than it does in this country.) Indeed, we do not want to plan forces that cannot tolerate any delay in the mobilization decision. Our assumption, therefore, is that that decision might take as long as four days (i.e., on the 5th day of the Pact mobilization) unless, of course, the Pact attacks sooner than the 5th day. Though we make some provisions for earlier (and thus smaller) attacks, the earliest attack we program against is one of 40 divisions on the Central Front 4 days after Pact mobilization starts. We also specify
