Foreign Relations of the United States, 1958–1960 Volume V American Republics Microfiche Supplement Editor Harriet D. Schwar Editor in Chief John P. Glennon Department of State Washington 1991

DEPARTMENT OF STATE PUBLICATION 9896 Bureau of Public Affairs Office of the Historian For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington, D.C. 20402

III About the Digital Edition In creating this digital edition, the Office of the Historian focused on maintaining the original structure of the microfiche supplement while aligning with the current standards of the Foreign Relations series. Numerous documents are partially or completely illegible; those that were known to have had such problems during the preparation of the microfiche were stamped: “Best copy available” and the editors have indicated gaps in legibility by inserting “[illegible in the original].” All brackets, except those indicating illegible or redacted text, are in the original. During review, the editors discovered the following problems with images in the microfiche edition and made the following corrections: Documents in the Nicaragua chapter (NI–1 to NI–26) have received the normalized prefix of “NI–” to the document identifier rather than the mix of “NI–” and “HU–” prefixes that were previously used in the microfiche version. Documents in the Chile chapter (CH–1 to CH–41) have received the normalized prefix of “CH–” to the document identifier rather than the mix of “CH–” and “CI–” prefixes that were previously used in the microfiche version. Cross-references to the Foreign Relations series have been corrected and expanded throughout the footnotes.

V Preface The publication Foreign Relations of the United States constitutes the official record of the foreign policy of the United States. The printed volumes in the series and the accompanying microfiche supplements include, subject to necessary security considerations, all documents needed to give a comprehensive record of the major foreign policy decisions of the United States together with appropriate materials concerning the facts that contributed to the formulation of policies. Records in the files of the Department of State are augmented by documentation from other government agencies involved in the formulation of foreign policy. The basic documentary diplomatic record presented in the printed volumes of the series and the microfiche supplements is edited by the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State. The editing is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and in accordance with the following official guidance first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925: There may be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating the place in the text where the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing may he omitted for the purpose of concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of policy. However, certain omissions of documents are permissible for the following reasons. a. To avoid publication of matters that would tend to impede current diplomatic negotiations or other business. b. To condense the record and avoid repetition of needless details. c. To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by individuals and by foreign governments. d. To avoid giving needless offense to other nationalities or individuals. e. To eliminate personal opinions presented in despatches and not acted upon by the Department. To this consideration there is one qualification: in connection with major decisions it is desirable, when possible, to show the alternative presented to the Department before the decision was made. Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V The initial research, compilation, and editing of the printed ­volume and microfiche supplement took place in 1980 and 1981. Before select-

VI Preface ing documents, the editors developed a research plan based on the topics to be included and on official records and other documentation in the Department of State and at the Dwight D. Eisenhower Library at Abilene, Kansas. The documents included in the printed volume and in the microfiche supplement present the record of basic U.S. policies toward South America, Central America, and the Caribbean area, and of the major incidents in U.S. relations with the nations in the region. The documentation on multilateral issues and regional U.S. policies contained in the printed volume focuses on U.S. concern in the years 1958–1960 over economic development problems, political instability, the Castro regime in Cuba, Communist activity, the U.S. role in hemisphere defense, and the role of the Organization of American States in promoting stability and peace in the region. The goodwill trips by President Eisenhower, Vice President Nixon, and Dr. Milton Eisenhower, which reflect this concern, are documented in some detail. U.S. bilateral relations with Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico are also covered. A summary of the print volume is printed on pages 47–53. U.S. relations with Cuba and the U.S. attitude toward the regime of Fidel Castro are extensively documented in volume VI. This microfiche supplement presents documents on U.S. economic policies toward the region, including technical assistance, and bilateral relations with the nations of Central and South America and the Caribbean area, except Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, and Cuba. Summaries of the compilations included in the microfiche supplement, with references to specific documents, are printed on pages XLIX–LXXXVIII. This guide to the microfiche supplement contains lists of sources, persons, and abbreviations and a comprehensive index of all the documents, as well as the summaries noted above. The print volume and the microfiche supplement have separate indexes. Compilations on bilateral relations in this volume and in the microfiche supplement include the texts of telegrams from the Department of State to posts in the region containing instructions and policy guidance, telegrams from posts to the Department of State containing reports, analyses, and recommendations; the texts of policy memoranda and reports, and memoranda of conversation between U.S. and foreign officials. In selecting documents for the print volume and microfiche supplement, the editors concentrated on National Security Council and Cabinet meetings, NSC and Department of State policy papers and memoranda that set forth policy options. The editors also selected finished intelligence reports (such as National Intelligence Estimates and intelligence briefings to the NSC) on which policy decisions were made, communications with foreign governments and international

Preface VII organizations, and policy recommendations and analyses sent by U.S. missions abroad to the Department of State. Because the focus of the print volume and the microfiche supplement is on major diplomatic aspects of U.S. policies toward the region, the editors did not document the U.S. military assistance program, intelligence activities, or detailed aspects of economic and cultural relations. They did not, therefore, seek expanded access to foreign affairs records of agencies outside of the Department of State, the White House, and the National Security Council. The editors had complete access to the records of the Department of State including all the central indexed decimal files and the various special decentralized files (lot files) relevant to the volume. At the Eisenhower Library, the editors gave particular attention to the Ann Whitman file, with its master collection of National Security Council records, Cabinet papers, and other important Presidential records. The editors reviewed other pertinent records at the Eisenhower Library, including papers of Secretaries of State John Foster Dulles and Christian A. Herter, and records of the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs. The editors believe that no documentation at the Eisenhower Library relevant to the subject matter was overlooked or withheld. A complete list of the files consulted in preparing both the print volume and the microfiche supplement is on pages XIII–XIX. The editors of the volume are confident that the documents included in the print volume and in the microfiche supplement taken together provide a comprehensive and accurate record of U.S. diplomatic policies toward the Caribbean, Central America, and South America region. The declassification review process for the documents originally selected for this volume, outlined in more detail below, resulted in withholding from publication approximately 3 percent of the manuscript of the print volume and 4 percent of the microfiche supplement. Editorial Methodology The documents in the microfiche supplement are reproduced directly from copies of the original documents. Headings, footnotes, and editorial notes have been added by the editors in a format similar to that of the printed volume. Documents with excisions due to continued classification appear in the supplement with the excised portions shaded in black. Documents that were denied in the declassification review process have been noted by inserting a page containing the document number, its date, and the repository in which it was found. The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Incoming telegrams from U.S. missions are placed according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving

VIII Preface agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted. The document’s source and original classification are contained in the editorial headings at the beginning of each document. Distribution and drafting information, information on the background of important documents and policies, and indications if the President and/or his major policy advisers read the document are in the first footnote. Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not included, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and summarize and provide citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-­hand accounts has been used when applicable to supplement the official record. Declassification Review Procedures Declassification review of the documents selected for publication was conducted by the Division of Historical Documents Review, Bureau of Diplomatic Security, Department of State. The review was made in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy Act, and the criteria established in Executive Order 12356 regarding: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations; 2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security; 3) foreign government information; 4) intelligence activities (including special activities) or intelligence sources or methods, 5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States; 6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security; 7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities; 8) cryptology; and 9) a confidential source. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and appropriate foreign governments regarding documents of those governments. The principle guiding declassification review is to release as much information as is consistent with contemporary requirements of national security and sound foreign relations.

Preface IX N. Stephen Kane supervised the planning and compilation of the chapters that comprise the printed volume and the microfiche supplement, under the direction of Paul Claussen. Editor in Chief John P. Glennon supervised the final preparation of the microfiche supplement for publication. Mr. Kane compiled the sections on regional economic policies and relations with Colombia. Carl N. Raether compiled the sections on U.S. relations with Honduras and Panama. Evans Gerakas prepared compilations on Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Peru. Other compilations were prepared by Edith James (Bolivia, Chile. Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela); Aaron D. Miller (Nicaragua); and Nina J. Noring (Dominican Republic, Haiti). W. Taylor Fain III prepared the summary of the printed volume. Summaries of individual compilations in the microfiche supplement were prepared by Mr. Glennon, Edward C. Keefer, David W. Mabon, Charles S. Sampson, Harriet D. Schwar, and Louis H. Smith. Bret D. Bellamy prepared the lists of sources, abbreviations, and names. Rita M. Baker performed the technical editing. Barbara A. Bacon of the Publishing Services Division (Paul M. Washington, Chief (retired)) oversaw production of the volume. Do Mi Stauber prepared the index. William Z. Slany The Historian Bureau of Public Affairs July 1991

XI Contents V List of Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIII List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXI List of Persons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XXIX Summary of Print Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XLIII Summaries of Compilations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XLIX United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XLIX LII LV Colombia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LVII Costa Rica. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LIX Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LXI LXIV El Salvador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LXVI Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LXIX LXXI Honduras. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LXXIV Nicaragua. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LXXVI LXXVII Paraguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LXXX LXXXII Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LXXXIV Venezuela. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LXXXVI

XII Contents American Republics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . El Salvador . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Nicaragua . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Paraguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1023 1138 Venezuela . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1192 1315

XIII List of Sources Unpublished Sources Department of State 1. Central File. The major source of documentation for both the printed volume and the microfiche supplement was the indexed central files, or decimal files, of the Department of State. 2. Lot Files. Documents from the Central Files have been supplemented by materials from decentralized office files, the lot files of the Department of State. A list of the lot files used or consulted follows: ARA Files: Lot 62 D 359 Uruguay desk files for the years 1958–1960, as maintained by the Office of East Coast Affairs of the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. ARA Files: Lot 66 D 94 Honduras desk files for the years 1960–1964, as maintained by the Office of Central American Affairs of the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. ARA Deputy Assistant Secretary Files: Lot 61 D 411 Office files of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (William P. Snow) for the year 1958, as maintained by the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs. ARA Special Assistant Files: Lot 60 D 371 Functional files of the Special Assistant (John C. Hill, Jr.) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs for the years 1958 and 1959, as maintained by the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. ARA Special Assistant Files: Lot 60 D 513 Functional files of the Special Assistant (Henry A. Hoyt and John C. Hill, Jr.) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs for the year 1958, as maintained by the Office of the Special Assistant in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. ARA Special Assistant Files Lot 62 D 24 Office files of the Special Assistant (Frank J. Devine and Park Wollam) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs for the year. 1959–1901, as maintained by the Office of the Special Assistant in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. ARA/ECP Files: Lot 64 D 353 Subject and country files for the years 1957–1962, as maintained by the Office of Regional Economic Policy of the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. ARA/EST Files: Lot 60 D 249 Venezuela desk files for the year 1958, as maintained by the Office of East Coast Affairs. ARA/EST Files: Lot 61 D 319 Venezuela desk files for the years 1958–1959, as maintained by the Office of East Coast Affairs.

XIV List of Sources ARA/EST Files: Lot 62 D 8 Venezuela desk files for the year 1960, as maintained by the Office of East Coast Affairs. ARA/EST Files: Lot 62 D 354 Paraguay desk files for the years 1958–1960, as maintained by the Office of East Coast Affairs. ARA/IAS Files: Lot 65 D 285 Military and security files for the years 1953–1962, as maintained by the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. ARA/IAS Files: Lot 67 D 9 Military and training assistance files for the years 1936–1964, as maintained by the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. ARA/IPA Files: Lot 66 D 230 Economic files for the years 1947–1963, as maintained by the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. ARA/OAP Files: Lot 61 D 110 Chronological and subject files relating to Central America for the years 1957–1958, including correspondence with Ambassador Whiting Willauer, Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s trip to Central America in 1958, and activities of the United Fruit Company, retired by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs. ARA/OAP Files: Lot 64 D 67 Panama desk files for the year 1959, as maintained by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. ARA/PAN Files Lot 65 D 176 Panama desk files for the years 1960–1962, as maintained by the Office of Panamanian Affairs. ARA/REA Files: Lot 62 D 303 Country, subject, and chronological files for the years 1957–1961, as maintained by the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. ARA/REA Files: Lot 63 D 210 Country, subject, and chronological files for the years 1952–1961, as maintained by the Office of Inter American Regional Economic Affairs. ARA/REA Files: Lot 63 D 211 Subject and country files for the year 1960, as maintained by the Office of Inter- American Regional Economic Affairs. ARA/REA Files: Lot 63 D 415 Mutual Security Program and International Cooperation Administration files for the years 1952–1962, as maintained by the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. ARA/WST Files: Lot 61 D 45 Working files of the Officer in Charge of Peruvian Affairs, Sandy M. Pringle, for the years 1957–1958. ARA/WST Files: Lot 62 D 16 Bolivia desk files for the year 1958, as maintained by the Office of West Coast Affairs of the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs.

List of Sources XV ARA/WST Files: Lot 62 D 31 Chile desk files for the year 1959, as maintained by the Office of West Coast Affairs. ARA/WST Files: Lot 62 D 429 Bolivia desk files for the year 1959, as maintained by the Office of West Coast Affairs. ARA/WST Files: Lot 63 D 20 Colombia desk files for the years 1959–1960, as maintained by the Office of West Coast Affairs. ARA/WST Files: Lot 63 D 61 Bolivia desk files for the year 1960, as maintained by the Office of West Coast Affairs. ARA/WST Files: Lot 63 D 85 Chile desk files for the year 1960, as maintained by the Office of West Coast Affairs. ARA/WST Files: Lot 64 D 1 Colombia desk files for the year 1960–1961, as maintained by the Office of West Coast Affairs. Cabinet Meetings: Lot 68 D 350 Memoranda, cabinet agenda, and miscellaneous files on foreign policy subjects taken up at Presidential Cabinet meetings for the years 1953–1965, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State for the years 1955–1958, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Conference Files: Lot 64 D 559 Chronological files on visits by various foreign dignitaries to the United States and on various international conferences abroad for the year 1960, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Conference Files: Lot 64 D 560 Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States and on major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State for the years 1958–1959, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Current Economic Developments: Lot 70 D 467 Master set of the Department of State classified internal publication Current Economic Developments for the years 1945–1969, as maintained by the Bureau of Economic Affairs. EST Files: Lot 61 D 172 Office of Brazilian Affairs files for the years 1958–1959, retired by the Officer in Charge of Brazilian Affairs in the Office of East Coast Affairs. EST Files: Lot 61 D 332 Chronological files for the years 1957–1959 and files of Vice President Nixon’s trip to South America in 1958, retired by the Office of East Coast Affairs. EST Files: Lot 62 D 308 Brazil desk files for the years 1959–1960, retired by the Officer in Charge of Brazilian Affairs in the Office of East Coast Affairs.

XVI List of Sources INR Files Files retained by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. INR–NIE Files Files of National Intelligence Estimates, Special Estimates, and Special National Intelligence Estimates, retained by the Directorate for Regional Research in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. OAP Files: Lot 60 D 647 Guatemala desk files for the years 1956–1958, retired by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. OAP Files: Lot 61 D 7 Costa Rica desk files for the year 1958, retired by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. OAP Files: Lot 61 D 473 General subject files for the year 1959, retired by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. OAP Files: Lot 63 D 127 General subject files for the year 1960, as maintained by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. OAP Files: Lot 63 D 146 Guatemala desk files for the years 1959–1960, as maintained by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. OAP Files: Lot 64 D 16 Subject files of the Officer in Charge of El Salvador Affairs for the year 1960, as maintained by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. OAP Files: Lot 64 D 17 Subject files on Guatemala for the years 1959–1961, as maintained by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. OAP Files: Lot 64 D 66 Costa Rica desk files for the years 1958–1961, retired by the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. OAS Files Lot 60 D 665 Basic collection of records of meetings of the Oragnization of American States, other major inter-American governmental organizations, and inter-American conferences together with related subject files for the years 1939–1962, as maintained by the Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs. PPS Files: Lot 67 D 548 Subject, country, and chronological files; documents; drafts; and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff for the years 1957–1961. Presidential Correspondence: Lot 64 D 174 Exchanges of correspondence between President Eisenhower and heads of foreign governments, excluding the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and the Soviet Union, for the years 1953–1960, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

List of Sources XVII Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149 A complete chronological record of cleared memoranda of conversations with foreign visitors for the years 1956–1964, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. REA Files: Lot 61 D 248 Chronological country and subject files relating to general economic matters for the years 1955–1959, including sugar and coffee, miscellaneous conference files, and Mutual Security Program estimates, retired by the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. REA Files: Lot 62 D 302 Subject, country, and chronological files relating to economic matters for the years 1960–1961, retired by the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. Rio de Janeiro Embassy Files. Lot 65 F 4 Classified central files of the Embassy in Rio de Janeiro for the years 1956–1958, which

XVIII List of Sources S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351 Serial file of National Security Council documents and correspondence for the years 1947–1961, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95 Administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council documentation, including NSC Records of Action, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. S/S–OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430 Master file of the Operations Coordinating Board for the years 1953–1960, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat. USOAS Files: Lot 72 D 291 Master sets of documents of the Council of the Organization of American States for the years 1948–1967. Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas Council on Foreign Economic Policy (CFEP) Records Records of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy for the years 1955–1961 Dulles Papers Papers of John Foster Dulles for the years 1952–1959. Herter Papers Papers of Christian A. Herter for the years 1957–1961. President’s Daily Appointments Daily appointment books of Dwight D. Eisenhower as President, 1953–1961. Project “Clean Up” Records Project “Clean Up” collection. Records of Gordon Gray, Robert Cutler, H. Romer McPhee, and Andrew J. Goodpaster. Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Records Records of the Special Assistant for National Security Affairs for the years 1952–1961, including records of Robert Cutler, Dillon Anderson, and Gordon Gray. Staff Secretary Records Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary (Paul T. Carroll, Andrew J. Goodpaster, L. Arthur Minnich, and Christopher H. Russell), for the years 1952–1961. White House Central Files Records of Dwight D. Eisenhower as President, 1953–1961. Whitman File Papers of Dwight D. Eisenhower as President of the United States, 1953–1961, as maintained by his personal secretary, Ann C. Whitman The Whitman File includes the following elements: the Name Series, the Dulles-Herter Series, Eisenhower (DDE) Diaries, Ann Whitman (ACW) Diaries, National Security Council (NSC) Records, Cabinet Papers, Legislative Meetings, International Meetings, the Administration Series, and the International File.

List of Sources XIX Published Sources Documentary Collections and Periodicals Organization of American States Annals of the Organization of American Stales, vol. VIII,

XXI List of Abbreviations ACSI, Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence AD, Acción Democrática (Democratic Action Party), Venezuela ADU, Acción Democrática Unitas (United Democratic Action), Nicaraguan political group AEC, Atomic Energy Commission AFCIN, Air Force Intelligence AFL, American Federation of Labor AFL-CIO, American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations AFP (AF&P), American and Foreign Power Company ALCOA, Aluminum Company of America ANDE, Administración Nacional de Electridad (National Administration of Electricity), Uruguay AP, Associated Press APRA, Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana (American Popular Revolutionary Alliance), Peruvian political party ARA, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State ARA/REA, Office of Inter-American Economic Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State ARMA, Army Attaché ASW, anti-­submarine warfare AV, Aviation Division, Department of State BAR, Browning automatic rifle BMEWS, Ballistic Missile Early Warning System BNDE, Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Economico (National Bank for Economic Development), Brazil C, Counselor of the Department of State CA, Central America CA, circular airgram CAB, Civil Aeronautics Board CABEI, Central American Bank for Economic Integration CADE, Compañía Argentina de Electricidad (Electric Company of Argentina) Cahto, series indicator for telegrams from Secretary of State Herter while away from Washington CAIRC, Caribbean Air Command CAP, Corporación Argentina de Productores de Carnes (Argentine Meat Producers Corporation) CARE, Cooperative for American Remittances to Everywhere, until July 30, 1958; thereafter Cooperative for American Relief to Everywhere CCC, Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of Agriculture CFEP, Council on Foreign Economic Policy CG, Commanding General; Consulate General CGS, Confederación General de Sindicatos (General Conferderation of Trade Unions), El Salvador CGT, Confederación General del Trabajo (General Confederation of Labor), Argentina CGTS, Confederación General de Trabajadores Salvadorenos (General Confederation of Salvadoran Workers) CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

XXII List of Abbreviations CINC, Commander in Chief CINCARIB, Commander in Chief, Caribbean CIO, Congress of Industrial Organizations cirtel, circular telegram CIVI, Corpo Identificación, Vigilancia, y Investigación (Identification, Vigilance, and Investigation Corps), Peru CMA, Office of Caribbean-Mexican Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State COAS, Council of the Organization of American States COB, Central Obrera Boliviana (Bolivian Labor Central, Bolivian Workers Federation) COCOM, Coordinating Committee of the Paris Consultative Group of Nations working to control export of strategic goods to Communist countries Codel Nixon, series indicator for telegrams concerning Vice Presidential delegation travel COMIBOL (CMB), Corporación Minera de Bolivia (Bolivian Mining Corporation) COPEI, Partido Social Cristiano Copei (Venezuelan Christian Socialist Party) CORFO, Corporación de Fomento de la Producción (Production Development Corporation), Chile CORPOSNA, Corporación de Obras Sanitarias de Asunción (Sanitary Corporation of Asuncion), Paraguay CP, Cabinet Paper CPN, Coalición Patriotica Nacional (National Patriotic Coalition), Panama Cr, cruzeiro (Brazil) CTAL, Confederación de Trabajadores de America Latina (Confederation of Latin American Workers) CTC, Confederación de Trabajadores de Cuba (Confederation of Cuban Workers) CTP, Confederación de Trabajadores de Peru (Confederations of Workers of Peru) DA, Department of the Army, Defense Attaché DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission DD, destroyer DE, destroyer escort Depcirtel, Department of State circular telegram Deptel, Department of State telegram DLF, Development Loan Fund DLM, Dominican Liberation Movement DLP, Democratic Labor Party, West Indies DOD, Department of Defense DPA, Defense Production Act Dulte, series indicator for telegrams from Secretary of State Dulles while away from Washington E, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State ECLA, United Nations Economic Council on Latin America ECP, Office of Regional Economic Policy, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State ECU, Engineering Construction Unit ED, Investment and Economic Development Staff, Office of Financial and Development Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State EDT, Eastern Daylight Time Emb, Embassy EmbOff, Embassy officer Fmbtel, Embassy telegram EST, Office of East Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

List of Abbreviations XXIII EST/A, Officer in Charge of Argentine Affairs, Office of East Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State EST/B, Officer in Charge of Brazilian Affairs, Office of East Coast Affairs, bureau of Inter- American Affairs, Department of State Exim (Eximbank), Export-Import Bank of Washington FAO, Food and Agricultural Organization, United Nations FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation FCDA, Federal Civil Defense Administration FCN, Friendship, Commerce and Navigation (Treaty) FHA, Federal Housing Administration FHLB, Federal Home Loan Bank FLP, Federal Labor Party, West Indies FM, Assistant Secretary of the Army (Financial Management) FonOff, Foreign Office FSB, Falange Socialista de Bolivia (Socialist Falange Party of Bolivia) FSO, Foreign Service officer FY, Final Year FYI, for your information G, gourde (Haiti) G, Deputy Secretary of State G-2, Army general staff section dealing with intelligence at the divisional level or higher GAF, Guatemalan Air Force GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade GCR (GOCR), Government of Costa Rica GNP, gross national product GOA, Government of Argentina GOB, Government of Bolivia; Government of Brazil GOC, Government of Chile, Government of Colombia; Government of Costa Rica GODR, Government of the Dominican Republic GOES, Government of El Salvador GOG, Government of Guatemala GOH, Government of Haiti; Government of Honduras GON, Government of Nicaragua GOP, Government of Panama; Government of Paraguay; Government of Peru GOV, Government of Venezuela GSA, General Services Administration H, Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations HEW, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare HOLC, Home Owners Loan Corporation IA, Inter-American IADB, Inter-American Defense Board IACC, Inter-American Cultural Convention IA-ECOSOC, Inter-American Economic and Social Council IAPC, Inter-American Peace Committee IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ICA, International Cooperation Administration ICA/W, headquarters of the International Cooperation Administration in Washington ICAITI, Instituto Centroamericano de Investigación y Tecnologia Industrial (Central American Research Institute for Industry and Technology) ICE, Instituto Costarricense de Electrididad (Costa Rican Institute of Electricity)

XXIV List of Abbreviations ICEM, Intergovernmental Committee for European Migration ICFTU, International Confederation of Free Trade Unions ICJ, International Court of Justice, The Hague IDA, International Development Association IFC, International Finance Corporation IIAA, Institute of Inter-American Affairs IMF, International Monetary Fund IND, Partido Independiente (Independent Party), Costa Rica INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State INS, Immigration and Naturalization Service IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State IR, Integración Republicana (Republican Integration), Venezuelan political party IRCA, International Railways of Central America ISA, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs ITC, International Tin Council JBUSDC, Joint Brazil-United States Defense Commission JBUSMC, Joint Brazil United States Military Commission JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff JMUSDC, Joint Mexico-United States Defense Commission L, Legal Adviser, Department of State LA, Latin America LAV, Linea Aeropostal Venezolana (Venezuelan Airpostal Lines), Venezuelan airline LORAN, Long-Range Navigational Aid M, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs MA, Military Attaché MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group MAP, Military Assistance Program MC, Division of Munitions Control, Department of State MDAP, Mutual Defense Assistance Program MDN, Movimiento Democrático Nacionalista (Nationalist Democratic Movement), Guatemalan political party MDP, Movimiento Democrático Peruano (Peruvian Democratic Movement), Peruvian political party MFM, Meetings of Foreign Ministers MID, Office of Middle American Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State MNR, Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario (Nationalist Revolutionary Movement), Bolivian political party MSA, Mutual Security Assistance; Mutual Security Act; Mutual Security Agency MSF, minesweeper, fleet MSP, Mutual Security Program NAC, National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems NACOIIA (NACIAA), National Advisory Committee on Inter-American Affairs NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization NCG, National Council of Government, Uruguay NCWC, National Catholic Welfare Conference niact, night action, communications indicator requiring attention by the recipient at any hour of the day or night NIE, National Intelligence Estimate NSC, National Security Council

List of Abbreviations XXV OAP, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State OAP/N, Officer in Charge of Nicaraguan Affairs, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State OAS, Organization of American States OCB, Operations Coordinating Board OCDM, Office of Civilian and Defense Mobilization ODECA, Organización de Estados Centroamericanos (Organization of Central American States) OEA, Organización de Estados Americanos (Organization of American States) OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OFD, Office of International Financial and Development Affairs, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State OIC, Officer in Charge OISP, Overseas Internal Security Program OPA, Operation Pan America OPAR(s), Operations Program Approval Request(s) (administrative form(s) used by the international Cooperation Administration to request allocation(s) of local currency resources) ORIT, Organizacion Regional Interamericana de Trabajadores (Inter-American Regional Organization of Workers) OSA, Office of South American Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State PA, purchase authorization PAO, Public Affairs officer PAR, Partido Acción Revolucionaria (Revolutionary Action Party), Guatemala PBOS, Planning Board for Ocean Shipping (NATO) PCA, Partido Comunista de Argentina (Communist Party of Argentina) PCB, Partido Comunista de Bolivia (Communist Party of Bolivia) PCE, patrol craft PCP, Partido Comunista de Paraguay (Communist Party of Paraguay); Partido Comunista Peruano (Communist Party of Peru) PCV, Partido Comunista Venezolano (Communist Party of Venezuela) PEMEX, Petroleos Mexicanos, S.A. (Mexican Petroleum Corporation) Petrobras, Petroleo Brasileiro, S.A. (Brazilian Petroleum Corporation) PGT, Partido Guatemalteco del Trabajo (Guatemalan Labor Party), Communist Party of Guatemala PLN, Partido Liberación Nacional (National Liberation Party), Costa Rica PMG, Postmaster General POR, Partido Obrero Revolucionario (Revolutionary Workers Party), a Trotskyite faction of the Bolivian Communist Party PR, Partido Revolucionario (Revolutionary Party), Guatemala PRAM, Partido Revolucionario April y Mayo (April-May Revolutionary Party), El Salvador PRG, Partido de la Revolución Guatemalteca (Party of the Guatemalan Revolution) PRUD, Partido Revolucionario de Unificación Democratica (Revolutionary Party of Democratic Unification), El Salvador PSD, Partido Social Domocrático (Social Democratic Party), Brazil PSD/ICA/W, Public Safety Division, International Cooperation Administration, Washington PSP, Partido Socialista Popular (Popular Socialist Party), Cuban Communist Party PUN, Partido Union Nacional (National Union Party), Costa Rica REA, Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

XXVI List of Abbreviations RPA, Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State RPA/S, Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs, Security and Military Assistance, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State S, Office of the Secretary of State S/AE, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Atomic Energy Affairs SAMF, Sindicato de Acción y Mejoramiento de los Ferrocarrileros (Railwaymen’s Action and Improvement Union), Guatemala SCA, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs, Department of State SCIDA, Servicio Cooperativo Interamericano de Agricultura (Inter-American Cooperative Agricultural Service), United States agricultural cooperation with Guatemala SCIPA, Servicio Cooperativo Interamericano de Producción de Alimentos (Inter-American Cooperative Service for Food Production), Peru SCISP, Servicio Cooperativo Interamericano de Salud Publica (Inter-American Cooperative Public Health Service) SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Secto, series indicator for telegrams to the Department of State from the Secretary of State or his delegation at international conferences SHAPE, Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers in Europe Sitrep, Situation Report SOMISA, Sociedad Mixta Siderurgia Argentina (Mixed Steel Company of Argentina) S/P, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State SS, submarine Stat., U.S. Statutes at Large STICA, Servicio Tecnico Interamericano Agricola (Inter-American Technical Service for Agricultural Cooperation) SUMOC, Superintendencia da Moeda e do Credito (Superintendency of Money and Credit), Brazil TAC, Trade Agreement Committee (Interdepartmental Committee on Trade Agreements) TC, technical cooperation TCA, Technical Cooperation Administration Tedul, series indicator for telegrams to Secretary of State Dulles while away from Washington TIAS, Treaties and other International Acts Series Tomur, series indicator for telegrams concerning Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Murphy TPC, Trade Policy Committee U, Office of the Under Secretary of State UAR, United Arab Republic UBD, Uruguayan Political Party UCR, Union Cívica Radical (Radical Civic Union), Argentina UCRI, Union Cívica Radical Intransigente (Intransigent Radical Civic Union), Argentina UCRP, Union Cívica Radical del Pueblo (People’s Radical Civic Union), Argentina UDN, Uniao Democratica Nacional (National Democratic Union), Brazilian political party UFCO, United Fruit Company U/MSC, Office of the Deputy Coordinator for Mutual Security, Department of State UN, United Nations UNEF, United Nations Emergency Force UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNGA, United Nations General Assembly UNICEF, United Nations International Children’s Fund UNO, Nicaraguan Opposition Union

List of Abbreviations XXVII UNTAA, United Nations Technical Assistance Administration UP, United Press UPD, Democratic Patriotic Union, Dominican exile organization URD, Union Republicana Democrática (Republican Democratic Union), Venezuelan political party USARCARIB, United States Army, Caribbean USAF, United States Air Force USC, United States Code USDel, United States delegation USIA, United States Information Agency USIS, United States Information Service USMA, United States Military Attaché USMC, United States Marine Corps USOM, United States Operations Mission USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics UST, United States Treaties and Other International Agreements UTE, Administración General de las Usinas Electrica y los Telefonos del Estado (General Administration of State Electric Power and Telephone Services), Uruguay VARIG, Empresa de Viacao Aerea Riograndense, S.A., Brazilian commercial airline W, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs until July 30, 1958; thereafter Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs W/MSC, Office of the Special Assistant for Mutual Security Co-­ordination, Department of State WFTU, World Federation of Trade Unions WHO, World Health Organization WHO/PAHO, Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization WST, Office of West Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State YPF, Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales (National Petroleum Company), Argentina YPFB, Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales Boliviano (Bolivian National Petroleum Petroleum Corporation)

XXIX List of Persons Editor’s Note: The identification of the persons in this list is generally limited to circumstances and positions under reference in this volume. All titles and positions are American unless there is an indication to the contrary. Where no dates are given, the official held the position throughout the period covered by this volume. Achilles, Theodore C., Ambassador to Peru until January 1960; Counselor of the Department of State from March 1960 Acly, R. Austin, Counselor of the Embassy in Panama until August 1959 Acosta, Eduardo, Minister and Petroleum Counselor of the Venezuelan Embassy in the United States, April 1958–January 1959 Adair, Charles W., Jr., Chief, Trade Agreements and Treaties Division, Office of International Trade, Department of State until June 1958; Director, Office of International Financial and Development Affairs, June 1958–October 1959; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs from November 1959 Adams, Sherman, The Assistant to the President until November 1958 Alejos, Carlos, Guatemalan Ambassador to the United States from June 1960. Alejos, Roberto, Guatemalan Coordinator of Ministers until March 1959; adviser to President Ydígoras Alessandri Rodriguez, Jorge, President of Chile from November 1958 Allen, George V., Director of the United States Information Agency Allende, Salvador, Chilean Marxist Senator Alvarado Puerto, Andres, Honduran Minister of Natural Resources until 1958; Foreign Minister from 1958 Anderson, Robert B., Secretary of the Treasury Andrade, Victor, Bolivian Ambassador to the United States until October 1958, and again

XXX List of Persons Barfield, John D., Second Secretary of the Embassy in the Dominican Republic until August 1960; thereafter Consul Barnes, Robert G., Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Mutual Security Affairs until March 1958; Special Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination, March 1958–July 1959 Barrau Pelaez, Manuel, Bolivian Foreign Minister until October 1958; Ambassador to the

List of Persons XXXI Brand, Vance, Director, Export-Import Bank; also Director, Development Loan Fund from September 2, 1959 Brewster, Robert C., Staff Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, March–April 1958; Staff Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, April 1958–April 1959; Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, April-June 1959; Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State, June 1959–August 1960 Briggs, William T., Office of South American Affairs, Department of State, until September 1958; Officer in Charge of Brazilian Affairs, Office of East Coast Affairs, September 1958–March 1959; Deputy Director, Office of East Coast Affairs, March 1959–August 1960 Brucker, Wilber M., Secretary of the Army Burke, Admiral Arleigh A., USN, Chief of Naval Operations Burr, Jorge, Counselor of the Chilean Embassy in the United States until January 1959; thereafter Minister-Counselor Burrows, Charles R., Minister-Counselor of the Embassy in Venezuela until August

XXXII List of Persons Coughran, Thomas B., Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs until 1958; thereafter Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Cruz Salazar, Colonel Jose Luis, Presidential candidate in the Guatemalan elections of

List of Persons XXXIII Falcon Briceno, Marcos, Venezuelan Ambassador to the United States, August 14, 1958– November 11, 1960 Falla Caceres, Ricardo, member of the Salvadoran Junta from October 26, 1960 Farland, Joseph F., Ambassador to the Dominican Republic until May 28, 1960; Ambassador to Panama from August 29, 1960 Farley, Philip J., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Atomic Energy Affairs until March 1958; thereafter Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Disarmament and Atomic Energy Affairs Figueres Ferrer, José, President of Costa Rica until May 8, 1958

XXXIV List of Persons Guevara Serna, Major Ernesto (“Che”), head of Industrial Department, Cuban National Institute of Industrial Reform from 1959; President of the National Bank of Cuba from November 26, 1959 Gutierrez Gomez, José, Colombian Ambassador to the United States until October 16, 1959 Haedo, Eduardo Victor, member of the Uruguayan National Government Council Hagerty, James C., Press Secretary to the President Hammond, Henry S., Counselor for Economic Affairs of the Embassy in the Dominican Republic until March 1959; First Secretary–Labor Attaché of the Embassy in Cuba, March 1959–October 1960; thereafter Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs, Department of State Hanes, John W., Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until January 1959; thereafter Administrator, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs Harley, Charles R., Chief of the Latin American Division, Office of International Finance, Department of the Treasury Harr, Karl G., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs until Match 1958; thereafter Special Assistant to the President and Vice Chairman of the Operations Coordinating Board Harrington, Julian F., Ambassador to Panama until July 14, 1960, Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration from August 1960 Harrison, Faustino, member of the Uruguayan National Government Council Hazera, Jorge, Minister-Counselor of the Costa Rican Embassy in the United States until 1960 Hemba, Alton W., First Secretary of the Embassy in El Salvador until July 1959; Officer in Charge of Brazilian Affairs, Office of East Coast Affairs, Department of State, July 1959–August 1960; thereafter Deputy Director, Office of East Coast Affairs Henderson, Horace, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration, June 1958–January 1959; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Henderson, Loy, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration Hernandez Volio, Alfredo, Costa Rican Minister of Economy and Finance, May 8,

List of Persons XXXV Hoegh, Leo A., Administrator, Federal Civil Defense Administration until July 1, 1958, thereafter Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization Hoghland, John S., II, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations Howe, Fisher, Director of the Executive Secretariat, Department of State, until October 1958 Howe, Walter, Ambassador to Chile from June 1, 1958 Hoyas Osares, Guillermo, Counselor of the Peruvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs from 1958 Hoyt, Henry A., Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs until August 1958; Counselor of the Embassy in Uruguay, August 1958– November 1960; thereafter Counselor of the Embassy in Argentina Ibáñez del Campo, General Carlos, President of Chile until November 3, 1958 Ingersoll, John J., Assistant Officer in Charge of Brazilian Affairs and Officer in Charge of Venezuelan Affairs, Office of South American Affairs, Department of State, until September 1958, Assistant Officer in Charge of Brazilian Affairs, Office of East Coast Affairs, September 1958–August 1959; thereafter Officer in Charge of Venezuelan Affairs Irwin, John N., II, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs until September 1958; thereafter Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Jacobsson, Per, Swedish Managing Director and Chairman of the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund Jamison, Edward A., Counselor for Consular Affairs of the Embassy in Costa Rica until February 1959; Counselor for Consular Affairs of the Embassy in Guatemala, February–

XXXVI List of Persons Leddy, John M., Special Assistant, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, until June 1958; Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, June 1958–June 1959; thereafter Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State Leggett, Herbert B., Officer in Charge of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, Office of Middle American Affairs, Department of State, until September 1958; Deputy Director, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, September 1958–August 1959 Lemus, Lieutenant Colonel José Maria, President of El Salvador until October 26, 1960 Lightner, Edwin Allan, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs until June 1959 Linville, Francis A., Counselor for Economic Affairs of the Embassy in Peru until June 1960 Litsey, Weldon, Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs, Department of State, until August 1959; thereafter First Secretary and Consul General of the Embassy in Argentina Little, Edward S., Officer in Charge of Caribbean Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State, until September 1958; Deputy Director, Office of Caribbean and Mexican Affairs, September 1958–September 1959; thereafter Counselor of the Embassy in Ecuador Lleras Camargo, Alberto, President of Colombia from August 7, 1958 Lleras Restrepo, Carlos, leader of the Colombian Liberal Party; Vice President of Colombia from November 1960 Llosa, Rear Admiral Luis Edgardo, Naval Attaché of the Peruvian Embassy in the United States Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr., Representative at the United Nations until September 3, 1960 Lofton, Harry M., Second Secretary–Consul of the Embassy in the Dominican Republic until August 1960; thereafter Consul of the Consultate in the Dominican Republic López Henriquez, Brigadier General Jose, Venezuelan Minister of Defense from July

List of Persons XXXVII Mejia Salazar, Jorge, Colombian Minister of Agriculture until August 7, 1958 Menapace, Robert, Executive Vice President, Inter-American Development Bank, from December 1959 Méndez Montenegro, Mario, Presidential candidate in the Guatemalan election of January 19, 1958 Merchant, Livingston T., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, November 1958–August 1959; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, August– December 1959; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from December 1959 Miller, Colonel Henry W., USA (ret.), Director of the United States Operations Mission in El Salvador Miller, Rear Admiral William, USN, Assistant Chief of Naval Operations, Plans and Policy from 1959 Minnich, L. Arthur, Jr., Assistant Staff Secretary to the President until August 6, 1960 Montiel Arguello, Alejandro, Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Mora, José A., Secretary General of the Organization of American States Moreno, Miguel J., Jr., Panamanian Foreign Minister Moreno Cordova, Hugo, Bolivian Minister of Finance and Economy (Finance and Statistics) until 1959 Morgan, Gerald D., Special Counsel to the President until 1958; Deputy Assistant to the President from 1958 Morse, True D., Under Secretary of Agriculture Morse, Wayne, Democratic Senator from Oregon; Chairman of the Subcommittee on American Republics Affairs, Senate Foreign Relations Committee Muccio, John J., Ambassador to Guatemala from February 1, 1960 Mueller, Frederick H. Assistant Secretary of Commerce until November 1958; Under

XXXVIII List of Persons Paarlberg, Don, Assistant Secretary of Agriculture until October 1958; thereafter Special Assistant to the President for Economic Affairs Paes de Almeida, Sebastiao, President of the Bank of Brazil until June 1959; Acting Minister of Finance, June–July 1959; thereafter Minister of Finance Parada, General Alan, Salvadoran Minister of Defense until October 26, 1960 Parker, Roberto A., Salvadoran Minister of Public Works until October 26, 1960 Paz Lstenssoro, Victor, Bolivian Ambassador to the United Kingdom until 1960; President of Bolivia from August 6, 1960 Peñaloza, Luis, President of the Central Bank of Bolivia Pérez Alfonso, Juan Pablo, Venezuelan Minister of Mines and Petroleum from February

List of Persons XXXIX Ramírez Pinto, Colonel Arturo, Guatemalan Ambassador to Mexico, 1958–1959;

XL List of Persons Shillock, John C., Jr., First Secretary–Consul of the Embassy in Panama, February–July 1959; thereafter Counselor and Consul Silberstein, Joseph A., Officer in Charge of West Coast Affairs, Office of South American Affairs, Department of State, until September 1958; Deputy Director, Office of West Coast Affairs, September 1958–June 1960 Siles Zuarzo, Hernan, President of Bolivia until August 8, 1960 Sinn, Melvin E., Second Secretary and Consul of the Embassy in Uruguay until September 1960; thereafter Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs Siracusa, Ernest V., Officer in Charge of Brazilian Affairs, Office of South American Affairs, Department of State, until September 1958; Director, Office of West Coast

List of Persons XLI Taylor, Henry L., Officer in Charge of Costa Rican-Nicaraguan Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State, until April 1959; Officer in Charge of Nicaraguan Affairs, April 1959–October 1960 Tello Baurraud, Manuel, Mexican Foreign Minister from December 1, 1958 Thorndike, Augusto, Peruvian Minister of Justice until January 8, 1958; Minister of

XLII List of Persons Wells, Milton K., Counselor of the Embassy in Colombia from January 1958 Wheaton, Anne W., Associate Press Secretary to the President Whelan, Thomas E., Ambassador to Nicaragua White, Paul Lincoln, Chief of the News Division, Department of State White, General Thomas D., USAF, Chief of Staff of the Air Force Whitehouse, Charles S., Special Assistant, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, until June 1958; Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, June 1958–March 1959 Whiteman, Marjorie M., Attorney-Adviser, Inter-American Area, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs, Department of State, until October 1958; thereafter Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs Wieland, William A., Director, Office of Middle American Affairs. Department of State, until September 1958; Director, Office of Caribbean and Mexican Affairs, September 1958–October 1960 Willauer, Whiting, Ambassador to Honduras until March 24, 1958; Ambassador to Costa Rica from May 5, 1958 Willis, George H., Director, Office of International Finance, Department of the Treasury; also Secretary of the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems Wilson, Jackson W., Office of South American Affairs, Department of State, until September 1958; Officer in Charge of Nicaraguan Affairs, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, September 1958–August 1960; thereafter Officer in Charge of Brazilian Affairs, Office of East Coast Affairs Wilson, Simon N., Office of Inter-American Regional Poltical Affairs, Department of State, until October 1958; thereafter Officer in Charge of Inter-American Organizations and Conferences, Office of Inter-American Regional Political Affairs Woodward, Robert F., Ambassador to Costa Rica until March 15, 1958; Ambassador to Uruguay from April 21, 1958 Yanes Urías, Colonel César, member of the Salvadoran Junta from October 26, 1960 Ydígoras Fuentes, General Miguel, President of Guatemala from March 2, 1958 Young, John P., Chief, International Finance Division, Office of International Financial and Development Affairs, Department of State Yriat, Juan F., Director General, Uruguayan Foreign Office.

XLIII Summary of Print Volume Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text of the print volume. The print volume presents documentation on U.S. relations with the nations of Latin America and the Caribbean during the last 3 years of the Eisenhower administration. The volume first focuses upon general U.S. policy toward Latin America during the period and U.S. policy regarding hemispheric defense and military assistance to the American republics. Also included are principal records regarding the visits by Vice President Richard M. Nixon to South America in April and May 1958, Dr. Milton Eisenhower to Central America later that August, and President Eisenhower to South America in February and March 1960. The volume covers the Fifth Meeting of Consultation of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics held in Santiago, Chile in

XLIV Summary of Print Volume In January and February 1960, the administration moved to reevaluate its Latin American policy in the wake of the Cuban Revolution and the intensification of Soviet and communist propaganda and political activities in the region. Accordingly, the National Security Council discussed the need to discourage Latin American governments from pursuing relations with the Soviet bloc (13) and to provide them with increased economic support (14). The nature of U.S. military policy toward Latin America was

Summary of Print Volume XLV the region (46). The violence was attributed by U.S. officials who accompanied the Vice President to be orchestrated by communist agents. The demonstrations prevented Nixon from carrying out many of his scheduled activities in Venezuela. An analysis of the Vice President’s trip made by the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs on May 15, the day of his return to Washington, concluded that the visit had essentially been a success from the United States’ standpoint, even in Peru and Venezuela. It argued that the confrontations had been directed primarily by communist-­led organizations and that the revulsion that the violence caused among the peoples of the countries visited by the official party would benefit the United States in Latin America (54). On May 22, the Vice President himself reported on his trip to the National Security Council indicating that the dangers of communism in Latin America were greater than at any time before. He was concerned that few of the democratically-­elected political figures with whom he had met properly understood the insidious nature of the threat in their countries. The people themselves, he believed, were more wary of the return of traditional right-­wing dictatorships than of the threat of communist-­led revolution (56). In view of the difficulties experienced by the Vice President’s official party in May, precautions were taken to ensure the safety of the President’s brother, Dr. Milton Eisenhower, during his subsequent goodwill trip to Central America that year. His trip was delayed from June to July 1958 while detailed reports from the Central Intelligence Agency and the appropriate embassies were prepared to assess the likelihood of anti- U.S. demonstrations during the visit (61, 64). The President, the Secretary of State, and the Director of Central Intelligence were all involved in the decision-­making process leading to the successful and peaceful trip of

XLVI Summary of Print Volume Tensions between Rafael Trujillo’s Dominican Republic and Cuba as well as newly-­democratic Venezuela were near the boiling point. The U.S. Government, although reluctant to back the autocratic Trujillo against his neighbors, was nevertheless determined to uphold the principles of non-­intervention and non-­aggression in the hemisphere. It suggested that tensions in the region be reduced through a meeting of the Western Hemisphere’s Foreign Ministers (81). The Council of the Organization of American States approved the proposal on July 13 (82). The meeting opened in Santiago, Chile, on August 12. Secretary Herter addressed its second plenary session the following day and called for a new declaration of principles of the inter-American system, formation of a special temporary committee to study the Caribbean situation, and authorization for a permanent committee, such as the Peace Committee, to make a study of the problems underlying the tensions in the Caribbean (94). Herter cabled the President on August 17 that the meeting had been a success and that the U.S. proposals had been “reduced to concrete, satisfactory resolutions” (98). The conference ended the next day. The political situation in the Caribbean remained volatile, however, and continued to concern U.S. policymakers The Eisenhower administration feared that the numerous revolutionary movements in the region, inspired and supported by the Castro regime, were communist influenced and anti-American in character (112). The U.S. Government decided to pursue a policy of opposing foreign-­based revolutionary movements (118). Of particular concern to the United States was the security of its military facilities in the Caribbean and the continuation of its military assistance programs in the region. A Special National Intelligence Estimate of March 10, 1959 concluded that the United States would be able to retain access to its military facilities but would probably be met with local demands to alter the terms of agreements governing them (111). In April 1959, the U.S. Government distributed an Aide-Mémoire to its European Allies which stated that because of unsettled conditions in the region the United States had adopted a practice of examining carefully on a case-­by-­case basis requests for military assistance to the Caribbean (117). As British power declined in the Caribbean, U.S. policymakers agreed on the need for the United States to play a larger role in defending its interests in the region traditionally protected by the United Kingdom. The emerging nations of the area, such as those within the nascent West Indies Federation, it was recognized, would present new foreign policy challenges to the United States. On March 21, 1960, the National Security Council adopted a “Statement of U.S. Policy Toward the West Indies” to help define and address these challenges (129). On

Summary of Print Volume XLVII June 22, the OCB presented the Council an “Operations Plan for the West Indies” to guide U.S. policy in the region (140). U.S. relations with Argentina between 1958 and 1960 remained friendly. The Eisenhower administration welcomed the election in February 1958 of Dr. Arturo Frondizi as Argentina’s President after a period of military rule (140). Argentina’s economy was a shambles in early 1958, and U.S. policymakers recognized the role that wisely administered economic aid could play in securing the Frondizi government’s friendship. Argentina might otherwise be tempted to seek assistance from the Soviet bloc Frondizi made an official visit to Washington in January 1959 during which President Eisenhower congratulated him on his efforts to restore his country’s democracy and rejuvenate its economy (167). Frondizi used the occasion to request more economic aid and to ask for credits with which to purchase U.S. military equipment (168). The question of military credits to Argentina occupied policymakers for much of

XLVIII Summary of Print Volume State Dulles, viewed the plan as laudible in its intention yet unrealistic and potentially divisive in its reliance on American funding (254, 261). Despite tensions between the nations, President Eisenhower’s visit to Brazil in February 1960 was very successful. Eisenhower’s personal popularity with the Brazilian people was credited with having contributed to a more positive tone in U.S.-Brazilian relations, although nothing concrete resulted from his visit (282–286). As 1960 ended, the Kubitschek government was replaced with that of Janio da Silva Quadros (296). U.S. policymakers were concerned that the Quadros government, though not likely to upset dramatically the course of U.S.-Brazilian relations, would pursue a more willful and neutralistic foreign policy than his predecessor (300). The Eisenhower administration assigned a high priority to cultivating good relations with Mexico. Eisenhower himself corresponded regularly with Presidents Adolfo Ruíz Cortines and Adolfo López Mateos. He met three times with López Mateos during 1959 and 1960. Numerous contacts at the ministerial level were maintained. U.S. policymakers welcomed the inauguration of López Mateos on December 1, 1958, believing him to be more realistic in his views on Mexico’s domestic economy and economic relations with the United States than Ruíz Cortines. Senate majority leader Lyndon B. Johnson, who had met with López Mateos in November, however, found him to be “reserved and somewhat prejudiced” against the United States, particularly American business interests (320). U.S.-Mexican relations continued to be characterized by an air of outward friendliness coupled with a traditional suspicion, on Mexico’s part, of U.S. intentions and Economic questions, particularly on trade, dominated the U.S.- Mexican agenda during the late 1950s. U.S. tariffs on Mexican lead and zinc troubled the Mexican Government and Eisenhower administration alike. Discussions of the coffee and cotton trade, of the promotion of tourism, and about territorial waters and fishing rights were pursued in this period. Politically, the Eisenhower administration tried to impress upon the Mexican Government the dangers posed to the hemisphere by the Cuban revolution and Fidel Castro. The López Mateos government, however, was sympathetic to the aspirations of the Cubans in overthrowing the Batista dictatorship (345).

XLIX Summaries of Compilations United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy Note. The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. The concern of U.S. policymakers with political and economic developments in Latin America in 1958–1960 led to some shifts in U.S. economic policies toward the region, foreshadowing the Kennedy administration’s Alliance for Progress, although less extensive and dramatic. Reexamination of U.S. Policies Early in 1958, the Department of State undertook a reexamination of U.S. policies in the light of economic trends in the area. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles initiated the study. He was concerned by declining Latin American exports to the United States, falling prices of some important commodities produced in Latin America, and efforts by the Soviet Union to expand its trade and influence in the area. Dulles stated in a January 19 memorandum to Under Secretary of State Christian A. Herter and other officials that he thought U.S. economic policies in relation to Latin America were “too negative,” that U.S. policy concerning trade between Latin America and the Soviet bloc was too restrictive, and that there should be a reexamination of the U.S. policy of opposing quota arrangements on commodities. He continued: “I doubt that we are in a good position to withstand in that part of the world a Soviet economic offensive at a time when the demand for raw materials is down and prices are very low.” (ETA–1) In response to Dulles’ request, an interbureau task force examined a range of problems and possible policy changes. (ETA–4) Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs Thomas C. Mann and Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs Roy R. Rubottom summarized the task force’s conclusions in an April 10 memorandum to Dulles. They called for policy adjustments but no major initiatives. Noting that trade was the cornerstone of U.S. economic relations with Latin America, they urged efforts to prevent restrictions on U.S. imports from the region and recommended U.S. participation in multilateral study groups on coffee and on lead and zinc, leaving open the question of possible price stabilization agreements for these commodities. They did not think Soviet bloc efforts to expand trade with Latin

L Summaries of Compilations America posed a major threat, but they recommended continued U.S. warnings against the risks of economic dependence and political penetration. They recommended efforts to respond to Latin American needs for financial assistance through existing institutions, but they also observed that there was strong Latin American sentiment for the creation of an inter-American development bank and recommended U.S. participation in a multilateral study of this possibility. (ETA–6) Creation of the Inter-American Development Bank After a visit to Brazil in early August 1958, Secretary Dulles became convinced that it was necessary for political reasons to take a regional approach to the problem of providing financial support for Latin American development. On August 12, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Douglas Dillon announced that the United States was prepared to consider the establishment of an inter-­American development institution. (ETA–8) After several months of discussions, a U.S. proposal was put forward for an inter-American bank. To ensure that the bank would be financially sound but at the same time fulfill the function of providing funds for economic development, it was determined that the bank would make both hard and soft loans but keep the two operations entirely separate. (ETA–8 through 15) Formal negotiations began in January 1959. At the outset, the United States proposed total initial resources of $850 million for the bank, while Brazil called for $5 billion, but a compromise was reached on

Summaries of Compilations LI In an August 1 memorandum to the President, Dillon urged that the United States should “press forward with a broad program for Latin America.” Adequate funds were available for sound economic development projects, he stated, but there was an immediate need for funds for social development projects, such as land settlement, improved land use, pilot and self-­help housing, basic community facilities, and vocational training, and if such programs were not initiated promptly, “unrest with violent political consequences is likely in a number of Latin American countries.” He proposed a Special Fund of $600 million (including $100 million in disaster assistance for Chile) to be used exclusively in Latin America to provide grants or loans, primarily through the Inter-American Development Bank (ETA–44) In spite of some opposition to the proposal within the administration on budgetary grounds, Eisenhower approved it. In an August 8 message to Congress, he requested an authorization of $600 million, and Congress authorized the money in legislation signed into law on

LII Summaries of Compilations Bolivia U.S. Relations With Bolivia Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. The central theme that runs through the story of United States relations with Bolivia during the last 3 years of the Eisenhower administration is the effort made by U.S. officials to encourage the reform of the ailing Bolivian economy while not, at the same time, contributing to the collapse of the Bolivian Government. Except for Haiti, Bolivia was the poorest country in Latin America. The Bolivian economy was inefficient, underdeveloped, imbalanced, and plagued by the vagaries of the international metals market. The Bolivian Government was hampered in its efforts to deal with these problems by its commitments to the workers who had supported and sustained the government since it came to power in 1952. Bolivia was heavily dependent on financial support from the United States to meet a succession of economic crises, but the Bolivian Government had to avoid the stigma of appearing to fall back into the embrace of “Yankee imperialism.” Under the circumstances, the objectives which the United States hoped to achieve in its relations with Bolivia were easier to define than to achieve. A policy paper drafted in the Department of State on November 3, 1958, stipulated that the United States was prepared to support any government in Bolivia which was free from Communist influence, and which had the ability and disposition to carry out an effective stabilization program. Conditions in Bolivia were so difficult, however, that the paper defined the primary objective of U.S. policy as “the maintenance of relative political stability in order to forestall a serious politico-­social upheaval.” (BL–15) The Natural Resources Issue Vice President Nixon visited Bolivia in May 1958 and President Hernán Siles Zuazo took advantage of the opportunity to point up the problems afflicting the Bolivian economy, particularly in light of reduced exports of and prices for tin. He asked for Nixon’s support for additional loans from the Development Loan Fund. Nixon promised to support such loan applications, but he stressed the importance of continuing Bolivian efforts to establish an effective financial stabilization program. He also indicated that prospects for Congressional support for financial aid for Bolivia would be enhanced if Bolivia would complete the compensation of U.S. shareholders of the mines which had been nationalized in Bolivia in 1952. (BL–5)

Summaries of Compilations LIII State ownership of Bolivia’s natural resources was a central tenet of the governing party, the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement. It was politically difficult for President Siles’ government to meet foreign demands for full compensation for expropriated properties, and it was correspondingly difficult for Bolivia to attract new foreign capital to develop such assets as unproven oil reserves while maintaining the principle of public ownership. As a result, the Bolivian Government pressed the United States repeatedly for development loans to the state-­ run companies which managed the Bolivian mining and oil industries.

LIV Summaries of Compilations Bolivia would be wasted unless Bolivia could implement the economic reforms necessary to stabilize the Bolivian currency and to convert the critical mining sector of the economy from a financial drain to a contributing asset. Consequently, the United States repeatedly pressed Bolivia to accept the rather draconian solutions proposed by the International Monetary Fund as a basis for stabilizing the Bolivian economy. (BL–5,

Summaries of Compilations LV Chile U.S. Relations With Chile Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. Although the United States and Chile continued cordial relations during 1958–1960, there was considerable tension between them over copper policy. About one-­half of Chile’s foreign exchange was derived from this one commodity, and the United States affected Chile’s copper market in a variety of ways: as consumer, as homeland of Chile’s two principal copper operators (Anaconda and Kennicott Corporations), and as prime mover in the worldwide COCOM effort to keep vital raw materials out of East bloc countries. At the beginning of 1958, the U.S. Congress was preparing legislation to reinstitute a copper duty to protect domestic production in the face of declining world demand. The Embassy, pointing out that the Chilean perception of the importance of the U.S. market was even more important than the market was in actuality, recommended alternatives such as stockpile purchases or an outright subsidy. The Department fundamentally agreed but observed that some compromise would have to be found. (CI–1) Vigorous public support of the duties by Interior Secretary Fred Seaton led Chilean President Carlos Ibáñez del Campo to cancel a scheduled visit to the United States. (CI–2, 4) In the wake of this setback, the Embassy recommended increased U.S. courtship of Chile, especially including measures of economic aid and cultural exchange which would remind Chileans that the United States did “recognize the difference between a Dominican dictatorship and a Chilean democracy” (CI–5) In elections held in September 1958, Conservative-Liberal candidate Jorge Alessandri gained a narrow 31 percent to 29 percent plurality over Salvador Allende, the standard-­bearer of a broad left-­of-­center coalition. Increased foreign exchange problems coincided with his victory. (CI–11). The Department and Embassy wanted to help Chile work out a favorable solution with the International Monetary Fund, especially as they perceived Alessandri as “much more business-­like” than

LVI Summaries of Compilations In the spring of 1960, President Eisenhower visited Chile during his Latin American tour. The two Presidents, in cordial conversations, discussed general disarmament, Chile’s own military situation, and economic topics. Alessandri assured Eisenhower of Chile’s welcome to foreign capital investment. During a discussion of copper, it appeared that Eisenhower had not been aware of the U.S. import tax on imported copper. Eisenhower did promise Alessandri to make no releases from the copper stockpile except in extreme emergencies, and issued appropriate instructions to carry out this promise. U.S. domestic considerations prevented the administration, however, from taking action on

Summaries of Compilations LVII Colombia U.S. Relations With Colombia Note: The parenthetical citations to the numbered documents in the text. During the last 3 years of the Eisenhower administration, the United States maintained cordial relations with Colombia. In 1958, the reopening of Protestant churches in Colombia was the main U.S. concern, while in 1959 and 1960, the United States listened sympathetically to Colombian requests for economic assistance Throughout the 3-­year period, high-­level visits by officials of both countries figured prominently in the relationship. On January 16, 1958, Ambassador Cabot tailed on Colombian Minister of Government Rengifo primarily to discuss the question of the Protestant churches which had been closed. Cabot stressed that he realized this was a delicate matter, but emphasised that every time the Eisenhower administration tried to obtain loans for Colombia, Protestants in the United States raised the question of the churches in Congress, and the aid could not be secured. Rengifo promised to do what he could (CO–1) Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom also raised

LVIII Summaries of Compilations preparation for Lleras Camargo’s visit to the United States in April, the Director of the International Cooperation Administration and the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs sent a joint memorandum to Under Secretary of State Dillon recommending a sympathetic hearing for the program and U.S. involvement with it. (CO–25) While Lleras Camargo discussed a wide variety of topics with President Eisenhower and Secretary of State Herter, the main theme of their conversations was economic assistance. (CO–28 through 33) The trip to Washington was successful and resulted in the announcement of a $70 million credit from the Development Loan Fund and the Export- Import Bank.

Summaries of Compilations LIX Costa Rica U.S. Relations With Costa Rica Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. Relations with Costa Rica during the 3-­year period were unmarked by crises and difficult problems. The close of the period, however, saw the emergence of an issue that plagued the United States in Latin America and other parts of the world: the effect of the threat of communism on everyday U.S. relations with friendly and sympathetic governments. The question was whether that threat made the United States neglect its old friends while pursuing the support of more recalcitrant countries. Early in 1958 the election of Mario Echandi Jiménez to the Presidency of Costa Rica offered a leader whom the United States saw as both friendly and oriented toward the stability of business and investment. (CR–1) During March, President-­elect Echandi visited Washington and met with President Eisenhower and officials from the Departments of State and the Treasury. Echandi stressed the need for economic development in his country and also gave assurances of his awareness of the threat of communism in the hemisphere, particularly from infiltration of labor unions. Proud of his country’s record for tolerance, he said that Costa Rica would continue to provide safety to political exiles but would not allow them to launch subversive operations

LX Summaries of Compilations efforts in 1960 to get the Central American nations to break relations with the Cuba of Fidel Castro. (CR–23) Ambassador Whiting Willauer in San Jose reported on the widespread feeling in the country that the United States was very often too slow to aid its old friends like Costa Rica and too responsive to threats from allies or neutrals of unfriendly actions. Willauer wanted quick favorable action on Costa Rica’s modest economic requests. He also stated that, while Echandi personally detested Fidelismo, the President was in no position politically to buck public opinion by severing relations with Cuba. (CR–24) Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Roy Rubottom assured Willauer of U.S. sympathy for Costa Rica’s request, but cautioned that lack of overall planning in San José had resulted in indecisiveness and lack of followthrough, which had delayed U.S. action. (CR–25) In November 1960, Rubottom’s successor, Thomas Mann, wrote to Echandi promising U.S. support for Costa Rica’s applications for loans from the Development Loan Fund and the Export-Import Bank for water projects and development of new farms. (CR–27) The compilation closes with coverage of Costa Rican actions to control anti-­government Nicaraguans operating out of north-­west Costa Rica against the Somoza government in Nicaragua. (CR–28, 29) Costa Rica, which had pointedly announced its intention to abolish a standing army (CR–5), nevertheless wanted to demonstrate its ability to maintain peace within its borders and friendly relations with the neighboring states.

Summaries of Compilations LXI Dominican Republic U.S. Relations With the Dominican Republic Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo had ruled the Dominican Republic since 1930. While promoting himself as “the Benefactor,” Trujillo’s rule had become increasingly harsh and dictatorial. His attempts to strike at exiled dissidents in the United States had caused serious strain in relations with the United States. The Eisenhower administration faced one overwhelming problem in the Dominican Republic: how to ease Trujillo out of power without allowing pro-Fidel Castro/anti-American elements to take over. In late January 1958, the Director of the Office of Middle American Affairs surveyed U.S.-Dominican relations and high-­lighted the principal U.S. interests in the Dominican Republic: its strategic position in relation to the Panama Canal, a U.S. guided missile tracking station on the northeast coast, and general Dominican support for U.S. policies. The Director recommended that U.S. Ambassador Joseph S. Farland meet with Trujillo in an attempt to normalize relations. Farland was encouraged by his discussion with the Generalissimo in early February to believe that a better relationship was possible. (DR–1) Trujillo, however, proved sensitive to U.S. congressional criticism and supposed slights against his family so that relations did not improve markedly.

LXII Summaries of Compilations In March 1960, retired General Edwin S. Clark convinced President Eisenhower to authorize him to make a secret visit to Cuidad Trujillo (Santo Domingo) to convince Trujillo to step down from power. Clark’s unofficial scheme contemplated creating a foundation funded by the money amassed by the Trujillo family during its 30 years of rule. To be administered by former Latin American and American presidents, the fund would be used for the benefit of the Dominican Republic. It was designed to prevent confiscation of the Trujillo fortune by a successor government and assure that Trujillo did not take his vast fortune with him into exile. (DR–16, 17) Trujillo’s support in the Dominican Republic was weakening rapidly, according to U.S. intelligence assessments. (DR–18, 20) When the situation was brought to the attention of the National Security Council in April 1960, there was general concern that the U.S. policy of building a moderate potential transition government might be too little and too late. Vice President Nixon worried that it was the “old story” being repeated: the pro-Castro elements with definite objectives were the only minority capable of strong leadership. Nixon recommended that the United States consider intervention if this group threatened to come to power. The Council agreed that the United States must be prepared to take rapid action. (DR–19) General Clark returned to Washington from conversations with Trujillo in late March 1960 without a promise from the Generalissimo to retire. Meeting with Secretary of State Herter and General Clark on April 25, President Eisenhower discussed the possibility of “a plan for removing Trujillo from control of the country, and to establish in his position a controlling junta which would immediately call for free elections and make an attempt to get the country on a truly democratic When the National Security Council next considered the question of the Dominican Republic in July 1960, Eisenhower concluded that the Trujillo dictatorship was seriously deflecting attention from the real problem in Latin America, Fidel Castro. (DR–25) It was difficult to brand Castro a dictator and call for sanctions against him as long as Trujillo was in power. The new Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs, Thomas Mann, solicited advice from Deputy Chief of Mission Henry Dearborn who was the highest level diplomatic official now that U.S. relations with the Dominican Republic were suspended in conjunction with an OAS decision that the Dominican Republic had attempted to assassinate President Betancourt of Venezuela. Invited to give his “very personal and confidential” appraisal, Dearborn suggested that as long as Trujillo remained in the Dominican Republic—­as Governor of Santiago province or “dog-­catcher”—­he would dominate the country and there would be no chance for a true opposition.

Summaries of Compilations LXIII The only solution was removal of Trujillo from the country. Dearborn asserted that Trujillo would probably only do this under threat of death. Dearborn suggested that if he were a Dominican he would favor killing Trujillo. (DR–28) The Department of State’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research suggested that “assassination is an increasing possibility—­perhaps even a probability, considering the desperate temper of the opposition.” (DR–29) It is clear from this compilation that the Eisenhower administration tried without success to induce Trujillo step down. By the end of 1960, the dictator held grimly to power. Six months later he would be dead from an assassin’s bullet. Additional material may be found in Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders. An Interim Report of the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Repect to

LXIV Summaries of Compilations Ecuador U.S. Relations With Ecuador Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. Except for a brief period in 1960, U.S. relations with Ecuador during the closing years of the Eisenhower presidency were normal and uncomplicated. In April 1958, President Eisenhower in a letter to President Camillo Ponce Enriquez described Ecuador as “a nation enjoying political stability, freedom and steady economic development.” (EC–3) In the following month, Vice President Richard Nixon’s visit to Ecuador was described as an unqualified success, in contrast to his visits in Peru and Venezuela where violent anti-American protest broke out. Nixon said there were no great problems between the two countries. (EC–5) During his conversations with Ponce, the Vice President stressed the need to resolve the area’s economic problems as a prerequisite to curing the political problems. Ponce stated that stabilization of the Latin American economies would make all the countries better customers for

Summaries of Compilations LXV The United States, as it consistently had, stressed its desire for a mutually acceptable settlement. (EC–17) At the same time, Ecuador needed help quickly in terms of highway construction, electric power, housing, and medium industries. The United States stressed the need for careful planning, but noted it was anxious to assist. (EC–18) Shortly thereafter, in September 1960, the Embassy in Quito reported that students, demonstrating over the boundary dispute, stoned the Consulate General in Guayaquil. (EC–19) The Guarantors of the 1942 Rio Protocol, the United States, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, meeting informally, cautioned against unilateral action by Ecuador to denounce the Protocol, stating that most of the provisions of that agreement had already been implemented and unilateral denunciation was unacceptable. (EC–20, 21) On October 23, however, Ecuador announced its repudiation of the 1942 Protocol. The United States, responding as a Guarantor on December 7, stated that such unilateral action was not allowable. The Guarantors stood ready to assist in a mutual resolution by Peru and Ecuador of a satisfactory demarcation of the remaining areas of the boundary line still at issue. At the same time, the United States assured Ecuador that aggression by the other party would raise the security guarantees of the inter-American system against any armed attack. (EC–22) An Intelligence Note to Secretary of State Christian Herter on December 16 informed him that the December 7 statement had provoked attacks resulting in considerable damage to the Embassy and other U.S. buildings in Quito and Guayaquil. (EC–23) Since taking office, Velasco, rather than concentrating on economic problems, had focused on the boundary question. Ecuadorean overtures toward Cuba and the Soviet Union appeared designed to gain support on this issue. Meanwhile, leftist agitation was undoubtedly a factor in the assaults on U.S. property. Within a few days, however, relations took a turn for the better, according to the Embassy in Quito. (EC–24) Velasco dismissed his Minister of Government, Manuel Araujo, characterized as rabidly leftist and pro-Castro in his views. This dismissal brought to a close an unprecedented period of leftist agitation in the country. Just before the end of the year, Foreign Minister Chiriboga visited Washington. A joint statement issued on the occasion concentrated on economic development and indicated U.S. desire to provide loans for projects such as the establishment of savings and loan institutions, and construction of highways, municipal water systems, and electric power installations. The boundary dispute was not mentioned. (EC–25)

LXVI Summaries of Compilations El Salvador U.S. Relations With El Salvador Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. U.S. Relations With the Lemus Government U.S. relations with El Salvador were without serious difficulties during most of the 1958–1960 period. Johns Hopkins University President Milton Eisenhower visited El Salvador in July 1958 during his 3-­week trip to several countries in Central America as President Eisenhower’s personal representative. He met with President Jose Maria Lemus and other government officials, businessmen, and labor leaders. Lemus called attention to El Salvador’s economic problems and expressed interest in increased U.S. assistance but offered no specific proposals (ES–2) Lemus made a State visit to the United States March

Summaries of Compilations LXVII his supporters by failing to consult them. Nonetheless, Kalijarvi recommended continuing support of the constitutional government by speeding up action on pending aid requests. (ES–19, 23) The Recognition Issue On October 20, 1960, a military-­civilian Junta seized power in a bloodless coup. It declared the Constitution still in effect and promised to hold free elections, and the new Foreign Minister assured Kalijarvi that the Junta wished to maintain close and cordial relations with the United States. (ES–25) Kalijarvi reported 3 days later, however, that the coup represented a “decided shift to the left”. Although the military members of the Junta were friendly to the United States, they were young and politically inexperienced, while the civilian members included many strong leftists and some “out and out Commies.” The leading figure behind the coup was reportedly former President Oscar Osorio, who might think he could keep the leftists under control, but Kalijarvi thought the military clement in the Junta was “no match” for the leftists and that the coup should be regarded as the “first step towards Fidelismo.” Arguing that support for the Junta was already cooling and a countercoup might be in the making, he urged the Department of State to “go slow with recognition.” (ES–26) In Washington, the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs took a more benign view of the new regime, considering that the Junta’s civilian members were largely leftist but moderate. (ES–27) In a November 1 memorandum to President Eisenhower, Secretary of State Herter noted that the majority of the army and the conservative oligarchy supported the Junta, that Osorio had a long record of cooperation with the United States and opposition to Communism, and that several other countries had already extended recognition. He recommended prompt recognition in order to enable the United States to establish good relations and exert a positive influence on the new regime, and Eisenhower approved. (ES–28) Meanwhile, the Department’s concern about the new regime was increased by new reports from the Embassy, reinforced by Kalijarvi’s return to Washington for consultations. Chargé Donald P. Downs was instructed to meet with Osorio and selected army officers and ascertain their views. Downs reported on November 3 that Osorio had replied to questions vaguely and evasively and that he did not think it was necessary to curb Communist activities but intended that all parties should participate in free elections. Downs also met with one of the military members of the Junta, who he thought was friendly but “a complete babe in the woods.” (ES–29, 30)

LXVIII Summaries of Compilations At a National Security Council meeting on November 7, Acting Secretary of State Livingston T. Merchant reported that the United States had not recognized the new government in El Salvador in view of the possibility of a countercoup; the question was whether recognition should be extended in order to strengthen “reasonable elements” in the government or withheld in the hope of encouraging the opposition. Eisenhower remarked that the ease with which a few Communist elements could take over a government was frightening and that the reluctance of OAS members to take action was alarming; he observed that it might be necessary “to go back to greater reliance on power politics”. Secretary of Defense Thomas S. Gates, Jr., recommended delaying recognition, but further discussion was inconclusive (ES–32) In a November 10 memorandum to Eisenhower, Herter again recommended recognition. (ES–34) The President again approved, but action was postponed because of continued Department of Defense opposition and concerns expressed by the intelligence community

Summaries of Compilations LXIX Guatemala U.S. Relations With Guatemala Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. The assassination of the pro-American and anti-Communist President of Guatemala, Carlos Castillo Armas, in July 1957 threatened Guatemala with political uncertainty. In fact, a relatively orderly transition emerged. An interim government arranged a new Presidential election in which Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes won a plurality but not a majority. Through popular pressure and political dealing, Ydígoras won approval of the Guatemalan Congress to which responsibility for naming the President devolved when no Presidential candidate won a majority in the popular election. An upper-­class, authoritarian, former professional soldier who represented Guatemala’s traditional classes and conservative forces, Ydígoras assumed the Presidency in March 1958 without enjoying firm support in the new Congress where his

LXX Summaries of Compilations dissident military officers attempted to seize power on November 13 in Guatemala City and two provincial capitals, Ydígoras charged that the revolt was Castro-­inspired and asked for U.S. support in preventing

Summaries of Compilations LXXI Haiti U.S. Relations With Haiti Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. Haiti had the misfortune to be the poorest nation in the Western hemisphere. President François Duvalier was popularly elected in 1957, a break in the usual cycle of presidential succession by military coup, but soon after his election Duvalier proved himself another Haitian dictator. Duvalier ruled through control of the National Police, the Presidential Guard, and the secret police, all chosen for their personal loyalty to him and meant as a counterweight to the Haitian Armed Forces. Haiti’s economy was virtually bankrupt. Graft and administrative ineptitude discouraged international lenders from providing Haiti with additional loans. Because Haiti’s economy was dependent on coffee, a wild crop harvested by peasants, its revenues fluctuated wildly. During 1958–1960, U.S. officials responsible for relations with Haiti faced three overriding questions: how closely should the United States become associated with Duvalier, how could the United States use its influence to mitigate Duvalier’s dictatorial rule, and how much money should it give Haiti? As 1958 began, the Department of States was restoring normal relations with Haiti that were broken in late December 1957 when U.S. Ambassador Gerald Drew was recalled to protest the beating death by Haitian police of an American citizen, Shipley Jean Talamas, a political opponent of Duvalier. The Talamas family received compensation, and some official action was taken against his murderers. The Department of State then outlined a program of improved relations: restoration of grant assistance, military assistance, and loans; recreational visits of the U.S. fleet; possible augmentation of U.S. military training missions; and increased U.S. tourism, private investment, and technical assistance. (HA–1) In June 1958, Ambassador Drew expressed concern about this program. Speaking specifically of a U.S. Marine Training Mission that Duvalier avidly wanted, Drew confided: “I find myself becoming increasingly repelled by the thought of a mission here when the jails are crammed with political prisoners . . . ; when defeated candidates . . . are beaten, tortured and hounded into exile; when a restrained opposition press has been ruthlessly snuffed out of existence; and when masked night riders, . . . operate from their headquarters in the National Palace.” Drew suggested that in return for the U.S. Marine

LXXII Summaries of Compilations trainers the United States should extract promises of better behavior from Duvalier. (HA–4) The initiative shifted to Duvalier when his security forces foiled a coup by Haitian, Dominican, and American citizens launched from

Summaries of Compilations LXXIII Duvalier was not particularly grateful and complained publicly about the meagerness of U.S. aid, implying that U.S. parsimony was the real cause of Haiti’s poverty. The Central Intelligence Agency concluded that Duvalier was “drifting Leftward” because the ailing dictator had delegated authority to a “clique of leftists.” Still, the general consensus in Washington was that Duvalier was reasonably secure and the pro-American Haitian Army would not challenge him. In effect, the United States was reluctant to give up on Duvalier even though his government’s graft and mismanagement had crippled the U.S. aid program and notwithstanding his flirtation with the left. Duvalier was a force for stability in a country characterized by political instability. Despite his occasional anti-American tirades, he was a staunch anti-Communist. (HA–24, 26) The new U.S. Ambassador to Haiti, Robert Newhegin, arrived in Port au Prince in October 1960 with limited objectives and options. He was there to commit U.S. aid money, $5 million for budgetary support, $4.5 million for balance-­of-­payments support and economic development, and $3 million for additional development projects. He was to stress that this money was to help the Haitian people, but Haiti’s past use of aid and development assistance and its inability to repay past debts did not augur well. (HA–27 through 29)

LXXIV Summaries of Compilations Honduras U.S. Relations With Honduras Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. Throughout the 3-­year period, U.S.-Honduran relations were cordial and unencumbered by vexing problems. The United States welcomed the administration of President Ramon Villeda Morales as one with which it could do business and one which typified the type of decent, democratic government in Latin America that it liked to see. (HO–1, 2) Unfortunately, although Honduran needs were not great in terms of dollar expenditure, the United States had to be cautious in responding to requests for assistance. (HO–3) Villeda’s middle-­of-­the-­ road policies inspired grumbling by the Chief of the Armed Forces, but U.S. officials counseled patience and assistance to the civilian authorities. (HO–4) Although by no means a strong-­arm leader, Villeda fended off two military coups launched from outside the country in 1959 by the former Honduran Chief of Staff. (HO–5, 9) In 1960, Villeda made an informal visit to Miami and New Orleans and received a warm letter of support from President Eisenhower who praised the Honduran leader’s efforts to strengthen his country’s democratic institutions. (HO–13) Villeda was clearly perceived as someone friendly to the United States and aware of the dangers of international Communism. (HO–2) From this perspective, it was not surprising that in the late months of 1960, the Department of State took extraordinary measures to arrange loans for the financially troubled United Fruit Company, since it was felt that collapse of the company would seriously destabilize the Honduran economy, cause loss of jobs, threaten the future of the Villeda administration, provide a seedbed for Communist discontent, and deprive local Honduran communities of numerous public services which United Fruit provided in the absence

Summaries of Compilations LXXV that the Honduran claim was definitely a weak one, but he thought it politic to make the move in order to strengthen the Villeda government and offset the criticisms of the Castro government in Cuba which was itself incensed by American radio broadcasts hostile to Castro emanating from the islands. (HO–22)

LXXVI Summaries of Compilations Nicaragua U.S. Relations With Nicaragua Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. U.S. relations with Nicaragua during the final years of the Eisenhower administration were untainted by major differences between the two states. While concern in both countries about invasions of Nicaragua and attempts to overthrow the Somoza government remained a constant, none of the several attempts succeeded or even raised the real possibility of revolution. The most important event in relations between the United States and Nicaragua took place in 1958 when Milton Eisenhower visited Managua, July 21–24. Coming after Vice President Nixon’s stormy visit to Latin America, April 27–May 15, and in the face of concern that the President’s brother might encounter protests, the Embassy in Managua reported that it could protect Milton Eisenhower from similar indignities. (NI–7) The visit proved to be highly successful, as Milton Eisenhower discussed various issues with President Somoza and members of his government and met with leaders of the opposition political parties. (NI–8) The Embassy in Managua speculated that part of the reason for this success stemmed from Somoza’s genuine concern about accusations that he was merely another dictator. In a followup report in September, Ambassador Whelan concluded that everyone was satisfied with the visit which resulted in “much good” for the United States (NI–9) By 1959, the U.S. Government had become sufficiently concerned about attempts to overthrow the Somoza government or assassinate its President that it asked the Embassy in Managua for an assessment of the climate for a deal between the President and the “responsible opposition.” (NI–15) While the Embassy’s response indicated that this was an unlikely prospect, the Department of State continued to urge the Government of Nicaragua to reach an agreement with opposition elements. The Embassy in turn stressed that the only respectable opposition represented only a very small part of the anti-­government parties. (NI–17) At the end of 1960, the Government of Nicaragua began to share the concern of the United States, but its worries were about Communist-­ backed activities and intervention in its affairs sponsored by Cuba. This led to a request for U.S. assistance. On November 17, James Hagerty, President Eisenhower’s press secretary, announced on behalf of the President that air and surface units of the U.S. Navy had assumed positions off the coast of Nicaragua where they could assist the local government against such intervention. (NI–26)

Summaries of Compilations LXXVII Panama U.S. Relations With Panama Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text U.S. relations with Panama during the final 3 years of the Eisenhower administration focused mainly on questions arising out of the administration of the Canal Zone, and upon the larger issue posed by the symbolic, but politically sensitive question of whether the Panamanian flag should be allowed to fly alongside the United States flag within the Canal Zone. For the Panamanian Government, the flag issue was one of burning domestic importance. There was no question of challenging U.S. control over the territory and operations of the Canal Zone, but there was a strong Panamanian desire to see recognition of Panamanian sovereignty over the territory of the Canal Zone by flying the Panamanian flag within the Canal Zone.

LXXVIII Summaries of Compilations from “luxury items” from abroad sold through Canal Zone sales outlets. In essence, the Panamanian Government felt that the Canal Zone administration discriminated against Panamanians, and that Panama was not profiting from the operations of the canal as it should. The Panamanian Foreign Minister repeated these complaints in July 1959 in rejecting a U.S. aide-­memoire responding to the Panamanian complaints. (PM-18) Foreign Minister Moreno brought the dispute into the open with public statements at Santiago, Chile, in August and in New York in September 1959 charging the United States with non-­compliance with its treaty agreements. (PM–25) Meanwhile, the Panamanian Government continued to press for the right to fly the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone. The Panamanian complaints engendered a good deal of high-­level concern and policy debate in Washington. Panama was of critical strategic importance to the United States because of the canal, and concerns about the political stability of the Panamanian Government were magnified in May 1959 when a group of 80 armed revolutionaries, Cuban– led and supported, landed on the north coast of Panama and attempted to overthrow the government. (PM–14) Panamanian concerns and complaints found a sympathetic ear in President Eisenhower, who took a keen and continuing interest in the problems and was inclined throughout the period to accede to most of the Panamanian requests for

Summaries of Compilations LXXIX

LXXX Summaries of Compilations Paraguay U.S. Relations With Paraguay Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text During the final years of the Eisenhower administration, U.S. relations with Paraguay experienced no extraordinary departures from normal; indeed, the issues discussed and the policies pursued reflected the same concerns as in the preceding and succeeding periods. At the outset, Ambassador Walter C. Ploeser set the tone in a letter to Assistant Secretary of State Roy Rubottom. The primary concern of the United States was to avoid the possibility of any disorderly change in the Paraguayan Government, change which might open the door to Communist infiltration of the government. (PA–1) President Stroessner, who had seized power in a coup in 1954, would have to employ all of the political sagacity and astuteness at his command to defeat the threat of unrest stemming from Communist provocations. Ploeser was quick to point to Stroessner’s constant support for the United States in the world arena, even at the risk of alienating his own neighbors, yet the Ambassador and his colleagues were skeptical of the President’s assurances that he was leading the country in the direction of gradual democratization. Ploeser urged impetus for economic projects that would aid Paraguay, chiefly by improving the infrastructure of the country. He also asserted the constant and continuing theme of the United States in dealing with Stroessner that the U.S. goal was to ensure the stability of Paraguay by supporting the country and its people, but not necessarily the Stroessner government. Support for democracy in Paraguay did not mean showing favors to the current regime there. (PA–3) In September 1958, Paraguay attempted to exert a little leverage to gain U.S. attention when it registered complaints about U.S. aid to Bolivia at a time when that country was expressing interest in recognition of the Soviet Union. (PA–5, 6) Foreign Minister Raul Sapena Pastor said that lack of U.S. economic assistance might force Paraguay to turn to Soviet bloc countries and commented on the seeming incongruity of aid to Bolivia rather than to Paraguay, even though the latter had no dealings with any Communist states. The Department of State’s response was to put forcefully to Paraguayan officials the position that efforts to play East vs. West were inappropriate. On September 25, 1958, Sapena met with Rubottom in Washington. (PA–7) The atmosphere was cordial. The Foreign Minister stressed Bolivia’s support for the United States especially in terms of air bases should the United States desire that. Rubottom emphasized the need

Summaries of Compilations LXXXI for Paraguay to eliminate the “authoritarian” character of its government and stressed that the American press referred to Paraguay as a dictatorship. For his part, Sapena again complained of U.S. aid to Paraguay’s nemesis, Bolivia, while Paraguay preserved a more staunch anti-Communist posture. Rubottom reassured him that military aid to Bolivia was minute, that the system of inter-American guarantees made unthinkable any aggression by Bolivia, and that economic assistance to that country had to be seen in the light of a larger effort to aid the whole regional economy and shore up the free world. A year later, Ploeser, close to the end of his tour, could state that the United States had been successful in stabilizing the local economy and nurturing Paraguayan friendship for the United States. (PA–8) He was also able to say that no endorsement had been made of the Stroessner regime, but had to admit that pressures to move the government toward greater political liberalism had not been measurably successful. The United States, he reminded the Department, could only urge strongly; it could not intervene. In September 1960, Ploeser’s successor, Henry Stimpson came to Washington for talks and met with Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs Thomas C. Mann. (PA–12) Stimpson felt that “the troublesome stigma of dictatorship of the Stroessner government notwithstanding, the United States should pursue a policy of working with the [Stroessner] regime.” In addition, the United States should press for free elections and a generally more liberal atmosphere in Asuncion. Leftist infiltration would have to be prevented, he said, but once that threat was curbed, the U.S. Government should urge Paraguay to reduce its armed forces and use the manpower thus liberated for projects such as road building and maintenance. The Paraguayan economy by and large was in dismal shape, said Stimpson, and Mann agreed that the United States would have to continue to help.

LXXXII Summaries of Compilations Peru U.S. Relations With Peru Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. U.S. relations with Peru during the last 3 years of the Eisenhower administration were dominated by Peruvian requests for economic and financial assistance and by Vice President Nixon’s visit to Bogotá in 1958 and Prime Minister Beltrán’s visit to Washington in 1960. For the most part the relationship was cordial and noncontroversial. In May 1958, as part of a general trip to Latin America, Vice President Nixon visited Peru. He presented President Prado with a letter from President Eisenhower in which the U.S. President expressed his admiration for Peru’s progress in consolidating democracy. (PE–5) Unfortunately, the Vice President’s visit did not go smoothly. Crowds of students prevented him from visiting San Marcos University, and he was pelted with stones in the attempt. An unscheduled stop at the Catholic University proved more successful, but his talks with Peruvian leaders on the country’s economic difficulties resulted in no definite agreement for U.S. assistance (PE–8, 9) In his analysis of the visit, Ambassador Achilles reported that a weak national government had hoped to strengthen its position by the Vice President’s stop at Bogotá, but the seriousness of the anti-American demonstrations had shocked and embarrassed the government. The Ambassador noted further that anti-American sentiment and resentment of the United States were passions that existed just below the surface in Peru, and commented on the ease with which the small number of Peruvian Communists had been able to stage the demonstrations. (PE–10) Peru’s quest for economic assistance, which had begun in the talks with the Vice President, continued in June with an application to the Eximbank for loans (PE–12), but the shaky economic situation in the country was exacerbated in September when President Eisenhower informed President Prado that the United States was imposing quotas on lead and zinc imports, two of the leading Peruvian currency earners. (PE–15) Not surprisingly, this action caused strong resentment in Peru. (PE–16) By the end of 1958, the situation in Peru had deteriorated further. During his visit to the United States in October, Foreign Minister Barrenchea stressed his need to return to Bogotá with specific evidence of U.S. willingness to assist the country. (PE–18) While Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom expressed his sympathy for Peru’s plight, he told the Foreign Minister that he could not give such a commitment

Summaries of Compilations LXXXIII particularly in the form of credits. Peruvian requests for loans, however, were more successful. In 1959, despite an initial cold reception by the Development Loan Fund, Peru was granted a $4.5 million loan. (PE–23) At the same time, Prime Minister Beltrán proposed a major series of steps to deal with the country’s economic and financial difficulties. The plan, which was discussed with Secretary of State Herter in August (PE–27), received a very sympathetic hearing in the United States. In 1960, the Prime Minister spent nearly a month in the United States lobbying on its behalf. He received an attentive hearing from President Eisenhower on June 9, although the President remarked with some asperity that U.S. assistance was not appreciated in Latin America. (PE– 42) A further meeting with Under Secretary of State Dillon on June 21 garnered his support. (PE–43) By the end of 1960, largely because of the impression Beltrán created, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Export-Import Bank, and the Development Loan

LXXXIV Summaries of Compilations Uruguay U.S. Relations With Uruguay Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. U.S. relations with Uruguay during the triennium, while experiencing a surprising downturn at the start of the period, improved greatly after a change of government in Montevideo at the beginning of 1959. In March 1958, Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom noted: “It is paradoxical but true that with no country in the hemisphere do we have more difficulty in our relations than with Uruguay—­traditionally the most stable and democratically-­oriented nation in Latin America.” (UR–1) The problems, in considerable measure, stemmed from the increasingly bad state of the Uruguayan economy. The United States felt that Uruguay had to come to grips with its own sad plight for which it was itself almost solely responsible. (UR–2) The United States was concerned and willing to help, but as a first step Uruguay had to restrict imports and balance its budget. Vice President Nixon’s visit in April 1958 was regarded as a distinct success in smoothing ruffled feelings, as he promised that the United States would not intervene in the case of American meatpacking plants recently expropriated by Uruguay. (UR–3) Later, the Uruguayan Ambassador told Secretary of State Dulles that his country bought from the United States 4½ times what it sold there. The severe imbalance of payments forced Uruguay to seek sales of its goods to the Soviet Union which in turn attempted to impose further demands in return for the purchases. U.S. efforts to help by providing loans and removing high duties on wool tops, a key Uruguayan export, proved unsuccessful. General improvement in relations began with the advent to power at the end of 1958 of a different faction of the ruling Nationalist Party, one which favored agricultural interests. This was perceived as a necessary first step in developing agricultural exports, which would produce the foreign exchange necessary for Uruguay to acquire essential imports. The prospect made the Embassy in Montevideo generally optimistic about the future of relations. (UR–9) Early in 1959, it proved possible for the United States to remove its troublesome countervailing duty on Uruguayan wool tops (UR–10), and an aura of good feeling permeated the bilateral relationship. (UR–13) By 1960, U.S. preoccupation in the area with the threat of Fidel Castro was more and more evident. Uruguay was sympathetic but

Summaries of Compilations LXXXV unwilling to concede that Cuba represented a hemispheric problem any more than did the Dominican Republic. (UR–14, 16) Nevertheless, the U.S.-Uruguayan relationship could only be described as very cooperative, in no small measure due to the change in government in Uruguay. The local economy, although somewhat stagnant, was basically prosperous. (UR–15) In the realm of politics, the United States felt that it could count on Uruguay’s support in the world arena. This was a soothing consideration, since that country maintained its longstanding reputation as the best small country in the Western Hemisphere: democratic, enlightened, and progressive. As the period drew to a close, the International Monetary Fund, with U.S. support, agreed to assist the Uruguayan economy by extending a $30 million loan. (UR–17)

LXXXVI Summaries of Compilations Venezuela U.S. Relations With Venezuela Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. The overthrow of Venezuelan dictator Marcos Pérez Jiménez on January 23, 1958, ushered in a more hopeful period in Venezuelan politics. The United States, although it had maintained friendly relations with Venezuela during the Pérez period, swiftly recognized the new interim government on the grounds that it was in full control of the governmental machinery, enjoyed wide popular as well as military support, and had pledged to hold free elections as soon as possible. (VE–1) At the same time, the United States admitted Pérez in accord with its customary practice of receiving exiled Latin American leaders “in the absence of extraordinary circumstances,” just as Romulo Betancourt, a Pérez opponent and leader of the Acción Democrática party, had been admitted when Pérez took power. (VE–2) In elections held in December 1958, Betancourt won a near majority of the vote and took office as President of Venezuela in February 1959. The United States fundamentally approved of the Betancourt government. Support deepened as Betancourt gradually emerged as a leader of the anti-Communist left in Latin America, and thus potentially a solid counterweight to the steady leftward march of the Castro government, which took power less than 2 months before Betancourt’s inauguration in Venezuela. Nonetheless, there were sharp conflicts between the two nations over several issues, chief among them petroleum and the status of former President Pérez. One of the last acts of the interim government was to raise taxes on petroleum. This act had worldwide implications because it effectively exceeded the 50–50 split in revenues between a host country and international oil companies which had become the norm since the late 1940s. While the United States vigorously protested, neither the interim government nor Betancourt rescinded the action. (VE–16 through 19) In March 1959, President Eisenhower, by an Executive order, made mandatory a previously voluntary oil import control program. This action was the result of lowered worldwide demand for oil and was an attempt to protect the interests of U.S. domestic producers (VE–21) Although Venezuela did not like the action, it did not formally protest. (VE–22) Venezuelan patience was further strained when the United States, through a technicality, exempted Canada from the operation of

Summaries of Compilations LXXXVII of Canadian oil overland to the United States would help to maintain Canadian waterborne imports of Venezuelan oil. (VE–29) At the end of 1960, President Eisenhower, at the urging of Secretary of the Interior Fred Seaton and over the protests of the Department of State, made a change to the Executive order giving Seaton power to adjust oil imports more closely to domestic consumption, thus posing the possibility of further reduction in Venezuela’s sales. (VE–53) While insisting on U.S. freedom of action with regard to the oil quotas, U.S. officials gave some thought to means of assisting Venezuela economically. With its large revenues from oil, Venezuela was not as starved for foreign exchange as many developing countries. Nonetheless, Venezuelan reserves plummeted in 1958–1959 in response to decreasing worldwide demand for oil—­the same consideration which led to the tightening of U.S. import quotas—­and Venezuela was forced to declare quantitative restrictions on luxury items, and eventually full exchange controls. The United States supported these moves as well as Venezuela’s increased willingness to work with the International

LXXXVIII Summaries of Compilations The United States, while supporting these initiatives, vigorously urged Betancourt to combine his initiatives against Trujillo with similar actions against Fidel Castro of Cuba. With equal firmness but in a friendly spirit, Betancourt consistently refused these requests. In the words of Ambassador Sparks, “President is convinced Venezuelan people are on his side in this matter and from standpoint his own personal honor he cannot enter into any action against Cuba until Trujillo

American Republics United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy1

Washington, January 31, 1958. SUBJECT United States Policy Toward Latin America

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 3 Problem To analyze United States policy toward Latin America in the light of present-­day economic trends. Discussion 1. Trade is the cornerstone of our relations with Latin America. When high-­level trade is sustained with resulting good prices, most facets of our relations with the area are good. In 1955 and 1956 total trade between the United States and Latin America reached an approximately 7½ billion dollar annual figure, almost balanced in each direction. 2. In the last quarter of 1957 Latin American total exports to the United States began to slump, with prospect of a decline in 1958 of at least seven percent. The problem has been especially critical in lead, zinc, tin and copper. Coffee, the most vital commodity of all, started to decline but this was stopped by the main producers holding coffee off the market; most experts are predicting serious trouble ahead for the coffee market. Although we assisted financially Mexico, Bolivia, Chile and Peru, which were affected by the metals decline, this was offset by the profoundly negative impression created by the Administration-­sponsored Bill last year for increased tariffs on lead and zinc. The one country where we have had a serious trade problem for generations—Argentina—­because our products are not complementary, may very likely slip back into its traditionally anti-United States position unless we are able, through large loans and other means, to overcome this fact-­of-­life situation. 3. While in the past we have opposed vigorously any trade between Latin America and the Soviet bloc in strategic materials, we have not opposed other trade. Although Latin American trade with the Soviet bloc, about one percent of the area’s total trade, decreased

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 5 ETA–3. Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Acting Secretary of State1 Washington, January 31, 1958. SUBJECT Economic Policies—Latin America The following comments relate to the portion of the Secretary’s statement which was assigned to E in Mr. Howe’s memorandum of January 24.2 I. Latin American Exports. In our economic relations with Latin America, the most important problem facing us is the decline in demand and prices of Latin American exports which directly affect their budgetary and economic development plans. Related to this, is the growing protectionist sentiment in the United States, stimulated in part by the current fall off in our domestic economic activity, which threatens to restrict their access to the United States market. All of this makes it easier for Russia to increase its commercial relations with the area. This problem can best be attacked on a commodity by commodity, rather than on a general, basis. The most urgent facet of the general problem is what we can do if, as expected, the Tariff Commission recommends soon increased tariffs or quotas on lead and zinc. The Latin American countries most affected would be Mexico and Peru. We shall soon be faced with a similar problem regarding copper which is of great importance to Chile. My suggestion is that we consider at once the position we take with respect to lead and zinc. It would be best from a foreign relations standpoint if we were not to impose additional tariffs or restrictions on the import of lead and zinc, but it is possible that the President may consider himself committed to tariff action in response to a report by the Tariff Commission. On the assumption that the President will feel so committed, we should develop a program along the following lines: (1) Explore the feasibility of our participating in an international lead and zinc study or commodity group built around a competent secretariat which would make objective studies of trends in supply and demand and recommend measures by exporting countries to keep them in approximate balance. Our participation in such a group would be of great psychological and political advantage to us in the underdeveloped countries.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 7 II. Financial Assistance. As dollars earned by Latin American exports decline, it will be even more important to increase aid through the World and Exim-Banks and through the Development Loan Fund. ARA and E are jointly working on collecting and appraising projects with a view to determining which ones are eligible for DLF financing.4 4 A note from Rubottom to Howe, dated January 31, attached to the source text, reads as follows: “I concur in substance, but I would like to discuss one or two parts of the paper with Mr. Mann himself.” A handwritten notation from Mann to Howe on Rubottom’s note reads as follows: “I think R[ubottom] will want to leave open the possibility of a quota instead of a tariff & other details that can very well be decided until we have the report of the Tariff Commission.” ETA–4. Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Inter- American Regional Economic Affairs (Turkel) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann).1 Washington, March 26, 1958. SUBJECT Transmittal of Task Force2 Paper on U.S. Economic Policy Toward Latin America 1. Yesterday the Secretary called for the memorandum on a revised U.S. economic policy toward Latin America. The assignment was made on January 24 just before the Secretary went to the Baghdad Pact Meeting and the delay has been caused by two things: (a) rapidly developing petroleum situation, and (b) frequent absences of key personnel from Washington. 2. The Task Force feels that its work has been completed so far as possible. Supporting papers on lead-­zinc (Tab A), copper (Tab B),

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 9 relief for domestic lead-­zinc industry aid, if a tariff increase proves unavoidable, limit its scope and duration and indicate our willingness to join a multilateral study of a lead-­zinc stabilization agreement; (2) oppose any increase in the currently stipulated tax on imported copper and be prepared to discuss the possibility of establishing a study group looking towards an international copper agreement; (3) study the feasibility of a western hemisphere oil commission to review the oil supply and demand situation; and (4) indicate U.S. willingness to cooperate in a multilateral coffee study group on a world-­wide basis. As to financial assistance, the more important recommendations are: (1) that the Eximbank continue its development loan program in Latin America and be prepared, if necessary, to make assistance available supplementary to IMF assistance, to help meet temporary payments problems; (2) that the reasons for the recently low volume of IBRD loans to the area be investigated and, if indicated, that efforts then be made to increase IBRD operations; (3) that U.S. public loans be made to state petroleum enterprises for certain very limited purposes when U.S. foreign policy objectives thereby can be served; and (4) that we study the desirability of an Inter-American development bank. In regard to the Sino-Soviet Bloc economic offensive in Latin America, it is recommended that the U.S.: (1) continue its existing policy of not opposing expansion of trade-­in non-­strategic commodities with the European Soviet Bloc; (2) maintain efforts to persuade individual countries, as appropriate, to minimize or eliminate their trade and financial arrangements with Communist China; and (3) alert countries to the political and economic pitfalls associated with certain aspects of trade with the Sino-Soviet Bloc. I Commodity Problems As producers of primary products, the Latin American countries are perhaps more interested in stable and remunerative prices for their commodities than in any other aspect of our economic relations. They feel they are particularly vulnerable because in most of the countries, foreign exchange earnings depend on only one or a few commodities. Generally, raw material prices decline sooner and stay depressed longer than do the prices for finished products. The traditional U.S. position has been strongly opposed to international commodity agreements. Wheat and sugar are exceptions. Efforts have been made in the recommendations below to ease gradually into a changed position on commodity agreements. 1. The lead-­zinc problem is an important one for which there is no easy solution. It seems realistic to assume that the Tariff Commission report will probably recommend maximum increases in duties and possibly even import quotas. Yet if increased protection is granted to

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 11 importers, threatens the continuance of the voluntary quota system which to date has been remarkably successful. Considerable pressure is being exerted on the Administration to convert the voluntary program to a mandatory program. While restive under the voluntary program, Venezuela has indicated that conversion to a mandatory program would be considered a violation of the U.S.– Venezuela trade agreement, and that it was studying the imposition of retaliatory measures in that event. The seriousness of the problem to our relations with Venezuela and Canada subsequently moved the United States to suggest high level consultation by all three governments. Accordingly, early in March, consultations were held in Venezuela7 with high level Canadian observers.8 The U.S. delegation sought to obtain acquiescence to the continued imposition of unilateral import quotas by the U.S. under Article 7 of the Trade Agreements Act,9 and on a mandatory basis if that should be necessary, on the ground that a serious price decline would be imminent in the absence of such controls. No definite decisions or agreements were reached. Venezuela reserved the position that it objected in principle to restrictive measures on its petroleum exports, and that additional restrictive measures (e.g. mandatory controls) would give grounds for their consideration of retaliatory measures. The advantage of such consultation was affirmed by all parties and the desirability of their continuance as required. Both Venezuela and Canada have indicated their interest in the creation of a more permanent type of inter-Governmental consultative body for a continuing review of petroleum matters of mutual interest. Recommendation It is recommended that: (a) to meet the immediate problem, the type of inter-Governmental consultation undertaken be continued, and (b) study be undertaken of the feasibility of a western hemisphere oil commission which would keep the western hemisphere supply and demand situation under constant review. 4. Coffee (a) At the appropriate time in the near future indicate that the United States is prepared to cooperate in a multilateral coffee study group on a world-­wide basis, and that

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 13 2. If, as seems probable, commodity prices continue to decline and balance of payments problems worsen the U.S. (through the Eximbank or Treasury) should be prepared increasingly to extend temporary balance of payments support, in concert with such support from the IMF (private banks where possible) upon evidence that the countries concerned are taking reasonable self-­help measures. 3. Determine the reasons for the relatively low volume of recent IBRD loans to Latin America and, if so indicated, take appropriate steps such as high level representations by the Department to IBRD management to induce an increased volume and broader range of IBRD loans to Latin America (including increased financial and technical assistance to national development financing agencies). 4. Taking into account world-­wide requirements, employ DLF credits in Latin America in accordance with the criteria of the DLF. 5. Participate actively in the study called for by Resolution XVIII of the Buenos Aires Conference concerning the desirability for establishment of an Inter-American development bank.12 Particular attention should be given to the type of operations appropriate to such a bank and capital contributions to it, as well as management and voting rights. III Petroleum Development Policy There has been in force an informal, but nevertheless rigid, prohibition against U.S. financial assistance to foreign government petroleum agencies. It is recommended that the rule be changed as follows: (a) In the light of developing circumstances, we should work carefully in the direction of limited and selective loan assistance to petroleum projects of foreign governments, subject to the condition that foreign policy objectives will be served, and particularly in the expectation that the attitude toward American private capital will be improved by such loans. (b) Loan assistance may be granted for surface geological work, transport, storage, refining and marketing. Except for exporter credit facilities, the loan assistance contemplated will not be granted for exploratory or developmental drilling. IV U.S. Trade with Latin America The very cornerstone of our relations with Latin America is trade. When trade is maintained at high levels and commodity prices are 12 For text of the resolution, see Economic Conference of the Organization of American

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 15 (c) Try to make countries which engage or contemplate engaging in trade with the Sino-Soviet Bloc aware of political and economic pitfalls associated with certain aspects of such trade with the Soviet Bloc, with particular attention on risks of dependence and political penetration. If, nevertheless, trade is expanded significantly, or in sensitive items, such as oil well supplies, we shall have to review the problem and consider countermeasures. In the absence of a concrete case, it would be dangerous to attempt specific guidance at this time. Tab C Petroleum Development Policy13 Washington, March 20, 1958. 1. Basic Considerations Underlying the Proposed Change in Policy. (a) Maximum development of petroleum resources in friendly foreign countries will strengthen their economies, reduce the burden of their foreign exchange earnings, and contribute to the mutual defense strength of the allied and friendly nations. (b) In certain countries, national policy and legislation limit the extent of foreign private capital participation in the petroleum industry, and reserve certain areas of the industry (e.g., exploration and development) to official petroleum entities. Failure of these official entities to obtain capital in the amount required to carry out operations on a desirable scale has: (1) Given strength to the propaganda arguments advanced by their nationalistic elements in these countries, although without foundation, that the United States Government and foreign oil companies desire the liquidation of these government petroleum entities, and this has served to mobilize national support to their monopoly position in the industry. (2) It has, moreover, resulted in national acquiescence to the actions of such petroleum monopolies prejudicial to the operations of the private foreign oil companies in the marketing and distribution phases of the industry to which they have been limited. This has reduced thereby the profitability of the private foreign oil company operations, threatened their capital investment, limited their expansion, and consequently retarded the country’s economic development. (c) It is believed that maximum development of the petroleum industry in any country can only be attained by encouragement of the competitive force of private capital. Therefore, effort should be made to 13 Drafted by Nestor C. Ortiz of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs on March 20.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 17 ETA–5. Memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Secretary of State.1 Washington, March 31, 1958. SUBJECT Coffee Problem High coffee prices have stimulated production in Latin America and in other areas, particularly Africa, with the result that coffee production is rapidly outdistancing consumption. The demand for coffee is relatively inelastic and a price reduction will not stimulate consumption enough to prevent a decline in total income. Recognizing this, the seven principal coffee producing countries of Latin America have been holding supplies off the market in a joint effort to maintain the price in a range of 50 to 60 cents a pound. The Governments of Colombia and Brazil, which produce more than half the world’s coffee, and which depend upon it for 60 and 77% respectively of their foreign exchange, are both in balance of payments difficulties which could become critical if there should be a further decline in coffee prices. The price of Colombian coffee has already fallen about 33% and Brazilian about 10% over the past year. Both governments have also shouldered a heavy fiscal burden in undertaking to finance the supplies of coffee withheld from market. African producers are not party to Latin America’s efforts to maintain prices. There is danger that the marketing agreement will collapse in the near future, and that coffee prices will decline sharply as each country tries to dispose of its own surplus carryover. The long-­term solution to the problem must be a decline in coffee prices sufficient to curb plantings and bring supply back into equilibrium with requirements. It is in the United States interest as well as that of the producing countries, however, to accomplish this objective gradually rather than through a sharp break in coffee prices which would create serious political, economic and social problems in 7 Latin American countries. The Latin American producing countries have been urging the negotiation of an international coffee agreement as a means of stabilizing prices for the past three years. Failing to obtain support from the United States for this approach, they have recently established a World Coffee Organization primarily to stimulate consumption through a trade promotion program but also to study economic trends of the

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 19 A more detailed statement of the coffee problem is attached as Tab B.3 Recommendation That you authorize the Department to propose to the CFEP United States participation in an international coffee study group, to be composed of important producing and consuming countries, on the basis described above.4 Concurrence ARA—Mr. Rubottom Approved_______ ________5 Disapproved______________ 3 Not printed. 4 In a memorandum to Clarence B. Randall, Chairman of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy (CFEP), dated May 5, 1958, Douglas Dillon, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, recommended that the CFEP authorize participation by the

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 21 to the recent strengthening of the voluntary control system increased their understanding of our problem. In the case of copper our current information is that the Department may be able successfully to oppose the pending bills to increase the tax on imported copper. Recently the price of copper has been relatively stable and two of the three largest U.S. producers also produce in foreign countries. It should be emphasized, however, that if the markets for these commodities deteriorate further we may have to consider additional measures. We shall watch this situation closely and make further recommendations as circumstances warrant. Since the very cornerstone of our economic relations with Latin America is trade, it is imperative that the U.S. refrain from imposing undue restrictions upon our own imports. The extension of the Trade Agreements Act as requested by the Administration will have very beneficial effects on evidence of our intentions, provided it is not accompanied by increased resort to restrictive measures affecting individual commodities. Financial Assistance: Although the needs for development capitol in Latin America are enormous, their immediate financial problems are closely related to the commodity problems discussed above. Thus, Brazil, Chile and Colombia are pressing so for what amounts to balance of payments assistance to tide them through periods of depressed commodity prices. It is necessary that we respond to those situations, while [illegible in the original] the same time maintaining pressure, through the International Monetary Fund, for needed internal reforms and endeavor to encourage policies which will help stabilize their economies. The United States is prepared, in principle, to extend financial assistance to these three countries and dimensions are, or soon will be, underway with their representatives regarding specific amounts and related matters. It should be emphasized that balance of payments assistance to Latin America and other areas is a temporary expedient which results in no additional economic development, and has little lasting effect except as countries take advantage of it to improve their own economic policies. Neither the Export-Import Bank nor the Development Loan Fund are designed to extend this kind of assistance. The International Monetary Fund is equipped to do so although tin resources would have to be enlarged to enable it to become fully effective. We believe the U.S. should consider a further subscription to the end of something like 41 billion which, on the basis of the original subscriptions, would be matched by 2 billion from other countries of which $500 million would be in gold and dollars. We would like to explore this

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 23 considerable scope for regional groupings which would provide larger markets and would combine the special circumstances, talents and resources of two or more countries. An example is provided by Salvador and Honduras, where the excess population and capital of Salvador could be useful in developing the resources of Honduras. If a true common market or free trade area between these two countries could be achieved it might serve as an example and stimulant to others. The principal obstacles are Honduras’ fear of domination by Salvador and the adjustment that a few, small industries in both countries would have to make. These might be overcome, with some political risk to us, if the U.S. actively supported such an arrangement and helped them devise practicable solutions to specific economic problems; some financial assistance from us might also be necessary. We think the potentialities of such an experiment would justify an effort on our part. Soviet Bloc Trade Although Soviet bloc trade missions have been active in Latin America, there have as yet been no Soviet bloc approaches of the magnitude and nature of their approaches in other areas such as Syria, Egypt, Ceylon, India, and Indonesia. We shall, however, continue to watch this situation closely, and endeavor to evaluate the precise scale and objectives of the Soviet bloc economic offensive in Latin America. Meanwhile, the United States should not oppose the expansion of trade in non-­strategic commodities with the Soviet bloc. We should, however, try to make countries which engage or contemplate engaging in trade with the Soviet bloc aware of the political and economic pitfalls associated with certain aspects of such trade, with particular attention on the risks of economic dependence and political penetration. The unsatisfactory condition of certain primary commodity markets has increased the vulnerability of Latin America to Soviet bloc offers to take such commodities. If the Soviet economic offensive in Latin America is expanded significantly, particularly in [illegible in the original] fields such as petroleum development, we may wish to consider other countermeasures. Our policy against financial assistance for petroleum development because private capital is available if allowed to enter, gives the Soviet bloc a field which it may exploit. Failing such exploitation, the present does not appear a propitious time for changes in this policy. Should it be possible to make limited changes in the future without generating reactions in the U.S. which would endanger other important elements of U.S. foreign economic policy, we should be prepared to consider certain types of petroleum loans such as exporter credits and loans for transport, storage, refining and marketing facilities. However, should the Bloc show that it can enter this field in an effective manner or otherwise exploit this situation, we will wish to

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 25 From the brief survey we were able to make of the Central American area, I am personally convinced that the countries involved need economic assistance from an external source at this time. The economies of each of the Control American countries have been adversely affected by the serious drop in the price of coffee and in some cases also by lowered production and declining sales of bananas. I believe that each of the countries is in a position to do more for itself than it has done; more could and should be done by the governments and by the wealthy citizens. Nevertheless, I feel that they are in acute need of economic aid and that it is in the interest of the United States that we extend some economic assistance to the Central American countries at this time. In my opinion, economic assistance should be given to the Central American countries in the form of loans from three sources, namely: 1. The Export-Import Bank 2. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 3. The Development Loan Fund Although the lending activities of the above named institutions are already coordinated to some extent, particularly through the National Advisory Council, I feel that a greater and well-­coordinated positive effort is desirable. Conferences should be arranged between executives of the three lending institutions to study the economic problems of the Central American area, to compare notes and opinions, and particularly to consider projects in each country which would most quickly and effectively aid the economy of the country. More particularly, I feel that in the proposed conferences between the three lending institutions, the following factors and conditions should be studied: 1. The present economic and financial condition of each country. 2. Economic projects most urgently needed in each country. 3. Estimated capacity of each country to repay additional loans in dollars and possibly in local currency. 4. Recommended allocation of essential projects to the three lending institutions, or possible participation by DLF and the Export-Import Bank and/or the International Bank wherever this seems advisable. In my opinion such a joint study would be of considerable value, and it should be possible to reach an agreement among the lending institutions as to the approximate amount of loans to be considered by each institution and the specific projects to be covered by each of such loans. In addition to the extension of economic assistance by the three lending institutions, I feel that ICA (International Cooperation Administration) should be urged to increase, if possible, the amount of its technical assistance in each of the Central American countries. In my opinion it would be helpful if through ICA some experts could be sent

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 27 ETA–8. Minutes of the 269th Meeting of the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems1 Washington, August 26, 1958. Secretary Robert B. Anderson (Chairman), Treasury Department Mr. Julian B. Baird Mr. Elting Arnold Mr. Philip Schaffner Mr. Henry J. Bittermaan Mr. Ralph Hirschtritt Mr. Ralph V. Korp Mr. C. Douglas Dillon, State Department Mr. John Parke Young Mr. Emerson Ross Mr. Walter Williams, Commerce Department Mr. Marshall M. Smith Governor Wm. McC. Martin, Jr., Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System Mr. Arthur W. Marget Mr. Robert S. Sammons Mr. Lynn U. Stambaugh, Export-Import Bank Mr. Vance Brand Mr. Walter C. Sauer Mr. Harry R. Rowntree Mr. Walter Schaefer, International Cooperation Administration Mr. Hale T. Shenefield Mr. Frank A. Southard, Jr., International Monetary Fund Mr. William F, Doering, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mr. Arthur G. Kevorkian, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mr. Maurice Stans, Bureau of the Budget, Visitor Mr. Bartlett Harvey, Bureau of the Budget, Visitor Mr. Hal Lary, Council of Economic Advisors, Visitor Mr. Edmond C. Hutchinson, Development Loan Fund, Visitor Mr. George H. Willis, Secretary Mr. C. L. Callander, Assistant Secretary Mr. Allan J. Fisher, NAC Secretariat 1 Source: Treasury Department Files, NAC Minutes. For National Security Council Use Only. The source text is designated “Draft of Minutes.” A table of contents is not printed.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 29 up an institution that would in any way handicap American industry in competing with lower-­cost foreign industries. Mr. Stambaugh continued that if Latin American economic problems could be solved simply by providing more credits, a new institution would not be needed. The Export-Import Bank believed there was need for a new institution with functions different from those of the existing institutions. The problems of obtaining the local currency for development projects and for budgetary financing, were chronic in Latin America. The new Institution could usefully confine its financing to such internal expenditures, and should also be able to give technical advice and to assist the Latin American countries in planning their development programs. Mr. Williams inquired as to the need for the proposed Institution, and whether Dr. Milton Eisenhower and Vice President Nixon had been consulted. The Commerce Department had also considered whether the Institution might not more appropriately be a Latin American than an Inter-American Institution with the function of providing local currency for local currency needs. The Chairman commented that the Latin American feeling of having a special relationship with the United States had been weakened by U.S. participation in regional organizations in other areas, such as NATO and SEATO. On several occasions during the past several years, the Latin American countries had proposed a regional Inter-American Bank, to include the United States. The United States had opposed such a bank on the grounds that resources could not be increased simply by multiplying institutions. The recent determination of the President to offer the support of the United States for an Arab Bank involved for the first time U.S. support of such a regional financial institution.4 Accordingly, it was decided to announce support of a new Institution before the announcement concerning an Arab Bank was made in the United Nations. The Chairman then stressed the importance of avoiding failure of the new Institution. It should be thought of as a financial institution subject to a minimum of political influence. Mr. Martin questioned the need for the proposed Institution, and agreed with Mr. Stambaugh’s remarks about existing institutions. He added that a financial institution to be successful should be divorced 4 In his address to the third emergency special session of the U.N. General Assembly on August 13, 1958, President Eisenhower proposed, inter alia, consultations between the Secretary-General and representatives of the Arab states of the Near East to determine whether they could reach agreement on the establishment of a regional development institution, and he also indicated that the United States would support a “soundly organized” institution. For text of the President’s address, see Department of State Bulletin,

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 31 Conference would be held in Ecuador about January, 1960,5 and that the Latin Americans would like to have the Inter-American Bank matter settled well before that meeting. He suggested, therefore, that it would be desirable to have a high-­level conference early in 1959. The Chairman suggested that the Staff prepare a paper that would present various alternatives with respect to the creation and operation of the Institution, together with the problems and issues raised by each, for subsequent consideration by the Council. This was agreed (see Staff

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 33 Mr. Smith5 expressed agreement with the views of Mr. Waugh. He felt that a clear idea of the objectives of the Institution, particularly in the field of development, was needed, as well as a view of the extent to which the Bank could make funds available at reasonable interest rates. Mr. Dillon expressed concurrence with the Chairman’s views on the time schedule. He felt that October should be used to develop the United States position, following which talks could begin with the Latin Americans to ascertain what kind of bank they desired. He agreed with the Staff emphasis on technical assistance activity, which really involved improvement of planning, and suggested that these activities be referred to as development planning so as to avoid confusion with existing technical assistance programs. He saw the task as having two parts, first to work out the objectives of the Institution, and second to determine what should be in the articles of association. He recalled that the basic motive was political, to meet the Latin American desire for a special association with the United States, and expressed preference for a flexible approach to the purposes of financing, currency of repayment, and similar matters. He expected it would be difficult to define the idea of supplementing and not competing with the existing institutions. He felt that the form of capitalization would depend to some extent on the kinds of loans to be made, and agreed that the Bank should not accept deposits. He felt the suggestion of limiting the Bank to economic development projects should be sharpened, but that too categorical a view should be avoided. He suggested that the drafts prepared by the Staff include draft policy statements for internal U.S. consideration. Mr. Schaefer6 agreed that the new Institution’s activities should supplement those of existing institutions and noted that the paper offered no suggestions for using foreign currencies now available to the United States. Mr. Reid felt that principles to apply to development banks generally were needed, and hoped that the United States would not go so far in the Latin American case as to prejudice our position in other areas. On the illustrative figures in the paper for the amount of capitalization, he felt it was difficult to determine amounts without a clear idea of the Bank’s objectives. He noted that the prospective increase in the resources of the International Bank and International Monetary Fund presumably would affect the needs of Latin America and therefore the capitalization of a new Institution. The Chairman summarized by saying that the Staff work through October should not be considered binding on any agency with respect 5 Marshall M. Smith, Assistant Secretary for International Affairs, Department of Commerce. 6 Walter Schaefer, Assistant to the Director for Finance, ICA.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 35 subsidiaries of governments, whether the Bank would lend for housing and other non-­productive purposes, and similar questions. He added that any international agreement on a charter for the Bank should be reached outside the forthcoming meeting of foreign ministers in Washington, but within the OAS.7 With respect to a suggestion that the OAS ask the Inter-American Economic and Social Council (IAECOSOC) to draft the charter, the Chairman said that the drafting was a task for specially qualified financial experts rather than the usual delegates to IAECOSOC. Mr. Dillon agreed the drafting of a charter should not be done by the staff of IAECOSOC, although it could be done under the aegis of that organization. The drafting should be done by specially designated representatives of governments, including ad hoc financial experts. Ambassador Randall8 commented that no difficulty was expected in IAECOSOC, since the United States had already made clear its view that the drafting should be done by a specially qualified group. 7 The Foreign Ministers of the American Republics met in Washington, September

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 37 I want you to know about this matter because we may have to enlist your quiet support if the issue becomes more serious. Tom Mann and I intend to see Secretary Anderson today or tomorrow, if possible. If we are unable to resolve the problem, we shall have to take it up with the Secretary, with Doug Dillon’s support, of course. I am certain that we have nothing to lose, and much to gain, by taking a positive approach on the discussion of this Institution, without committing ourselves to anything, especially bearing in mind that it is only six or seven weeks until the other committee will meet in January. Great resentment will build up against us if we should attempt to hold back discussion of this Institution in this present forum, in fact, I doubt that we would succeed. I think that the prospect mentioned under point no. 3 of a bifurcated development institution offers real hope. None of the Latin American countries are going to want to put in money to be repaid in some other kind of currency; therefore, most of them want the strictly banking side of the institution to be a hard loan entity. Mexico, Cuba and Venezuela have been very outspoken on this point, as you might expect, in view of their relatively hard money. On the other hand, everybody wants to be able to get soft loans through the institution and we, of course, are the only source of that kind of money. We could lend money from the DLF to the institution and it could make soft loans. After a few years, it would have repayments coming in in the various kinds of currency which could be revolving and our contributions could cease. With warmest regards, Very sincerely yours, R. R. Rubottom, Jr. Enclosures: 1. Memorandum 2. Mr. Dillon’s speech.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 39 However, the overwhelming majority of the Latin Americans are thinking of a development institution engaging also in soft loans, including loans for social overhead projects. They are thinking of U.S. help in economic development financing through loans of a combined magnitude not realizable by a bank to which Latin America could contribute even half of the capital. They are thinking in terms of $300 to $400 million annually for the next ten years, in addition to maintenance of the current leading activities of the IBRD and the Eximbank. Obviously we will be unable to meet that kind of request but we shall have to deal with the problem of profound disillusionment unless we can devise some means of meeting this aspiration for a soft loan institution. Messrs. Dillon, Mann and I have discussed that probably the most feasible approach might be to establish an institution with two departments, one to operate along sound banking lines and to make only hard loans, and (2) a completely separate department that would make soft loans and that would be authorized to borrow from the U.S. Development Loan Fund, say, at the rate of $100 million per year. The latter department would be able to lend funds for certain important overhead projects, like schools, and hospitals, and could also lend money for the local currency costs of projects for which the hard loan department would lend to cover import requirements. The Department has prepared a position paper which will be made available to the other members of the NAC at its meeting on Tuesday when this subject will be discussed. Attached is a copy. Recommendation: That you authorize Mr. Dillon support an institution which would make hard loans but with a department which could also handle soft loans and would be authorized to borrow from the DLF, at the NAC meeting on Tuesday, November 25; That yon also take an early occasion to inform the President of your views that this kind of institution is absolutely necessary to meet both the urgent economic problems in Latin America and the political problems created by their increased expectations of U.S. assistance. [Attachment] Paper Prepared in the Department of State2 Washington, November 24, 1958. In order to permit the institution to make some loans of convertible currencies repayable in local currencies to assist in financing 2 No classification marking.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 41 Mr. Marshall M. Smith Mr. Clarence I. Blau Governor Wm. McC. Martin, Jr., Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System Governor M. S. Szymczak Mr. J. Herbert Furth Mr. Samuel C. Waugh, Export-Import Bank Mr. R. H. Rowntree Mr. Dempster McIntosh, Development Loan Fund Mr. Robert M. Cabot Mr. Walter Schaefer, International Cooperation Administration Mr. Hale T. Shenefield Mr. Charles Warden Mr. Thomas P. Doughty Mr. Frank A. Southard, Jr., International Monetary Fund Mr. John S. Hooker, International Bank Mr. Max Myers, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mr. William F. Doering, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mrs. Katherine Wiley, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mr. Larry F. Thomasson, Department of Agriculture, Visitor Mr. Bartlett Harvey, Bureau of the Budget, Visitor Mr. Hal B. Lary, Council of Economic Advisers, Visitor Mr. George H. Willis, Secretary Mr. C. L. Callander, Assistant Secretary Mr. Victor A. Mack, NAC Secretariat 1. Inter-American Development Banking Institution The Council considered the paper submitted by the Staff Committee on policy issues involved in the Inter-American Development Banking Institution (NAC Document No. 2431). The Secretary of the Council reviewed the Staff Committee discussion, pointing out that the basic assumption of the Working Group was that the institution would be a conservative financial institution which would revolve its funds through a banking operation. If this broad principle were altered to emphasize the possibility of soft loans, the paper would have to be modified. The Staff Committee had discussed the question of currency of repayment and agreed this matter required further Council consideration. Another important issue was whether the authorized capital should be $600 million as outlined in the paper, or $1 billion as suggested by the State Department in the Staff discussion. The Secretary noted that these questions also involved the question of U.S. voting power in the institution. The Chairman asked for the views of the Department of State. Mr. Dillon recalled the political motivation of United States support

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 43 continued exportation of U.S. dollars and gold was desirable. The proposal for an Inter-American Bank envisaged a revolving financial institution, but the Latin Americans were saying that the institution could not be established unless the United States put up the money. A division of contributions would need to be worked out, but it was imperative that the Latin Americans have a real and hard sense of contribution. He preferred a ⅓–⅔ ratio because it was consistent with the idea of an international institution, and agreed that if the contributions were on a 50/50 basis the capitalization should be smaller than if it were ⅓ and ⅔. He would be willing to consider soft loan authority for the institution, but would oppose creating a soft loan institution with a commitment of constant replenishment by the United States without participation by the Latin Americans. United States participation must be by direct appropriations from Congress on the basis of a clear understanding of the amount and nature of the capitalization and the dividing line between hard and soft loans, and a clear understanding that further appropriations would be necessary in the future. The Chairman agreed that the institution should have the right to borrow in private markets, and that the emphasis should be on project loans, with the possibility of other types of loans to the extent feasible. Secretary Strauss commented that he had a number of questions concerning the institution, including the need for it, but that he would in the first instance seek the answers from his staff. Mr. Waugh expressed surprise at the turn of the discussion of the institution away from the hard loan approach. He questioned the notion of U.S. veto power, recalling that the initial approach involved control by the Latin Americans. He also questioned the proposal that the Development Loan Fund lend to the institution to enable it to make the same type of loans that the DLF could make bilaterally. He did not see that any approach was being made to the main Latin American problem of financing social overhead projects. He outlined the view of the Export-Import Bank’s Board of Directors: that the Inter-American Bank would necessarily involve competition with existing institutions; that the competition of a bank which made only hard loans would be preferable to competition of a soft loan institution; and that the charter of the Inter- American institution should require that its loans offer reasonable assurance of repayment in the same currency in which the loans were made. This would permit hard loans in Latin American currencies. Mr. Waugh continued that if the Inter-American Bank made soft loans it would interfere with and perhaps drive out sound loans by private lenders said existing public institutions and would require periodic new appropriations by the United States. Any soft loans of U.S. funds should be made only by agencies controlled by the United States. Mr. Waugh felt that the matter should be discussed with interested Congressional committees

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 45 the International Bank, or private capital. He agreed that the institution should not have the right to additional appropriations every year, and that the matter should be discussed with the interested Congressional committees. Mr. Hooker suggested that the DLF could cooperate with the Inter-American institution, which could prepare soft loan projects for DLF consideration, but without itself making soft loans. He also wondered whether the Latin American delegates to the OAS Special Committee were the appropriate people to make decisions about the Inter-American Banking Institution. The Chairman said that the main point was that the Inter-American Banking Institution should be regarded as a financial organization, and that the Latin Americans must realize that the institution would run out of funds unless the Latin Americans contribute more than the United States. If it depended only on United States contributions it would not be a financial institution even though it would be so regarded. With respect to the meeting of the OAS Special Committee, the Secretary of the Council commented that there were still some apparent differences of opinion among the Latin Americans about the nature of the institution. He also noted that the OAS document on financing Latin American economic development had been produced by its secretariat, and that the attitudes of the Latin Americans toward it were not known. Mr. Mann asked the advice of the Council with respect to tactics on the drafting group which had been set up by the Special Committee. The Chairman said that it was not possible to make an immediate decision on all the issues in the institution and that the best course appeared to be to tell the Latin Americans that we would try to produce an outline of the new institution by the first of the year, and that this would require bilateral consultation with individual countries and consultations with Congressional committees. [Here follows discussion of agenda items 2 and 3: “International Monetary Fund and International Bank” and “Other Business.”]

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 47 thoroughly conversant, have since that date further underscored the importance of such DLF action in terms of improvement in U.S. relations with the other American Republics. The DLF Board has so far approved loans to Latin American applicants totaling $18,940,000. I recommend prompt and favorable action on an additional seven applications in the amount of $27,840,000 as a minimum. Even including the $21.75 million for Argentina, which is a very special case, the combined total for Latin America would thus

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 49 role and such funds should be segregated so as to avoid any impairment of credit of new institution in capital markets. B. Contributions to funds for both hard loan operations and soft loan operations should come from all the American states and voting power of any state should be broadly related to size of its capital contribution. C. United States Government should not repeat not have majority vote in management of funds for hard loan operations. However, with respect funds for soft loan operations U.S. recognizes limited extent to which Latin Americans able to contribute and hence U.S. willing accept majority contribution and majority vote in respect this department of institution’s operations. D. Capitalization of institution should take account limited capacity Latin Americans contribute gold or dollars to paid-­in capital. Hence reasonable portion L.A. contributions to funds for both hard and soft lending operations should be acceptable in local currencies. E. Payment of capital subscriptions should be spread over reasonable period of years. This desirable view (a) fact that institution will require initial period organization before operations can begin; and (b) desirable maximize total capitalization without undue financial strain on governments any particular year. F. Some portion total capital subscriptions should be in form contingent liability on governments meet obligations of institution. If institution soundly administered, this should enable it in time to raise capital through issuance bonds in private securities market. 4. As indicated Under Secretary Dillon’s statement at Committee

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 51 institutions now making loans in Latin America, particularly the IBRD, the Export-Import Bank and DLF. It would also help if one had some general idea of the likely loan terms, i.e., interest rate, length of loan, etc. It is possible that the loan conditions contemplated would enable the proposed bank to complement, rather than replace IBRD and Ex-Im on the one hand and DLF on the other, although, as I understand it, DLF would discontinue all direct loaning activities in Latin America and local currency repayable loans would be handled by the special loans department of the proposed bank. According to the NAC paper, the ordinary loans department, in addition to dollars, would receive and lend local currencies to be repaid in the same currency as lent. This would appear to be of marginal value in Latin America. The only instance I know in which borrowing countries would be able to repay the local currency of another Latin American country easier than dollars would be in the case of Paraguay and possibly Bolivia. These two countries might be able to repay Argentine pesos easier than U.S. dollars. Unless the loans contemplated by the ordinary loan department involve a much longer repayment period than IBRD and Ex-Im Bank typically provide, I do not see how there could be very much business done over and above that which the IBRD and the Ex-Im Bank are prepared to do. Almost inevitably, it seems to me, the IBRD will reduce the ceiling on the loans it would make to any particular Latin American country to the extent that that country undertakes repayment obligations in dollars or other convertible currency through the proposed Inter-American Banking Institution. The trouble is not that IBRD and Ex-Im Bank do not have authority to make substantially larger loans to Latin America, but, rather, the capacity of Latin American countries to repay these loans. Adding another banking institution would not increase that repayment capacity. Nor, in general, will the requirement that the Latin American countries contribute part of the capital of the proposed Institution increase the total capital available for borrowing by the Latin American countries. Perhaps any contributions by Venezuela might be a net contribution because of its relatively large foreign exchange reserve, but surely in the case of most other countries—Brazil, or Argentina, or Ecuador—­contributions by these countries to the capital fund will inevitably reduce almost pro rata the capital availabilities within the country. Much the same considerations apply to the special loans department. Latin American countries traditionally are chronically short of local currency, so they are likely to be unenthusiastic about contributing local currency to the proposed Institution. I think they would be doubly reluctant to contribute from their already limited

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 53 ETA–17. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Economic Development, Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs (Rosenson)1 Washington, January 30, 1959. SUBJECT Inter-American Bank PARTICIPANTS Asst. Secr. Upton Mr. Willis Mr. Rosenson Mr. Mario Mendivil, Argentina (Chairman of Conference) Mr. Ignacio Copete, Colombia (Chairman, Subcommittee I) Mr. Felipe Herrera, Chile (Chairman, Subcommittee II) Mr. Rafael Glower, El Salvador (Chairman, IA/ECOSOC) This conversation took place at a dinner in Mr. Upton’s residence on January 29th. Mr. Upton encouraged his Latin American visitors to give him their views on our proposals regarding the Bank, which they did quite readily. Each one spoke only for himself but there was considerable agreement among them, and they expressed the belief at various times that the majority of the other delegations held views similar to theirs. They of course made an exception for Brazil, which they regarded as a special problem in the current negotiations. They expressed the hope that the U.S. would undertake the task of bringing the Brazilians into line, but received no encouragement on this score. The conversation revolved almost entirely around the capital structure of the “A”, or hard-­loan, department (the subject of the “B” department was touched on only at the end). It will be recalled that the U.S. has proposed the following capitalization for the “A” department. Paid-In U.S. L.A. in dollars in local currency Callable U.S. L.A. Total “A” capital

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 55 the “B” department as an integral part of our proposals on the Bank. He accordingly invited the Latins to give him the benefit of their views on this question also. However, because of the lateness of the hour it was agreed to defer this part of the discussion to another early occasion. ETA–18. Memorandum from the Officer in Charge of Economic Development, Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs (Rosenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, February 4, 1959. SUBJECT Inter-American Bank: Issues A second informal and “off the record” meeting was held on the evening of February 2 in the home of Mr. Rafael Glower to continue the discussions which took place several nights before at Mr. Upton’s home.2 It will be recalled that at the previous informal meeting the Latins asked for four concessions from the United States proposals. These related to: 1) increase in U.S. subscription to callable capital, 2) reduced Latin American dollar-­subscriptions, 3) stretch-­out payments, and 4) voting power. At the meeting of February 2 the discussion narrowed down to essentially two issues, i.e. the nature of the soft-­loan department of the institution, and the amount of callable capital in the hard-­loan department. Several of the Latins present thought that the soft operations of the Bank ought to be separated from the hard loans even more sharply than contemplated in the United States proposal which called for two separate departments within a single bank. It was suggested that there should be a special “Fund”, organizationally entirely separate from the Bank but administered by the latter as a trust. This idea had been put forward earlier in a session of Subcommittee I by representatives of Venezuela and

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 57 articles of agreement and “keep things moving” so that differences could be narrowed down. The Latins tried to get him to say that his position on callable capital was the United States position as of the present moment, but this he refused to do. Nevertheless, I believe he succeeded in leaving the impression with the Latins that if they were reasonable on other parts of our proposal (and in particular as regards the B Department), we would not be absolutely adamant on the matter of the callable capital. ETA–19. Memorandum from the President’s Special Assistant (Paarlberg) to the President’s Personal Secretary (Whitman)1 Washington, March 5, 1959.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 59 made to conclude the work of the Specialized Committee in the next few weeks. In an effort to reach an understanding which the Brazilians as well as the other Delegations might accept, we propose, subject to your approval, to offer a final integrated package proposal which would not be subject to any further concession as a result of Brazilian or other pressure. If you approve, we should like to present this proposal to the other Delegations, with an indication that it has been approved at the highest level. We would like to indicate that if this proposal is not found acceptable, and the drafting of the charter is not completed here in Washington by the end of March, we think it unlikely that we can obtain Congressional approval for any institution at this session of the Congress. In this event, because of budgetary considerations, no funds would become available from the U.S. for the institution under any conditions until the second half of the calendar year 1960. With respect to capitalization, we would now propose that: 1. The initial capital of the bank should be $1 billion, to which the U.S. would subscribe $450 million, $250 million to be paid in installments and $200 million in callable capital; and 2. The charter should specify that an additional $500 million would be added to callable capital after all installments of initial paid-­in capital had been paid and provided the increase was approved at that time by a 3/4 majority of the total votes in the Board of Governors, i.e., U.S. would have a veto. This would raise the total capital of the Bank to $1.5 billion. The U.S. would be morally committed to subscribe an additional amount of approximately $200 million in callable capital after three to five years, unless at that time we had very strong reasons for rejecting such an increase. We have been reluctant to make this institution too large because (1) our influence over the use of our money once it has been committed will be limited; (2) we do not wish to have the operations of the new institution impinge too heavily upon the Latin American lending activities of the Export-Import Bank and the International Bank; and (3) we are limited by the Budget statement to providing not more than $300 million in new obligational authority at the present time and are also required by the Budget to limit our expenditures in fiscal year 1959 to not more than $100 million and to have no authorization or expenditure in fiscal year 1960. In putting forward these proposals on capitalization we also propose to take the following positions as parts of a package: 1. Some countries have expressed a desire to eliminate the proposed soft loan operation. We will indicate our willingness to transfer our subscription to the bank’s Class A (hard loan) resources, if other countries are willing to do likewise.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 61 U.S. urges draft charter be completed ASAP permit presentation U.S. Congress. Proposed that final act of conference be signed before end March by representatives all governments at closing session Washington. Alternatively, final act could be initialed in Washington

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 63 On the other hand Brazilian indicated some disappointment and stated would have to cable home for instructions End FYI. Requested Action You are requested discuss this proposal ASAP at highest appropriate levels host government and urge government to instruct its delegation to Specialized Committee to accept and support this new U.S. proposal in order we may successfully establish and begin operation this institution we all so much desire at earliest practicable moment. You should stress U.S. has made strongest effort meet position Latin American delegations and these very real concessions were very difficult to make in light pending and accomplished increases in IBRD, IMF and Eximbank resources. Reiterate U.S. proposal is an integral one cleared at highest level repeat highest level U.S. Government and early action essential. Treasury Secretary Anderson and Rubottom personally spoke to Latin leaders prior presentation in Specialized Committee. Please report host government reaction soonest. Herter Acting ETA–22. Editorial Note On March 24, 1959, Acting Secretary Dillon approved a recommendation contained in a memorandum from Wilson T. M. Beale, Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (initialled by Assistant Secretary Mann), to authorize Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Upton to sign the Final Act incorporating the articles of agreement for an Inter-American Economic Development Banking Institution prepared by the Socialized Committee of the Organization of American States. The memorandum reads in part as follows: “Initialling the Final Act of the Specialized Committee will constitute in effect a commitment on the part of the United States not to propose any alteration in the draft charter since we have so proposed to the other countries. Subsequent signing of the Final Act will signify in effect United States agreement to accept or reject the draft charter in toto, without reservations, after customary legislative action.”

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 65 Your views and the forthright manner in which you expressed them made a deep impression on me. I truly regret that your telegram did not reach me until after the working group made its decision on Washington as the site for the new institution. Although this circumstance precluded my consideration of your message before the decision was taken, your Government’s views were well known to our representatives, and I assure you that those views were given most careful consideration. But after study of all factors, the United States Government felt obliged to conclude that the technical and practical advantages of having the institution located in Washington, at least in its initial stages, would greatly facilitate the successful establishment of this important venture in hemispheric cooperation. In reaching that conclusion, we had in mind the desirability of selecting a site that would be near the New York money market and existing banking and financial institutions, including the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund, and the Export-Import Bank of Washington.3 I know that you share my deep personal interest in supporting measures which contribute to the general welfare of all of the people of this hemisphere. I look forward to the continued association of our two nations in such important projects as the Inter-American Development Bank as a means of achieving the objectives we consider essential to the peace and prosperity of the Americas. Thank you for making your views known to me in such a friendly fashion; I hope that you will not hesitate to communicate with me in a similar manner in the future. Sincerely, Dwight D. Eisenhower 3 Department circular telegram 1092 to all diplomatic missions in Latin America, dated March 26, 1959, discussing the location of the Bank, stated that a U.S. site would facilitate

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 67 development corporation at this time. The question of whether it may later be decided by the Central Americans to set up a separate development institution to borrow money and make loans on its own account is not foreclosed at this time. The only issue is whether we should make a commitment to finance through the DLF, sound projects totaling $15 million per country or whether we should say orally something like this: “The DLF does not ear-mark its funds and the availability of its funds is dependent on annual appropriations by the Congress. So official commitment can therefore be made. However the Department will recommend to the DLF Board that sound projects facilitating transition and economic development in a new trading community based upon GATT principles will be approved up to a level of $15 million per country. This figure should not be considered as a calling if sound projects are presented in excess of that amount. The speaker therefore suggests it would be prudent for Central American planning to take into account this attitude of the Department of State.” If it is possible for the DLF to make a commitment of the kind which Mr. Rubottom suggests, this would be frosting on the cake. If not, I believe I could sell the alternative approach to Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala which currently appear to be the possibilities. Attachment Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Acting Secretary of State2 Washington, August 4, 1959. SUBJECT Central American Common Market Discussions In recent months, the United States Government has left the impression throughout Central America that it would like to see the countries in this area form a real common market and that the United 2 Confidential. Drafted by Turkel and John L. Gawf, Officer in Charge of El Salvadoran and Honduran Affairs, Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 69 States was asked to provide the countries with an outline embodying the United States Government’s suggestions as to the form this organization might take. We have agreed to provide this outline. 4. At the close of the State Visit of the President of the El Salvador on March 23, 1959, a joint statement of President Lemus and President Eisenhower was made that they agreed that a Central American common market “costs make a significant contribution to the stimulation of capital investment in these nations and to the steady improvement of the welfare of the people. This subject will receive continued study by the two Governments with a view to taking approximate action to carry on these sound plans already contemplated.”6 The discussion between the two Presidents was even more enthusiastic than [illegible in the original] from the press release.7 Our immediate difficulty in carrying out the policy thus enunciated is in obtaining Treasury’s concurrence in the paper we are preparing for distribution to the five Central American countries, outlining in very general terms to steps that should be taken to form a common market. One of the principal issues with Treasury was whether we would recommend the formation of a new Central American economic development institution. To get a present to have agreed on a “Community Fund” whose job it would be to facilitate the adjustment of the economies of the member states to the new common market conditions. This fund would derive resources from a fraction of the [illegible in the original] revenues of the member states, but these will obviously be inadequate to cope with the need for economic development. We consider it essential that a [illegible in the original] of basic economic development projects proceed concurrently with the transition to an integrated economy. Moreover, we feel that it will be necessary to give the governments concerned [illegible in the original] definite advance indication that U.S. financial assistance will be available for this purpose; otherwise, the current integration effort will never get off the ground. Treasury has suggested that we tell our embassies that if any of the governments concerned express disappointment over the absence of

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 71 ETA–26. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Commercial Policy Branch, Office of International Trade (Fishburne)1 Washington, November 18, 1959. SUBJECT Economic Integration in Latin America PARTICIPANTS Dr. Raul Prebisch, Executive Secretary of ECLA Dr. Esteban Ivovich, Chief of Commercial Policy Division of ECLA Mr. Milic Kybal, Director of Washington Office of ECLA E - Mr. Mann OT - Mr. Hadraba CPT - Mr. Fishburne After a few words of welcome, Mr. Mann asked Dr. Prebisch to indicate what he would like to take up in particular as the topic of discussion during the meeting. Dr. Prebisch said that he wanted to discuss regional economic integration in Latin America and was especially interested in the views of Mr. Mann as to the merits of an over-­all approach to economic integration as contrasted with a subregional approach. His own feeling, he said, was that the subregional approach might prove to be detrimental to the formation of an over-­all Latin American Common Market. He did, however, make an exception for the Central American countries since they are already fairly closely knit and have a long history of attempting to attain economic integration. He based his objection to the subregional approach on the fact that the market in a subregion is not large enough for the growth of efficient industry, and protection would inevitably grow up on manufactured products, such as automobiles. Mr. Mann said that experience in Europe so far has been contrary to the idea expressed by Dr. Prebisch. He cited the example of Benelux, which is being integrated successfully into the European Economic Community. He said that if a subregional group started out with the proper concept of the advantages of competition, it would be easy for that group to make the transition into the larger market; on the contrary, if the group started out with protectionist ideas, further integration would be very difficult. Mr. Mann said that we have given encouragement to the Central American countries to make a start on economic integration even if less than all are ready to make a start. He said that we agree that it would be best for all five countries to act together; but if that is politically

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 73 free access to the United States and Canadian markets but would not be prepared to give the United States and Canada anything better than preferential tariff rates. Mr. Mann remarked that this would be contrary to the GATT. ETA–27. Letter from the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Hoghland) to Senator Thomas H. Kuchel.1 Washington, December 24, 1959. Dear Senator Kuchel: I read with interest your letter of December 1, 1959 to Under Secretary Dillon,2 regarding stabilization programs in Latin America in which the United States Government participates in cooperation with international institutions and private banking groups. In general such programs have achieved a substantial degree of success in arresting inflation in Latin America and creating a firm basis for sound economic development. There now exist nine such programs in operation. The countries involved are: Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay and Peru. Several additional programs are now under active consideration. In your letter you state that Uruguay had decided not to participate in any stabilization program under the International Monetary Fund. Actually, the country in this case was not Uruguay but Brazil. The information you request on the stabilization programs for Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia and Paraguay is given in some detail in the enclosure. I hope that this information will meet your request. Since the financial affairs of other governments, international organizations and private banks are involved, the material in the enclosure is not intended for public use. Sincerely yours, John S. Hoghland 2d Acting Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 75 was to be substantially reduced by the curtailment of expenditures and the imposition of new taxes and other sources of revenue; commercial bank credit was to be limited and at the same time internal subsidies which had distorted the price structure were to be eliminated. As a consequence of these radical steps which were necessary to eliminate distortions in the economy, there was a sharp upward movement in prices during 1959 because of the depreciation of the exchange rate, the dropping of subsidy payments on basic articles of consumption, and the continued necessity to increase wage rates. As a result the cost of living increased by 75% during the first six months of 1959. However, once the initial adjustments in the price structure were made and the budgetary situation improved, there was a noticeable tendency toward price stability. In July and August 1959 the cost of living increased by

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 77 operation since December 1956 and an International Monetary Fund representative is resident in La Paz. The stabilization program has been carried out with a considerable degree of success considering the magnitude of the problems and recent political history since 1952. The single rate of exchange has been fairly stable at about 12,000 Bolivianos to the dollar; the cost of living which rose by 178% during the year before the stabilization program began, has increased by only about 20% in the past two years; the government has followed an austerity plan in its expenditures and has made some progress in its credit restrictions. However, the financial situation began to deteriorate again in the middle of 1958 when pressures for wage increases resulted in numerous strikes and higher public expenditures; at the same time public sector financial deficits increased. Early in 1959 a revised standby agreement was negotiated with the International Monetary Fund but the Bolivian government has had some difficulty in complying with some of its provisions. The basic difficulty was the government’s unwillingness to discontinue price subsidies in commissaries operated by the nationalized mines, which were creating a heavy financial burden. After considerable negotiation in which the United States Government supported the International Monetary Fund’s position, the commissary price issue was finally resolved and a new standby agreement concluded in May 1959. This standby is still in force. Under the stabilization agreement of May 1959, Bolivia was given a further drawing of $1.5 million by the International Monetary Fund and to date has drawn $0.2 million of this amount. ICA grant assistance has continued in the amounts indicated above and it is believed that it may be possible to taper off grant aid over the next years. The fundamental problem in Bolivia has been that production of the basic export product, tin, has declined as a result of nationalization of the mines, antiquated equipment, and worker indiscipline, so that foreign exchange earnings have fallen off drastically from a total of $150 mil-

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 79 PARAGUAY In March 1956 the Paraguayan government made its first real effort to cope with an inflation which had raised the cost of living nine-­fold between 1950 and 1956. The Paraguayan currency unit, the Guarani, was devalued to 60 to the dollar from the multiple rates previously existing and a move was made to reduce internal monetary expansion. This program was not successful and in August 1957 a more complete stabilization program was put into effect in cooperation with the International Monetary Fund which made available a standby of $5.5 million. Since then this standby has been twice renewed and now expires in August 1960. To date Paraguay has drawn a net amount of $2.75 million under the International Monetary Fund standby arrangements, making available a total of $2.75 million which can still be drawn. Under its agreement with the International Monetary Fund Paraguay devalued the guarani to about 12C to the dollar and set up a unified free exchange system. Internal stabilization measures were put into effect involving a limitation on Central Bank advances to the government and the private sector and the curtailment of credit by the commercial banks. As a result of these stabilization policies the rate of monetary expansion was reduced from an average of about 70% per

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 81 to continue expansion in production. However, adequate financial reserves are available to meet Colombian external needs. Costa Rica. Despite weak coffee prices, managed to maintain adequate reserve position because of large coffee crop. Government has conservative financial policies. In 1960 lower export income likely to require continued caution, if payments equilibrium is to be obtained.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 83 have dried up capital inflows, while budgetary and monetary policies have had adverse impacts. The drain on dollar reserves should slow down to manageable proportions in 1960 as long as the GOV follows sound policies and makes a real effort to deal with its internal problems. The outlook, however, is not too good for any revival of economic growth. ETA–29. Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs (Turkel) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, February 5, 1960. SUBJECT Discussion at Secretary’s Staff Conference—February 5, 1960 I feel that you should be aware of the following points that came up at the Secretary’s staff conference on February 5.2 [Here follows discussion of two matters unrelated to U.S. loan activities in Latin America.] 3. I stated that my colleagues on IA–ECOSOC yesterday had referred to the February 4 front page article in the New York Times by

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 85 associates had already been in contact with bankers in New York, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and other organizations that they believe should be contacted for the future operations of the IADB. Mr. Dillon said that he hoped that the new bank was going to have close cooperative relations with Mr. Black of the IBRD since Mr. Black was wondering how the two institutions would work in the future with regard to loans for Latin America. Mr. Dillon stated that he had informed Mr. Black that he hoped that the two banks could work jointly on some loans with each one taking up a participation. Mr. Herrera thought this was a very good idea since he believed it would increase the prestige of his institution and make available additional financial resources, since the IADB had relatively limited capital. Mr. Dillon said that he saw the new bank as filling three basic requirements: 1. As an institution which was directly intended to meet Latin American requirements and therefore close to the Latin American scene; 2. As being able to offer technical assistance in the development of projects and plans which could then facilitate loans to individual countries; 3. And, through its Special Fund, being able to assist countries which have a narrow margin of credit-­worthiness and which could later cooperate with the new International Development Association. There was some discussion on the importance of the IADB maintaining a good record on its regular banking loans. Mr. Dillon declared that there might be some problems on such loans if the IBRD and the new bank maintained different standards, but he was sure that there would be a satisfactory way of working things out. Mr. Herrera said that they were hoping to obtain the U.S. contribution to the Bank’s capital funds shortly and that he had discussed the matter with Mr. Anderson. Mr. Dillon said that he understood that the U.S. would make its capital contribution during the next fiscal year but that if there was an adequate cash balance in the Treasury toward the end of this fiscal year part of the U.S. capital would be paid in at that time. Under the legislation, Mr. Dillon indicated, the Administration could pay in the U.S. capital in either of the two fiscal years. Mr. Herrera said he would like to have the U.S. capital paid in because he expected to take a trip to Latin America shortly to discuss arrangements for payment of capital participations by other member countries. Mr. Menapace and General Cutler said that they had received excellent cooperation from U.S. Government officials in securing space for their new headquarters. General Cutler said that they expected in time to occupy the top four floors of the building at 801 19th Street and that by May 15 two of those floors would be vacated and available for occupancy.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 87 Some discussion regarding detailed projects in the list prepared by Mr. Rosenson ensued.3 Mr. Brand said that the Honduran project is the only one ripe for decision. Mr. Brand recalled the earlier favorable attitude, as did Mr. Dillon, of President Black of the IBRD toward coordinated IBRD-DLF loan projects in Latin America, an attitude which seems to have changed to negative recently. Mr. Dillon adduced one reason for Mr. Black’s change was probably due to his desire that good economics require that the countries themselves furnish the local currency for any projects for which IBRD furnishes the foreign exchange costs. Mr. Brand recalled that DLF had had lengthy discussions with IBRD on their joint road project in Peru. The issue here was one of permitting the Government of Peru to select the U.S. engineering firm of its choice rather than being forced to accept a European engineering firm favored by IBRD whose qualifications did not appear as strong to DLF. It was agreed that this may have been a factor affecting Mr. Black’s current attitude. Mr. Dillon suggested that the problem was a fundamental one and required an additional meeting possibly with Secretary Anderson to which all the pertinent agency heads would be invited.4 Messrs. Dillon and Brand agreed with Mr. Rubottom that a stepped-­up consideration of viable loan projects in Latin America by any and all U.S. lending agencies, relative to their resources, was essential to improve our relations in the area. Mr. Brand noted that DLF has a positive and constructive attitude toward Latin American loan applications that meet the test of DLF’s statutory requirements. Mr. Dillon suggested that we undertake to prepare the “flow of funds” chart as a part of our campaign to achieve the above objective.5 We all agreed that one problem in our loan policies toward Latin America was that we had taken essentially the commercial bankers approach to the area, waiting for applications to come in, while our good relations with these countries now require that we take some initiative in stimulating worthwhile projects for loans. 3 No “list” matching the description here was found with the source text.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 89 we requested this year. If we do not recommend additional funds for the Inter-American Bank I think our request for the Development Loan Fund should be increased by $150 to $200 million for the specific purpose of increasing its efforts in Latin America. In the overall Mutual Security Program this increase would be offset at least to some extent by continued reductions in our front aid programs. I discussed this briefly with Secretary Anderson some time ago and I will now pursue the subject further with him4 and keep you advised.5 DOUGLAS DILLON 4 Under Secretary Dillon summarized the content of this memorandum in a tele-

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 91 A specific action is needed to define and dramatize that goal - an action which will be significant both in itself and as a symbol of further effort to come; an action which will capture men’s imagination and mark the road we intend to travel in the period ahead. 2. The situation in Latin-America creates an occasion for just such action. This area is passing through rapid social change. Dictatorships and oligarchies which sought to repress this change are falling by the wayside. In their place, two groups are contesting for leadership of the continent: Moderate groups, which seek to carry out needed reforms through orderly methods. Extremist groups, led and symbolized by the Castro government, whose policies seem designed ultimately to detach Latin America from the free world. The most effective way we can intervene in this contest is by helping the moderate groups’ programs to succeed. This means extending help for such varied purposes as more schools, better paid teachers, housing, land reform and land clearance projects. Substantial U.S. help for these purposes will be the more needed if we are forced to move against Castro. Adverse reactions may be lessened if we can then hold out a promising alternative to Castroism. 3. The August session of the Congress provides an opportunity to create that alternative. It had been intended to request extra funds for the Special Fund of the Inter-American Bank in the next budget and to announce this at the meeting of the Committee of Twenty One in Bogotá. Why not make the request when the Congress reconvenes—­ perhaps in a substantially larger amount than presently contemplated? Such a request might well receive the support of both candidates and parties. It would permit us to channel the concerns which Castroism generates in the U.S. in a constructive direction. It would enable us to exploit the coming session for an affirmative foreign policy purpose. The action could be taken—­like the original Congressional contribution to the Inter-American Bank in September 1959 - wholly apart from the Mutual Security Program, it need not interfere with Congressional consideration of that Program. 4. This action could have world-­wide impact and implications. In presenting this request to the Congress, we could emphasize the growing need for “social infrastructure” assistance—­not only in Latin America, where we faced a particularly urgent problem, but elsewhere.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 93 ETA–34. Memorandum from Henry C. Ramsey of the Policy Planning Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning (Smith)1 Washington, July 6, 1960. SUBJECT Latin American Initiative: Mr. Mann’s Reaction I showed Tom Mann the S/P memorandum of July 5 on a new Latin American initiative last evening. After reading it and expressing great enthusiasm, he made four points: 1. It would be “good politics” to ask for $500 million. Loans should be soft. After a good deal of discussion, he concluded it would be best to channel the loans through the Inter-American Development Bank but, since the Bank has not opened for business, he thinks Congress may demand some DLF veto on loans over a certain amount. We should make clear that the fund would finance social overhead projects and that it would supplement hard loans through the World Bank, Ex-Im Bank and IADB. 2. Psychologically and politically, it is very important that the new fund be earmarked for social overhead projects and be used as leverage to develop sound projects. 3. We must carefully draft a broad statement which would make it crystal clear that the U.S. purpose in making the fund available is to enable countries to finance projects which will lead to a more equitable distribution of the national income. One of the criteria for loans from the fund should be that they advance the well-­being of the lower classes. Mann thinks we should use the fund as leverage to accomplish, among other things, more equitable tax structures. 4. It is also highly important that we support land reform but that we not set our sights too high or make it appear that land reform will solve the unand under-­employment problem. Mann thinks land reform will alleviate the employment problem and is vital in view of the population explosion but that we cannot expect new recipients of land to rise above the subsistence level too soon. (His views on this subject coincide with those of Milo Perkins.2)

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 95 we would find adding to the capital of the IADB a solution to our problems and the adoption of this course at this time might well make us unable to attempt a more considered program later. If we want to have a new program for Latin America, then I think a task force should be immediately put to the job of developing a proposition which is defensible. I would think the Congress would regard as somewhat hysterical a proposal to add a large dimension of capital to an organization that has yet to spend its first penny and that in all probability could not use any additional capital for a long time. ETA–36. Notes of Telephone Conversation between the Under Secretary of State (Dillon) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 97 ETA–38. Editorial Note On July 11, 1960, during his news conference at Newport, Rhode Island, at which Secretary Herter was present, President Eisenhower commented on the basic ideas that would guide United States participation in the forthcoming meetings of the Committee of 21 at Bogotá, Colombia. He announced, inter alia, that the United States was committed to cooperative action aimed at helping Latin American governments to achieve “soundly based” social and economic progress, accelerate the trend already evident toward greater respect for human rights and principles of democratic government, and improve the opportunities of the bulk of the population in Latin America “to share in and contribute to an expanding national product.” For the full text of the President’s state-

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 99 Mr. Bell, Mr. Saccio (ICA), Mr. Hart (DLF), and Dixon Donnelly. No representative of ARA had been invited. Mr. Dillon had read the rather voluminous briefing book prepared by the Mann task force. He noted that there was no firm agreement as between Mann, ICA and DLF on the administration of the new program. He invited Mann to speak. Administration of Fund Mann acknowledged that the task force had not been able to reach agreement on how the new fund should be administered: some preferred DLF, some the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), some ICA. He would advance a “revolutionary plan”—­the reactivation of the Institute of Inter-American Affairs,5 the appropriation of funds to the IIAA, and the administration of the new program by the IIAA through use of ICA, DLF, and especially IDB, as executive agencies. Mann stated his belief that we should rely on the IDB to the greatest extent possible. This proposal held certain advantages. First, the IIAA was popular in Latin America, had done fine and pioneer work in technical assistance under Nelson Rockefeller, was still associated with the Rockefeller name and was a “politically good thing” to reactivate (The IIAA lapsed as of June 30, but the consensus was that it could easily be reactivated by Congress during the August session, or next year). Second, since the Assistant Secretary for ARA chaired the IIAA, putting both the funds and the power to act at his disposal made sense administratively: it would permit ARA to marry political and programmatic considerations and to act quickly and decisively and would restore to ARA the power which had gradually eroded through Departmental reorganizations in the postwar period. Mann emphasized that, if ARA was to have the power to negotiate, it must have the power to administer the funds. Achilles strongly supported Mann’s proposal. (It was obvious that the two had concerted before the meeting, as the IIAA approach has been Ted’s since his return from Peru.6) Saccio, Hart and Bell then tried to shoot IIAA down. Their arguments boiled down to three: (1) existing agencies could do the job if given the money and the policy direction, (2) the executive agency concept was spurious since the agencies would be serving two masters 5 The Institute of Inter-American Affairs was originally incorporated in 1942 and became a U.S. Government corporation in 1947. It was established to aid governments in the Western Hemisphere by promoting technical programs and projects for health, sanitation and food supply.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 101 Dillon thought we might try to get an ICA increment of $50 million during August for Latin America and outlined a strategy for obtaining it at the last moment without going to Passman. No definite decision was made. He was fuzzy on whether to ask that the DLF appropriation be increased from $550 to $700. I concluded that he did not believe we could or should request any appropriation during August, though he blew hot and cold on the subject. I believe he is thinking along these lines: Use the contingency fund to the extent possible during the next six months and, possibly, ask at the last moment for an ICA increment of $50 million. Forward Approach Dillon asked Mann to put this new plan down on paper. Since the President was visiting Denver after his Chicago appearance,8 we should plan to approach the President early next week (week of August 1). He said the President would probably “not be firm one way or the other”, would probably say he was all for the plan if Congress had no objection. Hence it would be necessary to discuss the plan with the Presidential candidates9 and Congressional leaders. It was agreed that the plan should be put forward as a non-­partisan program. Dillon seemed to feel that Treasury and Budget could be approached after the plan had been outlined to the President. Dillon laughingly observed that there should be no difficulty in obtaining the Vice President’s concurrence, since “he and Nelson are now for a confederation in the hemisphere and this is certainly a little less than that” (a reference to the Nixon-Rockefeller platform talks of last Friday evening).10

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 103 disappointment that the Bank would not help increase the export of capital goods through export financing. On a country basis, he reported the following: Venezuela appeared very unstable, the reduced money supply adding to this difficulty. President Betancourt worriedly stressed the bad social conditions in Caracas, the problem of unemployment, inflation, and the danger from the Fidelistas and other leftist elements. There is a dire need for housing and adequate water supply, according to Betancourt. In reply to Under Secretary Dillon’s inquiry as to what Venezuela had done to reduce its debt, Mr. Herrera replied that it had cleared its short-­term debt, balanced its budget, and had kept its exports high. Venezuela’s problems, he reiterated, remained inflation, unemployment, and pressure from the communists and the Fidelistas. Peru and Colombia have strong leadership, and there is much sentiment for an agrarian reform and housing program. Everyone is puzzled concerning Ecuador, but agree that agrarian reform and housing are also the two most pressing needs. In Chile the people are of the opinion that the stabilization policy should be relaxed but, despite this, the government is maintaining a strong anti-­inflation stand. There has been a strong emotional response to United States generosity, the recent earthquake disaster relief resulting in great U.S. popularity in the area. Mr. Herrera then mentioned that 75 percent of the Bank’s quotas had been paid, with Bolivia and Paraguay presenting the greatest problems in this respect because of their inability to pay their first instalments on their small subscriptions. Mr. Dillon mentioned that the U.S. should assist these two countries to meet their participation in the Bank. Mr. Rubottom inquired whether Mr. Herrera was of the opinion that Uruguay would come into accord with the IMF. Mr. Herrera said that that was his impression, despite the slim chamber majority (one vote) held by the Government. He added that the Government had already instituted some reforms. Mr. Dillon inquired when the Bank would become operative, and Mr. Herrera replied that by October 1 the Bank would be in operation and by the end of the year should commence making loans. The Undersecretary asked whether the IDB would reasonably be in position to administer monies entrusted to it by the U.S. Government under the Latin American economic cooperation program contemplated by President Eisenhower. Messrs, Herrera and Cutler replied in effect that by next June or July—­presumably after the Congress had its first opportunity in the spring to appropriate funds for the accelerated economic program—­ the Bank would be in a good position to administer any trust fund

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 105 next week. In answer to a question from the Secretary, Mr. Dillon said that we hope early in the August session of Congress to obtain approval of the framework in which the program will operate so that we will be able to move ahead at the Bogotá meeting.” (Secretary’s Staff Meetings, Lot 63 D 75) ETA–43. Memorandum from the Counselor of the Department of State (Achilles) to Acting Secretary of State1 Washington, July 29, 1960. The new “common man” program for Latin America should help to fill a major gap in plans and resources for development of the area. It will, however, deal only with one aspect of the larger problem of its accelerated economic and social development. The larger problem is both long-­term and urgent and will require very large resources. I recommend that in formulating and implementing the program, and at the Bogotá meeting, we give it major emphasis but keep it in the broader context. (The Latin Americans certainly will.) While naturally large amounts of straight “aid” will be necessary both for the common man and broader programs, I would hope that we could think and talk less in terms of “aid” than of “accelerated economic and social development.” This means endeavoring to mobilize and coordinate all available resources toward such accelerated development - private investment both local and foreign, foreign loans both hard and soft, U.S. grants and technical assistance, U.N. Special Fund and technical assistance, the big foundations, U.S. insurance companies, building and loan associations, etc. There is plenty of room for everybody and they will all be needed.2

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 107 of programs adequate to meet demonstrated needs. If such programs are not initiated promptly, unrest with violent political consequences is likely in a number of Latin American countries. Substantial United States assistance is required to give reasonable hope of success. Such United States assistance should go primarily to those countries that are willing and able to undertake satisfactory programs of self help. In this way United States assistance can promote the fiscal and tax reform in Latin America which is a necessary prerequisite for successful development. c) Administration: The program should be so administered as directly to facilitate the achievement of our foreign policy objectives in Latin America. The responsibility and authority for directing the program should rest in the Department of State. In determining the amounts and terms of financial assistance under this program the Department of State shall consult with the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems. The funds should be made available to the President as a Special Fund to be used exclusively in Latin America and under flexible and nonrestrictive provisions. These funds would be available in either grant or loan form and would be used through such agencies as the President may designate including the Inter-American Development Bank. Loans rather than grants would be made to the maximum extent practicable. It is expected that the principal lending instrument will become the Inter-American Development Bank which has an inter-American character and will be in the best position to encourage recipient countries to increase their own efforts to achieve maximum economic growth and social progress. United States financial and technical assistance to Latin America can only achieve their purpose if they are used to stimulate Latin American governments to mobilize their latent resources and to utilize them to achieve more rapid and balanced economic growth. d) Terms: Repayments of loans would ordinarily be required in the currency of the borrowing country in order to minimize the burden on countries’ resources available to service external debt. Aid funds should be available to meet local as well as external costs. Rehabilitation of Chile It is planned that of the total package of $600 million, $100 million will be used to assist the government and the people of Chile in their present task of rehabilitation. This task is the result of the recent series of disastrous earthquakes which left great destruction over wide areas of the most populous regions of Chile. Homeless people are counted in hundreds of thousands. Total damage has been estimated to be almost $500 million leaving a massive burden of reconstruction on the Chilean people. Congressional Action We would obviously be in the strongest position in Bogotá if Congress were to pass a $600 million authorization bill when it reconvenes in August. The Latin Americans hope for and expect concrete

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 109 ETA–45. Memorandum of Conference With the President, by His Staff Secretary (Goodpaster)1 Washington, August 1, 1960. OTHERS PRESENT Secretaries Herter, Dillon, Anderson, Dr. Ralph Reid, General Goodpaster Mr. Herter said he first wished to put before the President a memorandum2 concerning the proposed Latin American program setting out specific details more fully. The President read through the memorandum. He then asked why the request was being made for $600 million. He had thought that the work of the program might, in large measure, be accomplished through use of the IADB, and that funds would go to expand the capital of the IADB. Mr. Dillon said that the other American countries would prefer not to have this program handled out of normal bank capital if it were handled through the bank, but would keep the money in a special fund. If the money is authorized, this is the kind of specific arrangement that would be worked out through the discussions soon to be initiated. Mr. Reid said that from the standpoint of the Director of the Bureau of the Budget,3 a simple resolution giving the sense and support of the Congress would be preferable to an authorization. He is concerned over the idea of the Administration submitting new proposals at a time when the Congress has taken actions impairing the President’s FY-1961 budget surplus. Congress has already added about $1.6 billion to the budget. Losses of revenues, together with other costs foreseen, amount

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 111 Eximbank during the past twenty-six years has authorized in excess of $4 billion of loans in Latin America and at the present time has outstanding loans and commitments of approximately $2 billion. It is assumed that there is no intention to displace Eximbank in its historic activity in Latin America. It is further assumed that it would be advantageous to the realization of the ultimate goals of the new program that uncommitted funds now available to Eximbank be utilized directly in the program in situations in which loans repayable in dollars for United States equipment, materials and services may be justified from an economic and banking point of view. For the purposes of this memorandum we are assuming that an appropriation for the new program would be made to the President and thereafter allocations would be made in each case to the agency best suited to carry out the particular purpose of the allocation. It is the suggestion of the Directors of the Export-Import Bank that in those instances in which foreign equipment and services are required for a project in Latin America and a credit to acquire the same can be appropriately authorized out of funds of Eximbank, any monies to be loaned for local costs in connection with the same project be allocated to and administrated by Eximbank. An example of such type of project would be a highway or access road construction where as much as 30 or 40 percent of the cost may be in foreign purchases and where the United States is prepared to make a loan on a soft basis to defray at least a portion of the local cost involved. On the other hand, in the case of a project—­such as one for housing or for educational purposes—­involving solely soft loan arrangements, the funds would be allocated to an agency normally operating in such a field. The suggested procedure offers a number of benefits: 1. The lone experience and success of Eximbank in Latin America and particularly its experience in road construction which appears to be an important part of any program for the opening up and settling of new areas. Eximbank has financed road construction in nearly every country of Latin America. It has also financed flood control and irrigation projects and other similar programs requiring substantial amounts of equipment, materials and technical services from abroad. 2. Eximbank has broad powers under its legislative charter.2 Furthermore, its record of operations has acquired for it the support of the Congress and, particularly, the Banking and Currency Committees, to the extent that it has been permitted to operate with a minimum of restrictions relative to the establishment and implementation of credits. These facts have enabled Eximbank on many occasions over the years 2 Apparent reference to the Export-Import Bank Act (Public Law 173), approved

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 113 ETA–47. Editorial Note On August 8, 1960, President Eisenhower sent a Special Message to the 2nd Session of the 86th Congress, which reconvened on that date, commenting on the Administration’s legislative program, and indicating that he would present new matters to Congress for the purpose of promoting free world stability. The first new program involved “an authorization in the magnitude of $600 million to help our Latin American neighbors accelerate their efforts to strengthen the social and economic structure of their nations and improve the status of their individual citizens. This program, which should include further assistance for the rehabilitation of devastated Chile, will promote the dynamism and effectiveness of all our efforts in this Hemisphere. I urgently request enactment of this authorization prior to the Economic Conference of the American Republics, which convenes at Bogotá on September 5, so that discussions leading to the development of detailed plans may be initiated there.” For the full text of the President’s message, see Public

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 115 of U.S. willingness to work with the other American Republics may be seen in the recent Executive decision, and Legislative authorization, to go ahead with the President’s new concept of cooperative assistance to Latin American social development programs.4 I—BACKGROUND The Committee of 21 had its genesis in an informal Washington meeting of American Foreign Ministers in September, 1958, called in response to a suggestion by Brazil’s President Kubitschek in a speech of

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 117 March 1961 in Quito] special attention be given to working out additional measures of economic cooperation taking as the point of departure the Brazilian proposals known as ‘Operation Pan America” and such others as the American governments might wish to submit in connection with the general subject. The Foreign Ministers were of the opinion that the Council of the OAS should set up a special “commission” of the Council on which 21 republics would be represented. Recommendations of such a group could then be carried out either through OAS organs or by the individual governments. The communiqué also expressed the opinion that practical steps could be taken at once: the establishment of an inter-American economic development institution; intensification of efforts to establish regional markets in Latin America. On September 24, 1958, the Council of the OAS established the Special Committee for the Formulation of New Measures for Economic Cooperation (Committee of 21). Among the most important matters to be studied were the following: a draft resolution calling for an intensified program of technical training: a proposal for annual meetings of economic experts; a suggestion that the principal coffee consuming countries of the area urgently study the establishment of import quotas; a proposal to study possibilities for the establishment of a system of coffee buffer stocks, retention or export quotas and restrictions on production, a proposal to study ways and means to increase inter-­ American and international trade; proposals dealing with basic products; and a proposal to study ways and means to assist in increasing the flow of private investment capital to Latin America. The first sessions of the Committee were held in Washington between November

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 119 5. Financial and technical aid for the establishment of an inter-­ American organization for technological and productivity research in support of the industrial development of Latin America. President Kubitschek also called for a meeting of the Subcommittee

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 121 Latin American governments and nations make reasonable efforts to help themselves in attacking these problems, and (d) the United States stands ready to lend a hand in cooperation with individual national efforts. We believe that the approach taken by the Committee of 21 in its work over the past two years has not been fruitful and does not promise real accomplishment for the future. The United States will seek, at Bogotá, to achieve restoration to the regular organs of the OAS of the responsibilities which the Committee has been undertaking, with a view to making greater use of the IAECOSOC for the consideration of economic problems, for the conduct of necessary economic studies, and for appropriate recommendations for solutions. At the same time we will seek acceptance of the approach embodied in President Eisenhower’s program. The U.S. delegation will press for: (a) the establishment of what may be called the Inter-American Fund (or Program) for Social Development, (b) use of the Inter-American Development Bank as the primary mechanism for administration of the fund, (c) acceptance of the principle of self-­help, and (d) a strengthened IAECOSOC for Colombo-­type discussions on social and economic problems. The action by the meeting will probably take the form of an agreement accepting the above points or whatever part of them may prove acceptable. The text of a draft of such an agreement was given Latin American representatives by Mr. Dillon on September 26, und the text has also been forwarded to each U.S. diplomatic mission in Latin America.19 III—SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS (None) IV—PUBLIC POSITION Excerpts from the August 23, 1960 testimony before the House Foreign Relations Committee by Under Secretary of State Douglas Dillon (enclosed) may be used us our public position.20 EXCERPTS FROM STATEMENT BY UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE DOUGLAS DILLON BEFORE HOUSE FOREIGN AFFAIRS COMMITTEE—AUGUST 23, 1960 19 Under Secretary of State Dillon handed the draft text of the “Agreement for the Establishment of an Inter-American Program for Social Development” to Latin American representatives in Washington on August 26, 1960. Documentation concerning the formulation and presentation of this document is in file 371.04. 20 Under Secretary of State Dillon testified before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on August 23, 1960, in support of President Eisenhower’s request that the Congress authorize the appropriation of $600 million for the establishment of a new social program in Latin America.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 123 development. We would hope to include in the new social development program for Latin America the Federation of the West Indies, which has achieved self-­government and which will soon become fully independent—­probably next year. In a short time we shall be meeting with representatives of the governments of Latin America at Bogotá in a hemispheric economic conference. The discussions at Bogotá will look toward the development of plans for a positive and productive attack on the problems of social development. As I have suggested, effective plans will require strong actions by the Latin American governments, particularly in the field of domestic reform. To encourage them to take such actions, and to make plain that assistance to complement their actions can be anticipated, we need a clear and unmistakable expression of Congressional readiness to provide appropriations. It is for this reason that we are requesting an authorization at this time. Such an authorization would provide a framework within which we and our friends from Latin America can develop new and more effective plans and programs for attacking the problems of social progress. We envisage that the Conference should agree upon the basic objectives of a program for social development which gives primary attention to needs in three broad areas: (1) Improvement of the conditions of rural living and land use; (2) Improvement of housing and community facilities; and (3) Improvement of educational systems and training facilities. The program we envisage begins with the development of specific policies, plans and programs by each of the governments concerned. We foresee that the Latin American governments will obtain substantial help and advice from the Inter-American Development Bank, and the Inter-American Economic and Social Council in preparing specific projects and programs to expedite social progress, in examining the adequacy of existing tax systems, institutions, laws and policies to promote such progress and in developing more effective systems of mobilizing human and material resources to further these objectives. We foresee that the funds which the United States would provide to assist in carrying out these plans and programs would be utilized for the most part for loans repayable in local currencies and administered through the Inter-American Development Bank. Nevertheless, we do not preclude the use of other mechanisms or means including grants where appropriate. It is our idea that the total effort should be periodically reviewed and discussed within the Inter-American Economic and Social Council where the progress in each country could be assessed and plans for further progress could be discussed.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 125 The Latin American delegations welcomed the United States proposal. Their acceptance of the program was formalized in the Act of Bogotá, which was signed on September 13 by the representatives of all countries present except Cuba, whose representative had asserted on September 7 that the United States proposal was an instrument to stifle the awakening hope of the Latin American people in favor of the Cuban revolution, to isolate the Cuban people, to facilitate new aggression against members of the Latin American system, and to distract attention from problems of independent and self-­sustained economic development. For the texts of Under Secretary of State Dillon’s statement of September 6 and the Act of Bogotá adopted on September 13, see the

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 127 On the IA–ECOSOC, Mr. Dillon said our views are identical. As to commodities, we believe in effort to prevent violent swings in price. The producers should get together but should do so on a commodity-­ by-­commodity basis. In some cases the same commodity is produced in other parts of the world and this means we must have a world agreement. As to coffee, efforts must be made to strengthen the existing arrangements, and to do it in the coffee study group. There should be some way of working out statistical collaboration between the U.S. and the coffee countries, and thus help the coffee countries police their own agreement. We will have to talk to the Africans, but feel they are getting closer all the time to full collaboration. Sr. Eleta then proceeded to emphasize the limited credit potential of the Central American countries. If they are going to give priority to borrowings for hospitals, schools, and so on, they will put down on their ability to borrow for productive economic purposes. Even though they don’t like grants or endowments, Central America needs them. Mr. Dillon replied that when he had presented the new plan to Congress he told them the bulk would be distributed through the Inter-American Bank on the basis described, but the U.S. would reserve the right to utilize part of it for schools and other projects of that nature. We would be prepared to look at these through our IGA mechanism. There was no objection to this so long as it was limited to non-­productive projects. Education is, indeed, basic. There are tremendous accumulated needs in housing, but unless there are more job opportunities people should not be encouraged, through better housing to move to the cities. In the same way it is not a good idea to build hospitals if there are no doctors to man them and equipment to use. In this social development program we don’t intend to push the people to move too rapidly and get out of phase with economic development. The self-­help type of housing is best. Here Mr. Mann interjected that the first priority in housing would go toward fostering building and loan associations, and then mobilize local resources. Sr. Eleta spoke once more, repeating himself on basis commodities. Sr. Buess of Honduras then said that all six republics recognized that the main results would depend upon their own efforts. Some of these republics have been trying to inaugurate their own economics. It has required grant sacrifices and they have to be gaining momentum on a Central American common market, thus laying the basis of future development for greater production our greater consumption. Eventually they hope to became one political unit. Mr. Dillon said the U.S. strongly supports that concept and will help Central America [illegible in the original]. Mr. Dillon will speak to Mr. [illegible in the original] who arrives this afternoon, to see if we can’t get

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 129 Sr. Bueso presented a memorandum2 on how the U.S. could help in the integration of Central American economies by the establishment of a Central American development bank. Such a bank could finance roads of common importance, the linking up of electric power networks, industrial loans of a regional character, and loans to enterprises requiring help because of readjustments of tariffs. It would be a mixed bank of government and private capital, reinforced by external loans. Each Central American country would put in $2 million; there would

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 131 on American private enterprise in the task of financing economic development in these countries. I am advised, for example, that recent actions taken by the Cuban government have drastically reduced the willingness of American investors to subscribe to new security issues intended to finance an expansion of activities by U.S. firms in Latin America. It appears inevitable that the rising concern over the safety of existing foreign investment, which has already reached a high level, will seriously restrict new investment outside of Europe. Whereas our foreign policy objectives require an increase in the volume of private foreign investment in less-­developed countries, we appear to be threatened with a decline. We therefore propose to give serious consideration to means of reviving the interest and confidence of U.S. investors in the foreign field, especially Latin America. Perhaps we should seek to make available broader insurance coverage against expropriation and non-­convertibility. The requirement of a bilateral Investment Guarantee Agreement as a prerequisite to guarantees administered by ICA should be re-­examined. All other possibilities should be identified and explored. In this context, it would be most helpful if the Treasury Department could undertake a review of present tax legislation to determine the advisability of changes which would reduce the losses taken by U.S. firms when their overseas investments are seized by permitting recovery out of U.S. taxes to an extent and under conditions decried to be appropriate in view of the basic objective to which I have referred. I should appreciate your reaction to these suggestions and any other suggestions you may have on this important subject. With best wishes, Sincerely, DOUGLAS DILLON Acting Secretary

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 133 Both Mr. Barall and Mr. Rosenson replied that if the Bank places its loans wisely and can justify the need for increased funds, there would probably be no difficulty in finding additional funds. Another question raised by Drs. Rochac and Delgado, in view of the known IBRD interest in forming a regional bank to service small industries, was whether it would be inappropriate for the Bank to engage in this type of lending activity. Mr. Mann replied that this was a matter for the Central American representatives to explore directly with the IBRD. In conclusion, Mr. Mann stated that he thought that during the next two weeks, this group, as the representatives of the proposed Bank, should (1) meet with State, DLF, and ICA to work out the terms regarding loans and grants; (2) draw up a charter for the Bank, and (3) prepare a press release acceptable to the United States Government announcing the formation of the Bank. ETA–54. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Mann) to the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1 Washington, October 17, 1960. SUBJECT Central American Bank for Economic Integration - Request for Contingency Fund Financing Discussion: During the past several weeks discussions concerning the establishment of and United States financial assistance to a Central American Bank for Economic Integration have been carried on by United States Government officials and representatives of the Governments of Guatemala, Honduras, Salvador and Nicaragua. This memorandum requests the commitment of $2 million from the FY 1961 Contingency Fund, as part of United States assistance of $10 million to the Central American Bank for Economic Integration, as soon as the institution

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 135 the contribution which has been made by the regional Bank to such program, and member Government support for the institution. The representatives of the four Central American Governments have formally applied to the ICA for the funds to be contributed to the resources of the Central American Bank for Economic Integration. In order to inform the participating Governments that $5 million of the $10 million of assistance would be provided by DLF, we propose an allocation of a credit, under the terms of section 202(e) of the Mutual Security Act (Tab C),5 of $5 million to be extended upon the satisfactory establishment of the Bank. A formal application for such a loan has been filled with the DLF and several discussions have been held with DLF officials, including a nesting with the Managing Director. The draft charter (Tab E)6 of the Bank provides for paid-­in capital subscriptions, in three installments over a 14 month period, of $2 million by each member country. These contributions to the capital of the Bank would be available for use on a multilateral basis within the region (with the national currencies subscribed being convertible). It is deemed necessary to allocate $5 million of DLF funds for the purpose of a loan to the Bank at this time in order to further the establishment of the Bank which requires contributions by the member countries as well as the United States which contribution it is hoped will be authorized by the member countries in the near future. With respect to the $3 million from ICA, we believe that it would be possible to meet this part of the $10 million in a timely manner from FY 1962 ICA funds and thereby make minimum demands on the contingency Fund in 1961. We are therefore preparing papers for a 1550 determination (Tab A).7 The draft charter establishing the Bank (Tab E) which was discussed in retail with United States Government techniques, is subject to ratification by each of the national legislative bodies of the member countries before it can become operative. It is contemplated that ratification by the respective national legislatures be completed by January 5 Not printed here. 6 Not printed.

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 137 ETA–55. Circular Airgram from the Secretary of State to All Diplomatic Posts in Latin America1

United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 139 publicity responsibility naturally lies with USIA, other members of the Country Team can assist through word-­of-­mouth or other approaches to their particular contacts. It may be well to point out that some provisions of the Act of Bogotá do not lend themselves to official publicity through USIA. The self-­help sections are an example. The efforts of other agencies can usefully be directed toward the essential task of building a favorable climate of local opinion toward the concepts of tax reform, land resettlement, and similar self-­help measures which the Latin American nations have approved at Bogotá. The Embassy is requested to study these possibilities in the light of local conditions, and plan special projects and/or approaches through the Country Team. Reports of such activities will be appreciated. Background materials, including texts and speeches, in addition to those already transmitted through USIA, will be forwarded to the Embassy and/or USIA as they become available. (State and ICA are preparing Joint instructions to Embassy and USOM’s regarding preparation for $500 million Social Development Program in Latin America under American Republics Cooperation Act.) PUBLIC POSITION The statement of President Eisenhower at Newport last July 11 in announcing this new program, the testimony of Under Secretary Dillon before the House Foreign Relations Committee August 23, and statements by our official delegation both during and immediately following the Bogotá Conference, constitute our public position. Acting

Bolivia: U.S. Relations with Bolivia1

Bolivia 141 leader of the dominant party in Bolivia. Although he enjoys widespread approval, his authority rests heavily on organized labor—­a vociferous minority which has been the standard bearer and principal beneficiary of social and political change. Siles has demonstrated considerable skill in consolidating his position by taking advantage of the struggle for control of the labor movement between rival leftist labor leaders Lechin and Sanjines, with the latter providing influential support for Siles. However, Sanjines’ checkered and opportunistic background, including past associations with Communism, gives cause for some concern as to the reliability of his support. Further, some of Siles’ labor support will almost certainly be lost as he proceeds to apply the austerity measures necessary to his program. Nevertheless, we believe that with continued U.S. aid the chances are somewhat better than even that the present moderate regime will, barring Siles’ death or resignation, survive until the expiration of his term in 1960. The chief threat to the regime is the possible loss of Siles’ leadership since there is no indication of a strong moderate MNR successor. 3. Either a deterioration in the economic situation or too severe austerity would probably unite the labor movement against Siles. If labor unrest led to riots and violence on a large scale, the government probably could not preserve order. In any case, the resulting political turmoil would greatly improve the prospects for the assumption of control by a leftist labor regime and would enhance the influence of the small but militant Communist groups. DISCUSSION BACKGROUND 4. Bolivia has some potential for agricultural development and possesses sizeable petroleum resources which are beginning to be exploited. However, development has been and will continue to be hampered by great social and geographical obstacles. Hence Bolivia is today an exceedingly poor country; its standard of living is the lowest in Latin America, except for Haiti. Mining, principally of tin, is still the backbone of Bolivia’s money economy and provides the bulk of foreign exchange. Most of Bolivia’s three and one-­half million people are Indians. They are largely illiterate and are engaged in subsistence agriculture.2 5. The dominant political force in Bolivia is the government party, the Nationalist Revolutionary Movement (MNR), which came to power in 1952 through a revolution. The new regime under the presidency of Victor Paz Estenssoro stripped the old ruling group of power in favor of labor and middle class groups. The principal tin mines were nationalized and large landholdings expropriated. Civilian militias were organized as a counterbalance to the army, the political role of which was sharply 2 Agriculture and cattle raising employ about 64 percent of the population but contribute only slightly over 27 percent of GNP. [Footnote in the source text.]

Bolivia 143 9. Much of this improvement reflected the relative success of measures to balance national and foreign exchange budgets. U.S. aid was still needed to cover a budget deficit estimated at $13 million in 1957. Nevertheless, the government was able to limit borrowings from the Central Bank to about one percent of the money supply in the first nine months of 1957 as compared to 150 percent the same period of 1956. Bolivia’s balance of payments deficit in 1957 is expected to be less than half the level of 1956, and will be covered almost entirely by U.S. aid. Continued deficits through

Bolivia 145 call a general strike of the COB in mid-1957 failed because of this support and a split in the COB leadership. The emergence of a pro-Siles faction, headed by railroad federation leader Juan Sanjines, subsequently led to the ouster of Lechin from the Senate presidency and to congressional acceptance of the resignation of Vice-President Chavez. 16. Siles has consolidated his position in the party and in the government. Lechin and Chavez have been ousted from the MNR national political committee and replaced by labor leaders who support Siles. Paz, who has been Ambassador to Great Britain since late 1956, has refused periodic appeals primarily from the labor-­left for his return. In the 86 member legislative branch, the President commands a large working majority. Labor politicians responsive to Sanjines’ leadership, as well as moderate members of the worker-­peasant bloc which formerly dominated Congress, have aligned with pro-Siles moderates.7 In opposition are nine pro-Lechin labor leaders, several pro-Paz politicians, and a few die-­hard leftist supporters of former Vice-President Chavez. 17. Despite these gains, the effectiveness of the Siles regime is still hampered by MNR factionalism. Although the potential of Lechin and Chavez for challenging the regime has been reduced, many of their adherents continue to hold party and government posts in the departments. In Congress, the pro-Lechin minority has lost its battle against the extension of the emergency powers which permit Siles to continue the wage freeze. However, this minority may obtain greater support from other labor groups for wage increases on the basis of claims that workers are bearing the brunt of austerity measures. Other party differences revolve around labor-­left demands for increased participation in the government, for strengthening worker and peasant paramilitary forces, and for an acceleration of agrarian reform. 18. A threat to Siles’ position and to the effectiveness of his program is his dependence on the support of Juan Sanjines, who represents a somewhat unstable influence. Sanjines presently heads the majority pro-Siles labor segment in the COB. Prior to joining the MNR in October 1954, Sanjines was closely associated with both the pro-Communist Revolutionary Left Party and with the orthodox Bolivian Communist Party. Substantial numbers of orthodox Communists, Trotskyites, and their sympathies belong to the railroad federation he heads. Thus far Sanjines appears to be primarily interested in enhancing his own position and does not seem to be exploiting his now political prominence for Communist ends. We do not know whether he has in fact split with the Communist movement. 19. Labor support for the regime derives from the COB—­comprising about 250,000 members in mining, industrial, and white collar unions as 7 Federico Alvarez Plata, a trustworthy moderate, is President of the Senate and therefore successor to the presidency. Juan Sanjines, Chamber of Deputies President, is second in line for the presidency. Almost all of the congressional committees are controlled by representatives who appear to support Siles.

Bolivia 147 Three other labor leaders recently appointed to the MNR national political committee may still have ties with orthodox Communists. Role of Military and Para Military Forces 23. The present estimated strength of the army is 6,500, mostly career soldiers. Its usable equipment, largely of European origin, consists primarily of light infantry weapons and miscellaneous light artillery. The air

Bolivia 149 Lechin will seek to accelerate the process by calling for wage increases and other concessions. While Lechin will not hesitate to use any opportunities provided by labor discontent to move against Siles, his success will depend on the cooperation of labor groups associated with the rival leadership of Juan Sanjines. 31. We believe that Sanjines probably will continue to support the moderate leadership as long as his position in the labor movement is not threatened thereby. While agreement between him and Lechin does not appear likely, those two leaders might take parallel action against Siles and his program. The likelihood of such action would be increased by a sharp deterioration in the economic situation or even by the government’s inability to placate labor demands. Widespread labor unrest and violence threatening to exceed armed forces’ capabilities probably would lead to a modification of the stabilization program, and possibly to Siles’ resignation. 32. Sanjines appears to be motivated by an ambition to replace Lechin as COB Executive Secretary. If Sanjines gained a clear-­cut ascendancy in the labor movement, his continuing support for moderate MNR leadership would be doubtful. Even in present circumstances, his past association with Communist groups may result in further Communist penetration of the party and government. 33. Given continued external assistance at approximately present levels, the short-­term outlook is for slow improvement in the economic position of this impoverished country. Some increase in agricultural production is likely, and there may also be a reversal of the present downward trend in metal production. Only a major increase in foreign investment would lead to greater progress in economic development before the end of Siles’ term in 1960. Bolivia’s capacity to provide the stability necessary to attract foreign private investment will depend for some years upon U.S. assistance. 34. Nationalist and Communist propaganda attacks against U.S. private capital, especially in oil development, are likely to increase, but these attacks by themselves are not likely to affect foreign investment or over-­ all U.S. interests. Over the longer run, development of oil resources may lead to an improved economic condition. However, the modest economic progress we have estimated for the next few years will not necessarily assure the continuation of moderate MNR forces in control after 1960. 35. A serious deterioration in the economic situation would greatly weaken moderate leadership in the MNR. The otherwise poor prospects for the parties in opposition to the MNR, both rightist and Communist, would be enhanced. The resulting political instability would probably bring a leftist MNR regime to power and involve some increase in Communist influence. Such a regime would be weak and disorganized.10 10 A map showing the outline of Bolivia’s strategic mineral resources is not printed.

Bolivia 151 BL–2. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1 Washington, January 17, 1958. SUBJECT Presidential Escort Battalion—Bolivia Background: The revolution of 1952 in Bolivia caused far-­reaching economic and social dislocations, including the creation of armed workers’ militias. At the same time, the country’s regular army was demoralized and virtually disbanded. Since 1954, the United States Government has been providing economic assistance to Bolivia, initially in order to prevent a serious economic and political upheaval there which might have led to the formation of a pro-communist or communist government, and subsequently to try to help Bolivia to remedy the serious economic and social dislocations which resulted from the revolution.2 The United States had also used its influence in the attempt to strengthen the moderate elements in Bolivia and to weaken correspondingly the left wing extremists. These efforts showed their most significant results in late 1956, when the newly elected Bolivian administration put into effect with U.S. counsel and support an economic stabilization program. Discussion: At the end of the first year, the stabilization program has achieved considerable success and the position of the moderate elements in the Bolivian Government has been strengthened at the expense of the extreme left wing. Nevertheless, the lack of effective security forces at the Government’s disposal exposes it constantly to the latent threat of the armed irregular militia, which is subject to influence and in some cases control by extremist elements. Both President Siles and his Minister of Defense3 have requested United States military assistance to confront this basic weakness. Consequently, the accompanying Memorandum to President Eisenhower4 recommends that the President

Bolivia 153 BL–3. Editorial Note February 1, 1958. Growing labor unrest and reverses for the Bolivian economy threatened the Bolivian National Stabilization Program. Despite the wage freeze, which had been decreed on January 9 by President Hernan Siles Zuazo, labor groups demanded wage increases, and there was some indication that the Government might relax the decree. A heavy drain on exchange reserves, triggered by the Government’s announcement on January 24 of the discovery of a revolutionary plot, and aggravated by unfavorable developments on the international tin market, continued unabated. Documentation concerning these problems is contained

Bolivia 155 Rubottom recognized existence problems and re-­emphasized importance settlement. Siles and Barrau reiterated intention have Andrade proceed without delay on basis definitive instructions. Rubottom and Waugh request prompt consideration by DLF with cooperation various agencies working on Bolivian stabilization program of assist which can be made available promptly.7 Bonsal 7 A more detailed account of the meeting is contained in a memorandum of conversa-

Bolivia 157 payments resulting from declining revenues from the export of metals and (b) permit useful development projects to be initiated soon. I hope that it will be possible to realize the President’s expectations, particularly as we may be confronted with a serious dollar crisis at any time in view of the very narrow margin on which we are operating. But what we know here of DLF’s terms of reference coupled with the serious problem of preparing bankable projects under conditions prevailing here leads me to confess that I don’t see clearly how we are going to make good on what the President believes was promised him by the Vice President, Mr. Waugh and yourself on May 6. I hope you will keep me closely informed so that I can pass any developments on to the President. I assume from what was said at the time of your visit here that there is no chance, in the immediate future at least, to use DLF credits to YPFB or to COMIBOL as a means to pump dollars into the Central Bank Reserves. Would it be possible for DLF to advance funds for general development purposes on the following basis: The dollars to be placed in the Central Bank’s reserves and the resulting bolivianos to be placed in a special account either in the name of USOM/Bolivia or of the Central Bank to be disbursed as suitable projects are developed and approved? In order to develop such projects, we would, in my judgment, need to furnish special technical assistance to the Bolivian Government. (Our Bolivian friends are thinking along these lines as you will note from the account of the May 7 Stabilization Council meeting being forwarded in this pouch.)2 I am convinced that an immediate and substantial boost to the Central Bank’s reserves here would have economic and political consequences of real importance and would do much to maintain the confidence in Bolivia’s future which the Vice President’s visit did so much to strengthen. There would, of course, be a definite risk in the procedure indicated above. As development projects were initiated, the Central Bank reserves would be called upon for the dollar component thereof and, of course, the level of reserves might be insufficient particularly if world metal markets continue in their present state. However, if the Vice President’s generally optimistic view of the prospects of the American economy is realized, the risk would be minimized. And the risk could be largely eliminated if there were deposited in the Central Bank at this time only the equivalent in dollars of the estimated boliviano 2 No account of the May 7 Stabilization Council meeting was found in Department of State files.

Bolivia 159 export market is an absolute necessity. To transport the amount of oil necessary to make an operation of this size successful would require the building, at a tremendous expense, of an additional and larger pipeline to the seacoast. The history of this situation is that Mr. Whiteford and Gulf Oil had an open bid for a number of weeks to carry out this program and he has the feeling that he had the complete support of President Siles and also the General Manager of Y.P.F.B., Eduardo Hinojosa, who he says is a Penn State graduate and a first class oil man. Apparently, as is so often the case, the situation became embroiled in domestic politics and the President of the country and the General Manager of Y.P.F.B., were not able to carry through to a successful conclusion the steps necessary to be taken to consummate the arrangement. Mr. Whiteford insists that the loan requested at this time of from $8 million to $10 million would not aid, but would rather complicate the long-­range problem for, as above stated, this would be but the first step in a much larger program that would be necessary to complete the transaction. Mr. Whiteford makes the constructive suggestion that if the President and the General Manager of Y.P.F.B. could control the situation it probably could still be worked out whereby Gulf or a consortium of companies would go in on a 50–50 basis, not only to develop the field but also to provide the larger financing needed, namely, the building of an additional pipeline, and assuming the responsibility for the basic development of the markets. There would have to be an agreement reached to the effect that any money paid by the oil companies as a bonus would have to be earmarked so that it could be used for the further development of the producing properties that are already discovered and under the operation of Y.P.F.B. I have obtained Mr. Whiteford’s permission to discuss this problem with Ambassador Victor Andrade, with whom I have been in touch since our return and from whom I have obtained the information with reference to the outstanding oil concessions, etc. In view of what has transpired, I think it would be unwise to even approach any other oil company or oil executive until after we have explored the possibility outlined above. I will keep you and the State Department informed as to developments, but if you have any suggestions to offer in the meantime, please pass them along. Very sincerely, Samuel C. Waugh President

Bolivia 161 BL–9. Telegram from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the Department of State1

Bolivia 163 I would like to express my appreciation of the President's interest in our program and for his thoughtfulness in passing along constructive comments on it.8 Sincerely yours, J. H. Smith, Jr. Enclosure 8 On July 25, President Eisenhower sent another letter to Duruz in which he stated, inter alia, that he understood the ICA program in Bolivia “has been of concern to responsible officials of the Administration, and that there is ground for your specific criticisms. However, there is another side to the coin which, without going into details, is largely political in character.” He also stated that he wanted Duruz to know that “another look will be taken at the whole situation.” (Eisenhower Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File) BL–11. Telegram from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the Department of State1

Bolivia 165 18, to inform him of the levels U.S. economic aid in FY 1959, pursuant to ICATO 156.3 The President was accompanied by Walter Guevara Arze, newly appointed Minister of Government and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, and the Ambassador by an Embassy officer. On the previous day, at the suggestion of IMF representatives, the GOB had decided to suspend dollar sales by the Central Bank preparatory to reworking the Stabilization Program. The Ambassador said he was authorized to state that $17 million would be available for Special Assistance, plus a reserve of $6 million as and if required in the opinion of the U.S. Government as a result of “actual implementation” of the agreement to be reached between the GOB and the IMF on terms the continuation of the Stabilization Program. Although the conversation was in Spanish, Minister Guevara repeated “actual implementation” in both language interpolating the comment that this $6 million was “conditional”, and President Siles declared that he understood the phrase clearly. The Ambassador added that he believed Technical Assistance would continue at about the current level above $3 million. Both the President and Guevara expressed their pleasure at the inclusive total of $26 million. The Ambassador said also that DLF would be prepared to consider loan applications within available funds and on the basis of well prepared projects. He noted that although the possibility of DLF loans had been known to the GOB for several months, only two applications, those of Carlos Peña4 and the Gasser Brothers,5 had been submitted so far. In reply to Guevara’s question as to whether the DLF would consider both state and private projects, the Ambassador said that during his recent visit to Washington he had found interest in the possibility of a project to improve La Paz’ El Alto Airport, which would be a state undertaking. He again emphasized the advisability of speed and thoroughness in submitting loan applications. Guevara said that at this point he would like to give the Ambassador his frank opinion, admittedly formed only two days after his return to La Paz, of the Stabilization Program. The Program, he declared, had failed, because it had erroneously concentrated on stabilization instead of production. Instead of conceiving of stabilization as the first step and of production as the second, stabilization and production should have been given parallel emphasis. The great effort and courage with which 3 Not found in Department of State files. 4 Reference is to the loan application by the owner of a food processing plant, Fabrica de Conservas of Cochabamba, for purposes of expansion and modernization of facilities. 5 Reference is to the loan application of the owners of a sugar mill, Compania Azucarera La Belgica of Santa Cruz, for purposes of modernization and improving effi-

Bolivia 167 Admitting that some of the causes of the Stabilization Program’s present plight had been internal, Guevara said that it was nevertheless a fact that the program had failed and that the people would take the suspension of dollar sales as evidence of this failure. He predicted a reaction of profound concern. The Ambassador, pointing out that all of Bolivia’s neighbors had suffered depreciation of their currencies in the past year, and several to a greater degree than Bolivia, admitted to the gravity of the present situation but said he thought it was more a matter of losing a battle, and not the war, on the stabilization front. He saw no reason why it would not be possible to look on the coming operation merely as a retreat to a more defensible position. This observation met an enthusiastic response, with Guevara agreeing heartily and Siles observing that the continuation of the struggle with hope is imperative. At this point the President received a message that had originated in London bringing news that the International Tin Council (ITC) had just abandoned supporting the price of tin, while maintaining export quotas, and that the London price already had dropped heavily. Recovering from the gloom induced by this news, President Siles observed that it could be announced as the basis of the GOB’s action of suspending dollar sales by the Central Bank. Guevara, anticipating that the break in the tin market, coming on top of the suspension of dollar sales, would cause panic and possibly worse if unaccompanied by some compensating cause for hope, asked if the Ambassador would concur in a release by the Foreign Minister of a statement summarizing for the public the information he had just given the President on the new level of U.S. aid. (While this proposal was under discussion, the President received a telephone call from the Ministry of Finance saying that the Central Bank had in fact stopped dollar sales at 11 o’clock.) The Ambassador agreed with the timeliness and potential value of the proposed release and it was decided that he, accompanied by the Acting Director of USOM, would call shortly after midday at Guevara’s office in the Foreign Ministry to see the proposed wording.6 (The ensuing communique, as reported in Embtel 155,7 appeared in the evening’s Ultima Hora and Saturday’s morning papers.) Referring to the GOB–IMF discussions on reworking the Stabilization Program, Siles commented that some 70 percent of the nation’s workers had received an increase in compensation since stabilization and he had hoped, by finding a formula whereby future increase would be granted only to the remaining 30 percent, that it would be possible to restrict the depreciation of the Boliviano. 6 The draft press release, also sent under cover of despatch 231, is not printed.

Bolivia 169 To date, the ICA has advanced $500,000 to the Bolivia Government out of U.S. special assistance for fiscal 1959. The agreement represented by the October 4 letter would limit U.S. cash grants and drawings from the IMF to $1 million by the end of October, $2 million by the end of November and $3 million by the end of December, 1958, except in “unusual circumstances” and after agreement with the fund. Nevertheless, on October 16 the Foreign Minister made a request to Ambassador Bonsal for $1.5 million additional to be advanced from fiscal 1959 cash grants, “due to an abnormally high demand for dollars.” The dollar drain has continued heavy in spite of an increase in the exchange rate to 11,600 on October 16. The Bolivian government has allowed the exchange rate to depreciate but apparently not enough thus far to meet the high level of demand of the moment. Ambassador Bonsal and the Acting Director of the USOM in Bolivia are concerned that the request of the Bolivian Government implies a desire to keep the exchange rate from moving in accordance with market forces. The Embassy-USOM and IMF representative also consider the current dollar demand to be abnormal. In their opinion it reflects general belief in Bolivia that there will be a further serious devaluation due to the deterioration of the economic situation, and the belief that the Government will not maintain its stated positions on such matters as credit policy, restriction of budget deficit, and wage control. The Department, with the concurrence of Treasury, plans to instruct the Embassy to inform the Bolivian Government that the U.S. would consider an additional drawing at this time if the IMF is satisfied with Bolivian performance on the exchange rate and recommends the drawing. We believe the ICA should be prepared to advance $500,000 now, and as it is understood there have been several heavy non-­recurrent exchange requirements during this month, consideration might be given to an advance of another $500,000 before the end of the month, if Bolivian performance is satisfactory. There has been some speculation in Bolivia on the possibility of instituting selective exchange controls but the Department is strongly opposing this and has informed Embassy La Paz we do not believe there is any effective alternative for Bolivia to maintenance of a free exchange system. Furthermore, we propose to instruct the Embassy to encourage the Bolivian government to take a firm stand now on wage and other stabilization issues, since it appears that a “show down” on issues of inflation is inevitable, and the present moment may be the most propitious for a show down.

Bolivia 171 parties. Apparently the FSB considered the moment opportune for a revolt, in view of difficult economic and political conditions facing the Government. A new stabilization agreement between the Bolivian Government and the IMF resulted in devaluation of the currency at the beginning of this month. Prices have gone up, and the Government is plagued by demands for wage increases. The dumping of tin by the USSR and the U.S. quotas on lead and zinc have complicated Bolivia’s already difficult foreign exchange picture. Evaluation: 1. The full force and strength of the plot may not have been revealed due to last minute efforts at postponement. It is, however, generally thought that the FSB, unless it obtains substantial military or police support, has no chance alone of effecting a successful coup. 2. While the attempted coup might normally have been expected to strengthen the Government by promoting MNR unity, it does not in this case appear to have done so, possibly due to the apparent weakness of the attempt. 3. As a result, the leftist-MNR labor leader, Juan Lichín, as well as other minor opposition groups, appear to be endeavoring to capitalize on the situation by sniping at the Government in one way and another. 4. To the extent that the attempted coup gave credence to the Government’s claim of persistent plotting and helped identify spots of disloyalty, particularly among the Carabineros, the long-­run effects may be helpful to it. 5. The effect on the Government’s effort to stabilize the economy cannot yet be judged. Although the immediate result was the termination of a factory workers’ strike, accompanied by manifestations of loyalty, evidence of general discontent may weaken the Government’s resolve to impose stringent measures.

Bolivia 173 must be maintained and implemented. The U.S. should be firm in supporting the IMF in insistence on exchange rate flexibility. We should depend upon the IMF to take the lead in judging the specific rate of exchange which is appropriate and in counseling the Bolivian Government on rate policies. We should inform the Bolivian Government that utilization of the FY 1959 balance of payments special assistance will be predicated upon enforcement by it, in accordance with the stand-­by agreement with the IMF, of policies necessary to keep open the free dollar market at a rate of exchange requisite to achieve at least an overall balance between demand for and supply of dollars. B. Acceptable progress on the collection of counterpart should be a condition of use of United States balance of payments assistance in FY 1959. C. We should attempt to obtain Bolivian agreement to legislation permitting the dismissal of surplus labor. If legislation is found politically impractical, we should continue to explore with the Bolivian Government other means of achieving displacement of surplus labor. D. We should begin now to recruit a top-­grade fiscal expert for the financial mission to Bolivia, to serve as an assistant to the head of the mission (who is also Executive Director of the Stabilization Council) and to replace him during periods of absence. E. Although petroleum development offers the best long-­term prospect for Bolivian economic progress, mining will continue to be the country’s principal export producer for the immediate future and must also continue to play a major role in the economy in the long run. Reorganization, rationalization and re-­capitalization of this industry are therefore urgently needed. As the government mining corporation, COMIBOL, constitutes by far the major portion of the industry, and as its present inefficient operations are a chief source of Bolivia’s deficits we should strongly urge the Bolivian Government to implement the recommendations already made in this regard, including negotiation of a final settlement on compensation for the nationalized properties. The possibility of a management contract for COMIBOL with private mining interests might also be explored. III. Additional Assistance for Bolivia A. The full $17 million FY 1959 special assistance program contemplated in the Congressional presentation should be made available to Bolivia. In view of the decline in Bolivia’s export earnings and the commitment to help Bolivia meet its balance-­of-­payments problem made at

Bolivia 175 BL–16. Letter from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Bonsal) to the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Siracusa)1 La Paz, January 6, 1959. Dear Mr. Siracusa:

Bolivia 177 BL–17. Memorandum from the Operations Coordinator (O’Connor) to the American Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, January 28, 1959. For your information or action, there is quoted below an excerpt from my preliminary and informal note on the OCB meeting of January 28: “BOLIVIAN OIL SITUATION “The Weekly Activity Report, prepared by the OCB staff, stated Ambassador Bonsai’s view on the importance of obtaining U.S. public credit to permit YFPB (Bolivian government oil company) to enable it to (1) maintain increased field production, (2) free funds for exploration, and (3) give it greater freedom of action in negotiations with private companies. The Ambassador underlined the important political impact which the granting of such credit would have. “Mr. Smith (ICA) said an International Monetary Fund team2 had made an economic study of Bolivia six months ago and had suggested raising the price of gasoline and use of greater care in granting credit, particularly in the light of the company’s unfavorable position in accounts receivable.3 With some caution, Mr. Smith said the U.S. gives advice and when the country doesn’t take it ‘we help them anyway—­this must stop.’ Governor Herter said he did not have sufficient knowledge of the factors which support the granting of U.S. credit and would inquire. Under Secretary of Treasury Scribner noted that Argentina, Mexico and Brazil will be considered for aid in the petroleum sector of their economies and suggested the desirability of not discriminating against them in our treatment of the Bolivian state-­ owned enterprise.” Jeremiah J. O’Connor

Bolivia 179 TIME Magazine and I have found absolutely no evidence that such a statement was made by an officer of this Embassy. I have every confidence that no officer of this Embassy did, in fact, make such a statement The reprehensible suggestion that Bolivia be abolished and divided among its neighbors is obviously completely contrary to the demonstrated attitude and policy of the USG as evidenced by its respect for the independence and integrity of Bolivia and by its close and friendly relations with Bolivia, including cooperative efforts in recent years to assist Bolivia toward a solution of its basic economic problems. The Government of the United States is, and will continue to be, interested in a strong, independent and prosperous Bolivia. Accept Excellency, et cetera UNQUOTE Will confirm and report.3 Coerr

Bolivia 181 BL–21. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs (Siracusa) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, March 27, 1959.

Bolivia 183 ICA and USOM Bolivia have continued to believe that an aid level for FY 1959 of $23 million is excessive in the light of Bolivian performance and needs and that $18 million is adequate in the circumstances. ARA and OFD believe that the additional $5 million which Ambassador Bonsal, on authorization of the Department and ICA, told the Bolivians would be available if we found it was needed and subject to satisfactory performance by the Bolivians on stabilization, should be provided as indicated. They believe the full $23 million is necessary (a) to support the stabilization program to which we are committed, (b) because of the desirability, both politically and economically, for as much development activity as is practicable to go forward at this time, and (c) because our failure to provide the full support Ambassador Bonsal announced would be difficult for the Bolivian Government and people to understand now, when the Government has just successfully carried through a politically extremely risky operation to achieve an important stabilization objective, i.e., the unfreezing of commissary prices, and also since we will be continuing to condition releases of cash support on performance on the stabilization commitments of the Bolivian Government to the IMF. The relevant facts, from an examination of USOM and IMF documents as well as conversations with the USOM Director, Mr. Rey Hill, the U.S. Executive Director on the IMF,2 the staff of the IMF and Department personnel, appear to be as follows: 1. The United States aid program has two major economic objectives in Bolivia of an immediate nature (there are other longer-­term goals). These are (a) monetary stabilization, which the U.S. and the IMF have in common, and (b) economic development, which is a U.S.- supported objective to be achieved separately from but consistently with monetary stabilization. 2. As in other countries, the U.S. relies heavily on the IMF for establishing the Bolivian monetary stabilization program and for influencing the Bolivian government to adhere to that program. The 1959 target of the IMF, agreed upon with the Bolivian government, is to avoid depreciation of the present exchange rate of 12,000 bolivianos to the dollar while maintaining a free exchange system. To achieve this the IMF has reached agreement with the Bolivian government on the controls to be applied to the sources which generate monetary pressure, chiefly the budget, Central Bank credit, the use of aid counterpart, and wage and subsidy policy. A key issue between the Fund and Bolivia—­the immediate reduction and early elimination of subsidized prices in the commissaries of the mine workers—­has just been settled on a basis which the Fund considers will, together with other commitments, justify a new standby agreement and a further credit to Bolivia of $1.5 million. 3. The U.S. Director in the Fund and the Fund management, while conceding that the Bolivian stabilization program might well fail, 2 Frank Southard, Jr.

Bolivia 185 6. On the basis of the above, the Fund staff asserts that if USOM will sterilize existing counterpart on deposit at the level of 85 billion bolivianos, which the Fund believes should be done to prevent inflationary pressure, then USOM cannot finance 117 billion bolivianos for development out of counterpart without an aid level of $23 million. In other words, the Fund contends that if aid is reduced by $5 million, then the equivalent counterpart would not be available for development expenditures, and if such expenditures were financed through other means, severe inflationary pressure would result and the stabilization program would be impaired. 7. ICA is not certain that the above analysis of the Fund with respect to the development sector is correct. Nevertheless it is prepared to agree (a) that counterpart deposits at the existing level of $83 billion bolivianos should be sterilized (except that the need for sterilization at that level will be re-­examined periodically by USOM and IMF representatives), and (b) that the additional $5 million should be drawn upon to the extent determined to be necessary by USOM to provide counterpart for agreed projects in the development sector, which may or may not reach 117 billion bolivianos. It also recognizes that some or all of the additional $5 million may have to be provided in the form of a cash grant. Recommendations:

Bolivia 187 symbol of MNR unity, and on accommodation with Juan Lechin, leader of the leftist wing of the party. Alvarez Plata would almost certainly seek such an accommodation, but would not go so far to the left as to jeopardize the continuation of U.S. aid. Failing such an accommodation among the key leaders, a violent intra-MNR conflict would probably ensue. 3. What is the leaning of the Carabineros and the armed forces? The Carabineros (national police) and the armed forces are probably loyal to Siles. They, in conjunction with civilian militia units, would probably support the MNR government in sufficient numbers to put down any rightist or leftist attempt to seize power. However, if Siles had left office and a violent intra-MNR conflict were to occur, the action of the Carabineros and the armed forces would be uncertain. The bulk would be likely to support the MNR moderates as they have in the past, if there were a cohesive moderate group to support. 4. What would be the likely effect on the present moderate government of a withdrawal of U.S. aid? The withdrawal of U.S. aid probably would bring Siles’ leadership of Bolivia to an abrupt end. He has become so strongly identified with the policy of co-­operation with the U.S. that he would be completely discredited and probably could not remain in office even if he tried to do so. We believe it unlikely that he would try. There would be a strong upsurge of anti-American sentiment and the MNR left wing would become dominant in the party and in the successor government. These circumstances would enable the small orthodox Communist and the Trotskyite groups to increase their influence. 5. What would be the outlook for the successor government? The tenure of the successor government would depend largely on its ability to cope with Bolivia’s economic problems. If U.S. aid had been denied, the success or government would desperately seek aid from any available source, including the Soviet Bloc, as an immediate action necessary to avert internal economic collapse and political chaos. 6. What would be the likely attitude of the successor government toward the U.S. and the possibility of fruitful U.S. cooperation with it? Denied U.S. support, a successor government would adopt an extremely unfriendly attitude toward the U.S. and would seek to influence other Latin American countries to do the same. Internally, there would be a violent anti-American campaign which would probably involve acts of violence against U.S. property and persons. 7. What would be the effect of a withdrawal of U.S. aid to Bolivia upon U.S. relations in the inter-American community? In these circumstances, there would be a widespread sympathy for Bolivia in Latin American opinion. It would be contended that Bolivia

Bolivia 189 himself as the party’s candidate for next year’s presidential election. At the moment it would appear Victor Paz was the front runner. Whoever was nominated by the MNR party would undoubtedly follow the same general policy of cooperation with the U.S. as the present Government, Andrade stated, and Mr. Rubottom replied that he was glad to hear Bolivia would continue this policy. Concerning the present economic situation in Bolivia, the Foreign Minister reported that last week he had a long satisfactory talk in New York with the head of the Gulf Oil Company’s Latin American section, and that Gulf had confidence regarding its Bolivian operations. The Bolivian Oil Company, according to Andrade, is expected to become productive later this fall or winter in the Madrejones area, with a possible eventual production there of 10,000 barrels a day. In the Santa Cruz area, agricultural prospects were good, he said, with an improvement in sugar production and cattle raising. He thought that the entire economic picture was slowly improving. There had been impressive gains in manufacturing, end some plants (he specifically mentioned SAID and “a glass factory”) were even rehiring workers. The past year had seen tough tough battles in the social sector, according to the Foreign Minister. The GOB, he said, had resisted the demands of the miners and teachers for higher wages. Andrade stated, however, that something would probably have to be done for white collar workers, such as government and clerical employees, who still earn very low salaries. Mr. Rubottom mentioned the continuing harassment of our aid program in Bolivia, in which La Nación had participated. He said that we understood La Nación had been somewhat better in this respect recently. Andrade replied that he had a long talk with Ambassador Strom2 concerning La Nación. He added that this newspaper must be permitted independence on “little” issues in order for it to support the government’s position on larger issues, else it would be discounted as purely a “government mouthpiece”. Personalities were also involved in the minor irritations between citizens of our two countries, Andrade added. Some U.S. citizens just don’t understand how things work in Bolivia. There was no doubt, Andrade said, that there were different cultural roots and he said we must all have patience. He confirmed that we were agreed on the fundamentals. He referred to the fact that some Bolivian officials considered certain U.S. officials arrogant, and he then mentioned an incident when an American lady at La Paz who had been drinking told him at a party that she was fed up with Bolivia and wanted to go home. Some

Bolivia 191 with a smile that this would have to wait for the next administration. Mr. Silberstein also remarked that as long as there was no settlement Comibol would undoubtedly find it difficult to get help from abroad. Andrade agreed that this was a serious problem. BL–26. Memorandum from the Assistant of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1 Washington, October 5, 1959. SUBJECT Assistance to YPFB In my attached memorandum (Tab B),2 you were informed that Treasury, ARA and this Bureau had concurred in a new approach to the problem of providing financial assistance to the Bolivian Government’s petroleum company, YPFB, which would authorize Embassy La Paz to offer a grant of $5 million to the Government of Bolivia to be used indirectly for YPFB and which would permit President Siles to make some announcement in connection with this assistance. You were also informed that ICA did not concur and favored a direct loan to YPFB. Since that time, we have had further discussions and are now all agreed on a new message to Embassy La Paz (Tab A) which is now ready for transmission. You will note that the mechanism proposed is that we would release up to $5 million in boliviano counterpart to the Government of Bolivia for it to loan to YPFB and we would make $5 ­million available in cash grants to the GOB to be available for purchase at the Central Bank by YPFB to finance necessary imports. These funds will only be made available after YPFB has purchased a minimum of $4 million foreign exchange out of the current Bolivian exchange budget, and will be released to coincide with YPFB requests from time to time for conversion of local currency.

Bolivia 193 campaign in Bolivia “in defense of YPFB” which favors acceptance of a Soviet loan and drastic modification of the liberal petroleum code under which several U. S. oil companies are actively engaged in exploration activities. In recognition of Treasury’s opposition, on policy grounds, to a direct open loan to YPFB, we have drafted an answer to Embassy/ USOM La Paz (Tab A)7 authorizing them to reiterate the ICATO 81 proposal but also authorizing them to inform President Siles that when announcing the over-­all FY 1960 aid program and his Government’s plans for utilizing our aid, he could state that in view of the stabilization support Bolivia is to receive from the United States his Government has found it possible to channel some of Bolivia’s own resources to YPFB. We have pointed out that in connection with such an announcement he could explain the need for the necessary reforms. We believe that in this way Embassy/USOM’s main objections to the ICATO 81 proposal can be resolved. Unfortunately, although Treasury has cleared our message ICA has informed us (Tab D)8 that it cannot concur. ICA now holds that it does not agree with the indirect grant approach and favors a direct loan to YPFB. ICA further recommends that a survey team be sent to Bolivia to study YPFB’s financial situation and future prospects to provide the basis for determining the amount and conditions of a loan. In view of Treasury’s strong objection to a direct loan we cannot accept ICA’s proposal. Moreover a survey team would be inconsistent with Treasury’s desire to play down the connection between our aid and YPFB’s financing. We have no doubt YPFB badly needs at least $5 million in financial assistance at this time. The details of what our assistance would be used for and procedures for assuring ourselves that our money goes for this purpose can be worked out through our Embassy and USOM. Recommendation I recommend that you speak directly with Mr. Saccio9 to obtain his concurrence with our proposed telegram. In the present context, our 7 Not attached to the source text. 8 Not attached to the source. The reference is to a memorandum from ICA to Assistant Secretary Rubottom, dated September 9, 1959. 9 Leonard J. Saccio, Deputy Director, International Cooperation Administration.

Bolivia 195 Communist subversive potential which establishment Soviet Embassy here would entail and said such exchange of Missions would certainly raise questions United States Congress re our relations with Bolivia whose outcome I could not predict. Paz said he had not discussed matter with President Siles. He noted possibility funds might never be used for this purpose saying this common Bolivian budgetary practice. However, he said fact that anti-Communists Siles, Guevara and Moreno3 have taken this action indicative they under great pressure; greatest Communist public opinion gains have come on issue aid to YPFB; happily, “we” have been able calm down campaign against private oil companies and for acceptance Soviet loan (He had talked personally to union leaders Cochabamba refinery who pushing campaign that area, explaining his experience difficulties negotiating with Soviets); nevertheless, fact remains “United States doors appear closed” on possibility loan to state oil enterprise; meanwhile YPFB continues be regarded with pride by all Bolivians who determined not let it fail and Soviets, whether seriously or not, hold out possibility of assistance; YPFB has just received invitation from Soviet Embassy, Buenos Aires, send six engineers to USSR inspect newest Soviet drilling equipment; this is other side of coin which United States must consider. I said we had considered this aspect problem and are awaiting formal GOB reply own proposal assist YPFB. Urged him use influence obtain such reply promptly. Comment: Embassy has already transmitted to Department GOB reaction to our YPFB proposal on basis information received informally from GOB officials. I shall continue press for official reply4 but in meantime I recommend that State again urge on Treasury necessity of making adequate loan to YPFB in amount determined by study already proposed. I believe adequate loan is crucial for our relations with Bolivia over next five years and our ability protect investment and opportunities of ten American oil companies in Bolivia with which YPFB cooperating fully. Our failure assist YPFB gives Soviets opportunity they can exploit at will. If United States attitude remains unchanged, I believe Bolivia will ultimately accept a serious Soviet aid offer. This will involve establishment Soviet diplomatic mission in La Paz with all the opportunities for subversion that it will entail. Acquisition Soviet machinery and equipment for use YPFB oil fields will most likely bring swarm of Soviet “technicians” with most serious problems for United States. 3 Hugo Moreno Cordova, Minister of Finance and Statistics.

Bolivia 197 Spanish text of the YPFB memorandum;3 and (2) an informal translation of the memorandum into English.4 Enclosure No. 1 has been photostated to expedite transmittal. The Embassy cannot account for the inordinate delay in receiving the official reply of the GOB, having obtained unsatisfactory explanations (documents having been lost, misplaced, etc.) from Foreign Office officials. In view of the delay it had been thought that possibly the GOB was redrafting the YPFB memorandum. By now certain matters treated in the memorandum are outdated and no longer pertinent (this would apply particularly to the condition that YPFB purchase at least $3,000,000 from the Central Bank in 1959). The long discussion this point, as well as the terms for repayment of the proposed loan, is based both upon a misinterpretation of the conditions set forth the U.S. offer and upon conditions assumed by YPFB but not contained in the U.S. proposal. Perhaps the principal point made in the whole memorandum is that YPFB cannot utilize $5,000,000 to increase production from proven oil reserves since at this time it does not have such known or proven reserves. In other words, the entity’s main need is to engage in further exploration with a view to discovering and developing other oil deposits. The Embassy, after having made many inquiries concerning this matter, is inclined to agree with YPFB’s position on this issue. For the time being the Embassy has no further comments to add to those already set forth in the telegram under reference with respect to this matter. This despatch bears a Confidential classification solely because of the reference made to the telegram of February 12. For the Ambassador: William F. Gray Counselor of Embassy For Economic Affairs

Bolivia 199 production had dropped considerably in the first quarter of 1960 and a sizeable deficit was probable this year.3 He said we understood that Mr. Clark4 of the IMF had talked to President Siles about this matter.5 It appeared that action was needed in order to take those measures, such as the dismissal of a large number of surplus miners and elimination of commissary losses, which were required if a bad inflationary spiral were to be avoided.6 Mr. Rubottom hoped that the necessary action would be taken, although he realized it might not be possible to institute some measures until after the elections. Mr. Rubottom also referred to the attack by a large number of demonstrators on April 26 against the building housing the Servicios in Cochabamba. He said that he understood that the police had eventually arrived and provided adequate protection, but he deplored the irresponsible actions of the Confederation of Construction Workers.7 Andrade replied that he was not familiar with this incident, but would inquire regarding the circumstances. Following the discussion in Mr. Rubottom’s office the Ambassador and Mr. Pitts continued the discussion along the following lines: Should an agreement be reached with Patiño, Andrade said the GOB would probably then approach the Department in an effort to obtain assistance in financing such a settlement. The Ambassador pointed out that the Bolivian government simply did not have the required funds with which to pay Patiño and would, therefore, have to look to lending institutions of the United States Government or to the IBRD and commercial banks for help with this matter. Mr. Pitts replied that he could not encourage Andrade regarding possible action by the USG. Andrade commented that he had been assured that once a settlement of Bolivia’s outstanding bonded indebtedness had been concluded, the GOB would be able to obtain funds from the IBRD. Although an agreement was reached and payments were being made to the bondholders, the GOB had not obtained assistance from the IBRD as it was unable to finance the studies required before presenting proposals to the IBRD. Andrade added that COMIBOL was badly in need of funds with which to purchase new equipment and improve its activities. He said that should a settlement with Patiño not improve the GOB’s credit standing to the

Bolivia 201 political authority; not assume political responsibility for the bloodshed involved as would be case with military junta. Therefore although right wing coup attempt good possibility prior to or immediately after June 5 elections believe military will support GOB. Rumors of possible installation of military junta by Siles rife last ten days. Embassy place little credence these reports. Believe rumors have two sources: (1) Effort of both left and right opposition drive wedge between GOB and military and (2) uninformed speculation on recent appointment military officers as prefects bringing total of military prefects to seven out of nine (several these military men extreme leftists who would not join any attempt establish rightist junta). Should critical COMIBOL situation result in GOB bankruptcy, Embassy believes anarchy and political chaos likely results with extreme leftist holding political initiative. (For report on COMIBOL see EMBTEL 657). In Embassy’s opinion effort to establish military junta would only became probability at onus stage. In view likelihood that military and rightist leaders would be among first targets leftist night of long knives consider fruitless speculate on which individuals might lead such effort. Strom BL–32. Despatch from the Ambassador in Bolivia (Strom) to the Department of State1 La Paz, July 14, 1960. No.20 REF Embtel No:122 SUBJECT Conversation with the President-Elect, Victor PAZ Estenssoro: Comibol Political Truce Cochabamba Valley Civil War Paz’s Visit to Argentina The Ambassador, accompanied by Mr. Williams and Mr. Thompson,3

Bolivia 203 could easily be straightened out; Dr. Paz said that he would seek to intervene in the situation. Prospects for Understanding Among Opposition Parties and the MNR The Ambassador referred to proposals which had been made by Fernando DIEZ DE MEDINA, until recently Ambassador to Rome and the Vatican, that the opposition groups and the MNR mutually agree to a sort of political truce in which they would eschew violence and carry on their activities by purely legal and constitutional means. Dr. Paz [text not declassified] was willing, in his first message to the nation, to express the new administration’s desire for domestic peace and reconciliation. The opposition parties would then be at liberty to make similar declarations. Cochabamba Valley Civil War The conversation turned to the continued fighting between Roja’s4 and Veizaga5 forces in the Cochabamba Valley. It was pointed out that large number of campesinos who were engaged in this activity were neglecting their farms and sooner or later would be confronted with famine conditions. [text not declassified] Dr. Paz’s visit to Argentina The Ambassador wished Dr. Paz every success on his visit to Buenos Aires, especially hoping that Dr. Paz would return with a substantial quantity of free dollars as a result of his negotiations regarding the Bolivian-Argentine Bilateral Agreement. Dr. Paz said that he had been preparing for this part of his trip to Argentina by consulting with Mr. Clark of the International Monetary Fund, and he expected that he would be able to convince the Argentine Government to release perhaps as much as $3,000,000 in free dollars out of the Convenio account. The Ambassador pointed it was also essential to terminate the Bilateral Agreement and Dr. Paz replied this was one of his two prime objectives in making his trip. (As long as the Agreement is in force, the dollars YPFB sells to the Central Bank are blocked dollars. The bolivianos which are put into circulation as a result of these sales are eventually returned to the Bank for the purchase of free dollars which places a strong inflationary pressure on the boliviano.) For the Ambassador: William L. S. Williams Counselor of Embassy 4 Reference is to the forces of Jose Rojas Guevara, leftist leader. 5 Reference is to the forces of Miguel Veizaga, rightist leader.

Bolivia 205 and did not believe that he is the only one who can do anything about it, if he has the will, this despatch would not be written. Two changes have occurred in recent weeks: (1) there is widespread apprehension concerning Comibol’s drain on the nation’s economy, and (2) there is recognition in high quarters of the Government that something must be done about it. There is an added element of great importance: President Paz’ recent election gives him and his Government a greater freedom of action than Dr. Siles had in the closing stages of his administration. I believe that the rehabilitation of Comibol is the key to any early economic improvement in Bolivia. I regard it as highly unlikely that there will be, during the foreseeable future, any serious disposition on the part of Government leaders to return Comibol mines and holdings to private enterprise. Indeed, I suspect that the former owners of Comibol mines themselves have no serious interest in returning to Bolivia. No Bolivian with any political responsibility has even hinted to me that Comibol should be liquidated and that its assets be offered to private investors. President Paz told me that such a step would be “political suicide”. The nationalization of the great mining companies was and remains a major tenet of the Bolivian Revolution. Comibol is the chief economic symbol of the Revolution. Given that Comibol is the key to any improvement in the economy of Bolivia, it would seem that the United States is confronted by a most serious dilemma. Although no specific position in this regard has been taken at the highest levels of our Government, our policy has been not to consider United States Government aid or to encourage American private assistance to Comibol until the Government of Bolivia has reached a final settlement with the former owners of Comibol’s holdings. A considerable percentage of the stock of Patiño Mines is held by American citizens or by persons who are at least resident in the United States. I understand that this is not so in the case of Aramayo and Hochschild. The Government of Bolivia has been paying “retentions” to the former mine owners and, according to the Embassy’s information, the sum of retentions already paid has now reached over $17 million. Recent discussions were held between representatives of the Patiño group and the Government of Bolivia in Montreal, with a view toward a final settlement of the amount to be paid to the Patiño group in accordance with the Government of Bolivia’s commitment to compensate the former mine owners. In essence, the Patiño group asked a sum double that which the Government of Bolivia was prepared to give. To the Embassy’s knowledge the discussions ended without agreement and no further discussions have been held. The Government of Bolivia considers that it has already paid to the former mine owners sums in the form of retentions approaching the book value of the holdings which were nationalized in 1953. (Mine owners dispute this claim on grounds

Bolivia 207 the Matilde Mine. Hence the Government of Bolivia will be looking abroad for public capital. The Embassy anticipates that approaches will be made to the United States Government for substantial assistance to rationalize Comibol’s operations. It seems most probable that overtures will be made at the same time, also, to Iron Curtain countries for assistance and that, therefore, the United States Government will be in a squeeze, threatened with the prospect of important Czech or possibly Soviet Union economic (and political) inroads into this country, if we do not come to Comibol’s assistance. [text not declassified] In summary, the problem which Comibol poses for the United States is as follows: Our substantial program of economic and financial assistance is designed to assist Bolivia in improving its economy, a condition, precedent to political stability, the introduction of a reign of law and order in the country, and the consolidation of a purely national revolution which has promise of being a most valuable counterweight to the Castro revolution in Cuba. Yet Comibol constitutes an enormous drain on the resources of the country and, to a large extent, vitiates progress in other sectors of the economy which is being made with our help. Comibol is the key to the economic health of Bolivia, yet our share in economic development here does not touch it. American public funds cannot accomplish all that is desired until a program of reform and recapitalization of Comibol is begun and carried through. The interests of a small number of investors in the United States, the holders of Patiño stock, which dictate that United States public funds not be made available to Comibol, appear, therefore, to conflict with the broader interests of the mass of American taxpayers whose money is not accomplishing, and not likely to accomplish, what is desired here so long as Comibol remains such a heavy drain on the country’s economy. I believe that the United States Government’s interest lies in assuring that the Bolivian Revolution remain a national one and that it succeed along the general lines which it has now taken. I am confident that within a short time the Embassy will be asked what will be the nature and extent of United States cooperation with the Government of Bolivia in reorganizing and recapitalizing Comibol. I should, therefore, appreciate receiving promptly guidance from the Department concerning the nature of my response to this question.3 Carl W. Strom

Bolivia 209 BL–35. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Bolivia1

Bolivia 211 BL–37. Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge of Bolivian Affairs (Weise)1 Washington, November 9, 1960. SUBJECT The Critical Economic and Political Position of Bolivia PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Victor Andrade Under Secretary Dillon ARA - Mr. Barall MA WST - Mr. Weise Ambassador Andrade said that he wished to describe briefly the critical and uncomfortable situation in which the Paz Government was finding itself as the result of the new Soviet drive in Bolivia. During the past month, following Khrushchev’s offer of a tin smelter and tin concentration facilities to Bolivia, pressures from Communist and pro-­ Castro elements have been mounting to the point where these forces are now threatening the political stability and very existence of the Paz Government. Ambassador Andrade emphasized that the Bolivian revolution is a national revolution and that, unlike the Castro revolution of Cuba which has sold out to Khrushchev, the Government of the MNR has resolutely defended itself against Communist domination. The Soviet offer of a tin smelter, Andrade said, has revived certain popular concepts regarding Bolivia’s dependence upon world marketing arrangements for the sale of tin, which although erroneous in some respects, were nevertheless widely spread. Considering that Bolivia is the largest producer of tin in this hemisphere and that the United States is the largest consumer of tin in the world, many Bolivians do not understand why their country must market its tin through Great Britain and be dependent upon British smelters. Many Bolivians also do not understand why the Texas City smelter was not built in or near Bolivia where its operation would have been more economical and advantageous to the Bolivian tin industry. Failure of the United States to give a satisfactory answer to these and other questions relating to the Bolivian tin problem has led many Bolivians to feel that the United States is not interested in helping Bolivia free itself from outside international controls over the world tin market. Bolivians also remember, Andrade claimed, that when the United States ceased to buy tin for its stockpile, world prices dropped, which

Bolivia 213 BL–38. Telegram From the Embassy in Bolivia to the Department of State1 La Paz, November 16, 1960. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 4 pages not declassified. BL–39. Telegram From the Embassy in Bolivia to the Department of State1 La Paz, November 20, 1960. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 3 pages not declassified. BL–40. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Bolivia1

Bolivia 215 BL–41. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Bolivia1

Bolivia 217 BL–43. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Bolivian Affairs (Weise)1 Washington, December 29, 1960. SUBJECT Courtesy Call of Vice President of Bolivia Juan Lechin on Acting Secretary of State Livingston T. Merchant PARTICIPANTS Juan Lechin, Vice President of the Republic of Bolivia Victor Andrade, Bolivian Andrade Ambassador the United States Mr. Livingston T. Merchant, Acting Secretary ARA - Mr. Mann WST - Robert W. Weise, Jr. Lechin said that the purpose of his visit was to strengthen relations between Bolivia and the United States. He said he wished to discuss two problems with Mr. Merchant—­the first was related to the situation of anarchy which prevailed among labor in the Bolivian mining industry. The reason mineral production has not declined more in the past year, he said, is due solely to the dedication of the individual miner and his desire to maintain output. However, in order to increase production, the miners need food, tools, machinery, and prompt payment of wages, elements which are lacking under present conditions. Lechin said that many of the difficulties confronting the Bolivian mining industry were created by Patiño and the former mine owners because of their failure to plan long range production and to make provision for an adequate supply of electric power. The principal cause for the decline in minerals production is, however, the lack of capital. Lechin then said that United States aid to COMIBOL (for modern concentration facilities) was a step in the right direction and that it would help increase production, although it could not be expected that production would reach the 1952 level in the immediate future. He estimated that mineral production could be increased by about 30% within a year after the reorganization of COMIBOL. The shortage of electric power was still a factor which would continue to limit production. The second problem raised by Lechin concerned the difficulties with which the mine workers themselves were confronted. These difficulties included 1) lack of pulperia (commissary supplies); 2) terminal benefits for excess miners; and 3) the inability of COMIBOL to meet payrolls when due. He claimed the workers have had to accept

Bolivia 219 Bolivian Government has an immediate need for loans to cover current budgetary deficits. Mr. Merchant thanked Mr. Lechin for his statement and said that the Department would consider all elements of his presentation carefully. He said that the United States placed great importance upon the continuance of good relations with Bolivia, which have always existed between the two countries. He said that the United States is not unaware of the problems of Bolivia and that we are keenly aware of the need for economic development throughout Latin America. Mr. Merchant also emphasized that economic development must be built upon stabilization and expressed the hope that the triangular undertaking recently announced by the United States government, Inter-American Development Bank and the German Government will be a beginning in the solution of Bolivia’s long-­range problems. Mr. Merchant referred to the President’s Special Social Development Program for Latin America for which the President has asked Congress for an appropriation of $500,000,000. He said he hoped that when Congress convened in January it would act upon this program and make the necessary funds available. Mr. Merchant observed that the United States is now in a period between two administrations, which makes it difficult for us as well as for our friends. He felt certain, however, that the new administration will not be less interested in Bolivia and he again assured Vice President Lechin that his statement will be considered very carefully by the Department of State, including other interested agencies of the United States Government.

Chile: U.S. Relations with Chile CH–1. Despatch from the Chargé in Chile (Belton) to the Department of State1 Santiago, March 21, 1958 No. 957.

Chile 221 Added to these permanent factors is the complication that 1958 is a Presidential election year in Chile. Moreover, 1958 is going to be a very difficult year for Chile because of drastic drops in tax income and foreign exchange receipts from the copper industry as a result of the low international price of copper (see below for a discussion of this point). Considering the current precarious status of the Chilean economy, the application of any import tax by the United States on Chile’s leading export will have a deadly psychological effect locally. The imposition and increasing of the import tax will be even more serious. The Embassy believes that the United States import tax will become a local political issue which will be exploited to extremes with little regard for

Chile 223 mid-1957, when copper prices continued their unchecked decline and rumors began circulating about a possible reduction in production. Now, with prices still lower and Government income from the tax levied on the companies’ profits down greatly, criticism of the New Law is increasing. The grim realities of Chile’s reduced income from copper sales may be seen in recent statistics. In 1956, Chile received a total of US$370,100,000 in hard currency exchange. Of this, the large copper industry contributed US$196,420,000, or 53 percent of the total. Of the total copper payments, US$128,610,000 was in the form of income tax payments to the Government. In 1957, Chile received a total of US$313,200,000 in hard currencies, with the copper industry providing $143,044,000, or 46 percent of the total. Of the total copper payments, only US$73,602,000 consisted of income tax to the Government. For 1958, the two American companies estimate that their total contribution in foreign exchange to the Chilean economy will be about US$109 million, of which only US$31,622,000 will be income tax paid to the Government. The Embassy estimates that the $109 million will consti-

Chile 225 CH–2. Press Release Prepared in the Office of the Secretary of the Interior (Seaton)1 Washington, April 11, 1958. SECRETARY SEATON URGES REPEAL OF SUSPENSION ON COPPER-IMPORT TAXES Secretary of the Interior Fred A. Seaton today recommended that Congress repeal the suspension on copper-­import taxes which has been in effect since 1947. In recommending passage of S. 3234 which would revoke the suspension of copper-­import taxes, Secretary Seaton said: “The import tax was suspended at a time when copper was in short supply the world over. Serious difficulties were being experienced in meeting defense requirements arising from the Korean War. Both the Government and domestic producers wished to remove any obstacles to increasing copper supplies.” “The circumstances on which the original suspension and its subsequent extensions were based no longer exist. In the course of the past year and one-­half the extreme shortage of copper has disappeared and there is now an adequate supply,” the Secretary said in a letter to the Senate Finance Committee. Copper-­import taxes have been suspended since 1947 with the exception of short periods in 1950 and 1951. The current suspension remains in effect so long as the price of copper is 24 cents per pound or above, or until June 30, 1958, unless sooner repealed by Congress. The suspended import taxes on copper are now two cents per pound when

Chile 227 CH–4. Telegram from the Chargé in Chile (Belton) to the Department of State1

Chile 229 strong and friendly ally, we may have to accept certain Chilean failings and find ways to pursue our policy in spite of them, rather than slow down or halt our help while waiting for Chileans to change character. U.S.-Latin American policy, while recognized as basically sound and accepted as helpful by most Chileans, has nevertheless exhausted its overt appeal here. We solved our major hemispheric political problems and supplemented that action with a welcome reciprocal trade program during the Thirties and Forties, thus creating a reservoir of good will which has carried us a long way and still has significant background values, but which is no longer exploitable. Our part in World War II also helped to build our reputation. With the political problems mostly out of the way, economic difficulties have taken over the stage. In our efforts to help solve these by loans, grants, technical assistance, and arguing the virtues of private enterprise, we have had only limited success. What we have done has been appreciated, but it has been badly overshadowed by the volume of our assistance to the rest of the world, and by the fact that economic problems larger than any we have helped solve keep appearing. The net effect is one of relative neglect. At the same time, unfortunately, our expressions of willingness to help and our largesse throughout the world have created an atmosphere of paternalism which has caused Chile to expect much more from us than we have delivered, and at the same time to fail to recognize its corresponding obligations. Specific complaints Major Chilean complaints boil down to the following: 1) U.S. resistance against commodity arrangements to guarantee reasonable copper prices, while keeping presumed Soviet bloc demand uneffective, leaving Chile, so extremely dependent on foreign trade in copper, to shoulder a cold war burden re this strategic commodity far beyond its capacity. 2) U.S. tendency to revert to protectionism at the expense of its friends in the face of what to Chile appear relatively minor domestic economic problems, thus forgetting our position and obligations as the leading world power. 3) Failure of the U.S.—­or of international financial agencies which the U.S. could apparently influence heavily—­in spite of declared intentions to the contrary, to provide development capital sufficient to enable Chile to progress enough to keep up with growth rates elsewhere and especially in the U.S, not to mention reducing the vast distance between our standards of living. 4) Failure of the U.S. to distinguish within the hemisphere between truly democratic friends such as Chile and dictatorships.

Chile 231 this argument can’t be won by talk alone, but only by giving them a sense of participation. 10) Our recent interest in Africa is even harder to explain to Chileans than are our European and Asian expenditures. They see Africa as almost as remote from the Soviet orbit as South America, and any developmental assistance we give there as directly harmful to their own interests because it fosters the African capacity for economic competition against Latin America. 11) We have made it appear that our economic assistance is available only if it is to be applied according to our own ideas of economics. As a result we often seem to be making “free enterprise” or “people’s capitalism” the “goal” rather than a possible and preferred “means” toward our major purpose of promoting economic development. Many of our aid and loan programs assist government and semi-­government development programs. Since this is often in accordance with local economic theory, we should exploit this de facto situation. 12) Chileans, as a people, undoubtedly know us, as a people, better than we know them. Everything, including our world position, movies, press wire services, USIA, make that inevitable. Yet they understand us poorly. That being the case, how can we expect to understand them well. They have none of our means to bring themselves to our attention. Our ignorance of them is abysmal. Our lack of interest is almost as great. They know this and it offends them. Review is called for. The problems above have not created bitterness in Chile toward the U.S., but they have created an atmosphere in which Chileans are clearly satisfied that the Nixon trip brought Latin American-U.S. problems dramatically to the forefront. No one here excuses the excesses of Lima or Caracas, and all are quick to say it “couldn’t happen here.” They are clearly pleased, though, that one way or another their problems finally reached the front pages of the U.S. press, and they are reasonably sure this would not have happened in any other way. What to do? If we want to alleviate these problems, if we want to keep peace in “our own patio” and, most of all, if we want to create a strong, friendly neighbor out of Chile, new verve must be added to our policy. Quoting the title of El Mercurio’s May 16 lead editorial, “The U.S. Has the Floor.” But Chileans want to hear some new ideas from us, not more explanation of old ones. Nevertheless it would be tragic if we panicked at this stage and started throwing money or anything else around carelessly. Our attitude of requiring performance with our assistance and of helping those who help themselves is fundamentally sound. We need, however, to reassess not only the degree of help they can, but will, give themselves, taking into consideration the social and

Chile 233 In Chile this is not a matter of providing comforts. It is the difference between life and death for thousands of individuals. Out of Santiago’s population of one and one-­half million people, more than 200,000 live under tin cans. Another 500,000 are in what we would call slums in the United States. There will be frost on the ground here most mornings for the next four months. The other day we had two inches of rain in eight hours. People living as millions of Chileans live can’t stand such conditions and remain healthy and productive. We can’t build houses for everyone in Latin America, but we can give appreciable assistance. Technical assistance is being given but it alone is not enough. It must be accompanied by economic assistance utilizing private initiative and private means. To tap private capital and private savings might help establish a system of savings and loan associations such as we have in the United States, offering DLF money for initial capital in much the same way as our Government did in the early days of the Federal Savings and Loan System and as it now does through purchase of mortgages by the Federal National Mortgage Association; and we might extend FHA insurance to include investments in Chilean mortgages by United States private capital. 6) Increase our PL-4804 Title III program to the maximum to provide undernourished people the food we can’t sell. Create, support, or expand school lunch programs and other effective distributional means. Excellent progress has already been made with Title III in Chile but we would like to see it continue and improve. 7) Demonstrate that we do recognize the difference between a Dominican dictatorship and a Chilean democracy. We have already proved that giving the cold shoulder to the dictators is not the ideal way. Continue to treat them courteously and with sufficient cordiality to guarantee their cooperation where this is essential. Reflect the differences we recognize and feel by doing extra things for the true democracies. Wrap up some nice packages, some cultural, some financial, some political, but all of a type providing mutual benefits. Present them to the democracies, letting it be known we are doing so because they are democratic. 8) We must work to get the full benefits of the impact of the helpful things we do here, through better coordinated publicity and more expeditious action. We have often announced sizable loans at times or in ways which gave us practically no propaganda value. Others we have not announced at all. Often we have, without remark, let the Chileans give advance publicity about large sums they were seeking to borrow, so when we loaned less we got criticism instead of congratulations. 4 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agriculture Trade Development and Assistance Act of

Chile 235 helpful things and do them in a way to provide hope and encouragement to the vigorous elements within Chile. William Belton Chargé d’Affaires ad interim CH–6. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1 Washington, June 18, 1958. SUBJECT Strategic Control On Copper And U. S. Relations With Chile Problem: Chileans are unconvinced of the importance of security controls on exports of copper to the Soviet bloc. Many believe they are senseless and harmful to Chile’s economic position. This is grist for the communist mill and being exploited by the extreme-­left presidential candidate who is coming up strong in the race to be decided by the September 4 elections. Discussion: The Communists have long claimed that U.S pressures on Chile to restrict sales of Chilean copper to the bloc have been harmful to Chile. They have implied that all of Chile’s economic problem would be solved if the strategic controls were ignored and Chile embarked on a policy of unrestricted trade in copper with the bloc. Although some Chileans realize the spuriousness of this contention, it is widely accepted and is at the root of much Chilean resentment of the United States. At a time when copper prices are falling, when the reimposition of the U.S. excise tax on copper imports is imminent, and when the press is full of reports of strong pressures in the U.S. in favor of hiking up the excise, this feeling becomes particularly strong and the leftist argument in Chile especially appealing.

Chile 237 we will have to acquiesce to such a downgrading. I also understand that the large loophole in existing controls created by the downgrading of copper wire of under 6 mm has already resulted in a substantial movement of free-­world copper to the bloc in the form of wire and that it is doubtful whether the downgrading of other copper would lead to a significant charge in the supply availabilities of the bloc. I further understand that the chances of our obtaining agreement within COCOM to upgrading the controls on less than 6 mm copper are negligible. It is pertinent to recall that for some time the communists in Chile argued that Chile’s economy was suffering from U.S. objections to Chilean trade in nitrates with Communist China and that there would be a significant improvement in Chile’s balance-­of-­payments position and in the position of the ailing nitrate industry if Chile could only take advantage of the “tremendous” potential market that existed in communist China for Chilean nitrates. In 1954, the Chilean Government finally consulted with us on this point and was informed that we did not object to Chilean sales of nitrates to Communist China. Since that date, to our knowledge, not one pound of Chilean nitrates has been sold to Communist China and an effective communist propaganda argument has been eliminated. I understand that information available to the departmental officers concerned with strategic controls indicates that continuation of existing international controls on exports of copper to the bloc will not have a significant impact on Soviet military capabilities so long as copper in the form of wire is available to the Block. In these circumstances U.S. initiative in agreeing at this time to the elimination of these controls would remove an issue damaging to our relations with Chile and with other copper-­producing and trading countries, could help to forestall the possibility that a pro-­Soviet administration might be elected in an important country of the Western Hemisphere, and thereby could make a contribution to U.S. security interests more substantial than maintenance of controls which apparently no longer serve a significant purpose. Recommendation: Accordingly, I recommend that the Department: 1. After appropriate consultation with other agencies, agree to remove copper from the embargo list in the forthcoming Consultative Group negotiations. 2. Give prompt notification to Chile of the Consultative Group decision in order to obtain maximum advantage in U.S. Chilean relations.

Chile 239 CH–9. Memorandum from Robert K. Phillips of the Office of West Coast Affairs in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, September 24, 1958. SUBJECT Position of Chilean President-­elect on Major Issues In public and private statements both before and after the September 4 Chilean presidential election, the apparent President-­elect, Senator Jorge Alessandri, has been generally forthright in stating his position on most of the domestic and international issues facing Chile. His views on some of the more important problems: Presidential Role—Expects to be a strong leader, not under obligation to anyone. International Affairs— Relations with U.S. and Free World—Would continue basic Chilean foreign policy as part of Free World. Friendly to U.S. but not subservient. Wants closer relations with neighboring countries and the rest of Latin America. Relations with Communist bloc—Not stated, but not likely to favor closer relations with the bloc. Defense—Would prefer to devote funds to economic development but feels he must keep forces at reasonable parity with Argentina and Peru. Foreign Investment—Favors foreign investment as best means of increasing productive capacity without requiring new sacrifices from the Chilean people. Foreign Aid—May seek some foreign loans in order to consolidate short-­term debts, but hopes to rely primarily on better use of Chile’s own resources. Does not expect a “Marshall Plan” for Latin America. Foreign Trade—­import prohibitions should be eliminated, but certain (unspecified) import duties should be raised to protect national interests. Doubts feasibility of Latin American common market. Favors reciprocal trace arrangements.

Chile 241 CH–10. Telegram from the Ambassador in Chile (Howe) to the Department of State1

Chile 243 CH–12. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Chile1

Chile 245 indicated their determination develop and carry through realistic, austere program. GOC has reached agreement with IMF mission now in Chile under which drawings will be permitted through end of year (Embassy telegram 189). This includes: 1) adjusting banking exchange rate to realistic basis, which Vergara said and 2) new agreement on credit restrictions and government borrowing from Central Bank would be done promptly. Agreement with IMF mission represents important first step and shows willingness new administration come to grips with certain financial problems. Believe this and any other help which IMF may be able extend most useful. However, scope IMF mission too limited provide comprehensive analysis situation on which United States policy could be based. Urge United States mission arrive here if possible on December eight. Suggest it have both economic and political representation from Department and that representatives also be included from Treasury, EXIM Bank and possibly DLF. Believe such mission would be extremely helpful because greater accessibility factual information and key Chilean personnel in Santiago will provide opportunity assess financial crisis in relation to over-­all politico-­economic situation and fiscal program new administration. Would also give chance working with GOC officials while formulation their program in early stages. Realize that such a mission would not be in position to make commitment, but would hope that if facts developed by mission confirm urgent need, Washington would be prepared to act promptly. I feel prompt despatch to Chile of such a mission is absolute minimum we can do to support and bolster confidence of new government at this stage. I am having lunch with President Alessandri probably on Monday next week and I feel it is important to our position in Chile to be able to tell him at that time that a mission will arrive early in December.2 Howe

Chile 247 CH–15. Memorandum of a Conversation1 Santiago, January 20, 1959 SUBJECT Economic Program of the Alessandri Administration and Problems Which It Faces PARTICIPANTS Señor Roberto Vergara, Minister of Finance, Economy and Mines Señor Eduardo Figueroa, Chief Assistant to the Minister of Finance Ambassador Walter Muller, the new Ambassador to the United States Ambassador Howe, U.S. Embassy Mr. William Krieg, U.S. Embassy Mr. Raford Herbert, U.S. Embassy Mr. Robert Eakens, U.S. Embassy At a luncheon meeting today, various aspects of the Alessandri Administration’s economic program and the problems it faces, both with International Monetary Fund and from a domestic political standpoint, were discussed at some length. Vergara came to the luncheon straight from the Congress where he had been in constant hearings for several days on the Government’s recently submitted wage and economic and financial legislation. He was frankly discouraged at being caught on the one hand between the attitude of the Congress, which already had weakened the Administration’s program with larger wage adjustments than had been proposed, and on the other by the tighter attitude of the Fund, as reported by Figueroa. Vergara nevertheless felt that in spite of the pressures in Congress the program would go through without being weakened too much, either as a result of restoration by the Senate or use by the President of his veto. At the same time the attitude of Congress made it clear that the program proposed by the Administration was the most that could be hoped for. Figueroa had gone to Buenos Aires on Friday, January 16, for a discussion with representatives of the International Monetary Fund the following day. Costanzo was tied up and was not available but Figueroa has a 9½ hour discussion with Edgar Jones and Eugenio Bertens. [text not declassified] According to Figueroa, the discussion was very discouraging. Figueroa felt the attitude of the Fund had changed greatly, and had

Chile 249 is a sine qua non of a new agreement with the Fund. They considered that a cut of 10 percent should be made in the budgeted government expenses, that priority attention should be given to making State enterprises completely self-­financing through economies of administration and increases in tariffs, and that the government’s investment program should be so limited as to provide only for completion of existing projects, the initiation of new projects which would be financed with foreign loans not being justified in the existing circumstances. They recommended a drastic revision downward in the amount of the arrastre to be paid off. Upon completion of the current Stand-By Arrangement on March 31, they did not consider any further credit expansion justified for the next year since prices already had reflected the currently proposed readjustments in wages and any expansion would therefore be inflationary. They recommended that the entire import deposit system be abolished, all goods made freely importable, and several groups of commodities established with tariffs varying according to essentiality and high enough to yield more revenue and to control imports. Vergara, Figueroa, and Muller made it clear that they were in accord with almost all of the foregoing measures which were advocated by the Fund representatives. They felt, however, that Chile was being likened too much with the case of Argentina, that the situation was quite different in Chile, and that therefore the means of achieving the desired goals would also have to be different. An important difference is the fact that Frondizi’s party has control of the Congress and the army is accustomed over the years to be used in the control of Argentina. These things make it easier for Frondizi to take strong action and back it up with military force where required. Chile, on the other hand, is a democratic country split up into numerous political parties, with an army not accustomed to participating in politics or control of the economy, and with the present government having minority support in Congress. One point that Figueroa stressed was based on two talks which he has had with President Alessandri since his return from Buenos Aires. This was the President’s feeling that he has to try to do something about the unemployment situation and that he simply cannot take any measures which would increase unemployment. Figueroa and Vergara believe that the policies advocated by Jones and Bertens would have this effect. Vergara emphasized this point at considerable length, pointing out that he could not see how technicians from the International Monetary Fund could be so wrapped up in their figures and so cold-­ blooded as to advocate policies which would increase unemployment and starvation. While stressing his agreement with cost of the measures advocated by the Fund officials, Vergara raised the question several times as to what would be the attitude in Washington of the Eximbank and

Chile 251 of the importance U.S. agencies attach to a country reaching a prior agreement with the Fund, he could not say what their attitude would be unless there was a full agreement. As to the Administration’s program generally, Eakens indicated it would be helpful if that part concerned with credit were reduced to concrete terms. Mentioning that all measures thus far taken by the Administration for increasing the availability of local credit had been sound and non-­inflationary, he said the President had indicated his disagreement with the credit controls which had been in effect during the last two and a half years and that this had given rise to concern in Washington that the Administration’s actions in this field were going to be inflationary. He said the same concern was felt over the Administration’s housing program. Vergara said that they were taking measures to place the Chilean economy on a dollar basis and to encourage the use of dollars to finance imports and exports and relieve the pressure on existing local credit. While the results had not been as great as he expected, he said this was beginning in a small way to have the desired effects. CH–16. Letter from President Alessandri to President Eisenhower.1 Santiago, January 30, 1959. [4 pages not declassified] The Government has already embarked on a program to reorganize the public administration and state agencies, for the purpose of reducing national expenditures to limits consistent with the country’s economic capacity. To the [illegible in the original] and studies will be completed during 1959 that will permit the introduction of sweeping changes in the systems of social security, customs tariffs, and taxation. The first steps have already been taken to rationalize foreign trade, by adopting a policy governing rates of exchange that will effectively encourage export activities and reduce the demand for imported products to safe limits. With this purpose in mind, the areas of exchange 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.” Information on the source text indicates this is an official translation of the original. Walter Muller Hess presented his credentials to President Eisenhower on February 13, 1959.

Chile 253 CH–17. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1 Washington, February 13, 1959. SUBJECT Anticipated Chilean Request for Financial Assistance.2 Problem: The Alessandri Government, inaugurated in November 1958, claims that the restoration of economic and financial stability based on the private enterprise is its prime objective. However, the economic program it has devised does not give promise of achieving this end. Moreover, the Administration has dragged its feet on working out a satisfactory stabilization arrangement with the IMF, and the Government has announced that about $100 million of foreign loans will be required for budgetary and balance of payments support. Mr. Figueroa, Special Assistant to the Minister of Finance arrives in Washington February 16 to open discussions on external assistance. Recommendation: While it is in our interests politically to support the Alessandri Government, and while its application of a sound economic program will entail certain political risks, we believe that financial support in the absence of an effective stabilization program will serve neither Chilean nor U.S. interests in the long run. Further, it is our tentative view that Chile could go through 1959 without new balance of payments loans from U.S. official sources if a serious effort is made to adhere to an adequate stabilization program. The budgetary deficit is an internal problem not appropriate for external financing. This and other stabilization problems should be worked out in operation with the IMF. Therefore, it is recommended that the U.S. Government take the initial position that the Chilean Government should first reach agreement

Chile 255 draining foreign exchange reserves. The new Minister of Finance initially took a strong position for a sizeable devaluation of the peso but he agreed to accept only about half of the depreciation he had requested when the opposition took advantage of the Government’s indecisiveness. Since then, the Government has unified the dual exchange market in accordance with IMF recommendations but it is now too early to assess the impact of this measure on the reserve position since there is no assurance that the rate of exchange will be permitted to move with the market. In a series of radio speeches and in its submission to Congress, the Alessandri Government indicated that it expected to request budgetary and balance of payments loans from abroad and showed little liking for fiscal and credit restraint. The budget now before Congress envisages a global deficit of about 210 billion pesos ($210 million) of which 60 billion pesos is requested to cover unpaid bills from the previous Administration, 75 billion for public works including housing, and 70 billion for wage increases. The Government expects to finance 100 billion pesos of this total by increased tax revenues and has indicated that it wishes to obtain the remainder through foreign loans. President Alessandri has written a letter to President Eisenhower requesting him to use his influence with U.S. institutions in regard to prospective Chilean loan applications. On February 16, Special Assistant to the Minister of Finance, Figueroa, is expected in Washington to hold discussions with the IMF and with the U. S. Government agencies on these loan possibilities. The IMF discussions will be necessary since Chile is not now eligible to draw the $6 million for the first quarter of 1959 remaining in the standby arrangements largely because no agreement was reached on a satisfactory rate of foreign exchange sales by the Central Bank. It is now hoped that a revised one-­year extension of the standby agreement expiring in March, can be worked out between Chile and the IMF which would require Chile to maintain budgetary, monetary, and foreign exchange policies aimed at achieving financial stability. During 1958 the Ibánez Administration used about $40 million of balance of payments loans from abroad. For 1959 it is anticipated that the average price of copper will be about 30 cents compared with 25 cents for 1958, which would give Chile an increase of about $30 million in dollar earnings. In addition, there remains the $6 million undrawn under the standby for the first quarter of 1959. Then further resources of $12.5 million may be available from the IMF and the private U.S. banks, if the Chileans reach agreement with the IMF on renewal of the standby. Therefore, Chile will have available in 1959 in additional foreign finances about the equivalent of the balance of payments loans made to the previous Government in 1958. Foreign debt

Chile 257 CH–18. Letter from President Eisenhower to President Alessandri1 Washington, February 28, 1959. Dear Mr. President: Ambassador Muller has handed me your letter of January ­thirtieth,2 which I have read with great interest and sympathy. I appreciate the seriousness and extent of the economic and fiscal problems confronting you. It is gratifying to note that in facing up to these problems you attach great importance to a free enterprise system and monetary stability in your plans for Chile’s future. Surely these concepts must be the basis of any economic program which holds promise of realizing the better life, in freedom, that we earnestly desire for our peoples. In particular, I am convinced that in Chile, as in many other developing countries, a successful attack on the causes of inflation is essential to steady economic growth. It is not surprising that the Communists are seeking to create difficulties for your program. Since these men abhor freedom, they will surely endeavor to thwart the efforts of the Chilean people to achieve that full spiritual and material life which can only be realized in a free society. You are to be congratulated, Mr. President, on the effective steps you have taken to inform the people of Chile of the high purposes of your program. I am confident the Chilean people, whose fine qualities and dedication to democracy are so rightly admired, will support your enlightened and courageous efforts in their behalf. I am sure that you are fully aware of the economic assistance extended to Chile by the United States in the past. I am taking steps to see that the economic problems you outline in your letter are brought to the attention of the appropriate officials of this government who will be glad to discuss sympathetically with your officials mutual problems of economic and financial interest. I deeply appreciate the confidence you have demonstrated in providing me with the full and candid exposition of Chile’s problems which your letter contains. Please be assured, Mr. President, that I will follow closely your efforts to bring stability and prosperity to Chile, for these objectives are important to the people of the United States. With expression of my high esteem, Sincerely, Dwight D. Eisenhower 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.” 2 See Document CH–16.

Chile 259 economic development purposes provided this can be utilized in a non-­ inflationary manner. This is where the U.S. agencies come in. The U. S. team has had four three-­hour meetings with Figueroa, and at least one more meeting will take place. Besides the $50 million loan Chile will seek from the New York banks (in addition to the $25.3 ­million roll-­ over for the new stand-­by fund), Chile wants $50 ­million from us to cover the balance of an anticipated unfinanced budget deficit of $100 million. We believe that the Chileans have not been entirely realistic in assessing their financial prospects, particularly in respect of their balance of payments position and the inflationary impact the budget deficit would have even if it is financed by borrowing from abroad. We believe, however, that our analysis of the financial situation has been useful to the Chileans and may help to persuade them that a somewhat smaller amount of aid in 1959 will meet their immediate needs and ease the transition to 1960, when they propose to balance their budget without foreign aid. Nevertheless, both IMF and U.S. representatives recognize the desirability of helping President Alessandri to cope with his delicate internal political situation. We realize that the extension of the aid they are seeking involves the calculated risk that it may not cure the inflationary problem, but this appears to be less than the risk involved in doing nothing for Alessandri. The U.S. team is awaiting additional data promised by Figueroa which should enable us to determine just how much assistance we might feasibly give and for which purposes. Between the regular and supplementary budgets, we might be able to pick up about $25–26 million representing proposed imports of capital goods which could be eligible for Eximbank financing. It seems likely that Mr. Waugh’s high opinion of Figueroa will be translated into practical terms. Summary of Possible Package3 (in $ millions) 1. Stand-­by assistance

Chile 261 excise tax. Actually, in terms of assuring an adequate supply of copper, this would make a good deal of economic sense, and it undoubtedly would be highly agreeable to the Chileans. Unfortunately, industry opinion in the U.S. (including the brass industry) has not sufficiently jelled in favor of again removing the excise tax, and there is no common sentiment among the various interested U.S. agencies. Also, the interests and responsibilities of the agencies which might wish to see the excise tax removed do not necessarily coincide with those of OCDM, which is concerned primarily with the disposal of surplus stocks per se. We will be in touch with you as soon as anything new develops on this subject. In the meantime, the Embassy might wish to give some thought to the ways in which we might seek to avoid any injury to Chile or any undue strain on our good relations in the event the OCDM proposal materializes. I enclose some press items on the copper situation4 which you might find of interest. Sincerely, Robert M. Phillips 4 Not printed. CH–21. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, April 22, 1959. SUBJECT Disposal of D.P.A. Inventories of Copper Recommended Position It is recommended that in the Cabinet discussion on this subject you take the following position, which is consistent with positions already taken at the working level: 1. The Department fully appreciates the desire of the OCDM to dispose of the copper held in D.P.A. inventories, and will be glad to

Chile 263 pushed through a resolution saying that the release of any part of any Governmental inventories of copper at this time would cause “incalculable damage” to the security and well-­being of the country. The OCDM, and particularly Mr. Price, have been under sharp criticism in the trade press and in the Senate. The Senators have asked for public assurances that the D.P.A. copper would not be sold. The Labor Department probably has reason to oppose the action at this time, because the copper mining companies are in the early stages of wage negotiations which may lead to extensive strikes. A disposal of Government holdings of copper at any time prior to the final settlement of the wage negotiations and the conclusion of a new wage agreement would probably be regarded by labor as a strike-­breaking measure. On the other hand if there should be strikes and if the OCDM should wait until after a new wage agreement had been concluded it might well be possible to dispose of the D.P.A. inventories of copper at favorable prices and without incurring serious objections. Copper is the mainstay of the Chilean economy, accounting normally for 60 to 70 percent of the country’s hard currency earnings. Any move on the part of the United States Government which had the effect of pushing copper prices down seriously would be considered an unfriendly action by the Chilean Government and people. Chilean sensitivity in this regard was dramatically demonstrated last year when President Ibanez cancelled his impending state visit to the United States immediately after it was announced that our Administration favored action by the Congress to advance the date for lifting the suspension of the copper excise tax. Copper is of importance also, in lesser degrees, to Peru, Mexico, and Canada. These countries, especially Peru, have protested our imposition of import quotas on lead and zinc, and they would undoubtedly protest disposals of copper at this time. CH–22. Editorial Note

Chile 265 Castro’s arrival, as whatever invitations had been issued to the Cubans had come purely from individuals representing opposition political groups and the Cubans themselves had never even visited the Chilean Embassy in Habana to learn whether the visit would be acceptable to the Government. In sum, the President thought the Cubans had lost a great deal of prestige by the manner in which they had behaved and had only succeeded in making themselves ridiculous. The Secretary again complimented the President on the way in which the Chilean Government had handled this potentially difficult situation, which was strictly in accord with Chilean laws and regulations and to which nobody could have valid objection. The President then continued that his government was grateful for the financial assistance received from the United States through the series of credits which were recently approved and emphasized that the present administration was a responsible one, seriously concerned with putting Chile’s financial house in order and establishing its economy on a firm basis for growth. Here Mr. Rubottom mentioned the general respect in which the present Government of Chile was held in the United States and added that he ventured to feel that Chile was not alone in showing this sense of financial responsibility, mentioning specifically the efforts being made by President Frondizi to improve the situation in Argentina, and the program just now being developed by Sr. Beltrán, the new Prime Minister and Minister of Finance of Peru. The President agreed that these developments were all encouraging and mentioned that Sr. Beltrán had been following closely for the past eight months the development of the program in Chile and had indicated that it would have a strong influence on his own plans for Peru. The President went on to say that he felt that the International Monetary Fund needed to show more flexibility in dealing with the problems of the underdeveloped countries of Latin America. He emphasized that, while Chile was perfectly satisfied with the treatment it had received, in his opinion it was not necessarily sound policy to apply the same type of rules which might be applicable to the highly developed countries of Western Europe to the nations of Latin America, and that, unfortunately, this alleged rigidity of the IMF often resulted in the United States bearing the brunt of the criticism. The Secretary then pointed out that, as the President knew, the United States did not control the IMF but that we felt it was important to work through and in close consultation with it and the other international lending agencies. The President replied that he of course did realize that the IMF was an international and not a United States agency, but, nevertheless, the fact remained that the United States was often blamed for policies which, in his opinion, were frequently too inflexible. He then went on to say

Chile 267 CH–24. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Chilean Affairs (Phillips)1 Washington, October 23, 1959. SUBJECT Communist Chinese Offer to Buy Copper from Chile PARTICIPANTS Assistant Secretary Rubottom, ARA Chilean Ambassador Walter Muller Mr. Jorge Burr, Minister-Counselor, Chilean Embassy Captain Jorge Swett, Naval Attaché, Chilean Embassy Robert M. Phillips, WST Mr. Rubottom said we had been greatly concerned to learn from our Embassy in Santiago that Chile had received an offer from the Chinese Communists to buy 50,000 tons of copper wire and sheets and that the Chilean Government was thinking of permitting the sale of as much as 30,000 tons. Although the U.S. Government would not make formal objection to the proposed transaction, we believed Chile should be concerned with the impression likely to be created in the U.S. and other countries by the magnitude of this sale to the Chinese Communists. We were particularly disturbed to see Chile become apparently the primary target of Chinese Communist overtures in Latin America, and we considered that this might have serious political implications for Chile’s relations with the U.S. and other countries of the hemisphere. Ambassador Muller said this was the first he had heard of this development and that he, too, was concerned over it. Nevertheless, he hoped we understood that the Government was facing a difficult internal political situation and could not afford to risk criticism that it was obstructing commercial transactions for political reasons. The Government was very much concerned with developing markets for Chile’s exports, and it realized that the presently favorable copper market would not last too long. In fact, in recent conversations with the New York representatives of the copper companies operating in Chile, the Ambassador had been given to understand that world production of copper next year would exceed demand by approximately 10%. It was for this reason that Chile was particularly interested in finding new markets for its copper. Mr. Phillips said that, following the removal last year of strategic controls on copper, Communist China had been able to get all

Chile 269 unique in its flagrant disregard of the principles of the United Nations, as most recently demonstrated by its actions in Tibet and other places. A particularly sensitive aspect of the proposed transaction, Mr. Rubottom continued, was that our Export-Import Bank now had under consideration loan applications submitted by two of the three copper fabricating firms in Chile, and we understood that these firms would expect to participate in this sale. We hoped the Chilean Government would understand that it could be extremely embarrassing to all concerned if it became known that an agency of the U.S. Government was considering lending money to a foreign firm which would use U.S. funds to develop facilities for trading with Communist China while U.S firms are forbidden by law to engage in such trade.3 Mr. Phillips asked the Ambassador whether he had seen a study on copper prepared by W.R. Grace & Co. which was fairly optimistic concerning copper’s prospects over the next few years. The Ambassador said he knew of this study and hoped its optimism would prove to be justified, but the Chilean Government was worried primarily by the probability of a weak copper market in the particular year 1960. (Mr. Burr called Mr. Phillips at home the morning of October 24, saying that he wished to verify one point in yesterday’s conversation before reporting by cable to the Chilean Foreign Ministry. The Embassy was particularly interested in knowing just how much copper the U.S. Government thought Chile might reasonably sell to Communist China if it did not sell the proposed 30,000 tons. Mr. Phillips said he thought that no official of the U.S. Government could or should attempt to set a quota for Chile’s possible copper sales to Communist China. The Department had no intention of reopening the question of international strategic controls on copper. The issue posed by the Chinese Communist offer we considered to be a political one, and, in this context, we hoped the Chilean Government realized that the less business it did with Communist China the better.) (At a luncheon on October 26, Ambassador Muller told Mr. Rubottom that the Chilean Embassy had been instructed to inform us that we had nothing to worry about regarding the proposed sale. The Chilean Government intended to find the means of frustrating the proposed sale and was only concerned with doing this in a way which would not involve it in internal political difficulties or make it appear that the Government had acted under U.S. pressure. Mr. Burr also confirmed this in a later conversation with Mr. Phillips.) 3 The Department subsequently informed the Export Import Bank that it saw no objections to approval of the loans to the copper fabricators. (Memorandum from Phillips

Chile 271 4) liberalize foreign trade (eliminated lists of prohibited imports, maintained a steady exchange rate, increased general confidence in the economic future of the country, and announced plans for the reform of the customs structure); 5) obtain foreign loans and aid (mostly from the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany). The Government has also initiated much needed steps to improve the efficiency of Chile’s agriculture, to stimulate the construction of low-­cost housing, and has announced plans for development of the country’s transportation, electric power and steel industries. Plans are also under way to reorganize many government organizations, including the expensive and often mismanaged social security system. WST Comment: The air of confidence which Alessandri has managed to inspire cannot last indefinitely if his administration fails to deal more effectively with the continuing increase in the cost of living (up 36.9% in ten

Chile 273 as Chairman of the Sub-­committee on Latin American Affairs and as an influential member of the Senate, would do what he could to press this point of view and to assist in giving leadership to a movement towards a sensible approach to the whole arms question. Senator Morse replied that as he had already indicated in congratulating the President on his remarks to the press, he shared to a very large extent the views expressed by the President and that he knew also that among his colleagues there were many who were seeking ways to lessen the burden of armaments. Senator Morse then said that he would be very happy to have any views that might be helpful to him and to the Committee relating to economic problems or the economic development of Chile. The President replied at some length by retracing the pattern of foreign credits over the past forty years. In doing this he emphasized points that he has frequently made in the past, that up until the depression of the early 1930s Chile, along with other Latin American countries, was able to go into the foreign financial market, first in England, later in the United States, and borrow money on long term for public works and other necessary development projects. He said that it was important to remember that in this earlier period such funds had not only been available to defray the cost of imported equipment but had also been available for conversion into local currency which could be applied against local costs of development projects. With the depression this private foreign financing had largely dried up. In its place various forms of financing had arisen, first through such agencies as the Export Import Bank and later the IMF or IBRD. While such agencies had made many useful loans, those credits did not provide the same flexibility, particularly for public works and the development of the economic infrastructure of an underdeveloped country. In certain cases they were limited to covering the foreign currency costs of a project, making no provision for local currency expenses. In other cases they were directed towards or limited to specific objectives, again leaving the recipient governments without the needed degree of flexibility. The President continued that he admitted frankly that in Chile, as well as in certain other countries, what he regarded as faulty domestic policy had also limited the necessary growth of the fundamental economic infra-­ structure. Specifically he said that the mistaken policy of proceeding governments in going into fields which could better have been left to development of private enterprise and private capital had had a doubly unfortunate effort. First, frequently foreign credits had been obtained for such projects and had been in effect mortgaging an important part of the financial resources of the government. Thus the servicing of these credits had limited the potential foreign credits available for development in other fields; and second, the same policies had forced

Chile 275 Hence he felt it important that in addition to making credit available directly to the governments, such lending agencies should be sympathetic to the sound needs and requirements of private individuals or companies for assistance. The President replied immediately that he did, of course, fully agree and actually in the case of Chile there had been just such experience. He mentioned specifically the $20,000,000 credit provided by the IBRD to his own former company, Papeles y Catones, for the construction of a newsprint and celulose plant. He said that during the preceding administrations there had been much pressure from the government to have this credit granted to CORFO, the government development agency, but that the World Bank had insisted on making the loan directly to the private company. The President added that the Eximbank also had made a number of useful loans to private companies in Chile, both foreign and local. Senator Morse then said that in his own behalf and in behalf of Mr. Holt he wished to express his gratitude for the time the President had been kind enough to give to this interview; that he felt he had learned much and was happy to find that the President’s views coincided to such a marked decree with his own. In closing he said he also wished to tell the President how very helpful the Chilean Embassy in Washington had been to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and to assure the President of the high opinion which he and his colleagues on the Committee had of Chile. The President thanked Senator Morse; that he was glad to have his expression of appreciation for the helpfulness of the Chilean Embassy in Washington which he assured him had the full confidence of the government here. He also expressed his appreciation for the understanding and helpfulness of the United States Embassy in Chile with relation to the problems of his government. In departing Senator Morse said that, as a former professor, he had been privileged to attend as a student a most useful seminar, and congratulated the President on his helpful presentation of some of the problems facing his government.

Chile 277 endeavor to enhance its prestige by having President EISENHOWER visit Chile and inviting President Alessandri to visit the United States. We should make it clear that we approve of the constructive steps which the government has taken to cope with Chile’s problems. At the same time, we must recognize that the political pendulum has swung as far to the right in Chile as it is likely to go, and that the return swing is likely to be evidenced in the Congressional elections in 1961 and in the Presidential election of 1964. We must therefore also maintain good working relations with the non-Communist parties of the Chilean center and left and make-­every effort to clear up the misapprehensions which cloud their understanding of the policy and which cause them to fail to see that the interests of Chile and the United States are basically in harmony, not in conflict. In the economic field, our course is not difficult to state though it may be difficult to carry out in practice. We must encourage by every legitimate means constructive action by the Alessandri Administration to check inflation and provide a sound foundation for the country’s economic growth. At the same time, it would be an error to forget the political requirements of the Administration, and it would be self-­ defeating to insist on perfection overnight. Alessandri was elected with less than one-­third of the popular vote: his support in the Congress is based upon a delicately-­balanced coalition which may disintegrate if the political sensitivities of the various parties are not continuously considered by the Administration in designing its program. These factors cannot be overlooked by the United States when we measure the effectiveness of Alessandri’s programs and accomplishments. To stint in our support because of Alessandri’s failure to achieve the ideal in his first year in office might lead to even, less satisfactory progress in achieving stability politically; the alternatives would certainly be less attractive from our point of view and less in line with United States interests. We should therefore lend such aid as we properly can to stabilize the economy, and we should adopt a sympathetic attitude toward requests for financial assistance designed to further the sound economic growth of the country. Our technical cooperation program should be carefully examined to eliminate what is less productive and emphasize its most useful features. For the present, major emphasis should be placed on the expansion of agricultural production and on the stimulation of foreign and local investment in Chilean private enterprise, including the private housing industry. At the same time, it may be desirable to provide limited amounts of special assistance, probably in the form of equipment, where it appears that a small investment will

Chile 279 In these circumstances, the Embassy is unable to recommend that the MAP Program here be discontinued and, in fact, hopes that forward planning will become more definite so as to give the Chileans reasonable assurance as to what they may expect to receive from us during the next five years. As in the case of the technical cooperation program, a more thorough discussion of the Military Assistance Program may be

Chile 281 CH–29. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of Embassy in Chile (Krieg)1 Santiago, February 19, 1960. US/MC/25 SUBJECT Disarmament and Rearmament PARTICIPANTS

Chile 283 what portion of the Chilean budget was devoted to defense? President Alessandri replied that it was 14% and went on to say that he would suggest to the department conference that the definition of military expense be unified since many other countries currently hid military items in their budgets so as to disguise their expenditures. Chile had not only done this, but he had put an end to this practice when he was Minister of Finance several years ago. President Eisenhower replied that exclusive of pensions and payments to veterans, the United States spends 56% of its budget on national defense. The President hastened to add that he did not say this in a bragging way but merely to indicate how very sympathetic he was to President Alessandri’s objectives. President Alessandri suggested that the problem of armaments be viewed as a problem of protesting the rear guard of the United States. He also expressed the thought that funds saved from armaments could be used for economic development and that this would help to combat Communism. President Eisenhower said that he fully agreed and asked what effect the success of the disarmament conference would have on Chile’s intention to purchase more naval vessels. President Alessandri replied that Chile’s desire to acquire additional vessels was a result of recent purchases by the Peruvians. President Eisenhower repeated his question about the effect of a successful disarmament conference on Chile’s desire to purchase naval vessels, and President Alessandri replied that it would have a direct effect. President Alessandri went on to say that when he came to power he was under great pressure to acquire additional armaments because of incidents with Argentina in disputed areas. President Eisenhower said he would like to take that opportunity to comment on his meetings with the Presidents of Brazil and Argentina. The President said that while they had been less emphatic than Alessandri, he was convinced that both were sincere in their desire for disarmament. Both had stressed their devotion to inter-American friendship, and Frondizi had specifically expressed the hope that the boundary disputes with Chile would soon be settled. While it was true that Frondizi had wanted more modern arms, his purpose in so doing was to reduce his defense expenses in half by having smaller, more efficient forces. President Eisenhower then said he would like to come to the second of his two questions. He asked President Alessandri whether the latter believed that each nation had a right to decide its own level of defense for internal and basic defensive purposes. President Alessandri replied that each nation did indeed have the right to decide on its basic defensive requirements, but he saw this as no bar to mutual agreements for the limitation of armaments. He stressed that Chile was exceptionally

Chile 285 The President said that the United States supported the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Export- Import Bank, and other lending institutions and that he did not think the IADB would replace or duplicate them. His objective was to complement not to replace. President Eisenhower added that he felt the Latin American countries would feel a greater sense of responsibility because of the fact that their own monetary contributions formed part of the bank’s capital. President Alessandri then referred to Communist propaganda to the effect that the United States provided aid to Latin America exclusively for selfish motives and suggested that our aid be coordinated into a basic plan to overcome the charge that the United States neglects Latin America. A little later in the conversation President Alessandri repeated this suggestion and urged that a development plan to be carried out within a certain number of years be drawn up. He felt such coordination would make the plan better known, and recommended that the Department of State should answer charges made against the United States and conduct a vigorous campaign of counter-­propaganda. President Eisenhower said that he hoped the Chilean Foreign Office would do the same. President Alessandri said they would but that the Communists poured a great deal of money into Latin America. President Eisenhower said jokingly he assumed that President Alessandri was not suggesting that the United States buy a newspaper in Santiago and turn it into an official U.S. propaganda organ. President Alessandri laughed and said that of course such was not his intention. Copper President Alessandri spoke briefly of the importance of copper to Chile as a source of employment and as a source of revenue for the government. He said there are two things connected with the U.S. policy which concerned him: the first was the United States excise tax on imported copper of 1.7 cents per pound, and the second was the possibility that our copper stockpile might be liquidated, thus causing a disastrous break in world copper prices. He said he hoped the tax would be removed and that we would not liquidate the stockpile. President Eisenhower said he did not know about the copper tax and glanced at Secretary Herter and Mr. Rubottom who confirmed the existence of such a tax. The President said he did not know what the current situation was, that things were generally better and perhaps the tax was no longer needed. In any case, the President said he would have that matter looked into.

Chile 287 CH–31. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of the Office of East Coast Affairs (Briggs)1 Santiago, March 1, 1960. US/MC/14 PARTICIPANTS

Chile 289 U.S. legislation, saying that with these two destroyers the position of the GOC vis-­a-­vis its armed forces would be much improved and that, therefore, U.S. assistances in obtaining these two destroyers and the one submarine still lacking is grandly desired. Mr. Rubottom replied that our whole approach to inter-American military cooperation has been based on our support of hemispheric defense and not on bilateral problems between countries. With respect to the specific items mentioned by the Minister of Defense, the Chilean Ambassador in Washington has made this point well on several occasions, he continued. Nevertheless, Mr. Rubottom added, we have a difficult budgetary problem and also the matter of Congressional interest in and attention to hemispheric military affairs, which seems likely to increase and which at times virtually ties the hands of the Department. Moreover, he went on, the naval legislation of 1958 had originally provided for the recipient nations to pay for the rehabilitation of the naval vessels involved, but the Department, feeling that such rehabilitation costs would be a burden to Latin American countries, had asked the Congress for authorization to assure responsibility for these rehabilitation costs ourselves. This attempt to be generous has, in effect, delayed implementation of the program in Latin America for almost two years. With respect to the credit to Argentina for military purchases,

Chile 291 nor its Congress will take any unilateral action which might affect Cuba’s interests. This is manifestly impossible, given the independence of the Legislative Branch under our governmental system. Moreover, our sugar legislation expires this year and even should the Congress renew the sugar legislation in its present form, this would be definable as a unilateral act affecting Cuba’s interests. The Secretary noted that a good deal of opinion is arising in the United States to the effect that some action is needed with respect to Cuba. One suggestion which seems to be gaining ground is that we buy Cuban sugar at the world market price and put the difference between that price and the price paid to Cuba under the quota system in escrow to be used to pay damages for expropriation or other actions of the GOC against United States interests in Cuba. The problem of the moment, however, the Secretary went on, is the question of whether to send our Ambassador back to Havana or to keep him in Washington. There are pros as well as cons on this question. Those who advocate the Ambassador’s return say that he is needed in Havana in order to provide access to Castro and thus to enable us to have official contact with him. On the other hand, however, the Ambassador has often had to wait for three weeks or longer to see Castro and has on occasion had great difficulty in seeing him at all. The Secretary emphasized that we do not consider the Cuban problem as peculiar to the United States but feel that it is a Latin American problem, inasmuch as the Castro mystique is beginning to appear in other countries. Feeling, therefore, that this is a Latin American problem, we would like to consult thereon in order to insure that in dealing with it we avoid mistakes which might affect the interests of other American countries, the Secretary added. He mentioned parenthetically that the status of the Guantanamo Naval Base has not been raised at any time by the GOC. The Foreign Minister replied that President Alessandri’s sympathy for the United States position in the Cuban situation was shown by his recent statement to Senator Smathers, when the latter asked what the Chilean attitude would be if the United States Congress should take strong action against Cuba. In order to give President Alessandri a moment to collect his thoughts and reply to this unexpected question, the Foreign Minister said, he himself had asked the Senator what such action would be and what economic effects would be anticipated therefrom. Before the Senator could answer, President Alessandri had said: “All of our sympathies and those of most of the officials of the Government of Chile are with the United States Government, because we understand the damage which United States interests and the United States itself have suffered in Cuba; but there is a great mass in this country and that mass is more numerous than we are.” The Foreign Minister went on to explain that by this comment the President had

Chile 293 that large releases from the stockpile are under consideration or about to take place with little or no notice. The President stated he would like you to make it known within the Administration and specifically to OCDM, that the whole spirit and intent of our stockpile laws is to provide for the use of these materials for emergency purposes only. While an emergency of a severe character in the economic field might occur which would be of the same seriousness as war itself, and thereby justify releases, it is not his intent to release materials from the stockpile with the purpose of influencing the market through the normal, commercial effect of such releases. A.J. Goodpaster Brigadier General, USA Staff Secretary CH–34. Memorandum from the Officer in Charge of Chilean Affairs (Phillips) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, May 2, 1960. SUBJECT Balance Sheet on Chile With reference to the note you attached to our memo of April 19, following is a brief compilation of what the U.S. and Chile want from each other. Chile wants: 1. Credit to cover cost of rehabilitating vessels earmarked for Chile under ship loan program. 2. Economic development loans far (1) construction of Pudahuel airport, (2) termination of construction of University of Chile Medical School, and (3) survey of natural resources, particularly ground waters. 3. A new PL-480 sales agreement, with local currency loan funds to be earmarked for financing a savings and loan system to stimulate housing construction.

Chile 295 In the course of President Eisenhower’s February 29, 1960 conversation with President Alessandri, the latter expressed the hope that the United States copper excise tax would be removed. President Eisenhower said he would have the matter looked into. Following careful examination of this problem by interested agencies of the United States Government, the Embassy is requested to inform the Chilean Government that removal of the tax does not appear to be practicable at this time, for the reasons set forth below. Suspension or removal of the copper tax could be effected only through legislation. Legislation was passed suspending the tax continually from April 1947 through June 1958, with the exception of a brief interval in 1950–51. These prior suspensions of the tax were enacted at times when copper was in short supply, a situation which does not now prevail. The present tax is 1.7 cents per pound so long as the United States price remains at or above 24 cents per pound. At prices below 24 cents, the so-­called “snap back” point, the tax becomes 2 cents. The current United States market price for copper is 33 cents per pound, making the ad valorem equivalent of the existing tax only about 5 percent. It is felt that this tax has little restrictive effect at present and that the Chileans have virtually full access to the United States market. Indeed, a substantial part of total copper imports from Chile is reexported after processing, and is therefore not subject to the tax. The present copper market is thin and it seems probable that the price will fall in the months just ahead. Removal of the tax might accentuate the downward pressure on the United States copper price and thus possibly cancel out any benefit which Chile might expect to derive from suspension or removal. The present session of Congress might be an especially inappropriate occasion to seek suspension or removal of the copper tax. It will probably be a short session and the calendar is unusually crowded with items which would take precedence over copper legislation. There is sentiment in certain segments of the domestic copper producing industry in favor of raising the level of the present tax on copper or the “snap back” price or both. This sentiment is reflected in the attitudes of some members of Congress. If repeal or suspension were recommended to Congress it is possible that Congressional action, if any, would bring about a situation less satisfactory than the present one. The copper situation is, of course, being closely and continuously studied by all interested agencies of the United States Government, and, should future circumstances appear to favor a removal of the copper excise tax, the Administration would be prepared to consider supporting an appropriate measure for this purpose. The United States Government wishes to reiterate its willingness to discuss with the Chilean Government any problem which might affect a commodity of such importance to Chile as copper.

Chile 297 that I convey his assurance of sympathetic support for President Eisenhower in the difficult situation which he confronted at the Paris meetings. The President went on to say that while the world situation was grave and the attitude of Khrushchev at Paris a cause for concern, he personally was not surprised, as Khrushchev’s attitude was just such as might be expected from one of his background, which Alessandri compared to the background and attitude of many members of the local opposition to his government here in Chile, with the common traits of irresponsibility and demagoguery. He emphasized the increasing danger of Communism in Latin America and said that no doubt the Communists would exploit the current increase of world tensions to serve their own ends here and in this continent. Using these objectives and tactics of the opposition as a transition from world affairs to his own problems in Chile, the President mentioned the current situation relating to the wage and salary readjustment and his determination to explain it in the bluntest terms to the Congress in the course of his address this week. He blamed these difficulties primarily on petty political maneuvering within and among the various political parties, pointing out that with the congressional elections coming early next year many, if not all of the parties, were focusing their attention more on those elections than on the needs and welfare of the country. [text not declassified] He said that his failure to present to the Congress an administration-­sponsored project for wage readjustment during the early months of the year was due entirely to the fact that at no time had he been able to get sufficiently clear assurance of support from the Radicals to provide such a project with a reasonable guarantee of congressional approval. He said further that in recent weeks the attitude of the Radical Party had further deteriorated. Its official leadership continued to recognize the basic validity of the government’s position and to be in general accord with its stability program. Due to the approach of congressional elections, the leadership was under more and more pressure from elements within its own party and less willing or able to offer the administration the support which it requires. I remarked that I supposed that the Radicals, along with other parties, would have their own proposals relating to wage readjustments to introduce into the next Congress, after the 21st; the President replied, of course, there would be many, but stated with great vehemence that as long as he had the support of one-­third of the membership of either Chamber he would veto and continue to veto any wage proposal that would endanger the government’s stabilization program.

Chile 299 America. He emphasized again that there was a critical need for more capital from abroad that could be converted into local currency for public works, both to finance the urgently needed public works themselves and to take up slack in the employment without which it would be increasingly difficult to hold the Communists in check and for governments such as his to succeed in their program. He mentioned also that such foreign credits, that could be converted into local currency, would also be of great assistance to the United States in making available more dollars to Chile and, by implication, her neighbors, which could be used for imports from the United States, and thus help to relieve our own current export problem. When the President ended his comments on this topic I remarked that from recent conversations with Pablo Pérez, Minister of Public Works, and Roberto Vergara, Minister of Finance, I understood that the government was currently working on a program of public works, particularly in the fields of roads and irrigation. I said that I had expressed to both Ministers the hope that when they had their programs sufficiently developed they would make them available to us so that both the Embassy and our technical assistance people would have an opportunity to study them prior to any actual application being made to one of the international or U.S. lending agencies. The President then returned to the international situation, repeating that he felt that the current crisis would be fully exploited by Communists in Latin America as well as other parts of the world. He expressed the view that Khrushchev’s belligerent attitude was determined at least in part by growing differences between Russia and Communist China. Indicating that as between the two he felt that Russia constituted the greater threat to the free world, he expressed the wish that the United States could find it possible to follow a more flexible policy with relation to Communist China, both in order to relax tension with Communist China and with the idea of increasing the tension between Russia and China. He said that information coming to him from non-Communist visitors to China suggested that Chinese Communism was different from Russian Communism in that many Communist enterprises were apparently conducted through a mixed form of public and private ownership. (Comment: While the sources of President Alessandri on this subject are not fully known, it is quite possible that he may have been influenced by conversations with recent non-Communist Chilean visitors to China, including Liberal Deputy Jorge Errázuriz, Juan Gómez Millas, Director of the University of Chile, Francis Walker Linares, Director of Cultural Exchange activities.) I expressed some surprise at this, saying that while I certainly did not claim to be a student of that area, my understanding was that, if anything, Russia showed some signs of emerging from the primitive

Chile 301 in conjunction with the hospitals and to carry supplies to otherwise inaccessible areas. From the Canal Zone and the U.S., we have airlifted communications equipment and technicians, as well as large quantities of tents, blankets, cots, field rations, and medicines. Those expenses of emergency relief operations chargeable to the ICA contingency fund are expected to amount to approximately $2.5 million. This represents the cost of supplies and transportation but does not include the pay and allowances of personnel involved. Of course, your own direct appeal to the American people to help Chile has had a dramatic impact both here and in Chile.3 U.S. voluntary private agencies, as well as firms and individuals, are making generous contributions in cash and kind to Chilean disaster relief. The American National Red Cross is organizing a major campaign which should raise millions of dollars. Taking into account the sum total of foreign contributions and the efforts of the Chileans themselves, there appears to be no need for any substantial new emergency assistance from the U.S. Government. Even before the emergency relief operation is completed, we expect to devote urgent attention to Chile’s reconstruction requirements. Our Embassy in Santiago will soon be sending us a communication outlining the Chilean Government’s general policy and tentative action plan for reconstruction. On the basis of this communication, we hope soon to be able to make specific recommendations for courses of action by the U.S. Government. In the meantime, the Export-Import Bank has made available a $10 million dollar reconstruction credit.4 Douglas Dillon 3 For text of President Eisenhower’s statement, see Eisenhower, Public Papers of the

Chile 303 which the United States might supply and that the United States might also send Naval ships whose generating plants could supply power to coastal towns whose plants had had been damaged. The Ambassador did not indicate any need for the ships’ power plants, and said that, with the availability of the two American field hospitals for the immediate emergency, Chile had no serious shortage of doctors and nurses. The President said he had been thinking that it might be useful for the two Governments to form a group to study the problem of Chilean reconstruction. He said that possibly Ambassador Donnelly or Dr. Milton Eisenhower might work with two or three Chilean representatives. The Ambassador did not respond to this suggestion when made, but after leaving the White House told an officer of the Department he would be very much in favor of implementing the President’s suggestion. He said he would recommend that his Government, after the President had returned from his Far Eastern Trip,2 ask the President to send a personal representative to Chile to assist in studying the reconstruction problem. In response to the President’s question the Ambassador said his Government estimated the total reconstruction costs at about $500 million, equivalent to more than 50% of the Government’s budget. He said

Chile 305 CH–40. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Chilean Affairs (Phillips)1 Washington, September 2, 1960. SUBJECT United States Assistance to Chile PARTICIPANTS President Eisenhower Chilean Ambassador Walter Muller Lt. Col. John Eisenhower Robert M. Phillips, ARA/WST Ambassador Muller said he knew the President was extremely busy and had many preoccupations, but he thought that the President might want to hear something nice and which would not require any action. President Alessandri had asked the Ambassador to deliver a personal letter thanking President Eisenhower, the United States Government and people for the generous assistance given to Chile following the recent earthquakes. With the President’s permission, the Ambassador read aloud the text of President Alessandri’s letter, as follows [in translation prepared by the Chilean Embassy]. “Distinguished President and friend: “I have the honor to address Your Excellency, interpreting the feelings of deep gratitude of the people and of the Government of Chile, for the generous assistance of that sister nation in the sad emergency produced by the recent seismic disturbances, tidal waves and volcanic eruptions, which have caused deaths and material damages of extraordinary gravity in vast areas of Chilean territory. “The moral solidarity of your great republic, at a particularly difficult moment of Chilean history, reaffirms our faith in an authentic union among peoples, that will bring realization to the hope for the construction of a better world. “The very valuable material cooperation that the Government and the people of the United States has given us, has helped effectively to take care of the most urgent needs of the victims of the catastrophe and to then undertake the hard task of reconstruction of the devastated zones. “Accept, Excellency, the most sincere thanks of the Government and the people of Chile for the very noble attitude of the Government and people of the United States of America, together with the expression of my profound personal gratitude and of my very highest esteem and friendship. 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Official Use Only.

Chile 307 Heretofore practically all assistance had been given on a project basis and often did not reach a large part of the people. While the project approach would continue to be a useful device, it was most gratifying to know that assistance could now be given in such important sectors as housing, agrarian reform, public health, schools, etc. The President said he thought this type of program was the best answer we could make to the aggressive tactics of international Communism, and the Ambassador agreed. CH–41. Editorial Note October 28, 1960 By an exchange of notes at Santiago, October 28, 1960, entered into force on the same date, representatives of the United States and Chile signed an agreement providing for a grant of funds to Chile for purpose of disaster rehabilitation. For text of the agreement, see 11 UST

Colombia: U.S. Relations with Colombia CO–1. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot)1,2 Bogotá, January 16, 1958. PARTICIPANTS The Minister of Government, Brigadier General Pioquinto RENGIFO The American Ambassador, John M. Cabot General RENGIFO assumed office on January 8, and I today called on him at my request in order primarily to discuss the question of the closed Protestant churches. General Rengifo had been Governor of Antioquia at the time that I had accompanied Dr. Milton Eisenhower on his mission around South America,3 and we therefore briefly exchanged reminiscences. I then said to General Rengifo that he doubtless knew that the subject I had come to discuss was the question of the Protestant churches of Colombia. This was a matter which was of great interest to millions of Protestants in the United States since they had sent money for the construction of many of these chapels, and other contributions, and many had American pastors or other American connections. For decades the Protestant churches had existed in Colombia without any serious ­trouble - indeed, the Presbyterians had been invited by the Government

Colombia 309 to come to Colombia 100 years ago. In the last ten years they had had mounting difficulties which had culminated under the Rojas Pinilla administration. I had not heretofore pressed this matter due to the many other serious problems facing the Government, and Villarreal’s resignation, but now that the Government had a legal mandate from the people it seemed an appropriate time to move ahead. I mentioned the assurances I had been given since arriving here and described my conversations with Minister Villarreal. With regard to the circular which the latter had sent to the respective Governors in September as a result of my intercession, I said that I understood that at least some favorable replies had been received. I said there were two phases to the question. In some cases the Protestant churches had been closed in the so-­called mission territories. The Colombian Government had alleged that Protestant churches were forbidden in these territories under the terms of its agreements with the Vatican. On the other hand, there were a number of churches which had been closed outside the mission territories where no legal authority seemed to exist except the arbitrary fiat of the Government. I gently emphasized how arbitrary the attitude of the Rojas Pinilla administration had been in this regard, since General Rengifo had mentioned earlier that he had been “out of grace” with that administration. I said that we hoped that these churches at least could be opened as a starter. General Rengifo asked if we had a list of them available, and I handed him a copy of our Note of August 6, 1957, with this list. I said we recognized that this was a delicate matter and that a gradual approach might be better than a drastic one. I did want to say, however, that while we felt that the case was clear in regard to the churches in non-­mission territory we hoped that in due course the churches in mission territory could also be reopened. Although the Rojas administration had claimed that the agreements with the Vatican precluded Protestant churches, the text of the agreements did not bear this out, and the Nuncio had informed the Embassy that he did not so interpret them. I said that so far as I knew, although some parish priests and a few bishops were against the reopening of the Protestant churches, I had been informed by Minister Villarreal that the Cardinal and the Nuncio were quite willing to have them reopened, provided they did not proselytize. I said that I had no instructions to ask that they be permitted to proselytize and that I did not think that this was by any means as sore a point among Protestants in the United States as the basic question of liberty to worship, which was guaranteed by the Colombian Constitution and observed in practically every country in the world outside of the Communist bloc. General Rengifo said that he did not think there was any opposition to Protestants worshipping in their own churches. He recalled that

Colombia 311 CO–2. Memorandum of a Conversation1 Bogotá, February 10, 1958 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 2 pages not declassified. CO–3. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Colombian Affairs (Gerberich)1 Washington, February 20, 1958. SUBJECT Colombian Economic Situation. PARTICIPANTS Colombian Ambassador José Gutiérrez Gómez Assistant Secretary Rubottom OSA—Mr. Gerberich The Ambassador said he first wanted to mention the visit of two officials of the Soviet Embassy in Mexico to Colombia. There has been a lot of loose newspaper talk about what happened and he wanted Mr. Rubottom to have the true facts. The Colombian Government is favorable to an arrangement whereby a sizable amount of coffee can be marketed behind the Iron Curtain, and there is talk of receiving wheat, fertilizers and certain construction materials in return, which would be very acceptable. But actually no agreement was reached between the Coffee Growers Federation and the Russians, although it is hoped that one can eventually be worked out. There is not the slightest truth in reports of permanent diplomatic and consular relations developing from these talks. Mr. Rubottom thanked the Ambassador for this information and said he could see that the trade proposed by the USSR would interest the Colombians, if the Russians fulfilled their commitments. Past

Colombia 313 Foreign Minister accordingly. We have given consideration to the latter’s proposal that the U.S. finance the purchase of the two destroyers which have been built for the Colombians in Sweden2, and he was sorry to have to tell the Ambassador frankly that there is no possibility of doing this, regardless of any merits that the plan might have. We still have hopes that the two destroyers allotted to Colombia in the “ship bill” will be made available before the end of the year, however. Mr. Rubottom added that he plans to visit Caracas and Bogotá next week, leaving Washington on Wednesday, February 26, and arriving at Bogotá on Saturday, March 1.3 He said his plans were made somewhat hurriedly and he had not had an opportunity to inform the Ambassador sooner. The Ambassador said he was glad to hear that this trip was planned, and was sure it would have most beneficial results. 2 Ambassador Cabot had transmitted the Colombian proposal to the Department in

Colombia 315 CO–5. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Colombian Affairs (Gerberich)1 Washington, March 4, 1958. SUBJECT Colombian Coffee Problem; critical economic situation. PARTICIPANTS Assistant Secretary Rubottom OSA – Mr. Bernbaum OSA – Mr. Wardlaw OSA – Mr. Gerberich Mr. Rubottom said that while in Bogotá he had discussed the Colombian economic situation in detail with officials of the Colombian Government, and there was no doubt in his mind that the situation is serious. With regard to coffee, he said that the Colombians were hoping ardently that the United States would join the world coffee organization, even if the regulations have to be changed.2 He offered some hope but made no commitment. In the discussions of the backlog and the possibility of refunding the debt in the United States, Mr. Rubottom was careful to impress on the Colombians that if they want more economic help from the United States the first essential is to put their political house in order. Mr. Rubottom was satisfied that the Colombians are quite aware that this is a prime necessity.

Colombia 317 stability, that we have shown our willingness to be of assistance by the Eximbank loan granted last year, and that we hope to continue to be helpful within the limits of available resources. 2. Economic Development Loans. The Colombians have indicated, without being specific, that they plan to seek loans for economic development projects. The Eximbank may wish to consider their applications if their stabilization program shows further progress, but we cannot speak for the Bank. The IBRD has its own policies. The DLF might be interested in applications that meet its criteria, but funds for this purpose are limited. 3. Coffee Prices and Quotas. 85% of Colombia’s foreign exchange is derived from sales of coffee abroad. Coffee prices have been falling, and every cent that coffee drops on the New York Market means a loss to Colombia of $8 million in foreign exchange. The Colombians may urge us to assist them in stabilizing coffee prices and imposing coffee quotas. We are now studying various possibilities of cooperating on the coffee problem, but these have not yet been cleared through the Government, and until such time as we have reached full agreement, no hopes should be aroused in the Colombians. 4. Swedish-Built Destroyers. The Colombians will have two modern destroyers ready for delivery from Sweden about May 1, on which they still owe $7 million. The Foreign Minister has suggested that we provide the Colombian Navy with these vessels under the MAAG agreement by taking over the payments due. There is no way that we can do this. We hope the ship loan bill recently introduced in Congress will enable us to transfer two destroyers to Colombia, which would give them some flexibility in deciding what to do with the Swedish-­built ones. 5. Religious problem. The Protestant problem has two important phases: (a) The closed churches and schools, both inside and outside of Mission Territory, have not been reopened, with four or five exceptions. About 100 churches and chapels inside Mission Territory and 40 churches and chapels outside Mission Territory remain closed. About 200 Protestant schools are still closed. Our Ambassador has taken up this question with the Foreign Minister on several occasions, urging that a formula be found to permit the churches and schools to be reopened, but the Foreign Minister says that the clergy and masses are opposed to any such action and it is very difficult for the Government to intervene for this reason. The Ambassador has warned him that if nothing is done the success of his mission in the United States may be endangered. (b) Violence. Sporadic cases of violence against U.S. Protestant missionaries still occur from time to time. Recently the residence of a U.S. missionary in Supfa, Caldas, was dynamited following attacks upon her from the pulpit by the local priest. Our Embassy brought this case to the attention of the Foreign Minister, expressing some surprise that no action was taken against the priest for this. The Government rarely

Colombia 319 The Secretary apologized for being late since he had to confer with the President with respect to the latest Soviet note on a summit meeting and on Tunisia. Foreign Minister Santamaria stated that Colombia had made tremendous efforts to restore a democratic regime and to restore financial stability. It had ran into grave difficulties because of the fall in coffee prices, and although it had followed the advice of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, it needed help. To underscore that need, the Colombian Government had sent two ex-Presidents, two ex-Ministers of Finance and the Director of the Bank of Colombia. He said that President Lopez would make the main statement. President Lopez stated that Colombia faced a three-­fold problem:

Colombia 321 limit acreage cannot do the job since farmers use fertilizer to increase the productivity per acre. In cotton they are putting 50 per cent more per acre. The Secretary said there was no question at all as to our objectives; we are agreed that a greater measure of stability is desirable at reasonable price levels. The only question is how to achieve that. Our experience has been disastrous. This is not to say that the job is impossible. All we can now say is that our own economic people will work closely and sympathetically with you, although we have a certain skepiticizm. He asked the Colombians to remember that there were certain legal restrictions on Americans against restraining trade but this does not apply to foreigners. President Lopez summarized the Colombian situation by saying that they had two problems: (1) an exchange problem, and (2) what could be done in cooperation with other coffee-­producing countries for price stabilization. The Secretary said that with respect to the dollar gap, the Colombians should see the Eximbank, which is a separate department of Government here. He could ensure the Colombians that they will get sympathetic consideration there, although they could expect no bail-­ out loan. At this point, Mr. Mann said that we had granted Colombia $60 million in Eximbank funds last year for a bail-­out loan. President Lopez said that the Colombians wanted an extension of time from the Eximbank on pending payments plus additional facilities. They also had need for additional agricultural machinery in order to increase agricultural production. In response to the Secretary’s inquiry, he said that the increase in agricultural production would not, of course, apply to coffee. Mr. Mann and Mr. Rubottom here observed that they had been much impressed by what Colombia had been doing day by day in the field of expanding its agricultural production. The Secretary asked how much of a military program they had and Senor Alvarez stated that it was about $280 million pesos or some 20 per cent of the budget. Santamaria then stated that the Military Junta had cut the military budget by about 100 million pesos and further cuts were prevented only because so much was owing on prior debt. The Provisional

Colombia 323

Colombia 325 of congratulation to Lleras received excellent press coverage. So did similar messages from Ambassador Cabot and former Ambassador Spruille Braden. CO–11. Despatch from the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot) to the Department of State1 Bogotá, July 11, 1958. No. 20 SUBJECT The Religious Question in Colombia On considering further the religious question in this country after the very helpful talks when I had during my consultation in Washington,2 I thought it might be useful to the Department if I put on paper my thoughts regarding it in the present conjuncture. 1. What should be our basic purpose? Americans believe firmly in the principle of freedom of worship. That principle is being flagrantly violated today in Colombia—­only less so under the present Government than under the three preceding administrations. It is unquestionable not only that there has been violence against Protestants, their property, and their legitimate rights and interests by private individuals, but also that the Government by arbitrarily closing churches and schools on one pretext or another or by preventing the opening of churches and schools is deliberately interfering with freedom or worship. Strongly as we are attached to the principle of freedom of worship I question, however, whether it is a proper subject in itself for diplomatic representations, and I doubt that it is wise to attack the religious question from this angle. We do not, as a matter of proper interest, work to uphold in other countries freedom of the press, individual rights, and the other great liberties of a democratic system. It is perfectly proper that individuals and private organizations should seek to muster public opinion in the United States and other countries behind the maintenance of these principles. It is doubtful whether it is proper,

Colombia 327 unpleasant decision; the second is that it is apprehensive that the general reopening of Protestant churches and schools would produce very unfortunate public disturbances. The third is that, if they can stall long enough, they probably hope to get out of office before they are forced to reach a decision. I have reason to suppose that a fourth, and perhaps the most important, reason of all from the Government’s viewpoint is that at some time in March the position of the Catholic Church in this matter hardened. It seems quite possible on the basis of various bits of evidence which reach the Embassy that at some time in the month of March the Colombian Government, anxious to make real progress in the matter of financial assistance to Colombia in the crisis it then confronted, was prepared, as a result of Mr. Rubottom’s and my representations, to make substantial concessions to us. It is clear that at the beginning of the month the Foreign Minister seemed receptive to such a move. When he talked to me on the eve of his departure for Washington, it being clear at that time that only American good will (rather than strictly economic considerations) would induce us to bail Colombia out financially, the Foreign Minister should have been most anxious to humor us in matters of interest to us, yet in point of fact something had happened which forced him stubbornly to defend the present situation. I can think of no force which would have the power to do this except the Catholic Church. It is also interesting to note the chronology of attacks in the Catholic review America on this Embassy. The first major blast appeared in the March 8th issue. Rather obviously, it did not just happen, and as a further point the writer of the article showed no interest in getting the Protestant side of the question. It is at least plausible that the Colombian Catholic hierarchy, aware of our pressure to reopen Protestant churches and schools, decided to mount a counter-­offensive in the United States to stir up the many millions of our Catholic citizens to protest that the Embassy was acting in the interests of the Protestant sects rather than the nation. I think we can tentatively conclude that the present Government will stall for the remaining month that it stays in power. The present government is perhaps not quite so inclined to maintain discrimination against Protestants as would appear from its failure to take remedial action. (As the Department is aware, the only remedial action taken to date with regard to closed churches and schools has been to permit one church in Mission Territory and five chapels outside of Mission Territory to reopen, while scores of churches, chapels and schools both within and outside of Mission Territory remain closed.) The Foreign Office indicated to us informally that it would have no objection if any closed churches and chapels in Mission Territory were able to reopen quietly with local permission pending an over-­all resolution of the matter, and

Colombia 329 It stands to reason, however, that as a tiny beleaguered minority they tend to restrain themselves. The America articles mentioned above have undoubtedly acerbated a feeling which is latent among Colombian Catholics that the real purpose behind our representations is to cram Protestantism down their throats. This is obviously not a rational reaction, as they would quickly realize if they considered that Protestant missionaries, churches and schools operate with far greater freedom in all of the other 20 Latin American republics than here and yet that the peoples of those countries are no less Catholic than are the Colombians. Moreover, the greater part of the food we give the Colombian people is distributed through the Catholic clergy. Nevertheless, the emotion does exist, and it would be foolish to disregard it. I believe that this is a valid reason why we should be more specific as to our objectives. If Protestant organizations claim that by doing this we are cutting the ground out from under their feet, it would seem to me the best evidence that we had been intervening in this matter to an undue degree, thereby laying ourselves open to the very serious charge so often made by Colombian Catholics that we are disregarding Colombian sovereignty. The Department should note that any further representations made by this Embassy which come to public knowledge and any favorable results which come from such representations will inevitably be considered by fervent Colombian Catholics as proving our desire to Protestantize Colombia. Given the emotional atmosphere in which this matter must inevitably be considered and the Latin temperament of Colombians, I believe that, confronted with such pressure, they will simply dig their toes in and not yield even at the expense of grave harm to Colombia. Any such situation would not only be directly prejudicial to American interests in Colombia, it would also be very harmful to our basic objectives of promoting peace, stability and progress in Colombia. If, therefore, we are to pursue our representations on behalf of Protestants, it seems to me essential to clear the air somehow of this emotional Colombian belief. Moreover, we cannot get this message to the Colombian Catholic campesino—­and it is he whom Catholic priests have stirred up against Protestants—­without running the risk of some controversy. I do not mean by this that we should engage in polemics or make controversial statements. I do mean that we must ourselves adopt a moderate course and explain in moderate terms what it is and what facts lie behind it. We may not get anywhere by such a course; we may indeed do harm by it, but we are, in my opinion, less likely to do harm by this course than by pursuing our present one which, I believe, will simply amount to butting our heads against a stone wall. I doubt this will accomplish anything, and I fear it will prove seriously prejudicial to our relations with Colombia. We should not think that

Colombia 331 this as a further indication that we must ourselves think this problem through. It seems to me probable under the circumstances that the Lleras administration will try to sweep this whole matter under the rug to the best of its ability. I think it reasonable to surmise that the Lleras administration, like the present Government, will try gradually to ameliorate the situation, will take remedial action in more flagrant cases, and will make concessions from time to time. I doubt, however, that we can expect any drastic shift. Lleras may indeed try to shove the whole issue into the courts on constitutional grounds and thereby delay matters further. Given the present situation in Colombia, I also question whether we can afford to press Lleras into a corner on this issue. The probable alternative to Lleras is chaos, and in the coming years it may be quite hard to prevent precisely that. Given the social unrest in Colombia, the growing Communist activities, and Colombia’s geographical position, to mention but a few of the more obvious considerations, I do not believe that we can afford to finger the rug under Lleras on an issue which is not vital to the United States. 5. What, then, should be our course of action? The present Government has one month to live. I doubt it would be willing in that month to take any action which might annoy or upset a great many people in Colombia. We do not have the time to prepare the ground for further vigorous representations. We are not likely, therefore, to get any important remedial action from it. We should not, as I have already pointed out, make vigorous representations during the early part of the Lleras administration. We may hope that the situation will gradually improve. We may properly make representations in specific cases or press gently when the moment seems propitious, but we should be careful how far we go. We should try to clear the air of the poisonous fumes now in it by a positive program of publicity. Obviously, such a program should be geared to the tempo of our representations. If the premise that we should go slow regarding representations is accepted, then our efforts to clear the air through publicity may also be pitched in a low gear. In sum, I have the feeling that this is another example of what Talleyrand meant in his comment about zeal in diplomatic affairs. Like the violence which is still desolating the Colombian countryside, this situation is one which it may take years to correct, and it can be corrected only as the democratic warp and woof in Colombian life are strengthened. We should also bear in mind the possibility of solving this religious problem by court action. When the state of siege is lifted, as it presumably will be as soon after the inauguration of the new administration

Colombia 333 CO–12. Despatch from the Ambassador in Colombia (Cabot) to the Department of State1 Bogotá, July 11, 1958. No. 31 REF

Colombia 335 the loyalty of the armed forces was questionable. The Junta was convinced that the armed forces were loyal but then they had been similarly convinced before May 2nd. The Foreign Minister then got out a series of telegrams, apparently most or all of which originated in the Colombian Embassy at Cuidad Trujillo.5 According to these telegrams General Trujillo had suggested to the Panamanian Military Attaché (Aued?) that he organize a coup against the present Panamanian Government. Another message reported that Peron planned in conjunction with opposition elements in southern Brazil to go to southern Brazil or possibly Paraguay with the eventual purpose of re-­entering Argentina and overthrowing the Government there. The Foreign Minister thought that communists might be included among these opposition elements. I asked whether Peron was supposed already to be in southern Brazil and the Foreign Minister said he did not know from the telegram. With regard to Samuel Moreno Diaz, Rojas Pinilla’s son-­in-­law, he had arrived in Cuidad Trujillo. He had been met at the airport by protocol officers and taken to the Hotel Paz, which was a second-­class hotel owned by the Government. There he had received many telephone calls. The Foreign Minister then said [text not declassified] that there had been a great deal of arms smuggling recently to furnish weapons to dissident elements in various parts of the country. He said that he had looked into it, and was convinced that the actual smuggling was purely commercial but that didn’t alter the fact than the arms were getting into the hands of disgruntled elements. I said that we, too, had reports of arms smuggling, particularly from Panama, and that we had been looking into this matter to see if there were anything we could do to cooperate in stopping it. He said that they also knew that arms were coming in from Panama. The Foreign Minister then said that he thought it would be an effective discouragement to any military men who were considering a coup if we should announce that we were sending a special mission to the Lleras inauguration. In making the announcement, he suggested that we underscore that we were sending the mission in order to express our great satisfaction at the return of Colombia to democratic government, and say anything else which would indicate that we would take it decidedly amiss if Colombia were not returned to democratic government. I said that the idea of a statement seemed to me a good one. On previous occasions I had indicated to key military men that in the event of a military coup Colombia could expect no further help from the United States. He enthusiastically agreed that this was a wise move on my part since American aid was obviously essential to Colombia 5 The referenced telegrams were not further identified.

Colombia 337 Ministers.6 The date of the meeting was, as the Foreign Minister pointed out, purposely left very vague. The purpose would be to discuss the whole question of economic cooperation in the Hemisphere. I did not like the general tone of the Note and mentioned to the Foreign Minister that I didn’t think we would be altogether in agreement with him, but that he of course had the right to express his own views. I particularly took exception to a paragraph suggesting that cooperation has not been as close and ample as it should have been. The Foreign Minister immediately said that he had not intended this as a criticism of the United States but rather as a statement of the undeniable fact that the Latin American republics have not cooperated among themselves. He would re-­draft this paragraph and make this clear. I said there were several things which I would like to take up with him. I first asked whether he had ascertained whether Lleras intended definitely to decline the President’s invitation to visit Washington in November. The Foreign Minister said he had unfortunately failed to ask Lleras this the one time he had seen him, but he would telephone me and let me know. I then referred to the fact that the Banco de la Republica was letting us have only [illegible in the original] pesos to the dollar on money which we are drawing against payments for agricultural surpluses. Under the present exchange system this seemed to be in clear contravention of the terms of our agreement, and I hoped that instructions would be issued to the Banco de la Republica to pay us in accordance with these terms; i.e., certificate rate plus 10%. The Foreign Minister said that the 10% matter was being handled in Washington and I agreed to this. I noted that the Colombian Government was now collecting the 10% from purchases of surplus products. He agreed to take this matter up. I then said that I did not wish to discuss the entire religious question but there was one aspect of it which did seriously concern me. The Catholic Church was apparently putting on a systematic campaign against the Embassy and the Consulate at Cali in connection with this question. I said that I was accustomed to attacks and they didn’t worry me, and that it was of course the privilege of the Catholic clergy to say what it wanted. However, it seemed to me extremely injudicious under the present circumstances to wash all of this dirty linen in public. The attacks completely misrepresented the position of the Embassy and the Consulate. They alleged that we were trying to Protestantize the country by distributing food, whereas the fact was that we were distributing the food through the Catholic clergy. Bishop Alvarez Restrepo had 6 No copy of the draft note described here was found in Department of State files.

Colombia 339 appears bilateral will receive tough-­sledding at best in Congress, failure CAB clarify this point creates unnecessary complication in congressional consideration and the impression CAB “heckling” Avianca. Even in unlikely event CAB decision adverse, and therefore ratification fails, would serve to remove any ground for subsequent contention U.S. reserved this surprise until after Congressional action. If Colombian Congress rejects agreement, after permit granted they could not allege we were responsible because CAB had not granted Avianca permit. On other hand, if permit granted and agreement then rejected, we understand (DEPTEL 107) that permit would automatically be cancelled. Therefore urged Department attempt to bring CAB decision to head soonest to obtain final resolution Avianca permanent permit question.3 Cabot

Colombia 341 for the Board to reach a decision on the application, the processing of such data within the Board will be expedited. Sincerely Yours, Gurney Vice Chairman CO–15. Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1 Washington, December 1, 1958. SUBJECT Disquieting rumors of revolutionary plotting in Colombia. Facts: General Gustavo ROJAS Pinilla was overthrown as dictator-­ president of Colombia on May 11, 1957. For a year he was in exile in the Canary Islands. On October 12, 1958, despite warnings from the Colombian Government he returned to Bogotá, avowedly to “vindicate his honor”. His presence in Colombia has occasioned considerable plotting, some of it overt but most of it covert. Rojas himself has been defiant and contemptuous toward the Government, which is planning to bring him to trial on December 15 on a series of charges ranging from violation of the Constitution and Laws to “indignities”. The Senate has been conducting hearings on these charges for some time, and has its case against him ready to present. Current Situation: Our Embassy has from the moment of Rojas’ return expressed concern at the course events were taking and the danger of a violent overthrow of the democratic National Union Government headed by Dr. Alberto LLERAS Camargo. The Embassy has based this concern on the testimony of sources close to Rojas, but Rojas himself has not been hesitant about declaring openly his expectation that there will be an uprising in his favor. One source claims that 70% of the Armed forces, including

Colombia 343 warned Foreign Minister Turbay of what we knew from several sources was impending. Two nights ago Turbay told me that our information had been very useful. You will recall that I did the same thing with Santamaria in the case of the May 2nd coup but, unfortunately, they did not pay adequate attention to what I told them. I suppose that this is interference in their internal affairs, but my impression is that both Santamaria and Turbay were very appreciative. In any case, it would have been a major disaster for Colombia and for our relations with Colombia if either coup had succeeded, so I feel that it was wise to pass the information along. I believe that you agreed with this thought in the first instance. The other matter which I wish to mention is that we are beginning to move very quietly again on the religious front. I have just suggested to Lazear of the Presbyterian Colegio Americano, Executive Secretary of the Evangelical Confederation of Colombia, that, in my opinion, it would be a good move to send one of the Colombian Protestant leaders to see Amaya Ramíres, Minister of Government, and find out whether the present Government would be willing to relax further the restrictions on Protestant activities in Colombia. My reasons for feeling that the time to move has come are: (1) violence is very much diminished, thereby striking out the pretext which has been given heretofore for doing nothing; (2) while the state of siege has temporarily been restored, I think it will be raised within a few days; (3) with all of the talk about human freedoms in Colombia, it is certainly an anomaly that freedom of worship should still be restrictioned; and (4) the Government has removed restrictions against Communists, and it is therefore strange that they should be maintained against Protestants. Moreover, we have intimations that both the Liberals and Laureanistas view the Protestant situation as anomalous, and that there may be a more or less spontaneous protest against the maintenance of restrictions against Protestants. If we can possibly get the Government to move on a basis of pressure from Colombians, I think we shall be very much better off than if we bring the pressure ourselves, so I want to see what this will produce. We may of course find the water icy, and would then have to decide what, if anything, we should do further; but then again the water may turn out to be tepid to warm. We shall of course let you know if anything develops. With all good wishes of the Season, Very sincerely yours, John M. Cabot

Colombia 345 SEV (our liaison man with religious organizations), will know of it, and we will inform you, we hope with sufficient anticipation.3 In closing I should like to express to you and Mrs. Cabot our best wishes for the holiday season. Sincerely, R. R. Rubottom, Jr.

Colombia 347 its affairs through the past difficult months. They said that the people had responded whole-­heartedly to the austerity program and had cooperated with the national front. They feel, however, that the political situation will deteriorate rapidly if coffee prices drop much further and if economic prospects do not improve. Colombia had undergone quite a challenge with the return of Rojas Pinilla. People had not really expected him to return but the legal processes were being carried out now that he had. The trial will probably last another two or three weeks in the Senate and then he will be turned over to the Courts. Violence has abated in the worst areas of a year or so ago, but it has cropped up again in Caldas and northern Boyaca. Squatters are moving in on properties and are creating quite a serious problem. I stressed the role that Colombia has played traditionally in the OAS and in the UN and the great satisfaction which I took from seeing Colombia return to its outstanding position of the past. Diplomatic Asylum—The Foreign Minister said that Colombia is preparing to submit certain amendments to the convention on asylum for consideration at the Quito conference next year. They are in a difficult situation with Guatemala and Nicaragua, the embassies of both of these countries having given asylum to common criminals. They feel that the traditional rules of asylum should be respected and that the asylum-­granting country should determine when asylum may properly be granted, but the abuse must stop if the principle of asylum is to continue. One thing they have in mind recommending is that asylum should not be granted to military officers on active duty. CO–19. Memorandum from the Deputy Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs (Silberstein) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow)1 Washington, March 19, 1959. SUBJECT Political Situation in Colombia; “Alternation” issue.

Colombia 349 Oficial promptly in order to be effective. In the August, 1958, session,

Colombia 351 CO–21. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Colombia1

Colombia 353 CO–23. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Colombian Affairs (Gerberich)1 Washington, September 23, 1959. SUBJECT Bilateral Air Agreement with Colombia PARTICIPANTS Julio César Turbay, Colombian Minister of Foreign Affairs José Gutiérrez Gómez, Colombian Ambassador Mr. Rubottom, ARA Mr. Silberstein, WST Mr. Gerberich, WST/CO Dr. Turbay said that, as we were aware, the Colombian Congress has not yet ratified the Bilateral Aviation Agreement, signed in 1956, which entered provisionally into force in January, 1957. He said that he has encountered opposition to it for the following reasons: (1) it was negotiated and signed by the Rojas Government; (2) it provides that the Agreement enters into force provisionally from the date of signature, whereas under Colombian law all agreements enter into force from the date of ratification; (3) there have been some questions raised regarding flight frequencies. On this last point Dr. Turbay was not at all precise. Mr. Rubottom said that we have been concerned with the failure of the Colombians to ratify the Agreement. We have believed all along that the negotiations were carried through to a successful conclusion after all legal and constitutional provisions had been carefully considered and observed. We have been at great pains to satisfy the Colombians when they have raised any questions in connection with the Agreement, the most recent of these being our activity in urging that approval of Avianca’s landing permit be expedited. He urged that the Foreign Minister take whatever steps he appropriately could to urge ratification by the Colombian Congress. With regard to the specific questions raised by the Foreign Minister Mr. Rubottom offered to arrange for a meeting between the Colombians and our aviation technicians before Dr. Turbay returned to Colombia. It was accordingly decided that Department officers would meet with

Colombia 355 CO–25. Memorandum from the Director of the International Cooperation Administration (Riddleberger) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1 Washington, March 25, 1960. SUBJECT Proposed Program for Assistance to Colombia’s Agrarian Reform Program Problem: When Colombian President Lleras Camargo makes his official visit to Washington, April 5–8,2 he is expected to inform us of his strong interest in obtaining U.S. Government assistance for Colombia’s land reform program. We believe we should respond very sympathetically looking toward the possibility of subsequently extending a loan or loans to assist Colombia in its land reform program—more specifically in programs of land development and settlement. Discussion: 1. In Colombia, as in other under-­developed Latin American countries, the basic economic problem in which progress is essential to the achievement of U.S. objectives is two-­fold: (a) How to increase the national income; (b) how to achieve its more equitable distribution. 2. The bulk of our economic aid—­grants, loans, technical assistance—­is devoted primarily to problem (a), to increasing the national income. However, a greater peril to our objectives may lie in problem (b),—­in the potential popular reaction against the inequitable distribution of income and in the popular identification of the United States with the wealthy. No matter how much progress governmental and private capital may make in raising the national income, that very progress and our basic objectives will remain in grave danger if gross disparities persist in income distribution. While continuing our efforts to promote economic growth, we need to devise ways through which our aid may be more effective in achieving progress toward a more

Colombia 357 1959,3 Mr. Horace Henderson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, reaffirmed our recommendation “that same land reform or agrarian reform is in some countries essential to economic and social development. We reaffirm our support for the concepts of land reform as embodied in resolutions of the General Assembly of the UN, the Economic and Social Council and the FAO Conference.” With regard to Congressional opinion, two Senators who recently visited Latin America have reported as follows: “. . . we should be entirely sympathetic when a South American Government which has formulated a just and equitable land reform program needs capital to provide compensation for the land” (Senator Morse); “. . . the United States should adopt a more realistic lending policy . . . in regard to loans for social reform or welfare projects, as . . . land redistribution” (Senator Aiken). e. Colombia already is attempting a sound approach to agrarian reform. President Lleras Camargo, internationally respected leader of Colombia’s governing alliance between liberals and conservatives, both of which are economically conservative and regarded in Colombia as “the oligarchy,” is pushing land reform efforts on several fronts. By tax inducement he is attempting to stimulate the greater utilization of private lands. By legal provisions making available some deposits of commercial banks and savings funds for agricultural credit, he is attempting to increase production under existing ownership. Through the Caja de Credito Agrario (Agrarian Credit Institute), he is attempting a program of resettling landless peasants on governmental lands. Through the application of a seldom-­used law of 1936 providing for the expropriation of private lands that are not being and have not been used for over ten years, the Caja has expropriated (with compensation) some few private holdings. ICA has been assisting the Caja with technical assistance and PL 480 funds. However, the efforts so far have only begun to scratch the surface of the problem and there is considerable need for additional assistance. 4. Proposal for U.S. Aid Meaningful agrarian reform involves much more than providing the landless with land. Almost invariably it involves agricultural credit, and it may involve the development of adequate land classification, land title procedures, rural facilities such as roads and schools, and even markets. Last but not least, it requires an unusual degree of governmental administrative capacity. Thus, it is first necessary to work 3 The referenced session of the Food and Agriculture Organization of The United

Colombia 359 CO–26. Telegram from the Ambassador in Colombia (McIntosh) to the Department of State1

Colombia 361 years or how long friendly or sympathetic elements will continue in government. Such internal involvement could come back to haunt us. This connection, Department should realize that Colombia on eve of adaption to new political balance as result elections and this situation will undoubtedly cause President take more time in assessing recommended program in relation domestic situation. Working paper could not of course reflect subtle shifts now taking place, and in fact probably not possible assess these for few weeks yet. Am surprised and disturbed that working paper dated February 1st7 which was available in Department since early February was not sent to Embassy for comment. McIntosh 7 The referenced working paper was not further identified, and no copy of a document matching the description here was found in Department of State files. CO–27. Editorial Note President Alberto Lleras Camargo of Colombia made an official

Colombia 363 President Lleras said that he had been disturbed by the apparent renunciation of the Rio Treaty3 by Fidel Castro.4 The Secretary said that we also had been shocked at this turn. He added that we were not sure whether Castro had meant the Rio Treaty or the Caracas Resolution,5 although the principal was the same. He recalled that the Cuban revolutionary government had announced its intension to carry out country’s obligations to such treaties prior to recognition by the United States and other countries of the Hemisphere last year. President Lleras said that he had sent an instruction to all of the Colombian Embassies asking the Ambassadors to consult with the host governments on the question of the Castro statement regarding the Rio Treaty, but there had not been time to hear from the Embassies prior to his departure for the United States. He said that it would be appropriate to have this question raised in the OAS, thus focusing attention on the political and juridical problem represented by an irresponsible Cuba, rather than on her disregard for property rights and other similar problems bearing down most heavily on her relations with the United States, even though these subjects would have to be treated eventually. The Secretary expressed complete agreement with this approach through the OAS. At this point the group left the President’s Guest House for the White house. 3 Reference is to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, opened for signature at Rio de Janeiro, September 2, 1947, and entered into force for the United States,

Colombia 365 views. The President thought that another experiment in Utopia might be worthwhile carrying out, under controlled conditions, of course. President Lleras mentioned that Colombian Cabinet Ministers could go to the floor of Congress and engage in debates. The President said that he had come to the conclusion that the U.S. House of Representatives should be elected for the same term of office as the President, four years. He also said that the President should have the item veto. President Lleras said that he had that power which could be overruled only by two-­thirds votes of the Congress. To the President’s query about the size of the Colombian budget. President Lleras said that it was approximately two billion pesos ($300 million). Again responding to the President’s question, he said that defense items consumed about 20 percent of the above amount, but this included countrywide police. With respect to the loyalty of the senior military officers, President Lleras expressed no concern, adding that he felt that military coup d’etats were usually the fault of political leaders seeking intervention by the military rather than the ambition of the latter. He recalled that General Rojas Pinilla, who became the bane of Colombia, had been openly welcomed by most Colombians when he seized power in 1953. President Lleras said that the United States, quite different from the Latin American countries, had had long experience in self-­government prior to its revolution and that this had been a tremendous advantage. The President inquired about Colombia’s program of social and economic reform. President Lleras said that he had instituted a good program and that it was of tremendous importance in view of the wide public appeal of the Castro-­type program. The President declared that agrarian reform had to be carried out with proper land utilization and sound planning, rather than by mere seizure of lands already under cultivation. President Lleras agreed. He said that Colombia had state lands where effective re-­settlement could be carried out. Their principal problem is that of dealing with the many tiny, inefficient parcels of land (minifundia) as well as how to provide the necessary credit for the small farmer. They have a good agrarian credit bank, already thirty years old, but they need additional resources. He estimated that 80 percent of the motive power in Colombian agriculture was provided by animals. The President referred to the need to train personnel to use modern tractors and farm machinery. Responding to the President’s question about Colombia’s financial reserves, President Lleras said that they now totaled about $220 ­million but they could not use this money freely yet. All bankers say that Colombia is “sound” from an economic standpoint but her problems are still “grave”, said President Lleras. Ambassador McIntosh referred to the good financial record of Colombia and to the excellent borrowing record which Colombia has with all of the financial institutions; he said that most of the exporter credit loans with the Export-Import

Colombia 367 Declaring that his Government was most grateful for the support of the United States in the development of the Coffee Study Group,2 Ambassador Sanz said it was now time to start again the preparations for continuing the study group beyond its first year of life, due to expire in September 1960. He said that Brazil’s heavy surplus of coffee creates a most serious problem. Mr. Mann agreed, pointing out that the surplus is being augmented in Brazil both by price supports and by the fact that the world price is 36 cents per pound, whereas Santos growers can make money at 11 cents per pound. 2 Documentation on U.S. participation in the Coffee Study Group is in the compilation on regional economic policy. CO–31. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1 Washington, April 7, 1960. SUBJECT Conversation Between the Secretary and President Lleras of Colombia: Agrarian Reform. PARTICIPANTS

Colombia 369 CO–32. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1 Washington, April 7, 1960. SUBJECT Conversation Between the Secretary and President Lleras of Colombia: The Dominican Republic. PARTICIPANTS

Colombia 371 President Lleras added that Latin American naval departments are able to pressure the civilian officials to purchase ships, by alleging that the United States naval missions say the ships are necessary for hemispheric defense. It was pointed out to President Lleras that we do consider that Latin American navies have roles in hemispheric defense, such as anti-submarine warfare, but that many Latin American nations have ships far in excess of these needs. Mr. Rubottom confessed he had been set back a little by President Lleras’ remark on the previous evening, to Senator Fulbright at the White House, that President Lleras had had no personal knowledge that Colombia was about to receive a ship loan destroyer from the United States, especially since interest in the ship had been expressed several times by the President’s regime. Mr. Rubottom observed that in Congress the idea is strong that the Latin American military serves primarily to support dictatorships. He said he thought it important that there be more recognition of the important role of the military in supporting, with proper guidance, constitutional governments and in making possible the orderly transition from dictatorship to democracy. Ambassador Sanz said that Colombia furnished an example of the military’s playing such a role. CO–34. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1 Washington, April 7, 1960. SUBJECT Conversation Between the Secretary and President Lleras of Colombia: Guerilla Problem and Survey Team. PARTICIPANTS

Colombia 373 CO–35. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Colombia (McIntosh)1 Bogotá, September 8, 1960. PARTICIPANTS President Alberto Lleras Camargo of Colombia, Under Secretary C. Douglas Dillon, Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann, and Ambassador Dempster McIntosh President Lleras welcomed Under Secretary Dillon and Assistant Secretary Mann to Colombia.2 President Lleras then expressed optimism regarding results from the current meeting of the Committee of 21. The current economic situation in Colombia was then discussed and both President Lleras and Under Secretary Dillon emphasized the necessity for carrying out social programs in addition to strictly economic development. President Lleras in this connection referred to the necessity of financing projects which would have an impact upon the mass of people. Assistant Secretary Mann referred to the present situation in Cuba and commented that, although Fidel Castro is probably not an actual Communist, the present government in Cuba is definitely under Communist control and direction, that the Communist Party is presently the only legal party in Cuba, and that Cuban Government spokesmen are required to follow the Communist Party line in any statements they may make. President Lleras said he did not doubt that this was a correct analysis and mentioned that the Colombian Foreign Minister, Dr. Turbay, during the early part of the meetings at San José, Costa Rica, had a discussion with Cuban Foreign Minister Roa, during which Roa indicated a very reasonable attitude in connection with relations with other Latin American countries. The following day nine additional Cubans arrived by air from Havana, (President Lleras commented, presumably carrying guns) and apparently talked to Roa, with the result that when Turbay later had another discussion with him the attitude of

Colombia 375 CO–36. Memorandum of a Conversation1 Bogotá, September 16, 1960. [Enclosure] Letter from the Ambassador in Colombia (McIntosh) to the Special Assistant in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Devine)2 Bogotá, September 15, 1960. Dear Mr. Devine: I refer to your letter of August 313 enclosing copies of draft papers [text not declassified] proposing ways and means of responding to President Lleras’ request for assistance in combatting the violence and banditry problem. Your letter and these papers have been most helpful to me and to other members of the Country Team in understanding the problem confronted by the Department [text not declassified]. I heartily agree that the ideal solution would be to come up with an agreed upon and mutually accepted program on the basis of which Presidential determination for use of the necessary funds could be sought. However, [text not declassified] it appears that the Department must take the responsibility of proposing an assistance program which, on the one hand, will be responsive to President Lleras’ request and, on the other hand, will form the basis for requesting Presidential determination on the use of MAP. Urgency is of the essence. The Colombian Government officially requested our decision some 15 months ago. Our only answer to date has been to send a Survey Team to Colombia for the dual purpose of ascertaining whether the violence situation justified our seeking a Presidential determination for the use of Mutual Security Act assistance and to come up with possible recommendations for eventual use by the Colombian Government in the anti-­guerrilla campaign. While the GOC cooperated fully and whole-­heartedly with the Team, and the team concluded its field survey last December, we as yet have not submitted to 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. Secret; Official-Informal. 2 pages not declassified. 2 The source text is a carbon copy bearing Ambassador McIntosh’s typed name. 3 Not found in Department of State files.

Colombia 377 This Country Team recommendation is based on our considered view that the violence problem is essentially a national problem which has developed to the extent that a military action by the armed forces is required. Thus, this is a military rather than a police problem; and suppression of violence is primarily a military task in which police action should be the secondary role of maintaining order in pacified areas and of participating in direct anti-­guerrilla action only where bandit activity is sporadic. Another consideration is that the Defense Department proposal is more responsive to President Lleras’ request, both as regards equipment and as regards reorientation of our military assistance program in general. In none of the numerous conferences between President Lleras and U.S. officials was it ever suggested that he had in mind the use of the National Police in connection with the requested assistance. On the contrary, he initiated the formal request by calling in the chiefs of our three military missions, at which meeting Colombian military personnel were present but not representatives of

Colombia 379 All who have studied the problem agree that what is needed most is transportation, communication and possibly other specialized material. A few small obsolete helicopters now in the Colombian Air Force have been used successfully in a number of anti-­bandit operations, and no doubt if they were available in sufficient numbers and with sufficient lead and altitude capability the Colombian military would have the mobility badly needed to meet violence when and where it occurs, regardless of terrain. Both papers recognize the need of a public relations program to help civilian understanding and support in violence areas. Such a program would supplement the work of the Equipoz Polivalentes. We agree in principle on the need for a coordinated public relations effort in the anti-­violence campaign. However, President Lleras has indicated a personal aversion to government propaganda (perhaps because government propaganda has so frequently been discredited in the past) and I have reasonable doubts that he would accept the proposal for a public relations adviser per se—­especially if the latter were to be a foreign national. Also, I think it would be politically objectionable for the U.S. to be directly and overtly involved in this activity. I think any advise we give on public relations as related to the anti-­violence program, should be confirmed to such recommendations as can be given in a report to the President and to such ad hoc guidance as can be given through our established U.S. missions to Colombia. I agree with your personal reaction that neither of the two papers seems to represent a very comprehensive presentation. For your information the military Advisory Group to Colombia at the direction of the Commander in Chief Caribbean (stemming from a DOD request) is preparing recommendations for equipment and training under the MAP program for FY 1961 to combat this banditry problem. These recommendations are being coordinated with a Colombian Armed Forces plan to combat banditry. In making these recommendations every effort is being made to insure that the whole Colombian Government, especially the Army and Air Force, will coordinate in using the equipment against banditry in an organized and coordinated manner. These recommendations will be cleared with me before going forward through military channels. It is expected that these recommendations will form the basis for a specific DOD proposal on how to help Colombia and that they will be appropriately coordinated with the State Department in Washington. I apologize for the length of the letter. Nevertheless, the history and background of the problem is such that I think the above comments at this may be helpful to you and to those in the Department directly concerned.

Colombia 381 4. Purchase for stockpile. 5. Purchase under Defense Production Act.5 The results of these investigations have resulted in the conclusion that there is no legal way in which we can buy this sugar in 1960. There remain, apparently, only two alternatives: 1. Colombia to finance its excess stocks until next spring, meanwhile taking steps to join the ISA. Although there is a strong possibility that we can buy Colombian sugar under the Sugar Act, when it is renewed on March 31, it is impossible to guarantee this. 2. Colombia to sell the sugar at world market prices. It is recommended that Mr. Mann tell this to Ambassador Santamaria, if he has not already done so.6

Colombia 383 the Act that such assistance in the form of equipment and materials be furnished only in furtherance of western Hemisphere defense missions. Enclosed is a detailed statement of the background and justification of this program, the implementation of which is estimated to require the expenditure of up to $1,750,000 of funds available under the Act for military assistance, of which up to $1,500,000 may be used to furnish equipment and materials. A small amount of excess equipment and materials may be included. It is considered that the furnishing of the proposed assistance in the form of equipment and materials and the use of funds available thereafter under the Act are in furtherance of the purposes of the Act and are important to the security of the United States. IT IS, ACCORDINGLY, RECOMMENDED that you sign the enclosed memorandum which contains the determinations required by the Act in order to carry out such military assistance to Colombia.3 Livingston T. Merchant Enclosure Military Assistance for Colombia Requiring Determinations, Under the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended The assistance proposed for Colombia includes initial equipment and related services and specialized training for the Colombian Military establishment at an estimated total cost of $1,750,000. Equipment to be furnished would include vehicles, communications equipment, and air transport equipment. It is expected that the equipment and materials portion of the proposed assistance will cost up to $1,500,000. There will be a continuing modest annual requirement for maintenance and spares, but it is expected that the Colombian Government will be able to finance this continuing cost itself. A small amount of the initial equipment and materials may come from excess stocks. Training, at an estimated cost of $250,000, would be provided by United States training advisors or at selected United States installations in such subjects as counter-­guerrilla warfare, intelligence and 3 The referenced memorandum containing the necessary Presidential Determinations, designated No. 61-14, recommended by Dillon and conurred in by John N. Irwin, II, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, on Decenber 21, and Maurice H. Stans, Director of the Bureau of the Budget, on December 29, is not printed. The following typed note appears on the source text: “Approved by the White House; see

Colombia 385 in its efforts to solve the problem. Refugees from bandit-­infested rural areas have flocked to the cities where they create a serious social problem. They are easy prey for Communist and pro-Castro agitators. Lleras Camargo is of the opinion, which is supported by United States Government representatives in Colombia, that his government’s efforts to resolve some of Colombia’s basic social and economic problems within a democratic framework are doomed to failure unless the bandit problem is resolved. The Colombian military establishment has excellent personal. Its professionals have excellent training in military theory but limited practical training in field operations, particularly counter-­guerrilla activities. It lacks field equipment, both individual and organization, and it is short of transportation and communication equipment. In June 1959 President Lleras Camargo asked the United States to consider assisting him in attacking the bandit and guerrilla problem. In November-December 1959 this government sent to Colombia a team of anti-­guerrilla warfare experts to survey the problem. The team’s recommendations were mainly for steps the Colombians themselves could take, with United States technical assistance, e.g., to develop specially trained anti-­guerrilla forces, to establish effective intelligence and information services, and to undertake a program to install confidence in the armed forces. The team also recommended that special material be provided to enable the Colombian armed forces to combat the guerrillas in the field. The team’s recommendations have been accepted in principle by the responsible United States Government representatives in Colombia. Upon receipt of assurance from the Colombian Government that it is in agreement with certain courses of action which are to be submitted to it for consideration by the United States Government, and on receipt of a formal request for United States assistance, the Department of State and the Department of Defense recommend that United States be prepared to offer grant military assistance in the form of equipment, materials, related services, and training. It is considered to be in the United States interest to provide Colombia with the military equipment, materials, and services described above using up to $1,500,000 of funds available for military assistance in fiscal year 1961. The furnishing of military assistance on a grant basis to any Latin American nation is subject to several conditions. First, under Section 105(a) and 143 of the Act, the President must determine that the increased ability of the nation to defend itself is important to the security of the United States, and that the furnishing of such assistance will strengthen the security of the United States and promote world peace. Second, Section 105(b)(4) of the Act provides that military equipment and materials may be furnished to a Latin American nation only in furtherance of missions directly relating to the common defense of the western hemisphere and that, unless the President determines

Costa Rica: U.S. Relations with Costa Rica CR–1. Editorial Note Costa Rica held general elections on February 2, 1958. Mario Echandi Jiménez, candidate of the National Union Party (PUN), won

Costa Rica 389 Within the country the government has experienced difficulties with its budget and there is a likelihood of a sizeable fiscal deficit for 1957. Up to 1954 the fiscal policy offset the expansion of credit to the private sector, but since that time the government has competed with the private sector for available bank credit. If the excess of current government expenditures over revenues continues to increase, and if bank credit to the private sector expands at the rate of the recent past, the loss of exchange reserves will pose some very serious problems. Indications are that Echandi is very much concerned over the future financial condition of his country. In a recent press conference (March 5) he said, “our country is facing an economic situation which can be serious, above all if coffee prices continue to drop”. He has indicated that he will try to improve existing financial practices and future government revenue. In this connection he has announced that foreign capital could come to Costa Rica and work on even terms with Costa Rican capital. (2) Coffee The Costa Ricans are very much concerned over the possibility of an additional future drop in world market coffee prices. During 1957 coffee export prices dropped from an average of $0.70 per pound to a low of $0.50 per pound. The decline in coffee prices induced Costa Rica to become a very active proponent and signatory of the Mexico City coffee pact last October,2 which called for withholding a portion of their 1957–58 coffee crop in an effort to stabilize coffee prices. Mr. Echandi has already stated that coffee prices constitute a vital problem for Costa Rica, as unfortunately the economy depends fundamentally on the price of coffee. He has announced that he is in favor of the Mexican agreement and believes that if the coffee producing countries do not defend themselves against the trend towards low prices, the consequences to Costa Rica’s economy will be disastrous. The 1957–58 Costa Rican coffee crop is expected to be a record-­ breaking crop and the withholding from the export market of a sizeable portion of this crop (the excess over 80 percent of the average of the volume of the previous two crop years available for export) could prove to be an overwhelming financial burden for Costa Rica’s limited resources. Our Embassy estimates that approximately $35 million

Costa Rica 391 of facilities to increase loans to farmers and industrialists. He has also recently expressed his firm belief in the necessity of extending security and support to private initiative, limiting the intervention of the State in the field of economic activities to the absolutely indispensable. Suggested Position: That Mr. Echandi be encouraged in his desire to further economic development through increased private investment. It could be pointed out that an increase in private institutions would not only bring new capital into the country’s money market but also capital investment in industry and agriculture, and would also add to the government’s revenue in the form of taxes, without the necessity of the Government to be financially obligated for development and maintenance. It could be suggested that Mr. Echandi, while in New York, get in touch with various banks concerning his desire to permit private banks to operate in Costa Rica. (4) Costa Rican Armed Forces: Mr. Echandi has announced to the press that Costa Rica will abolish the Army and sell its armaments to buy farm implements and medicines. He does plan to keep the Guardia Civil for safety and police service. In this connection he may express interest in having United States assistance in establishing an engineering construction unit, the same as is now being established in Honduras. Our Embassy has recommended that such a battalion be established. Suggested Reply: If this subject is raised, it is suggested that Mr. Echandi be informed that we are very much interested in any disarmament proposals for Latin America, as well as plans any individual country has for reducing its arms; and that a reduction in a country’s expenditure for armaments leaves more money available for expenditures on constructive economic developments. With regard to an engineering unit, Mr. Echandi could be told that careful consideration will be given to his request. FYI: In this connection much depends upon available funds, and comparative priority needs of other Latin American countries in relation to our overall policy objectives. End FYI. (5) Loan Projects: World Bank: In January 1957 Costa Rica negotiated a loan with the IBRD for $3 million designed to finance the importation of capital goods for agricultural and light industry development. The Central Bank of Costa Rica now has a second loan request for its capital goods importation program in the amount of $5 million with the IBRD. This application is now under consideration.

Costa Rica 393 Mr. Echandi has informed our Embassy that he is authorized to discuss this method of increasing revenue on behalf of the Presidents of Guatemala and Honduras.4 Suggested Reply: It is suggested that Mr. Echandi be told the Executive in the United States does not have the authority sometimes found in other countries to modify tax liabilities of taxpayers. Taxpayers have well settled rights under United States laws and the regulations that are issued to implement those laws. Consequently, we cannot give an opinion as to whether the method for allocating the income of the United Fruit Company can be changed. However, to the extent that the present method may not adequately reflect the regulations and the law, the Treasury would be prepared to discuss the question with the United Fruit Company. It could be suggested that this matter be worked out between the United Fruit Company and the Treasury. Treasury has informed us that there would have to be a detailed study before any decisions could be made on this proposal. Suggested Subjects You May Wish to Discuss With Mr. Echandi: (1) Inter-American Highway: It is suggested that you point out to Mr. Echandi the importance of the Inter-American Highway to Central America. In this connection Mr. Echandi’s attention could be drawn to the expected increase in United States automobile traffic to Central America, with resulting additional revenue for the Central American countries and a closer tie between the people of the United States and the people of Central America. On March 17 the Legislative Assembly authorized the Costa Rican Government to negotiate an increase of $4 million from the EXIM Bank for completion of the highway in Costa Rica. (2) Elections You may wish to comment on the orderly, honest, democratic Presidential and Congressional elections which took place last February second. The Costa Ricans have taken great pride in these elections as they were intent upon showing other Latin American countries how free democratic elections should be conducted. As President Figueres’ party will have a plurality in the new Legislative Assembly, any comments Mr. Echandi has concerning how he expects to get his program through the Legislative Assembly will be of interest. 4 Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes and Ramón Villeda Morales, respectively.

Costa Rica 395 railroad and shop workers, has been known to be non-Communist but has entered into a cooperative working relationship with FOBA during the past half year. A third, minor organization, the Rerum Novarum, has about 100 members in the Company’s facilities at Golfito. None of the three unions supported Echandi in the recent election. Rerum Novarum very definitely supported the National Liberation Party and both FOBA and FETRABA, according to the Embassy, overwhelmingly demonstrated they were in the Calderonista-Communist camp. Problem: How will the Echandi administration handle the problem? Harassment for nonsupport of Echandi can strengthen the Communist position. Indifference, if it is felt to be an area not worth courting, could do likewise. Perhaps an ORIT-ICFTU campaign, now being contemplated, could be permitted to operate provided it is carried out on a strictly trade union, non-­political basis designed to diminish Communist influence. Additional Subjects President-Elect Echandi May Discuss (1) Change of Authority in Awarding Contracts for the Inter-American Highway: It is understood that President-­elect Echandi is interested in having the Government of Costa Rica take over the awarding of the contracts for the remaining work for completion of the Inter-American Highway in Costa Rica. Our Position: In view of the advanced stage of construction of the Inter-American Highway in Costa Rica it appears to be a poor time to change the procedure for the operation and final construction of this highway. In addition the United States is not aware that the Government of Costa Rica presently has in being a highway department which could adequately handle the letting and awarding of contracts on the highway. The United States does not believe that it would be advantageous for Costa Rica to build up a highway department to handle this project as the Inter-American Highway is a much larger project than any future foreseeable projects in Costa Rica. Therefore, it would seem to be to the benefit of the rapid completion of this project not to undertake to change the methods of operations at this time. The United States through the Bureau of Public Roads is willing to cooperate with and assist the Government of Costa Rica to build up and train a highway organization capable of carrying on and maintaining the highway after its completion and the Bureau of Public Roads

Costa Rica 397 constitute an important potential source of revenue. Three banana companies are or will be trading in Costa Rica: United Fruit, Standard, and a local company (possibly Bananaria). Only United Fruit, however, does not pay tax on its total income, he stated. Moreover, its income alone is not susceptible of determination by Costa Rica. Prices for the export of meat, which is being promoted, are set by a production council. Coffee contracts and the prices are registered with the government. Sugar has a world price and profits of Costa Rican companies can be based upon that world price. The same is true of cocoa. Only in the case of bananas has it not been possible to obtain an “independent” determination of profits. Rather than act arbitrarily, the President would prefer to come to some amicable agreement in the matter. Mr. Smith indicated briefly how the fifty-­fifty arrangement came into being and the fact that there is no independent banana price makes it necessary to resort to a formula. The formula, he emphasized, was utilized not only in the United Fruit case but in other situations—­where an America company sells to its distributing subsidiary abroad and no independent price exists. The formula used for imports is also used for exports. After some discussion, Mr. Smith indicated that the Treasury would be very glad to give its attention to this problem promptly. In passing, the President expressed an interest in having an American tax expert go to Costa Rica for a month or two to assist in improving their tax system. However, no comment on this request was made by Treasury. Mr. Smith suggested that Costa Rica may want to give consideration to the possibility of reaching an agreement on a tax convention between our two countries. The Costa Ricans expressed an interest and requested copies of recent tax treaties. Two sets of copies of the U.S. convention with Honduras, Japan and Germany2 are being forwarded to President Echandi. Present for Treasury were: Mr. Dan Throop Smith; Mr. David Lindsay, Assistant to the Secretary; Mr. Nathan Gordon, Chief, International Tax Staff. 2 For text of the Tax Convention with Honduras, signed at Washington, June 25,

Costa Rica 399 need for his country to diversify its production, increase its production of basic food crops, and reduce wherever possible expenditures for imports. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that we are aware of the difficulties that a drop in coffee prices would cause to Costa Rica and other coffee-­ producing countries. He said that we were looking into what could be done to help increase the consumption of coffee, and that there were at present several ways that a country could obtain aid if necessary. In this connection he pointed out that such institutions as the World Bank, the EXIM Bank, and the International Monetary Fund are available for giving objective advice and assistance upon request. He also stressed that a country should make efforts on its own behalf to take necessary steps to put its economy in good order, even if this involved some sacrifice on the part of the people. Armaments Mr. Echandi said that in keeping with Article 12 of the Costa Rican Constitution he desired to get rid of all excess armaments. According to him, he wants to keep only those arms necessary for use of the Guardia Civil for police purposes. He said that he would like to sell the arms to the United States and use the funds derived therefrom to buy tractors and other agricultural equipment. Mr. Echandi stressed that he had no personal reason for wishing to be rid of the excess armaments but since Costa Rica did not have any real Army of its own, and did not desire one, he could see no reason for keeping any excess armaments. Mr. Rubottom said he did not know how the United States Government could purchase the armaments but that the matter would be looked into. Mr. Echandi stated that he had no intention of selling the armaments to any country which would be likely to utilize them for causing trouble either within its own country or that of another. Ambassador Willauer stated that he in the past had had a great deal of experience with arms and that he had some ideas regarding the sale of the excess armaments which he would pursue when he took over his post in Costa Rica. Mr. Echandi also emphasized that his country was not an aggressive one and in keeping with Article 12 of its Constitution did not need arms for any other purposes than policing. Inter-American Highway Mr. Echandi said he wondered if a section near the Inter-American Highway, between El Coco Airport and San Ramón, covering approximately 40 kilometers could be included in the Inter-American Highway project. Mr. Rubottom informed him that at the present time it seemed best to concentrate on completing that part of the Inter-American Highway running through Costa Rica rather than attempting to reconstruct an additional road as part of this project. He pointed out to Mr. Echandi the difficulties of obtaining sufficient funds from our Congress in order to carry on the Inter-American Highway project

Costa Rica 401 Costa Rica’s democratic principles, but would not tolerate their engaging in subversive activities within or outside the country. He stated that political exiles could continue to find a place to live in Costa Rica and provided they lived there peacefully as law-­abiding citizens they would not be molested. Political and Economic Philosophy Mr. Echandi stated that he was a strong believer in democratic principles and private initiative. He stated that it was his desire now to unite the various political parties within the country in looking towards the best interests of the country. He said he was making an effort to have his Cabinet composed of representatives of the various parties and in this respect he had offered Rossi (the Independent Party candidate for President) a Cabinet post. He said that it was not his intention to change any of the government autonomous entities already functioning, but that he hoped additional economic development would be carried out through private enterprise by both foreign and domestic capital. Banks President-­elect Echandi said it was his desire to see private banks established in the country. He said that he hoped while in the United States to talk to some bankers with the idea of interesting them in setting up branches in Costa Rica. He thought that private banks within the country would help provide needed loans for the agriculturists, such as the coffee growers, and for small industrial enterprises. Mr. Rubottom asked him if it would be necessary to change the law of 1948 under which the banks were nationalized before private banks could function within the country. Mr. Echandi said changes in this law would have to be effected. Larger Share in Taxes of the United Fruit Company Mr. Echandi said that he had talked with Treasury officials this morning in regard to his desire to obtain an increase in the portion of United Fruit Company profits subject to Costa Rican taxation. He spoke appreciatively of the way he had been received by the Treasury officials and seemed pleased to know that his request would be given every possible consideration in accordance with United States tax laws. He indicated that the United Fruit Company would endeavor to work out this matter with the Treasury. Conditions in Other Central American Countries Mr. Rubottom asked Mr. Echandi if he had any comments he would like to make concerning observations of the Central American countries he had so recently visited. Mr. Echandi said that in El

Costa Rica 403 its budget for the coming fiscal year depended on an increase in revenue from taxes on the United Fruit Company operations in his country. It will be recalled that Echandi appealed to the Treasury Department during his visit to the United States for a greater share of the tax returns from the United Fruit Company. At present the taxes collected by the United States are based on an arbitrary division of fifty-­fifty which is

Costa Rica 405 CR–7. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of the Treasury’s Deputy (Smith)1 Washington, June 19, 1958. Dear Mr. Smith: While Mario Echandi, then President-­elect of Costa Rica, was in Washington he called upon you and other Treasury officials on March 28 to discuss a revision in the U. S. tax regulations whereby 50 percent of the profits of United Fruit Company and its Costa Rican subsidiary are taxable in the United States and the other 50 percent taxable in Costa Rica. Mr. Echandi expressed at that time a desire to work out an arrangement whereby a larger percentage of the profits would be allocated to the producing subsidiary company in Costa Rica. This would be done, he stated, without hardship to the United Fruit Company, by increasing the base for taxation of the firm’s profits in Costa Rica. President Echandi, who was inaugurated on May 8, has reiterated to our Ambassador in San Jose, a continuing interest in this matter, and the Department has been informed that other Central American countries in which United Fruit has subsidiaries also share his view. The Department recognizes, of course, that questions relating to allocation of income for tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code, involving as they do the fair and equitable administration of United States text laws, are within the province of the Treasury Department. Furthermore, the Department is not in a position, and has no desire, to become involved in the particular tax problems of individual American companies under the U.S. Revenue Laws. The recent drop in commodity prices has resulted in a reduction of income to Costa Rica as well as other Central American countries. For this, as well as other reasons, the Department of State considers that, generally, feasible measures which will improve the economic position of such countries will be beneficial in furthering our foreign policy interests. To the extent that such measures may be taken within the ambit of a fair and equitable administration of the tax laws, the Department considers that they would be in the national interest. Sincerely, R.R. Rubottom, Jr.

Costa Rica 407 provisions, there would be an agreed-­upon distribution of profits between the other signatory countries and the United States. Such a convention would have the advantage of producing a definitive solution to the problem and would presumably establish other desirable conditions with respect to international trade and investment between the signatory countries and the United States. Accordingly, it is suggested that this approach be suggested in the course of the forthcoming discussions between Costa Rica and the United States on the occasion of Mr. Milton Eisenhower’s trip there. If we can be of any further assistance in this matter, please let me know. Sincerely yours, Dan Troop Smith CR–9. Summary of Discussions in Costa Rica during Milton Eisenhower’s Visit1

Costa Rica 409 to diversifying their production and placing the national economy on a more solid basis. Furthermore, this would make available the amounts which the Government now devotes to servicing the national debt for a broad program of road construction which they are working on at the present time with the World Bank. If the loan were secured the Government would then feed this amount into the National Bank system to be loaned out to small rural credit agencies for direct loans to the small planter and farmer. 20% of the loan would be used for diversifying agriculture, developing cattle breeding and improvement of the breeds; 20% would go to stabilize the coffee industry and the remaining 10% would be devoted to housing. The President pointed out that not one cent of this money would be taken by the Government for any public works. For the first time in Costa Rica’s history the total amount of the loan would be turned over to the Development Bank for strengthening the economy and developing private initiative. The recent election had been fought largely on an issue of private initiative against “stateism.” The President and members of the Cabinet expressed the hope that this loan could be secured from Governmental or private sources in the United States as it was essential for the implementation of their plan. All members of the Government including the President were warm in their expressions of friendship for the United States and understanding of the immensity of the burden borne by the American people. They seemed proud of the high standard of living in Costa Rica. Reception of Dr. Eisenhower’s party was everywhere friendly and warm and while attending the funeral of the Minister of Health who died during Dr. Eisenhower’s stay in Costa Rica,3 Dr. Eisenhower walked several miles in the funeral procession, receiving the warmest demonstrations of friendliness from Costa Ricans of all classes. The matter of alleged United States support for dictators was not brought up by anyone on the Governmental side, although it was brought up forcefully by opposition leader Jose Figueres4 during a breakfast at the Embassy which he had with Dr. Eisenhower. Both former Presidents Figueres and Calderon Guardia5 expressed the friendliest feelings for the United States, the latter expressing his desire to help President Echandi in the measure in which he were allowed to do so. Figueres stated his belief that the United States had in some measure given the impression of favoring dictatorships and Calderon Guardia expressed his feeling that the

Costa Rica 411 rise to the serious problem of supplying drinking water and adequate sewerage. They have drawn up a plan to repair the old water system, undertake new construction and install water meters and believe that this plan would satisfy all foreseeable needs for 20 years. Plans are already drawn up and work could be undertaken if they could obtain the approximately $3 million necessary to undertake this project. Sewerage: An effective sewerage system is planned and is under slow construction. If further financing could be obtained this work could be carried out quickly and effectively. The cooperative Inter-American Public Health Service had rendered valuable cooperation in this work. Water Supply: Valuable cooperation has been received from the Point Four program in studying the supply of drinking water to the whole metro­ politan area but its resources are inadequate for the size of the problem, and the Government would be very desirous of obtaining a loan which would enable them to go forward swiftly with this project. German Taxes on Coffee: The Costa Ricans pointed out that Germany had two taxes on coffee that caused the price of this commodity to be extremely high in Germany. They felt that if the United States could in some way use its influence on the Federal Republic to have these taxes removed or lowered that this might increase German Coffee consumption by as much as 2 million bags yearly. Desire of the Costa Rican Government to Exchange Surplus Military Equipment for Transportation and Communication Equipment: The United States Country Team did not feel that the Echandi administration had the firm capability of maintaining internal security and the greatest weakness of the Public Forces was due to the lack of adequate transportation and communication. Recently the desire was expressed by a representative of the present Administration to trade items such as machine guns, rifles and obsolete aircraft for sedans, trucks, radios and two aircraft of the liaison type. They would like to trade in some $200,000 worth of the former items for some $253,000 worth of communications and transportation equipment. This would strengthen the internal security of the country and the exchange of weapons for vehicles would create a good impression for the United States in Costa Rica in the opinion of the Country Team.

Costa Rica 413 (3) a study of the domestic and foreign markets, including revenue from tourism; (4) a reexamination of government organization, financing, taxes and trade policies, with the purpose of seeing whether they could not be more effective in developing the economy of the country and supporting and regulating private investment. The contacts of the Fact-Finding Mission were uniformly friendly with people from all walks of Costa Rican life and while there may have been occasional misinterpretation of U.S. motives, no feeling of hostility toward the United States was at any time apparent. The President and his Cabinet gave evidence of their whole-­hearted support for the United States on the international scene and understanding of the problems of the United States. President Echandi stated specifically that there was too much of a tendency in Latin American countries to believe that the United States could solve all of their economic problems for them. CR–10. Despatch from the Chargé in Costa Rica (Godfrey) to the Department of State1 San José, July 30, 1958. No. 42. SUBJECT Analysis of United States and Other Assistance Programs in Costa Rica In conformity with the Department’s Circular Telegram of May 5, 1958,2 there is provided the following overall analysis of United States objectives and the role of various United States and non-United States programs in Costa Rica for fiscal year 1960. Since Ambassador Willauer was suddenly called to Washington3 it was impossible for him to review this despatch. However, the substance of the message was reviewed with him and the points included in the “special objectives” section were ­dictated by him.

Costa Rica 415 most of this special opportunity to demonstrate our willingness and our ability to help Latin America evolve toward a sound economic system based on democratic principles. 2. The Issue: Private Enterprise Versus Socialist Tendencies. After the five years of the Figueres Administration (1953–58), with its ever increasing inclination toward socialism, there was inaugurated in May of this year the Administration of Mario Echandi, who had campaigned on a program to reinstate private enterprise as the primary motivating force in the economy of the country. Since a primary U.S. objective is to prove that faith and reliance on the free enterprise system is justified, it follows that a major U.S. objective in Costa Rica is to help Echandi fulfill his campaign pledge. Last week President Echandi stated his position to Ambassador Willauer along the following lines: “Since I have championed the cause of private enterprise, the overall success of my Administration in improving economic conditions in Costa Rica will either aid or hurt the concept of private enterprise throughout this Hemisphere. Quite apart from any definite accomplishment I may achieve in my own country in improving economic conditions will be the repercussion my success will have elsewhere in Latin America. My success or my failure will be noticed and will help tip the scales one way or the other. Specific projects may or may not succeed, but the general result of my Administration must be favorable. If it is not successful, the fact that a man campaigned for private enterprise and failed will be used as an argument throughout Latin America for more socialism.” The basic need for positive results and their urgency was highlighted in an intimate meeting held a few days ago to discuss the possibility of holding a Central American Investment Conference in San José in February 1959,4 with President Echandi, Ambassador Willauer, and some prominent Costa Rican and American businessmen present. It was frankly stated that the investment climate still prevailing in Costa Rica is hardly propitious for holding such a conference with positive results, at least so far as Costa Rica is concerned, and the outcome of such a meeting would hinge on the change in the general economic climate which could be achieved in the meantime. President Echandi faces serious immediate obstacles in accomplishing his frequently reiterated objective of strengthening private enterprise. He is essentially a minority president having been elected with less than a plurality of the votes. The Legislature is controlled by the only well-­organized political party which is devoted to the semi-­ socialistic policies of former President Figueres. Echandi must depend 4 No record of the proposed conference was found in Department of State files.

Costa Rica 417 Operational Aspects of U. S. Technical Assistance5 a. Balance Between Programs, Both U.S. and Other. The overall “program” of United States assistance and other activity in Costa Rica, in addition to the work of the Embassy itself, is composed of the following essential elements: (1) The Mutual Security Program devoted to technical assistance in agriculture, health, education, housing, public administration, the complementary training program in these and certain other fields, a loan of 2 million dollars for the construction of the Children’s Hospital;

Costa Rica 419 agriculture was emphasized as being of special importance and it is being given a high priority by the Echandi Administration. This problem had already been appreciated by the USOM/CR and, in fact, two days after the Eisenhower visit the head of the Rural Credit Board of Costa Rica departed for the U. S. on a special rural credit study tour that had been programmed long before the Eisenhower visit. d. Minimum to Meet U.S. Objectives. While it is possible that some rearrangement of projects, and especially of priorities, might result from such an overall economic plan as that proposed elsewhere in this report, the current program on the basis of current evaluations does not exceed the minimum required to achieve U. S. objectives in Costa Rica. In fact, such an economic plan might well result in recommendations in an expanded or accelerated program. Certainly in view of the need to add such a project for an economic survey justifies the observation that the current program is less than the minimum required to achieve U. S. objectives. e. Coordination Between Various Assistance Programs. There is undoubtedly a need for more coordination of the various assistance programs in Costa Rica, especially by the Costa Rican Government itself. It is precisely the solution to this lack of planning and coordination which has been presented here as a special objective. The various Ministries and autonomous institutes are all busily engaged in formulating plans and competing among themselves for the limited facilities available for their execution. There is no problem of coordination between the various U.S. programs, since the Ambassador has established procedures which assure a constant review of U.S. projects both in the planning and execution stage. The USOM is often effective in advising the various Government agencies against entering into projects which would cause duplication of effort or be misdirected in an unproductive direction. The need for more coordination is being constantly brought to the attention of Costa Rican officials by U.S. officials, but the machinery for such coordination, especially in the planning stage, simply does not exist. A review has been made of all current projects being conducted by United Nations agencies and other international organizations. While some of them, such as the FAO, are working on projects that are closely related to some U.S. projects, there is no current duplication of specific projects. While reservations may be made as to their relative effectiveness, most of these non-U.S. projects may actually be considered as complementing our own objectives. Embassy and USOM officials are developing a close association with the UN technical assistance director for this area in an effort to implement further coordination. There is a small but increasing amount of technical assistance being given by other countries, especially France and Germany. Coordination,

Costa Rica 421 CR–11. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart)1 Washington, September 30, 1958. SUBJECT Re-Allocation of Profits of United Fruit Company Subsidiaries for Taxation Purposes. PARTICIPANTS: Department of the Treasury: Mr. Dan Throop Smith, Deputy to the Secretary; Mr. Nathan N. Gordon, Chief International Tax Staff; Mr. David A. Lindsay, Head, Legal Advisory Staff; Department of State: Assistant Secretary Roy R. Rubottom, Jr.; Mr. C. Allan Stewart. Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. By previous appointment, Messrs. Smith, Gordon and Lindsay met in Mr. Rubottom’s office to discuss the allocation of profits for purposes of taxation to the Costa Rican subsidiary of the United Fruit Company. This problem arose as the result of a request by President Mario Echandi of Costa Rica for a greater participation by his country in the profits of the Cfa. Bananera de Costa Rica, a subsidiary of United Fruit Company. Mr. Smith opened the discussion by stating that the Department of the Treasury had decided that it would be possible to undertake a study of the allocation of profits, now made under the 50–50 formula. He said that this could be done in one of two ways, namely, by (1) a change in the regulations, in which event the Internal Revenue Service would study figures presented by the United Fruit Company and determine whether the net profits could be allocated more favorably to Costa Rica, or (2) a change in the regulations for a different allocation conditioned on an Executive Agreement. He said the change in regulations would be a more simple procedure. Mr. Rubottom replied that a change in the regulations would be the preferable procedure, particularly in view of the time element. Mr. Smith said that this then would be the procedure followed, and assured Mr. Rubottom that the change in regulations would be undertaken without delay. It might take between two weeks and a month to put through the amendment. He cautioned that following the

Costa Rica 423 CR–12. Editorial Note Representatives of Costa Rica and the United States exchanged

Costa Rica 425 This problem has been dragging along for more than a year and until recently Treasury officials, without definitely committing themselves, had given the impression such a change could probably be effected. I have learned informally that Treasury tax experts now have completed a review of the data presented by United Fruit and have concluded that the present 50–50 split represents a fair, even generous, allocation of the profits so far as Costa Rica is concerned. While the discussions of these findings are still in the preliminary stage, it appears they will form the basis of a final Treasury decision denying any favorable re-­allocation of United Fruit profits. In presenting its case, it is understood that the United Fruit Company contended that the allocation should be increased from the present 50% to at least 75%. An allocation of taxable profits in a proportion of 75% to the United Fruit subsidiary in Costa Rica and 25% to the United States is in keeping with the type of allocation Costa Rican President Echandi expects. Echandi’s reason for this belief is that he knows that Standard Fruit Company has been paying on the basis of 77% for some years without U.S. objection. The following factors have an important bearing on the need for favorable action by Treasury on this problem: (1) The fact that Treasury has established an enabling regulation permitting a change in allocation of taxable profits is considered by Costa Rica, and the other countries concerned, as tantamount to granting the requested increase of the allocation. In this respect we are faced with the Latin American way of jumping to conclusions and at this juncture not to increase the allocation to the expected 75 percent will be considered as an act of bad faith on our part. (2) In 1950, President Echandi, then serving as Costa Rican Minister in Washington, was successful in having the United Fruit Company obtain an increase in the allocation of profits from 35% to the present 50%. The United Fruit Company was able to convince the Internal Revenue Service that on the basis of its foreign investments, an increase in the percentage of taxable profit allocation to the Costa Rican subsidiary would be more equitable. Echandi believes the present allocation is still inequitable as 99% of the United Fruit Company’s Costa Rican investment, consisting of the land and all productive facilities, is actually in Costa Rica. He has expressed his intention of obtaining a greater tax return one way or another. Since he was successful in obtaining an increase in the allocation in 1950, it is difficult for him to understand why this can’t be readily done again. (3) Any re-­allocation of profits of United Fruit’s Costa Rican subsidiary will apply to the other banana producing subsidiaries in Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic and Colombia. This fact, admitted by Treasury, has been emphasized

Costa Rica 427 made by March of this year.4 However, Mr. Smith resigned and his position was taken by Mr. Henry Wallich, who adopted a different attitude in the matter. On March 6, 1959, Mr. Stewart, Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs, met with Mr. Wallich and his advisors and it was evident that this new group was unconvinced of the merits of United Fruit’s case (see Tab C).5 However, Mr. Wallich indicated that the case might be settled by a 60–40 division of the profits. In view of the political factors enumerated above, Mr. Wallich was informed that the Department thought this would not be satisfactory to the producing countries concerned. Since that meeting the Treasury representatives with whom the Department has maintained contact have indicated that the study was progressing slowly and it was not until Mr. Samuel Baggett, Vice President and General Counsel of United Fruit Company, visited Under Secretary Scribner a few weeks ago that the matter was pushed. In making its decision, Treasury has not called upon the United Fruit for any information other than that made in the original presentation by the company’s attorneys. This may be standard Treasury procedure but it seems to me that in a case of such obvious importance the company should be permitted to justify its case in additional conferences with the experts who have made an adverse recommendation. Recommendation: That you discuss this matter with Secretary Anderson in an effort to induce Treasury to render a decision on this matter that will benefit our relations with the Latin American countries involved.6

Costa Rica 429 We do not know whether President Echandi’s claim for a 75–25 ratio is or is not soundly based. We do understand, however, that there are special circumstances relating to the trade in bananas between Latin America and the United States, and that because of these circumstances the Costa Rican case for an improved ratio is valid. Accordingly, we believe it reasonable, under the circumstances, for Costa Rice and the other banana-­producing countries to expect a significant and favorable change in the present allocation formula. We understand that the present 50–50 formula is based exclusively on investment and sales. However we believe that, at the least, in any new allocation formula the factor of payroll should also be given weight because it reflects the economic activity of the banana companies and because, we understand, there is ample domestic precedent. We do not believe that an allocation based on sales and costs alone, without regard to the investment and its situs, would be equitable. Certainly the very substantial investment of the banana companies in the producing countries constitutes a major income producing factor. Should it be determined in Treasury that a 75–25 allocation formula is equitable and sound, it would represent a substantial contribution to good relations with Costa Rica and the other banana-­producing countries. If this is not fully consistent with Treasury’s judgment regarding an equitable formula, then we would hope that a formula of at least 70–30 could be carefully considered. A decision to continue the 50–50 allocation, under the circumstances referred to above, would be most harmful to good relations with Costa Rica and the other banana-­producing countries of Latin America and would not only lead to higher tax rates in these countries, but would likely result in other harmful measures. It is, therefore, our hope that a new formula which is equitably and soundly based and which is favorable to the banana-­producing countries will be adopted. It is also our hope that this action can be taken promptly. Sincerely yours, DOUGLAS DILLON Acting Secretary

Costa Rica 431 Costa Rica, effective January 1, 1958, informing Echandi this decision:2 (1) strongly recommend he accept ruling as decision made in an equitable and fair manner after careful consideration; (2) stress increase in allocation obtained by strong efforts on part of State and UFCO; and (3) GOCR should deal directly with United Fruit hereafter on this matter. Also, remind Echandi this information being given him through diplomatic channels in accordance Pres. Eisenhower’s letter. Copy of Decision will be forwarded Embassy as soon as available; sent UFCO Boston yesterday.3 Herter 2 Documentation on Willauer’s informing Echandi of this decision was not found in Department of State files. 3 A copy of the letter to Baggett from Dana Latham, Commissioner of Internal

Costa Rica 433 CR–20. Telegram from the Ambassador in Costa Rica (Willauer) to the Department of State1

Costa Rica 435 participated in drafting. The recommendations were then reviewed by the contributing members of the Embassy staff, who were invited to suggest revisions or additions. This resulted in several additions, but otherwise no alterations were made in my original draft. The Embassy staff concurs in the opinion that the following recommendations should be placed before the Operations Coordinating Board. Recommendation No. 1 Overall Recommendation as to the Operation of the OCB In a personal and confidential letter to the Secretary on November

Costa Rica 437 a sworn enemy of Carías, who made it a practice for 20 years to allege communism against most of his political enemies. We ultimately were able, with the help of the Department, to get over this hump, but the delay was extremely embarrassing and I can assure the OCD that this is a frequent kind of occurrence. Recommendation No. 5 Regional Plan 19—Labor I understand that the basic philosophy of a free labor movement is that management and labor in the United States and throughout the Free World have accepted the principle that a healthy labor movement produces buying power and efficient operation of the free enterprise system, and that enlightened capitalism aids in the well being of workers. True, we have our rows about the details of the operation of this basic principle, but in the final analysis the principle is accepted on both sides. So far as the policy of United States free enterprise abroad is concerned, it has been my observation that the acceptance of this principle has not generally percolated down to the level of the local managers. Nor has it become a tenet of labor leaders in Latin America who are representing the free labor movement. All too often in the local scene I find that the basic philosophy on both sides remains that of Marx: “Labor must fight capital” and vice versa. My suggestions are: (A) That the “head office” management of our American enterprises abroad be approached to see whether they believe that labor and capital abroad in their various enterprises can and should work together to their mutual advantage. This is a delicate problem because conditions vary from country to country. For instance, here in Costa Rica the laws and administration of labor affairs are so relatively advanced that representatives of capital feel that concessions to labor have reached the point where it is economically impossible to make more concessions. I do not necessarily agree with the employers here but this is how they think. Labor, on the other hand, is so well treated in Costa Rica that there is only a slight incentive for a free and democratic labor movement. The situation in Honduras or in Guatemala is completely different. Without attempting to suggest what the policy of the free labor movement should be in every country, I wish to point out that it is not sufficient to “lump” Latin American labor in one category and to adopt one policy for all the countries involved. Like all policies, it is highly important that a “policy board” study and evaluate the actual conditions in every country before going into action. (B) That in any case, where it is agreed that the policy of cooperation of labor and management is correct, the local managers should be called home for consultation and “given the word.” (C) That in those countries where ORIT has active affiliated labor organizations, general labor policy concerning these countries be discussed and outlined between a top representative of ORIT and the top

Costa Rica 439 that they mutually know the history, the customs, the language and the aspirations of each other. In our cultural relations program we send art exhibitions, ballets, orchestras, basketball teams, etc., to Latin America, and all of these accomplish great good in the objectives of mutual understanding. Also we have a program of inter-­change of students through scholarships between Latin America and the United States and this also is a good thing. However, the size of this student exchange program, which is the most important one that I can think of in the realm of cultural relations, is totally inadequate to accomplish the kind of understanding we are attempting. It particularly fails in the quantity and quality of students from the United States that study in Latin America. My recommendations are: (A) At least 10,000 scholarships for Latin American students in the United States. At an average rate of $4,000 each this would total $40 million. (B) At least a thousand scholarships for North Americans to study or teach in Latin America. In this case I would allocate for each student the sum of $10,000 (or any sum required to be competitive) for a total cost of $10 million. I have suggested the higher allocation for North American students and teachers because I am certain that we ought to make it so attractive to them that they cannot refuse to go. I would hope that the experience of the first thousand students would prove so rewarding that the word would spread among the student bodies of the United States that Latin America is a place to seek out. (C) Costa Rica stands at or near the top in mass education of its population. It also has one of the highest ratings for sympathy towards U.S. policies and problems in the hemisphere. I submit that there is a large element of cause and effect in this coincidence. I submit for evaluation as to cost and feasibility a campaign aided by the U.S. to stamp out illiteracy in the hemisphere in ten years. I think if this goal could even be approximated it would pay us greater dividends than any other course of action in other fields which we might be contemplating. (D) Perhaps the U.S. Armed Forces could make greater use of the Latin American service schools. At present, to my knowledge, we are sending only one student per year to the Uruguayan Staff College. Several of the other countries have similar institutions, such as Chile and Argentina. The current reason given for not sending officers to these schools is that they are not as advanced as Leavenworth. Little consideration is given to the idea that these officers will gain a tremendous amount of knowledge from a year’s continuous and daily contact with Latin Americans under academic conditions. Recommendation No. 9 Public information Program—General I am generally satisfied with what we are doing to date [text not declassified]

Costa Rica 441 something generally known in the Honduran community, so I would not have been revealing “secret” information. (B) The Cuban attack on the impartiality of the United States press. An American friend in Costa Rica close to the press points out that the responsible press (liberal and conservative) in a dozen Latin American countries has been at least as strong in attacking events in Cuba as the United States press has been. He suggests that all this material should be gathered and under appropriate auspices put out in “block-­buster” form. (C) Coverage of Latin American seminars: The fact that Herb Matthews11 was able to get away with his defense of Castro in the top billing spot of the Stanford University October seminar pains me. Because of then existing Department of State policy I had to remain silent at Stanford, and could not answer him officially. In this connection I make the following suggestions: (1) That it should be arranged that persons (preferably known liberals) who know the score about communism should refute that type of talk. (2) That the agendas and subjects to be discussed at these influential meetings should carefully reviewed in advance by the Department. [text not declassified] In any event, these influential meetings should not be allowed to “go by default.” There are too many Latin Americans who feel that what is said in these meetings somehow expresses U.S. opinion. In this recommendation I am not unmindful of the excellent job that Dick Rubottom, Dr. Eisenhower and others do at these meetings. But what we need is a “task force” to cover these conferences. And the “task force” must also do a “follow-­up” job after the meetings are finished. For instance whether or not we agree with Professor Tannenbaum12 on Mexico and Cardenas,13 he made a speech at Stanford which basically refuted Matthews’ thesis. The “follow-­up” would in this case involve an attempt to get Tannenbaum to write a “critique” on the Matthews speech. (D) There are some indications that, either by design or by accident, the Roman Catholic Church in Latin America has had its attention diverted from communism into a program of resisting the inroads of Protestantism. Unfortunately, a propaganda link has been constructed between “Yanquismo,” U.S. Government representation and Protestant 11 Herbert L. Matthews, editorial staff, New York Times. 12 Frank Tannenbaum, Professor of History, Columbia University.

Costa Rica 443 month ago I made a similar recommendation to Carl Migdail of the Pan American Union, who seemed exceedingly interested in the idea. (3) In addition to orienting State Department personnel, service Attachés and military mission members should also be checked out on the functions and operations of the OAS and UN. I am told that our War Colleges and the Strategic Intelligence School have overlooked this particular aspect of training. Recommendation No. 11 Economic: B–2—Inter-American Highway I have for several years now been recommending the creation of an Inter-American Highway authority to make possible sound maintenance and transportation practices on the Inter-American Highway when it is completed. This objective has been adopted by ARA and much successful work has been done. For reference of the OCB I attach Tab G.16 I have informally suggested to ARA ways and means to keep up the present impetus behind this idea. Recommendation No. 12 Military—General Recommendation I submit for further study and consideration a memorandum entitled “The Place of the Military in Latin American Affairs with Comments on the Movements towards ‘Dual Purpose’ Military Units” (Tab H).17 The OCB may not be aware of the fact that I was one of the first to take up the cudgels for the dual-­purpose military unit concept while I was in Honduras. It may be useful at this time to review some of my thinking on the place of the military and of the reasoning behind dual-­purpose military units as expressed in the attached Tab H. To the extent that the Board finds my ideas, or better ideas if they exist, valid, I think they should be widely disseminated in the field. I hope that some way of providing military assistance to “dual-­ purpose” military organizations can be developed that takes advantage of the resources offered by both the Defense Department and ICA without provoking a bureaucratic struggle at home over “empire building” rights. I should like to renew a previous suggestion to OCB that we get behind and support regional military schools in the hemisphere. So long as the military play the great part they now do in Latin American 16 At Tab G was “A Proposal for an Inter-American Highway Authority,” by Ambassador Willauer, not printed. 17 This undated memorandum by Ambassador Willauer, is not printed.

Costa Rica 445 “We are going to need Costa Rica one day and I do not like the growing feeling here that they are being neglected, and the half-­jokingly expressed view, which may one day become seriously held, that the way to get cooperation from the United States is to play hard to get. Considering the great tactical and psychological advantage of having Costa Rica on our side in Latin American problems, such a result would be little short of tragic.” Unfortunately, my expressed fears as to a hardening of Echandi’s attitude have been completely borne out, and this attitude has become an important factor in his failure to cooperate with the U.S.-­supported request of the other Central American countries for an immediate joint

Costa Rica 447 of the Government’s move in diverting part of the short-­term Chase Manhattan loan to rural credit purposes.4 A beefing up of the rural credit system would directly help all walks of life in this country. Thirdly, the Echandi Administration is attempting to implement, through local bond issues which it can ill afford, a plan to improve its own road network, as distinguished from the Pan American Highway. This is known locally as the Plan Vial. Since every member of the Assembly has a direct interest in a piece of this project, help on this plan ought to gain us a lot of good will with the Congress, which is where we most badly will need it to forestall criticism, if the Executive acts on Cuba the way we want it to do. Perhaps as a fourth point, we might try to find moans of purchasing more Costa Rican sugar than they would otherwise expect under the new law.5 If my recommendations are favorably received in principle, I suggest the desirability of early consultation to work out the best possible package and to decide on the most important matter of tactics for the utilization of decisions taken. Whiting Willauer 4 The proposed use of the $10 million Chase Manhattan Loan is described in desp.

Costa Rica 449

Costa Rica 451 due primarily to the indecision and lack of clarity on the part of the Costa Ricans themselves, who never provided clear distinctions between this loan project (originally $5 million) and other projects for loan up to $30 million. The Costa Ricans apparently lost interest in this loan when they did not receive favorable consideration of their insistence on provision for a long term and a low interest rate for the loan. As an illustration of this lack of interest, a request in April 1959 to the Costa Ricans for information by the Export Import Bank for data in connection with consideration of the loan remained without reply until March 1960. With specific regard to the four recommendations for assistance made in your despatch No. 14 I can make the following comments: Suggestion No. 1. Water Works Project: As Allan Stewart informed you in his weekly OAP letter on July 15, we had already discussed such a loan project with Ambassador Escalante over a year ago and, by coincidence, had just received the Ambassador’s request for assistance in activating such a project. An informal discussion between Ambassador Escalante and officials of State and the DLF was held on August 14 with the result that (1) the Costa Ricans agreed to prepare a formal application and (2) that DLF agreed to its engineers informally reviewing the report by Rader and Associates to see if any additional technical information would be needed in formulating such an application. It was informally agreed that the application would include only the first stage of development recommended in the Rader report for an amount between $4 to $5 million. Suggestion No. 2. Rural Credit Loan: Allan reported to you in his informal letter of April 7, 1960,5 that Alvaro Castro, Manager of the Central Bank, during his visit to Washington, informed the Export- Import Bank that the Central Bank did not intend to press for the time being this loan application. The reason given was that that the Central Bank wished to see how the loan from Chase Manhattan would be applied. Castro indicated that the Central Bank might formulate a new project later this year. Approximately ten days ago Ambassador Escalante informed us that there was no plan to renew at this time the Juntas Rurales loan project since funds from the Chase Manhattan loan were being used for this purpose. Instead, the Ambassador stated the Costa Ricans wished to press the water works loan project. Until the Costa Ricans renew the rural credit loan project we are in no position to renew our efforts in its behalf. Suggestion No. 3. Road Network (Plan Vial): Over a period of almost four years the IBRD has discussed with the Costa Rican authorities the

Costa Rica 453 CR–26. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Costa Rican Affairs (Feldman).1 Washington, October 7, 1960. SUBJECT Meeting of Costa Rican Minister of Finance and Economy with Mr. Mann, Assistant Secretary to Discuss Various Loan Applications Made With the DLF and EXIM Bank. PARTICIPANTS: Minister Jorge BORBON Castro, Minister of Finance and Economy The Honorable Manuel ESCALANTE Duran, Ambassador of Costa Rica ARA – Mr. Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary OAP – Mr. Charles E. Higdon, Acting Director OAP – Mr. Carwell OAP/C – Mr. Arthur W. Feldman, OIC, Costa Rican Affairs Minister Borbon opened the meeting by stating that he was in Washington to discuss the Rural Credit Loan Application with DLF and the Water Works Project and a loan application for the export of U.S. cattle to Costa Rica with EXIM Bank. He was pleased with the sympathetic receptivity shown by the agencies in discussing the loan applications. He referred to the letter President Echandi had sent, via his person to Mr. Mann2 and to the serious situation faced by President Echandi in obtaining suitable legislation on agrarian reform from the Legislative Assembly, which is now considering the matter. Several radical amendments have been tacked on to the bill which would counter the policy of the Echandi administration by getting the Government directly involved in the distribution and exploitation of land. The Administration would prefer that the supervision and distribution of rural credit be handled through existing agencies, which have made an outstanding record in this operation over the past 10 years. Minister Borbon stressed the importance of his returning to Costa Rica with some written assurance of general agreement on the Rural Credit Loan Application which President Echandi could then use in obtaining the legislation he desires. Mr. Mann replied that he was in full sympathy with President Echandi’s position and would see what could be done to obtain such written assurance. Mr. Mann also indicated how pleased

Costa Rica 455 (Date not mentioned). He stated that Panama, in a similar position, had not had to pay the penalty. Mr. Mann was informed that an investigation had already been started and that a report would be forthcoming in a couple of days. Minister Borbon expressed his pleasure at having had a frank discussion of Costa Rican economic problems with Mr. Mann. Mr. Mann in turn requested that he be informed of any obstacles which might arise in the consideration of the loan applications by the DLF and EXIM Bank and reiterated his intention to reply promptly to President Echandi, giving a report on the status of the Rural Credit and Water Works Project loan applications. CR–27. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Mann) to the President of Costa Rica (Echandi)1 Washington, November 10, 1960. Dear Mr. President: I have delayed telling you what a pleasure it was to hear from you in the hope that I would be able to give you some definitive answers to the two questions to which your letter of October 1 refers.2 Both your Minister of Economy and Finance, Mr. Jorge Borbon Castro, and your Ambassador, Mr. Manuel Escalante, made very effective presentations concerning both of these projects to the respective banking institutions. Your personal letter has of course been especially helpful. I do not need to tell you of our interest in your plan to open up new farms. I have talked again today with the Development Loan Fund about this project. The Fund is awaiting some information which it expects to receive next week from Costa Rica. I have been assured that the Fund’s staff is considering this project on an urgent basis and with sympathy.

Costa Rica 457 Explained GON probably making written request for such assistance today. Echandi said profoundly moved by offer U.S. assistance but GOC feels no need air or sea patrol or other assistance in present situation. Although President was convinced Friday night and Saturday that invasion by Cuban force was occurring, he said subsequent developments made clear that recent trouble northern Costa Rica caused by Nica revolutionaries as on previous occasions, with no threat against CR intended. However, Echandi believes trouble here probably part of general Commie conspiracy stir up trouble Central America with intention and hope toppling some governments, if lucky. Regarding future, President said if any threat against CR develops directly or indirectly, will ask for U.S. assistance in writing as outlined, and will ask for OAS action under Rio treaty at same time. Echandi suggested that if U.S. assistance is extended to Guatemala, Nicaragua or other countries U.S. might as well issue policy statement saying U.S. responding to formal request for assistance by governments and that similar U.S. assistance available when requested in writing by any CA government invaded or under threat of invasion by external forces whether Cuban or other Commie elements. Comment: Country Team chiefs and I agree with President’s assessment that present situation under control and past weekend activity probably limited to Nicaraguan revolutionaries. Also agree with Echandi that Northern CR incident might have been part of general plan. Marcial Aguiluz,4 in Costa Rica link to Cuba and has been involved in previous excursions against Nicaragua. Kimmel 4 Marcial Aguiluz Orellana was a National Liberation Party Deputy in the Costa Rican Legislative Assembly and Secretary for Labor in the National Directorate of his party.

Costa Rica 459 Rican based United States aircraft to evacuate casualties and army field rations from the Embassy commissary were sent to the troops in the field.5 A friend of the President approached Embassy officers in his behalf about 1:30 a.m. of the twelfth with news of heavy fighting on the border and requested United States air and naval patrols and other assistance.6 However, when subsequent developments that day made it clear that the rebels were all Nicaraguans intent on only invading Nicaragua and that they did not constitute a threat against the Costa Rican Government, no formal request for military assistance was made of the United States Government. Our Army Mission Chief reported that the rebel group which numbered about forty men, all Nicaraguans, was now dispersed along the border by the patrol action of the Civil Guard.7 Although the Costa Rican Government instituted air search and has augmented the Civil Guard Patrols in the build-­up area, no rebels have been found since the ambush of November 11. Our Army Mission Chief has also reported that as of November 14, he has found no evidence of Cuban weapons used by the rebels or of Cuban involvement in this attempted invasion of Nicaraguans. President Echandi was informed by our Chargé on November 15 of the United States Government offer to help prevent the receipt by the rebels of supplies, especially from Cuba. President Echandi profoundly moved by this gesture, gratefully declined the offer since he believed that his Government had no need for air or sea patrols or other assistance at the present time. Estimate of the Situation The sensitivity of the Costa Rican Government to the possibility of a Cuban led attack against Costa Rica was made evident by the credence given at first to the unconfirmed reports of such an attack. These reports were subsequently proven unfounded. 5 The Costa Rican Government asked Bailey and Edwards to make the Inter- American Geodetic Survey “aircraft available for removal of wounded and for liaison with the Costa Rican force headquartered at the town of Liberia, south of the Nicaraguan border. The Army Attaché received permissions from the Caribbean Command to use the aircraft as required.” (Memorandum by Roy I. Kimmel, Counselor, Embassy in Costa

Dominican Republic: U.S. Relations with ­Dominican Republic DR–1. Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Middle American Affairs (Wieland) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, January 30, 1958. SUBJECT Future Course of Dominican-United States Relations Problem: Ambassador Farland recently came up from Ciudad Trujillo for consultation in the Department on the future course of our relations with the Dominican Republic. This matter is urgent in view of a talk the Ambassador had with Generalissimo Trujillo on January 17 when the latter indicated that he plans to withdraw very soon from an active role in his country’s affairs, turning over responsibility to others in fact as well as in name. Trujillo spoke particularly of the pressure the United States has brought to bear upon him because of the Galíndez- Murphy affair2; further, his doctors advise him to get rid of his heavy responsibilities. The policy question thus raised is whether the United States is willing to resume normal relations so that Trujillo can disengage himself from control without having this delicate process hindered by the present uncertainties in U.S.-Dominican relations. If the United States is not willing to clarify the relationship, Trujillo

Dominican Republic 463 Discussion: Our investigation of the Galíndez-Murphy case has pointed to the involvement of Dominican officials, notably General Arturo Espaillat, former Dominican Consul General in New York, and former Cabinet member for Security. The investigation has also uncovered other evidence of improper Dominican activities in the United States including use of unregistered agents. John Joseph Frank was tried and convicted in November 1957 for failure to register as a Dominican agent; Horace William Schmall was haled before a Federal Grand Jury in January 1958 but refused to testify on grounds of possible self-­incrimination; Carl Armfelt hastily departed from the Dominican Republic in January 1958 to avoid service of a subpoena to appear before a Federal Grand Jury. The Dominican Government has employed Sydney Baron of New York (and through him Morris Ernst and Judge Munson) to conduct an independent investigation of the Galíndez case, which per se tends to impugn the good faith of the Department of Justice investigation. General Espaillat has insulted our Government by stating to our Embassy that Frank was “framed”. These developments have been attended by keen public and Congressional interest and as a result Trujillo and the Dominican Government have been subject to continual public stigma. Congressman Porter4 has broadened his interest in the Murphy- Galíndez case to embrace the whole field of United States policy toward Latin America, particularly with respect to the “dictatorship countries”. Last summer Mr. Porter called for a suspension of technical and military cooperation with the “dictatorship countries” and sponsored a Bill to effect this change in policy. The Bill was defeated by a wide margin in late July but while it was under consideration we felt obliged to refuse to sell jet aircraft the Dominican Republic was then on the point of purchasing. Other Dominican requests for military supplies or equipment have been handled on an ad hoc basis. Similarly questions concerning our technical cooperation program in the Dominican Republic have been handled on a case by case basis, as have other questions such as a proposed visit by “Ramfis”5 to Washington next June, and a proposed visit in February by Admiral Richardson, Chief of the Dominican Navy. Thus, although there has been no formal change in policy, elements of uncertainty and hesitation have become very pronounced in our relations. This paper seeks to clarify our policy with regard to specific areas of interest. 4 Charles O. Porter (D-Oregon) 5 Rafael L. Trujillo, Jr.

Dominican Republic 465 important strategic area. An orderly transfer of power thus would be in our over-­all interest, particularly if such a transfer also gave promise of political and social responsibility. We hope for a greater measure of the latter if Ramfis or Hector Trujillo receive power. Upon his return to the Dominican Republic we propose that Ambassador Farland inform Trujillo of our position as set forth above and how it affects the following specific items of interest: l. Espaillat: Our investigation of the Galíndez-Murphy case has repeatedly brought Espaillat’s name to light. The Department of Justice has shown interest in questioning him regarding these cases and we have asked formally that Espaillat make himself amenable to the usual procedures in the United States in such matters. We are determined to continue our efforts to interrogate Espaillat in the United States under conditions where he can be charged with perjury if he lies. We have drafted a new note asking that Espaillat come to the United States to testify. We propose to authorize Ambassador Farland to so inform Trujillo and, in the context of the discussions, say that he will recommend to the Department that it not be delivered if its purpose can be achieved informally (i.e., if Espaillat would make himself available). The Ambassador would explain that we have no desire to embarrass the Dominican Government by presenting a formal note if the matter can be arranged informally. (Draft note TAB A).7 2. Other Improper Activities in U.S. An indicated in our note of November 11, 1957,8 (TAB B) we have been disturbed over evidence of unregistered Dominican Agents operating in the United States, the organization of picketing demonstrations, and distribution of propaganda of a type which friendly governments do not ordinarily disseminate in another friendly country. We expect that these improprieties shall cease, as requested in our note. 3. Dominican Meddling in Guatemala, Haiti and Other Areas The activities of John Abbes Garcia and Onessimo Valenzuela in Guatemala following the assassination of Castillo Armas9 were of serious concern to us. Dominican radio attacks on Guatemalan political figures have gone far beyond the bounds of propriety and truth and have tended to sow confusion, distrust and division among non-­Communist political elements in Guatemala at the very moment when these elements should have been encouraged to submerge their differences in 7 No attachments were found with the source text. 8 Not found. 9 Col. Carlos Castillo Armas, President of Guatemala until his assassination on July 26, 1957.

Dominican Republic 467 6. Atomic Energy

Dominican Republic 469 the United States relating to military and technical cooperation, and the operation of a guided missile facility in the Dominican Republic. This Resolution is now under study by the Executive Branch of the Dominican Government which is expected to take a decision by July 2. Ambassador Farland plans to deliver our views to the Dominican Foreign Minister this Saturday or Sunday. Background: The Dominican Government under the dominance of Generalissimo Trujillo took this action because of its resentment over the steady criticism it has received from certain members of our Congress and press as a result of the Galíndez-Murphy affair, and the extravagant indiscretions of General Trujillo, Jr. The final insult (in their eyes) was the recent decision of our Command and General Staff College not to grant a diploma to General Trujillo Jr. because of his long absences and low academic standing, although this factor is not included in the bill of particulars drawn up by the Dominican Congress. Our Objectives and Proposed Action: Our objectives in this situation are to preserve our right to operate the missile tracking station for the ten years agreed upon; continue our mutual security program if the Dominicans decide after mature consideration that it is in their interest to do so; and to minimize the repercussions of the present incident on our long-­term interest of carrying on normal friendly relations with the Dominican Republic as one of the American Republics. To achieve these objectives we plan to inform the Dominicans by formal note or aide-­memoire that it is our policy to seek normal friendly relations with the other American Republics and to carry on present cooperative programs if there is a corresponding disposition on their part. We are trying to avoid any appearance in the eyes of the world of threatening or cajoling the Dominicans in this matter, or of knuckling under to this type of pressure. Attached is a biographic summary of Mr. Farland (Tab B). The Ambassador will be accompanied by Mr. C. Allan Stewart.4 4 Deputy Director of the Office of Middle American Affairs. In a memorandum to Rubottom dated June 25, Stewart explained in detail the background to the joint resolution, and he recommended that Farland deliver to the Dominican Government a for-

Dominican Republic 471 Ambassador Farland said it is difficult for the Dominicans to understand the freedom of press and public criticism existing in the United States. He noted that Trujillo would like very much to visit the United States and inspect our military facilities. Regarding Trujillo’s retirement the Ambassador said that the Generalissimo is tired but that his retirement will probably be more a paper proposition than an actual turnover of control to his brother, the current President, Hector Trujillo. Mr. Stewart asked whether the proposed note was all right with the deletion of the paragraph mentioned by General White. General White said yes.4

Dominican Republic 473 the future requested technical aid and equipment, it was hoped that arrangements could be made for such assistance even though there was no military agreement. It was apparent from the context of this remark that the reference was to military aid and equipment, although this was not specifically stated by the Minister. The Secretary told the Minister that the Dominican Government’s request would be studied carefully and said that he appreciated the comments of the Minister regarding the attitude of his Government toward cooperation with the United States. He stated that it would be fruitless to deny that in the recent past there have been points of disagreement between our two governments. He said that some countries in the world take certain actions with which we agree to a greater or lesser degree, whereas others sometimes do things that we cannot approve. The United States Government’s attitude is that other countries, being sovereign nations, may do as they wish in conducting their internal affairs and that we will respect their sovereignty, but nevertheless we do have opinions on their actions. The Secretary alluded to the fact that some of the things the Dominicans have done in the past have had a poor public relations reaction here in the United States, mentioning specifically the letters of the former Minister of Commerce4 which were critical of certain Congressional figures in the United States. The Secretary stressed that the public reaction in the United States to acts of others was beyond our government’s control and was a fact of life which must be accepted. Nonetheless, the Secretary added, the United States Government believes that our two governments should work together to resolve our mutual problems. Mr. Rubottom commented at this point that, as Ambassador de Moya was fully aware, a number of problems affecting relations between our two countries have arisen in recent months and that our government’s effort has always been to deal with them in a way which would meet the objectives of both of our governments. Turning to another subject, the Foreign Minister said that he thought Ambassador Lodge’s meeting on China with the Latin American delegates to the UN General Assembly in New York was very timely and useful. In response, the Secretary briefly described his trip to Taiwan to see President Chiang and some of the issues raised by the division of China by communism.5 Before the Minister rose to leave, the Secretary said that he had one comment he would like to make. He wished to tell the Minister, and asked him to pass on his thought to his President and to the 4 Juan O. Velázquez, Minister of Industry and Commerce.

Dominican Republic 475 informed me that action requested per said memorandum was not in actual accord with that which had been contemplated by GODR, that inactivity was preferable to termination, and that Generalisimo expressed wish to discuss matter with me prior to any definite decision by either signatory. Further, if this be the case, and in view Ambassador De Moya’s statement concerning necessity hemispheric solidarity, the Department with same spirit cooperation considers it appropriate to ascertain Generalisimo views prior to implementing request. After offering a number of thin excuses for not having had discussion with me prior to time Foreign Minister delivered memorandum, Generalisimo stated Herrera Baez mission was not to ask termination of MAP agreement as such but rather his commission was to work out best possible solution of MAP agreement difficulties together with related matters, and if that effect non-­productive then to suggest termination as last alternative. Therefore for purpose re-­establishment his position, Generalisimo requested convey to Secretary Dulles complete assurances of GODR desire for cooperation and sincere friendship, stating both of which will continue as long as he has voice in GODR. He added that long ago he had cast his country’s lot with the policies of the U.S. and that he would not change that relationship. He stated that in view this fact and to prevent further misinterpretation he desired to meet with me in next few days to discuss his government concepts and policies in regard to military assistance program. He further stated that he would ask the President, Vice President,2 Foreign Minister and if possible Manuel De Moya to attend said meeting. He noted that the Foreign Minister was expected back from Mexico shortly and that he would forthwith wire Ambassador De Moya in Paris. He hoped further delay these few days would not complicate matters. I explained time primary importance to U.S. and meeting must be expedited. Atmosphere of meeting extremely friendly. Generalisimo expressed appreciation for U.S. cordiality evidenced during Secretary- Foreign Minister meeting and for the Secretary’s observations made at that time. Comment: Conversation indicated change of policy as reported to me by Ambassador De Moya at meeting November 24. As yet unable to ascertain extent this change. However in conjunction therewith it noteworthy that Trujillo, Jr. was not included among those persons suggested for aforementioned meeting. Also of interest is that Gereralisimo made great point of informing me Arturo Espaillat had been removed from all active military connections while engaged commercial activities. The “observation” made during meeting with Ambassador De Moya November 17 concerning Richardson and Espaillat apparently effected 2 Joaquín Balaguer.

Dominican Republic 477 of eleven official Americans, three members of the local diplomatic corps, two American clergymen, four American businessmen, and four Dominican citizens. No one who has lived in the Dominican Republic less than a year was approached. Excluding Dominicans, the average length of residence here of the participants is approximately three years. The questions posed and their answers follow: (1) Do you think there will be a serious invasion attempt against the Dominican Republic in the next six months and, if so, would it be successful? Answer – Eighteen answered that they believed there would be no serious invasion attempt within the next six months and six indicated one is unlikely. Only one person predicted that an invasion would be successful if attempted. (2) How long will the present regime survive? Answer – All but one person expressed the belief the present regime will survive until the Generalissimo becomes seriously incapacitated or dies. The average estimate before this would transpire, was approximately four years. One source thinks the Generalissimo would retain control for an indefinite period even though seriously incapacitated – ­in much the same fashion as Henri Christophe did in Haiti.2 (It is noted that Trujillo’s mother is reportedly 96 years old and is still active.) (3) What will be the sequel to the downfall of the Generalissimo with respect to the assumption of authority? Answer – Five sources said all contenders are so far overshadowed by the Generalissimo that it is impossible to make anything approximating an intelligent prediction. One said son Ramfis would take over on a permanent basis together with President Hector Trujillo. Two held out strongly for the chances of Lt. General Jose Garcia Trujillo. The remaining vast majority simply stated that a military junta would take over. Only two said this would be done without violence. The prevailing sentiment was that a relatively short period of time of tranquility will transpire, accompanied by furious jockeying for power behind the scenes, before the onset of inevitable violence. (4) Will the government that eventually stabilizes the political situation be more or less cooperative with the United States than the present one? Answer – Nine answered more cooperative, nine about the same, and four less cooperative. 2 Reference is to a leader of the Haitian war of independence who established a kingdom in northern Haiti in the first years of the nineteenth century. Henri Christophe suffered a paralytic stroke in 1820 and committed suicide later that year when revolts broke out at news of his incapacitating illness.

Dominican Republic 479 has not touched in some manner. They are, however, quick to emphasize their economic well being derives from the Trujillo regime and openly state they would be most reluctant to move against it or effect drastic changes, even after Trujillo’s demise. They would prefer and will probably demand a transition to a much more democratic regime through which their personal interests would continue to be protected. Politically significant discontent exists in several segments of the population. The Embassy does not consider that such discontent is likely to erupt in overt revolution under present circumstances. Elements of disconent have been discerned within the professional classes, the younger military officer class (not considered to be extensive and difficult to estimate), the non-Trujillo middle class merchant group, the well to do agriculturists of the Cibae. Recently, an Embassy officer has observed a nucleus of potential disaffection within the group of high level business associates of the Generalissimo. Members of the two latter groups must be classified as opportunists who will swing with the tides of fortune. The Embassy considers the most important political development since January 1 affecting the Dominican Republic was the downfall of Batista, Castro’s action in placing numerous military supporters of Batista before the firing squad doubtless converted many Dominicans who previously adhered to his cause to active enemies, through fear of any Castro inspired action against the Dominican Republic. The anticipation of violence marking the end of the “Era of Trujillo” inclines most people to “bear the ills they have rather than fly to others they know not of”, particularly when the present economic and political situation is compared to the pre-Trujillo one and the choice between retrogression and painful advance is contemplated. There seems little doubt that a greater degree of unity was achieved by Trujillo during the months of January, February, and March of this year than has been previously observed within recent years. Fear of Castro has probably accomplished for Trujillo what nothing else could have. Since the conference of American ambassadors at San Salvador and the intervention of the OAS in Panama, this unity has dissipated somewhat, motivated primarily by the adverse economic picture and lessening tension. However, in view of the recent slight increase over the previously existing rock bottom price for sugar and the encouraging upturn in the U.S. economy which sooner or later should be reflected in the Dominican economy, some improvement in the economic situation here is foreseen. Therefore, if the Dominican Government exercises even a modicum of restraint with respect to its purchases of weapons abroad, it appears probable that a reasonable degree of political stability may be contemplated for the Dominican Republic for the foreseeable future. A most important prerequisite for the validity of this prediction is that the Dominican Government will take no overt step to exacerbate

Dominican Republic 481 DR–8. Editorial Note On June 14, 1959, Generalissimo Trujillo informed Ambassador Farland of an attempted invasion of the Dominican Republic that afternoon. In telegram 480 from Ciudad Trujillo, June 14, Farland reported the following to the Department: “Trujillo advised me at 8:15 tonight that one transport aircraft landed at Constanza late this afternoon with 18 insurgents aboard. Dominican Army garrison reported in pursuit. Origin and nationality group as yet unknown. Landings momentarily and will keep Embassy fully informed. Ciudad Trujillo calm and as yet unaware this information but considerable military air activity noted

Dominican Republic 483 In view of a distinct possibility that the Government of Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo might face a crisis or fall before the end of 1960, it is of great importance that the United States work, without exposing itself to charges of violation of non-­intervention commitments, towards assuring insofar as possible that any successor government is reasonably friendly to the United States and in harmony with U.S. objectives for Latin America. In particular, the coming to power during the critical months ahead, of a Castro-­like government in the Dominican Republic might very well set in motion a chain reaction, replacing the Government of Haiti and probably one or more governments in the Central American area with governments more in consonance with Castro’s way of doing things than ours. Such a development, added to the Panamanian problem, could give rise to a much more serious situation in the Caribbean than we now face and would seriously jeopardize our chances of effectively dealing with the Cuban situation. It will admittedly be difficult for an experienced leadership friendly to the United States to fill the vacuum in the Dominican Republic if and when the Trujillo regime goes, and we cannot be certain that anything we can do would make such a result certain. The authoritarian regime which has governed the Dominican Republic for a generation has effectively liquidated and enfeebled virtually all potentially rival and democratic leadership while the current ‘anti-dictatorship’ feelings of Latin American and the inevitable urge to settle old scores upon the exit of the dictator will tend to give an opening to the radial leadership supported by Castro and, in many cases, infiltrated by pro-Communist elements. There are, however, several factors which give some hope and an opportunity worthwhile taking to reach our goals. Among the professional and commercial classes, including the active student elements, of the Dominican Republic there is growing determination to take action to supplant the Trujillo regime with a more democratic regime which would, however, not be patterned on, or susceptible to guidance from, Castro. These elements are usually friendly to the United States, although of late there has been growing resentment against us for not playing a role in overthrowing Trujillo. Certain elements among them think they have, or are working on obtaining, military support and may if they can get organized make an attempt to overthrow the government at an early date. Whether or not this attempt takes place or succeeds, it is primarily to this group that we must look for a government in accord with our interests because (a) at present, in the event of the death, incapacity, assassination, or overthrow of the Generalissimo, it appears improbable that his regime can long be successfully carried on by any member of his family or other strongmen, and (b) the more

Dominican Republic 485 would send out more detailed implementing guidance as shown in the enclosure.2 It is understood, of course, that the rapidly developing situation might require review and revision of these estimates and guidance at any time.3 2 Not printed. 3 A notation on the source text indicated that Dillon approved and initialed this memorandum on December 17, 1959. DR–10. Memorandum of Discussion at the 432nd Meeting of the National Security Council1 Washington, January 14, 1960 4. U.S. Policy Toward the Dominican Republic Mr. Gray3 said the State Department had requested that this sub­ ject be considered by the Council on the basis of a presentation by the Department. He called on Mr. Merchant. Mr. Merchant said the U.S. objective in the Dominican Republic was to seek to ensure that if the present regime in that country falls, the successor regime will be friendly to the U.S. We want to neutralize the ability of Cuba to influence any post-Trujillo regime. There appears to be little prospect of a Communist take-­over in the Dominican Republic, although an internal revolution against Trujillo is possible. A post-­ Trujillo government sympathetic either to Castro or to Communism 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Drafted on March 31, 1960, by Marion W. Boggs, Deputy Executive Secretary, National Security Council. The portions omitted from this memorandum cover the following agenda items: “1. U.S. Policy Toward South, Central and East Africa,” “2. Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security,” “3. U.S. Policy Toward Cuba,” “5. Prevention of Unauthorized Disclosure of NSC Documents and Deliberation,” and “6. The Situation in Iraq.” In preparation for the NSC meeting, Rubottom transmitted to the Acting Secretary, under cover of a memorandum dated January 13, 1960, a “talking paper” containing the rationale for the U.S. position on the Dominican Republic and a copy of the policy guide­

Dominican Republic 487 DR–11. Editorial Note Large numbers of Dominicans were arrested in January 1960 on charges of conspiring to overthrow the régime of Generalissimo Trujillo.

Dominican Republic 489 Pawley interjected that one political fact was Dominican people for most part were for their chief. Outside world did not understand government by parties was not possible here under circumstances because Dominicans desired one party. Generalissimo agreed saying he had invited formation opposition parties but invitation had not been accepted—­not only had he done this recently but also at other times in past. De Moya pointed out next national election for President would come in 1962 and that popular surge had already begun for Generalissimo to be candidate latter nodded and remarked he had refrained from saying he would or would not run. Pawley then brought up subject of recent wave arrests here and called attention to strong effect this having in other countries against Dominican Republic particularly in press. He suggested that those apprehended for plotting against GODR had proved be misguided youths and they should not be treated as hardened criminals. United States and many other countries would not understand their being treated as such. Generalissimo remarked those held were being tried according to Dominican judicial system. He stated that they would have right of appeal and that until action in legal channels had been completed he would not feel free to intervene. Pawley interposed he knew Dominican juridical system to be excellent and to be much like our own except there was no jury trial. Senator Smathers said he knew nothing about judicial process here but if this so he was making proposal that in order convince outside world justice being done in Dominican courts some distinguished jurist such as District Attorney Envin of Florida be asked come to Dominican Republic to witness trials. Generalissimo said he would welcome such jurist in Dominican Republic for this purpose. Pawley at first opposed this suggestion on ground no other government would permit such thing but withdrew in face reply by Smathers that other governments had better press than GODR and part of problem was to convince press GODR was dealing justly. Generalissimo then told stories about two past Dominican Presidents who had been killed by persons whom they had trusted and favored. With this in mind he confessed he was motivated by desire not to be killed. Following interview Generalissimo ushered all present to Chapel on Palace grounds and with usual skill at such operations managed have pictures taken being godfather to dozens of babies while accompanied by Smathers and United States Charge d’ Affaires. Considering that obvious purpose was to publish pictures showing Trujillo, United States and Catholic Church as happy triumvirate and considering this scene somewhat less than accurate as Department will appreciate from Embassy’s previous reporting this is one I preferred to duck but there was no escape.

Dominican Republic 491 line of succession and indication he was not even in line avoided main point Senator was making—­namely Trujillo alone has run GODR for 30 years and it was time arrange for democratic succession. Trujillo’s straight-­faced reference to his invitation to opposition to form political parties must have been based on assumption Senator entirely ignorant of history Trujillo regime. Trujillo has cut down his opposition ruthlessly throughout his regime and this largely explains why thousands of Dominicans live in exile and why thousands to Embassy’s certain knowledge have applied (without success) for passports to leave. DR. Embassy does not in least agree with Pawley’s observation that not possible to form opposition party here because everyone wants Generalissimo. Fear of economic and physical reprisals alone prevent formation of opposition parties especially among business and professional classes and Embassy knows this from those who would form such parties. Entirely possible if all heads in DR voted today peasant vote would still return Generalissimo to office. However, this by no means certain if free opposition political campaigns were allowed, including use of press, radio and television. Trujillo’s indication of fairness of Dominican juridical system can only be justified by technical explanation. This system may be magnificent on the books. Operationally when measured against judicial practices in civilized western nations it is an outrage abounding in trumped-­up charges, arbitrary arrests, search without warrant, and inhumane treatment of prisoners. Embassy believes policy question posed in penultimate paragraph Embassy telegram 431 comes down to decision whether we need Trujillo’s help against international Communism sufficiently to support regime characterized by such unsavory practices. In Embassy view it will not be possible guide Trujillo to abandon the practices. Example is that even day after Smathers visit he gave press conference stating pastoral letter of Catholic Church was brought about as reprisal of Church against GODR for allowing freedom for Protestant groups to operate in DR. This is so ridiculous one can only marvel at Trujillo’s courage in making the charge. Already evident from this insofor as Smathers approach was invitation toward enlightened government practices, Generalissimmo has not yet been converted. Dearborn

Dominican Republic 493 DR–15. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs’ Special Assistant (Hill) to the Representative at the Council of the Organization of American States (Dreier)1 Washington, March 15, 1960. SUBJECT Policy Towards the Dominican Republic While all concerned, including Ambassador Farland, would whole-heartedly agree with the point in your memorandum2—­that it would be desirable to encourage a satisfactory transition from the present regime to one which will work towards the development of “democratic procedures”—­this has already been considered in very great detail, and the situation practically does not exist that this can be done within a period of, say, one year. The ideal is not in-­harmony with the facts as they exist and there is, therefore, imposed on us the in escapable necessity over the next year of assigning priorities between our “negative” objective of keeping Castro out and our “positive” objective of working towards a more democratic regime. Unpleasant as it is, we must recognize that we must precariously ride both these horses as long as we can but that, if they come to a parting of the ways when a real possibility of a Castro or Castro-­type takeover of the Dominican Republic exists, we must be prepared to jump solidly on the “stop-­Castro” animal. With an eye to the longer term—­and to death, assassination or revolution this year—­we must of course work with all possible assets to assure that a successor government comes in which is friendly to us, stable, and as “democratic” as Dominican realities will permit it to be. This is being done insofar as possible, although we must recognize that our overt activities—­including those in the OAS—­must necessarily be limited by the consideration that we should avoid giving the present government a too rough a shove down until we reach an estimate that this would help achieve a U.S.-oriented rather than Castro-­oriented successor regime.

Dominican Republic 495 DR–16. Memorandum from Edwin N. Clark to President Eisenhower1 New York, March 21, 1960. Re: TRUJILLO A. PROBLEM: Increasing opposition both from within and without may lead to a collapse of the Trujillo regime in the Dominican Republic. Such a downfall, with bloody, chaotic conditions would bring further trouble for the United States in its relations in Latin America, and might be a prelude to the establishment of another Communist regime. B. OBJECTIVES: To induce Trujillo forthwith to take the necessary steps to insure a transition to constitutional government, with the effective prevention of any possibility of the establishment of a Communistic, Castro-­ like regime. This transition would be accomplished through the good offices of the United States, if possible utilizing the Organization of the American States. C. BACKGROUND: 1. The dictatorship of Generalissimo Raphael Trujillo has been in power in the Dominican Republic since 1930. During these years, although high standards of living have been created within the republic, Trujillo has amassed a large fortune for the Trujillo family. Most of this fortune is invested within the Dominican Republic, although 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. This memorandum was transmitted to Eisenhower under cover of two letters, both dated March 21, 1960, the first addressed formally to “Dear Mr. President,” the second a longer letter addressed to “Dear Ike.” In the second letter, Clark stated in part, “You probably remember the various steps which I took in 1955 to receive favors from Generalissimo Trujillo for the United States. Consequently, Generalissimo Trujillo knows that I have the privilege of personal friendship with you. Due to my unique position, I believe that I may, as a private citizen, be able to work out a solution with Generalissimo Trujillo which would redound to the great interests of the United States as well as to the people of the Dominican Republic. If I fail, no harm done, Hence my memorandum to you.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series) The reference to Clark’s private services in 1955 is unclear. The President forwarded Clark’s memorandum to Herter under cover of a letter dated March 21, 1960 which stated in part, “Please let me know what you think about the matter. I suppose that Rubottom ought to be the one to study this, but I would like to keep it as confidential as possible.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series). A handwritten notation on the source text indicated that it was shown to Rubottom on March 22, 1960.

Dominican Republic 497 indicated that he desires to retire if a way can be found to accomplish it. I believe a simple but rather ingenious way could be found to accomplish this result by the creation of a philanthropic foundation to which Trujillo and his family would transfer the assets of himself and his family within the Dominican Republic, which holdings would be administered for the benefit of the Dominican people. It is highly probable that any new regime in the Dominican Republic would confiscate the Trujillo family’s local assets and would attempt to seize any other assets outside the Dominican Republic as they were able to obtain. Therefore, in the plan for retirement and the transition to a constitutional form of government, most of the factors which would provoke bloodshed and chaos could be removed if Trujillo voluntarily turned over to a foundation to be used for the good of the Dominican people the bulk of his fortune and if at the same time peaceful conditions within the Dominican Republic were safeguarded by the good offices of the United States and the Organization of the American States. 2. The foundation hereinabove referred to should be administered by internationally known United States and Latin American citizens for the benefit of the Dominican people. Tentatively, the following names have been suggested for trustees: Ex-Presidents Hoover and Truman of the United States;2 Ex-President Eduardo Santos of Colombia; Ex-President Galo Plaza of Ecuador; President Kubitschek of Brazil (whose term expires this year); Pedro Aramburu, former Provisional President of Argentina; Ex-President Ruiz Cortines of Mexico; possibly Raphael Trujillo himself. 3. The Trujillo family and their friends might be given asylum in the United States during the establishment of this plan and until it became evident that their return to the Dominican Republic would not be an act provocative of bloodshed. When the plan was once established and a peaceful transition to constitutional government was assured, members of the Trujillo family might then return to the Dominican Republic. However, it might well be that they would prefer to seek permanent homes elsewhere. 4. Naturally, all of the foregoing steps would have to be taken in the utmost secrecy. Further, to be successful, the good offices of the United States would have to be utilized. In all probability the forum at which this plan would be announced would be the Organization of the 2 The phrase, “President Eisenhower after 1961,”was lined out by the President at this point in the source text.

Dominican Republic 499 weeks. [text not declassified] fearful that Castro or someone committed to Castro will come into power soon thereafter. We have no moderate substitute for Trujillo available. [text not declassified] considerable merit in getting Trujillo out of the country and trying to make a transition to some other government. Mr. Herter also thought that on the whole course of events favored by Mr. Clark seemed worth trying. He said we should not offer Trujillo asylum in the U.S. The President said that if Clark takes a part in this, he should not say that he has any authority from the President, or has even seen the President lately. [text not declassified] [text not declassified] The President said the project might go ahead. It should be kept secret, and that Clark would be acting on his own. [text not declassified] DR–18. Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, March 25, 1960. SUBJECT Intelligence Note: Dominican Republic—Political Situation A rising tide of discontent—­the first serious threat to the rule of Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo—­has been spreading through the Dominican Republic’s influential commercial, professional and intellectual classes for several months, and has even begun to penetrate the urban and rural lower class, heretofore a Trujillo stronghold. Arising largely from an economic crisis caused by low export prices and the tremendous drain of foreign exchange into Trujillo’s frantic arms-­ purchase program, this discontent is reinforced by a virtually complete lack of civil liberties. Opposition feeling came to a head in January with the exposure of a conspiracy to assassinate the Generalissimo and seize power. He retaliated with a wave of political arrests, totaling in the thousands, which still continues. Concentrated chiefly in the influential middle classes, the repression has left virtually no Dominican family of any prominence untouched. The arrests have stiffened opposition

Dominican Republic 501 civilian provisional junta, to be composed of one high military figure, a respected civilian, and a high Church official as leader. The participation of the military and the leadership of the Church should insure a relatively stable and conservative government to which anti-­Americanism would not be a major issue. Although the appeal of Castro and of his leftist radicalism is not now strong in the Dominican Republic, much leftist sentiment is concentrated among the exiles, who include some Communists and sympathizers. Their influence in a successor regime would not at first be important but many local observers predict that any new administration would soon collapse, amid bloody disorder. Radical sentiment would surely develop in such a milieu, and intervention, in one form or another, by the Castro regime in favor of a leftist faction or leader must be considered a possibility. DR–19. Memorandum of Discussion at the 441st Meeting of the National Security Council1 [Extract] Thursday, April 14, 1960. Mr. Dulles reported that in the Dominican Republic, Trujillo’s position continued to weaken and was now quite precarious.2 The wholesale arrests ordered by Trujillo last winter had affected almost every 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Extract. Drafted by Marion W. Boggs. The extract printed here is the portion pertaining to the Dominican

Dominican Republic 503 downfall might not occur for weeks or even months but, on the other hand, the situation might become critical at any moment. The Vice President wondered whether the worst outcome of the situation in the Dominican Republic would not be a take-­over by the pro-Castro elements. He also wondered whether we were doing everything possible to support other elements. Mr. Dulles said the difficult question was that of leadership of moderate elements in the Dominican Republic. The vice president of the Republic might be able to assume power or the principal military officers might govern through a military junta. Many prominent anti-Trujillo Dominicans were in exile. Mr. Dillon said this government was following the situation in the Dominican Republic closely and intended to try to prevent seizure of power by any pro-Castro group. This would involve working closely with the OAS. The Vice President believed that we could not let Castro or a pro-Castro group take over the Dominican Republic even if we had to intervene in order to prevent such a takeover. Mr. Dillon felt that in order to intervene we would need an invitation. The Vice President feared that the old story was being repeated in the Dominican Republic; that is, the pro-Castro element was the only minority group with strong leadership and definite objectives. Mr. Dulles said there was a group in Venezuela which would like to move into the Dominican Republic and take over the government. Mr. Dillon believed the Castro element in the Dominican Republic was not strong enough to assume control of the government without support from Cuba. It was, accordingly, very important that the U.S. be prepared for rapid action. The Vice President agreed that it was very important that the U.S., if necessary, take rapid action to prevent any move by Castro to seize power in the Dominican Republic. Mr. Dulles said the situations in Haiti and Venezuela were being affected by the situations in Cuba and the Dominican Republic. Betancourt, it is reported, has made a deal with the army whereby he will abandon government by coalition, will rule Venezuela with his own party supported by the army, and will take action against the communist movement. However, it is possible that the communists know of his plans and may take action to thwart them. Mr. Dillon said there was one favorable aspect to the situation in the Caribbean. If Trujillo could be removed from power in the Dominican Republic while pro-Castro elements were prevented from seizing power in that country, our anti-Castro campaign throughout Latin America would receive a great boost. The Vice President agreed that getting rid of Trujillo would be a favorable development for us.4 4 In NSC Action 2218, taken at this meeting, the NSC: “Noted and discussed recent developments with regard to the situation in the Dominican Republic, with particular reference to the importance of seeking to prevent anti-Castro and anti-American elements from seizing power in the event of the collapse of the Trujillo regime.”

Dominican Republic 505 DR–21. Special National Intelligence Estimate1 Washington, April 26, 1960.

Dominican Republic 507 effect a change of regime before uncontrollable disorder develops. At the psychological moment in this progression, it would be in accord with Latin American custom for the military to call upon the dictator to depart before the situation got out of hand. In such matters, however, timing is of the essence. A premature move could be fatal. On the other hand, to hesitate too long would permit an uncontrollable situation to develop. 9. If its timing were right, a junta with military, upper and middle class, and Church participation could probably take over the Dominican Republic without serious resistance. Such a junta would probably also take over in the event of Trujillo’s flight, natural death, or assassination. Once in power, however, such a regime would face serious difficulties. The fall of the dictatorship would entail a considerable amount of disorder and confusion. Although its fall would mean liberation to the upper and middle classes, the new regime would not automatically command the support of the urban proletariat and the peasants. Returning exiles, who are generally radical in their political views, would probably seek to incite these elements against a moderate government. Within the government itself, there might be a struggle for power between military and civilian elements. Finally, the Trujillo family has so dominated the Dominican economy that the confusion attendant upon their sudden departure would probably worsen an already bad economic situation. 10. Although Castro is probably incapable of overthrowing the Trujillo dictatorship, the political turmoil which would follow the fall of that dictatorship would afford him opportunities for political intervention in the Dominican Republic. Castro would certainly do all in his power to incite the masses against a moderate regime and to call for a radical revolution on the Cuban model. Unless a moderate Dominican government received prompt support from sympathetic governments of an undoubtedly liberal character (Venezuela, for instance), Castro might emerge as the ultimate victor. U.S.-Dominican Relations 11. The fall of the Trujillo regime would present new problems in U.S.-Dominican relations. Even among moderate opposition elements, there is considerable resentment of past U.S. support for and failure to intervene against the Trujillo dictatorship. Furthermore, almost any new regime would feel a need to demonstrate to the Dominican people and to other Caribbean peoples that it was not under U.S. domination. However, a moderate government would also be in desperate need of U.S. assistance. If the U.S. were to render essential aid discreetly, while tolerating occasional demonstrations of Dominican sovereignty, such a government would probably cooperate in fundamental matters. If, on the other hand, a Castro-­type government were eventually to come to

Dominican Republic 509 some people—­definitely in a minority—in the Dominican Republic. The President said their idea is that a group of political scientists, about four in number, of recognized reputation could come into the Dominican Republic and supervise an election. They think that Trujillo should promptly announce the holding of free elections. These men could invite the UN in to observe. The idea is that Trujillo is ready to do this, but first he must be left alone for a while in order to bring it up. The President went on to say that Mr. Pawley had charged that the U.S. Government is trying to bring about a breaking of relations of Peru, Colombia, and Venezuela with Trujillo. They claim it must be recognized that Trujillo has brought stability and progress to the Dominican Republic. The President said that Pawley seems to have a pathological hatred for Castro. Senator Smathers is genuinely concerned over the whole situation. The critical thing seems to be their idea that Trujillo must announce elections and govern until a new group comes in, with the UN or the OAS supervising these elections. The President thought the State Department should keep this matter under the closest attention, and should definitely not engage in trying to stir up other Governments against Trujillo. Mr. Dillon said one of the primary questions is whether in fact Trujillo is ready to step aside. He told the President of a report [text not declassified] Trujillo, [text not declassified] would not step aside, and in fact did not plan to retire “before the year 2000.” Trujillo had said that when Senator Smathers was there he talked only in a very rambling way about elections, which Trujillo had planned long ago. Mr. Dillon said the point is that we are fearful that Trujillo will not hold fair elections and we do not want our Government associated with some farce. He went on to say that we had nothing to do with the breaking off of relations with Trujillo by Latin American countries. Colombia and Venezuela have done it because he fostered the invasion of Venezuela. Mr. Rubottom stated also that we had nothing to do with the breaking off of relations. He added that the Colombians make the point that having done this they are in a better position to break off relations with Cuba later. Ambassador Farland then said that Mr. Pawley is not disinterested in this matter. He had disposed of his holdings, but retains a right to reacquire them. In addition, a brother continues to retain major holdings there. Mr. Farland said that he had tried to get Trujillo to step aside some time ago and that, after agreeing, Trujillo simply did not and would not do this. The main point about elections is that the dissidents, who would run in these elections, cannot raise their heads. If they were to try to campaign or to raise issues, Trujillo would not allow this to be done. If Trujillo is associated in any way with elections, the man in the street would have no faith in them. The President said he had been

Dominican Republic 511 DR–23. Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the President1 Washington, May 20, 1960. SUBJECT Report on Dominican Republic by Inter-American Peace Committee In February 1960, Venezuela requested the Inter-American Peace Committee to investigate the alleged flagrant violations of human rights in the Dominican Republic that have contributed to international tensions. The Committee, in acting on this request under the authority granted it by the Meeting of American Foreign Ministers in Santiago last August, was unable to obtain the permission of the Dominican Government to visit that country, but gathered information from other sources, including Dominican exiles who had recently left the country. The Chairmanship of this Committee rotates annually and it happens that the United States has the Chairmanship this year. The Committee has now decided to issue a report on this matter, with the Chairman, Ambassador Dreier, given the responsibility of having the first draft prepared for the Committee’s consideration. In accordance with the general sentiment of the Committee members, it is anticipated that the report, after reviewing the Committee’s action in the case, would conclude that flagrant violations of human rights have taken place and continue to take place in the Dominican Republic, involving imprisonment for political views, inhuman treatment of prisoners, and suppression of basic rights such as free speech and assembly. The report would state that this situation has in fact contributed to international tensions in the Caribbean area through aroused public opinion, stimulation of activity by Dominican exiles, and retaliatory maneuvers by the Dominican authorities. It is unlikely that the members of the Peace Committee would agree to a less forthright presentation than that outlined above, in view of the notorious practices of the Trujillo regime and the present state of opinion in the Latin American countries. Furthermore, a frank facing up to the Dominican situation by a Committee in which the United States plays a prominent part would, in the Department’s opinion, be favorable to our general political position in the Hemisphere and helpful to our subsequent efforts to have the Peace Committee face up similarly to the Cuban problem. 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. Confidential. The source text bears the initials “D.E.”

Dominican Republic 513 further said that when General Clark had asked him when he would retire he had not answered, but that he did not expect to retire before the year 2000. 2. We could assure him that contingency military planning with the Pentagon was well advanced and that, in fact, the U.S. was prepared to move when and if the President decided. 3. We felt that it was now necessary to develop a concrete solution on the assumption that we would not have the cooperation of the Generalissimo. I said that we were working on this within the government, and—­since I did not in any way indicate he would be consulted—­he should have got the inference that there was no role for him at this time. After brief reflection, General Clark said that his preliminary comments were as follows: 1. He still strongly believed that the Generalissimo would leave the Dominican Republic if inducements were held out to him to do so. He felt that in the approach which he had made he had been so restricted by the Department that he could not offer the Generalissimo inducements—such as U.S. cooperation in settling him elsewhere and in having him appear before the OAS— which would make it attractive for the Generalissimo to leave. He thought that the possibility of the Generalissimo’s leaving voluntarily should not be ruled out until we had made concrete and official offers to him. 2. He felt that contingency planning was not sufficient; the U.S. must have an active plan to remove Trujillo from the scene if the situation were not to drift to our disadvantage. 3. He felt that, after working with us, he had presented a plan which the President had approved in the presence of the Secretary, we owed it to the President not to leave the matter dangling and to put before him a detailed plan in writing. He (General Clark) would do his best to go along with such a plan but would dissent from it if he felt that he had to do so. He clearly indicated that he expected at some later stage to get together with the President and the Secretary to approve a final plan for the Dominican Republic. I had only a short time to reply to these comments, but did say that I was sure everyone was concerned with moving ahead and that the President was being kept informed. As the General was boarding the plane, he said that we should both reflect further on these matters and that I should call him when he returned to Washington next week. COMMENT: I did not feel it my place to tell the General that he would be excluded from further phases of planning with respect to the Dominican Republic. It was clear, however, that he expected to continue to play a role in this matter, that he believed the President had approved his plan, and that—­if it is not intended that he should continue to play his role—­he will have to be told so at a high level.

Dominican Republic 515 impossible to shake the belief of Latin America that the Trujillo situation is more serious than the Castro situation. Until Trujillo is eliminated, we cannot get our Latin American friends to reach a proper level of indignation in dealing with Castro. Secretary Herter then referred to the legal requirement for the purchase of sugar from the Dominican Republic and said an effort should be made to get the law changed in this session of Congress. The President said if the law were not changed, he would simply refuse to buy Dominican sugar. If impeachment proceedings were brought against him, that would take longer than his term has to run. Secretary Herter said his legal advisers had agreed that we were required to buy Dominican sugar but we were simply ignoring that requirement. As a result Congressman Cooley3 was on the warpath. In Secretary Herter’s opinion, a great deal of the difficulty was expenditure of Dominican money in the U.S. The President said that any proposals to buy Dominican sugar should be sent to him for approval and he would take a long time to study the matter. He also believed we should frankly say that it appears that the Dominican Republic bribes are coming into this country in an effort to influence this government. Secretary Herter agreed that we would lose prestige if we bought sugar from the Dominican Republic after refusing to buy it from Cuba. Secretary Herter then reported that Mexico had been suggesting that Brazil, Mexico, and Canada should mediate between the U.S. and Cuba. Such mediation would recognize the idea that the sole parties to the present controversy are the U.S. and Cuba. The President said we have already said that we are ready to have our problems with Cuba mediated. We want to have these problems settled peacefully. Secretary Herter said that the whole problem had been shifted toward the concept of the introduction of communism into this hemisphere. The President said that if we attempted to take any action with respect to Cuba before settling the Trujillo situation, we would be the loser. He had confidence in the Presidents of Mexico and Brazil and the Prime Minister of Canada but he thought the problem of Cuba was now before the OAS and should remain there. Secretary Gates said we had a difficult problem of public opinion because the American people were interested in the situation in Cuba but did not care about the situation in the Dominican Republic. The President said American newspapers had been attacking Trujillo for fifteen years. He asked how we could keep the OAS as a going concern. We could not do it if we focused sanctions on Cuba and forgot about Trujillo. We were able to induce the 3 Harold D. Cooley (D–N.C.), Chairman, House Agriculture Committee.

Dominican Republic 517 DR–27. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Mann) to the Consul General in the Dominican Republic (Dearborn)1 Washington, October 10, 1960. Dear Henry: I have scarcely been at my desk for two weeks and hence I have not had time to get into the Dominican problem in the depth that I will do in the near future. My first impression is that the problem of dealing effectively with Trujillo was made more difficult by the reluctance of the Foreign Ministers at San José to go along with a realistic program designed not only to bring about orderly elections but, equally important, to insure an orderly transition to a genuinely democratic regime. The latest I have is that the Brazilians may be planning some kind of an OAS committee to “observe” elections and while I would like to hear more about this if and when Brazil actually makes a proposal along these lines before coming to any final decision, I am afraid that this would be a “whitewash” operation which would not do credit to anyone connected with it. If there is not going to be effective multilateral action and if we are limited by our non-­intervention commitments in what we can do unilaterally, the question comes to mind as to whether there is really any chance of convincing the Generalissimo that in his own interest—­given the strength and depth of popular feeling throughout the hemisphere on the issue of his dictatorship—­he should, after making arrangements for a provisional government publicly committed to holding elections by a date certain, leave the country with his family and official entourage so as to permit an orderly transition to an anti-­communist democratic regime to take place. There are a lot of people in the States who apparently sincerely believe that the Generalissimo might be induced to leave. I doubt it myself but I am also aware that this is a matter involving subjective judgment which it would be difficult to prove beyond peradventure of doubt. I should like on a very personal and confidential basis to have your views concerning this and, in particular, who the best intermediary might be. For example, the name of Wilbur Morrison, Vice President of Pan American Airways, has been suggested. If the approach is not to be made

Dominican Republic 519 sentence is “realistic” and I am sure that is why you inserted it. First and foremost, the transition must not be a sham. This means that we must not fall into Trujillo’s trap of being satisfied with measures which legalistically remove him from control but, in fact, permit him to continue his dictatorship. An example of his efforts to achieve this is his announcement yesterday that he will run for Governor of the Province of Santiago. This is obviously a maneuver on his part to satisfy the U.S., the OAS and the OAR that he has bowed out of national politics, but which, at the same time, will permit him to remain in the country, to continue controls over its economic and financial life by his time-­honored methods. Trujillo as Governor of Santiago will be in every practical sense the same as Trujillo is now. While he is in the Dominican-Republic and/or while he maintains his economic domination, he will also continue his political domination whether he is President or dogcatcher. While this is a political fact, the responsible opposition to his regime will not dare to form true opposition parties. There will be no real freedom of assembly, of speech, or of the press and radio for these people. On previous occasions when they rose to his lure, once he spotted them he took severe reprisals against them and they are not prepared to put their necks on his chopping block again. A realistic program to bring about free elections can only, in my opinion, be built around one keystone – ­namely the removal of Trujillo from the country. Once this happens we should work toward an orderly break-­up of his economic stranglehold on the national life. I admit it is quite likely that once the opposition gets moving, this break-­up may be anything but orderly. This country, however, is as desperately in need of a revolution as any country. I remember reading about and revolutions are not usually orderly affairs. It should be our objective to see that the Dominican revolution is as bloodless as possible. At the same time, it is not rational to expect, in view of all the pressures of hatred which have been building up here over thirty years, that no one is going to get hurt. I would hope 1) that we could prevent the Ramfis-Espaillat-Abbes-Sanchez gang of cut throats from staging a St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre of the leading oppositionists in an effort to save the situation for the Trujillistas, and 2) that we could persuade the opposition, if they gain control, not to carry their purge beyond those immediately responsible for the criminal actions of the Trujillo regime. Our friends here favor a limited purge but if they cannot maintain their prestige among the opposition as a whole, there is no telling what excesses may result. If we attach importance to the future in this country, I cannot urge strongly enough that we do everything possible to restore the pro-U.S. oppositionists at least to their influence at the time of the Sixth MFM. This can only be done if the U.S. takes strong measures against Trujillo in one way or another.

Dominican Republic 521 unprecedented steps earlier this year by publicly criticizing the regime. The Nuncio’s statements to me at the time implied: “Well, we have done our part, now it is your turn”. I do not believe Wilbur Morrison would be a happy choice either. He would be running a great risk since if the Generalissimo should publicize the approach, Pan American’s reputation all over Latin America might suffer. None of the governments like Trujillo, but I suspect they would like even less the idea of a high official of a U.S. enterprise seeking to overthrow even Trujillo’s government. I regret that I cannot propose a likely name for you, but I think you will see why from comments on the embarrassment which I believe any approach of ours might cause us. Getting away from an approach by a U.S. agent or the Nuncio, the type of approach I think we could make without coming off second best would be one we might make in concert with other countries. The preferable approach would be by the OAS itself, ourselves participating. Next best would be an approach by, let us say, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico and the U.S. If we could include Canada this would be very helpful indeed. An approach of this sort might stand a chance of convincing the Generalissimo that the jig was up and the countries involved would be numerous and powerful enough so that Trujillo could not saddle any one of them with the onus of intervention. While this tack might have the advantage mentioned, I suppose the greatest obstacle in using it would be the unlikelihood that the countries named would participate owing to their non-­interventionist commitments. The approach by the OAS itself would perhaps be the most likely and certainly the most legally defensible—­but I do not suppose that we could obtain concurrence even there. As I mentioned, I believe the only reason the Generalissimo might leave is fear of imminent death—­and this is not certain. For this reason I think the Dominicans themselves have got to do the persuading. We can help them to do it in a number of ways, some of which are probably not legally possible for us. The best way would be to stop buying sugar, coffee, cacao and beef from this country. This would hit Trujillo and those around him. His own henchmen might then turn against him as their pockets would be affected. We should try to hasten the day when his own men will refuse to obey his orders and will tell him there is a plane waiting for him at the airport. Other measures which would help toward this result would be an embargo on exports of petroleum products, especially lubricants to the D.R. The country runs on these products and if we could make it impossible or highly expensive for Trujillo to obtain them we would be contributing to dissatisfaction among those dependent on him. Another helpful measure would be to induce Canadian and U.S. banks to stop loaning money to the D. R. [text not declassified] Anything we can do to show the Dominicans that Trujillo is losing his grip may at some point

Dominican Republic 523 necessary to drive a stake through his heart to prevent a continuation of his crimes. I believe sudden death would be more humane than the solution of the Nuncio who once told me he thought he should pray that Trujillo would have a long and lingering illness. I apologize for the length of this letter, but I wanted you to have a useful amount of my thinking on the questions you asked me. If there is anything I know, it is that I am not infallible. It may, for example, be possible for some one to think of a type of approach to Trujillo by a U.S. citizen which might induce him to leave. If some such proposal seems promising I would suggest you try it out on me since I will be quick to say “good” if it looks feasible from this battleground. With kindest regards, Very sincerely, Henry Dearborn DR–29. Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, November 22, 1960. SUBJECT Intelligence Note: The Current Situation in the Dominican Republic General Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina has survived many challenges during his thirty years of completely personal rule but none have been as persistent or serious as the current threats he faces. Confronting him are internal economic crises and widespread political dissension, plus the formal condemnation of the American community of nations. Although Trujillo seemingly remains in complete control, the days of his regime appear numbered, although the time and manner of his overthrow cannot be accurately predicted. Trujillo’s troubles can be traced directly to the fall of Batista in January 1959. Suddenly isolated, Trujillo soon bore the full brunt of the revolutionary, libertarian tide inspired by Castro’s success. Trujillo’s reaction was to embark on a ruinously expensive campaign of arms procurement, and to support openly followers of Batista then exiled in Ciudad Trujillo. The resulting economic dislocations soon turned a small but influential

Dominican Republic 525 and Trujillo is not likely to make the concessions which would mollify them. Although he has permitted several members of his family to leave the country, the Generalissimo himself will probably remain to the bitter end. How this end will come is uncertain. Assassination is an increasing possibility—perhaps a probability, considering the desperate temper of the opposition. Alternatively, economic and political conditions might deteriorate to an extent where the military would intervene and attempt to dismiss Trujillo, merely to preserve their own interests. In any case members of the Generalissimo’s entourage will not be able to retain power. The transition will probably be chaotic and bloody, a situation ripe for exploitation by pro-Castro and other radical elements. Such tendencies are well-­represented among the exiles, although anti-­Castro factions do exist. However, any external forces, including Cuban, must rely on a protracted period of disturbance to make their influence felt. The immediate successor regime would probably be a military junta with civilian participation, moderate and not anti-U.S., especially if we provided sympathetic assistance at an early date. There are civilian elements however, which might prove somewhat antagonistic: U.S. prestige, previously high among the moderates, has been declining steadily and these moderates have been losing influence to the pro-Castro extremists. The United States is being criticized for not taking a strong stand against Trujillo—­specifically, for not applying the import-­export restrictions which they are sure would soon topple him. The bitterness of this group is due largely to disappointment with the widely-­heralded OAS actions of last August, and there is some question as to the depth and permanence of these anti-U.S. sentiments. However, the tide is now running against the U.S. and the longer the current impasse continues, the more unfavorable to U.S. interests the outcome is likely to be when the Dominican pressure-­cooker finally explodes.

Dominican Republic 527 The Commerce Department has indicated its willingness to apply the necessary export controls.3 Christian A. Herter [Enclosure] Suggested Statement to be made in Special Committee of the Council of the OAS on Resolution I of the Sixth Meeting of Foreign Ministers My Delegation is now prepared to present for the consideration of this Special Committee its views with respect to the mandate given the Council of the Organization of American States by Resolution I of the Sixth Meeting of Foreign Ministers to study the feasibility and desirability of extending the suspension in trade with the Dominican Republic to articles in addition to arms. Some time ago this Committee was informed that the United States was preparing a study on Dominican foreign trade by commodity and country in an attempt to assess the feasibility of an embargo by the American States on specific items of Dominican commerce. As a first result of this study, petroleum and petroleum products and trucks and spare parts, which are not produced in the Dominican Republic, appear to the United States Government to be examples of items the export of which to the Dominican Republic it would be feasible to suspend at this time. With respect to petroleum and its products, in 1959 62% of Dominican imports by value came from the Netherlands Antilles directly and from Venezuela indirectly, 14% from the United States, and 13% from Venezuela. During the past year, Caribbean sources of Dominican petroleum imports have been largely out off. There are indications, however, that the Dominican Republic has started to tap other sources of petroleum supply, namely in Canada, Europe and perhaps the Middle East. This, of course, would tend to reduce the effectiveness of a total suspension in the exports of the OAS member states. Any effective embargo on all or most of the Dominican supply of petroleum would undoubtedly have a serious adverse effect on the Dominican people as inevitably would any measures taken which would have an impact on the Dominican economy. Dominican internal transport and over one-­half of Dominican production of

Ecuador: U.S. Relations with Ecuador EC–1. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in Ecuador (Ravndal)1 Washington, February 7, 1958. Dear Chris:

Ecuador 531 of the NAC. Although we have no reason to believe that the credit will not be approved without undue delay, no assurance of such approval should be given the Ecuadorans at this time. The terms will probably be for a three-year credit repayable in regular installments, with an appropriate down payment and interest charged on unpaid balance. With best wishes always, Sincerely, R. R. Rubottom, Jr. EC–2. Editorial Note

Ecuador 533 EC–4. Editorial Note

Ecuador 535 2. That all measures possible be taken assure success Santo Domingo colonization project; 3. Rapid processing of Ecuadorean requests to development loan fund for one million dollars agricultural loan, one million dollars small business loan, one million dollars silo construction and 1.75 million dollars freezing plants in Guayaquil and Loja; 4. Consideration by U.S. of reduction duties on unbleached Panama hats; 5. That EXIM Bank loans be repayable in local currency and that such loans be for longer period; 6. That U.S. technical assistance be planned for a longer period than one year and that scholarship grants also be for a sufficient length of time; 7. A loan of three million dollars from president’s emergency fund for the 1959 Inter-American conference; 8. Signature of double taxation agreement between U.S. and Ecuador (Minister also stated desire institute active policy attract foreign capital including parity treatment with Ecuadorean capital). 9. Only complaint was occasional U.S. competition with small countries giving example that U.S. sold rice to Peru under commodity credit corporation and PL 480 thus taking away Ecuador chance to sell rice. Ravndal EC–7. Despatch from the Ambassador in Ecuador (Ravndal) to the Department of State1 Quito, May 13, 1958. No. 730.

Ecuador 537 government could not pass regulations that its own materials must be brought in its own vessels. He referred to the shipping provisions under the United States PL–480 program and the Eximbank loan program and said that Ecuador accepts those regulations as being normal and natural, implying that the United States should therefore not object to the new Ecuadoran law. The Minister also said that one of the principal reasons for the Flota’s great increase in percentage of Ecuadoran-bound traffic is the fact that the Flota ships go all the way to Guayaquil, whereas the Grace ships offload at Puna with consequent added expense and exposure of cargo to theft and damage. He said that Grace was complaining so bitterly about the Ecuadoran law simply because it is a powerful company and is accustomed to brooking no competition. The Minister of Economy ended up by saying that if he had had the slightest idea that the new law might be considered discriminatory, he would have advised President Ponce not to sign it. He said that Ecuador must keep the friendship of the United States which has been so helpful to Ecuador in all its problems. There was then a discussion of the percentage of cargo carried by the Grace Line and the percentage carried by the Flota Grancolombiana, with the Ecuadoran officials insisting that the new decree would have little if any effect on the traffic of the Grace Line. Assistant Secretary Rubottom said that the principle is the important thing, rather than statistics, although these are interesting and important. He said that since there is no political problem outstanding between the United States and Ecuador, the group was free to concentrate freely on this shipping question and that he appreciated the frank manner in which the Ecuadorans had brought up the subject. He pointed out that the United States has tried for years to wipe off the slate the consular free question and that it seemed to be on the way to termination when this new decree was passed. He pointed out that the new decree was a heavy blow to United States expectations of seeing an end to the shipping problem and stated that in our point of view there is no doubt that the new decree is discriminatory. Mr. Rubottom said that the United States has always taken the same firm position on questions of discrimination and that we must continue to face such questions. He said that the attitude of the United States Government is not dependent in any way on the Grace Line and pointed out that the United States has been following the same principle of protesting against discrimination in the case of Argentina and Brazil. Mr. Rubbottom referred to the subsidies received by American shipping lines and said the Ecuadorans are the first to recognize that if the United States did not maintain a strong merchant fleet the resultant weakness would prevent it from being able to face Russia. He pointed

Ecuador 539 The Embassy has learned that the German Ambassador8 in Quito has received instructions from his Government to make a vigorous ­protest against the new Ecuadoran decree. The British Embassy in Quito is also lodging a formal protest with the Ecuadoran Foreign Ministry on behalf largely of Canadian interests. Christian M. Ravndal 8 Rudolf Pamperrien. EC–8. Editorial Note During the years 1958–1960, United States Government agencies concluded the following loan agreements with the Ecuadoran

Ecuador 541 Peru-Ecuador boundary. He said that Ecuador wanted to keep the subject quiet between now and the Quito Conference in order to avoid any kind of outbreak and to assure that Peru would attend the Conference. He commented on the bellicose publicity from Peru regarding this question. The Secretary indicated that the Guarantors in Rio had this subject under continuing review and acknowledged the possibility that a statement might be made by the Guarantors.3 The Foreign Minister expressed the hope that none would be issued. Mr. Rubottom asked the Foreign Minister whether his Government still intended to invite the Chiefs of State of the other American Republics to attend a meeting in Guayaquil at the end of the Inter-American Conference next February. Mr. Rubottom specifically mentioned the disturbances which had occurred in Guayaquil a few months ago as a factor possibly being considered by the Government of Ecuador.4 The Foreign Minister, ignoring the reference to Guayaquil, reaffirmed their intention to invite the Chiefs of State to Guayaquil and indicated that President Eisenhower’s health had been considered in the plan to meet at sea level rather than at Quito. (Mr. Rubottom had also alluded to the traditional desire of the Government of Ecuador to balance the treatment of the mountainous area of the country with that accorded the coastal region.) 3 Reference is to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and the United States, who, as Guarantors, signed the Protocol of Peace, Friendship, and Boundaries between Peru and Ecuador at

Ecuador 543 grant assistance be extended Ecuador. Should the Communists succeed in disrupting the Quito Conference, this would do great harm to United States prestige and foreign policy objectives in Latin America and would undermine the confidence of the peoples of this hemisphere in the Inter-American system which the United States in concert with other American nations has been working constantly to strengthen and perfect, most recently, for example, at the Meeting of Foreign Ministers in Santiago. Because of the urgency of commencing the internal security assistance to Ecuador as soon as possible, on July 12, 1959, a training ­program was submitted with the informal concurrence of the Departments of State and Defense and the Bureau of the Budget for your approval. On

Ecuador 545 United States patrol craft (escort vessels) to Ecuador. For the text of the agreement, see 11 UST 241. On February 24, 1960, at Quito, Ambassador Ravndal and Foreign Minister Tobar signed an Agreement Relating to a Cooperative Program in Ecuador for the Observation and Tracking of Satellites and Space Vehicles. It provided for continuing the operation and maintenance of the satellite tracking station at Paramo de Cotopaxi, known as the Quito Tracking Station Facility. For the text of the agreement, see 11 UST 179. EC–13. Editorial Note

Ecuador 547 The Ambassador remarked that he had presented his credentials to Dr. Velasco in 1956. Dr. Velasco acknowledged in a very friendly ­manner. The Ambassador mentioned Ecuador’s “oriente” region, and mentioned the “trocha’’ (a path made by cutting down jungle) between Brazil and Ecuador, and the possibilities of opening a permanent road connecting Ecuador with Brazil. Dr. Velasco replied that he had been aware of the Ambassador’s interest in the “oriente”, and said that he would be most willing to cooperate with Brazil in such a venture because it would be of very great benefit for both Brazil and Ecuador. The Ambassador expressed the desire to read the transition of the felicitations from the Secretary of State to Dr. Velasco on the occasion of Dr. Velasco’s electoral triumph, to which Dr. Velasco assented most cordially. He thanked the Ambassador and said that on this same day he would reply to the Secretary of State by telegram. The Ambassador suggested to Dr. Velasco that the U.S. Government was anxious to know of Dr. Velasco’s thinking regarding Point IV and the military and other U.S. missions in Ecuador, and expressed the hope that Dr. Velasco would collaborate with the programs of these missions. Dr. Velasco replied that he was well informed of the benefits which Ecuador had received and was receiving from Point IV programs in Ecuador. He said that he would most certainly cooperate with the United States, but that there must be an end to the “papeleo” (red tape) which bottled-up the launching of any program. Dr. Velasco made it clear that the red tape bottleneck was not the fault of Point IV, but rather of the Ecuadorean Government which took forever to sign necessary agreements. The Ambassador suggested that perhaps these administrative bottlenecks could be abolished by means of agreement between the two governments. Dr. Velasco reiterated his conviction that these delays were entirely the fault of the Ecuadorean Government; that these shortcomings had to be corrected, and said that reciprocity and mutual respect should result in the realization of mutual achievements. The Ambassador said that we sought his views and advice on how to help our friends in Latin America; that we would appreciate Dr. Velasco’s ideas and advice with the view of improving our relations with the Latin American people. Dr. Velasco thanked the Ambassador for this tribute. Velasco reiterated his sincere desire to cooperate with the U.S. Government, and mentioned a Secretary of State in President Roosevelt’s last administration, with whom Velasco said he conferred with the hope of attaining mutual benefits. He said, however, that conferring with this Secretary did not produce any results. Dr. Velasco again mentioned his desire to cooperate with the United States. The Ambassador said that the U.S. Government was anxious to help Ecuador in launching a low cost housing program, and that we

Ecuador 549 The Ambassador proceeded to make his departure, thanking Dr. Velasco for granting him the interview, and Dr. Velasco thanked the Ambassador for having called on him and for personally conveying to him the congratulations of the Secretary of State. Ward P. Allen EC–17. Memorandum of Conversation, by the First Secretary of the Embassy in Ecuador (Rogers)1 Quito, August 31, 1960. US/MC/12 PARTICIPANTS

Ecuador 551 EC–18. Memorandum of Conversation, by the First Secretary of the Embassy in Ecuador (Rogers)1 Quito, August 31, 1960. US/MC/2 PARTICIPANTS

Ecuador 553 Minister-Designate Chiriboga responded by saying that Ecuador was very much impressed that the United States—after having benefitted from its earlier mistakes—had concluded that more help must be given to Latin America. He said Ecuador is working hard on specific, clear-cut projects and that a number of these would be ready in early October, some of which would be worked out by U.S. companies. Minister-Designate Chiriboga mentioned a number of missions—World Bank, Exim Bank, housing etc., and emphasized the need for speed, saying he was frankly somewhat afraid for the future. He thought the housing project was especially urgent and mentioned the arrival of the ICA technician Baruch on September 10. He said he had spoken recently to Vance Brand about a $5,000,000 loan for housing3 and that the firm of Klein-Saks is sending a mission on September 15 to make a survey of taxation problems and to reorganize the Banco de Fomento. The Under Secretary referred back to the growth of Ecuador’s Gross National Product and said he hoped Ecuador could avoid the two extremes of stagnation and inflation. He said there had been an evolution in U.S. thinking the past two or three years with regard to the problem of commodities. We now realize that it is not simply a problem of buying in the cheapest market available. Some success has been achieved in the case of coffee and now it is not only the U.S. Government which supports the international coffee agreement but also U.S. ­importers. There are difficult problems in other fields—­cotton, lead and zinc—but despite limitations the U.S. is interested in and working on these problems on a case-by case basis. Minister-Designate Nebot brought up briefly the problem of price discrimination against Ecuadorean bananas, with Central American bananas receiving higher prices. This is a matter of life and death. He said he hoped some control over price discrimination might be possible. The conversation was broken off at this point because of other engagements and no response in substance was made to Nebot’s statement. 3 The Development Loan Fund entered into a loan agreement for $5 million with the Ecuadoran Housing Bank on October 31, 1961; for further information, see Agency for International Development, Office of the Controller, Status of Loan Agreements as of

Ecuador 555 Principal point made by Lafer was that it would be absurd for guarantors to accept Ecuadorean doctrine of nullity since major part of treaty provisions have already been implemented. He suggested possibility of mediation re part of boundary not yet agreed upon. Taboada observed Ecuador had not yet formally denounced treaty and reported Frondizi,3 had informed Velasco Ibarra Argentine ­disposed to view problem calmly on assumption Ecuador would maintain same attitude of calm. Fonmin expressed opinion treaty could not be nullified by unilateral act of Ecuador and expressed opinion formal joint demarche by guarantors unwise. Muller agreed with Taboada four power demarche unwise and expressed preference for bilateral discussions in Quito designed to encourage Ecuadorean government refrain from additional statements and actions. He said Chile would consider unilateral denunciation unacceptable. Dillon 3 Arturo Frondizi, President of Argentina. EC–21. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Rio de Janeiro1

Ecuador 557 (Depcirtel 456)4 was based upon premise that Ecuador would cease publicly agitate border issue and was designed provide cooling off period both countries. This was made clear to Chiriboga (Deptel 430).5 (2) In view of continued agitation of issue, Department believes a joint statement should be made by Guarantors rather than separate statements which would be subject varying interpretations. This would presumably include a clear statement of Guarantors position that Protocol cannot be invalidated by the unilateral act of one of the parties. (3) The text of statement can we believe best be worked out in Rio, to be cleared then with Department and presumably other Foreign Offices. We believe that it should be designed to encourage both Peru and Ecuador to cease public agitation of issue having in mind the need to maintain peaceful, friendly relations between the two countries and the need for a united hemisphere capable both of facing up to the intensified external and internal threats to its wellbeing and to the grave economic and social problems facing it. Some of the language used in Article I of Protocol and in last year’s draft Guarantor statement might be useful in this regard. (4) Department sees merit in suggestion made to us by Chileans that statement would have less adverse impact on Ecuadoreans in particular if it were issued in response to Chiriboga’s message apparently sent to all Guarantors. (Lengthy telegram October 22 addressed to Secretary6 presumably similar to memoranda you refer to as having been received by Brazilian and Chilean Foreign Offices from Chiriboga.) Statement might also refer in general to various memoranda received by Guarantors from Peruvians. Department suggests that, before text of statement is made public, later on behalf of Guarantors might consult with Rio representatives of both Ecuador and Peru re statement. Later might wish to make clear to Ecuadoreans that statement is directed to issue of unilateral denunciation and is not intended close door on possibility of eventual settlement satisfactory to both Peru and Ecuador. Herter 4 See Document EC–20.

Ecuador 559 With regard to the preoccupation manifested by Your Excellency concerning the concentration of Peruvian troops which may have been observed on the southern frontier of Ecuador, I wish to manifest to Your Excellency my confidence that no American country could today challenge the peaceful conscience of the continent and to remind you that solidarity in the face of aggression established by the Inter-American system is a secure guarantee against any armed threat. The United States, together with the other guarantor countries, is confident that the contracting parties will maintain between themselves the close harmony and fraternal union which should prevail between republics of the American Continent.3 Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.4 Christian A. Herter

Ecuador 561 Velasco has indicated privately that he would not take the initiative to establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union although he would give favorable consideration to any such Soviet request. These relations, according to Velasco, would be completely without commitments or strings and the Soviet Embassy would be drastically limited in its size and activities. The factors mentioned above, combined with the favorable reception in Ecuador of the recent U.S. affirmation of our respect for OAS treaty obligations to come to the defense of any American nation which suffers aggression,3 have reduced the probability that diplomatic relations will be established with the Soviet Union or that the Inter-American Conference will be cancelled. The decision as to whether, and if so, when, the XI Inter-American Conference will be held is now under consideration by President Velasco. His decision to attempt to hold the conference as scheduled, or to work for its postponement or cancellation, will be of major importance. Outright cancellation of the conference is reportedly favored by a majority of the cabinet and could imply Ecuadorean repudiation of the OAS. However, it is believed that Velasco is aware of the unfavorable impact that this would have on his economic development plans. Likewise, a further postponement of the Inter-American Conference would be a blow to Velasco’s prestige as he has severely chastised the preceding administration for the original delay. Holding the conference in Quito as scheduled, or even after some delay, could possibly reinforce Ecuador’s ties with the American system at a time when they are strained but also runs the risk of serious popular demonstrations against the OAS and the Rio Protocol guarantor powers. The situation is further complicated by the fact that the Minister of Government, Araujo, has authority over the police and conceivably could allow such demonstrations to wreck the conference. It has been reported that Velasco would like to remove Araujo from office prior to the date set for the conference. Yet, despite several opportunities, Velasco has failed to move against Araujo and Velasco may feel that he is unable to do so under the present conditions. In spite of the President’s assurances that adequate security measures would be taken should the conference be held, there remains a probability of serious demonstrations as a result of deliberate leftist agitation of the already emotionally charged boundary issue. Barring a previous determination concerning the conference by Velasco, the situation will be discussed further when Foreign Minister Chiriboga arrives for a Washington holiday about December 22.

Ecuador 563 EC–25. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Ecuador1

El Salvador: U.S. Relations with El Salvador ES–1. Despatch from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi) to the Department of State1 San Salvador, March 6, 1958. No. 481 SUBJECT Possible Deterioration in Relations with the Salvadoran Government While our relations with the Lemus Government have been cordial and friendly, a number of recent developments taken in toto threaten to produce a cooling off by the Salvadoran President and his Government towards the United States. The Lemus Government has given plenty of concrete evidence of its friendliness. A few typical instances might include the following: (1) The release of the U.S. flag fishing vessel Kokomo immediately after its seizure without formal protest on our part, in a most cordial atmosphere;2 (2) President Lemus’ freely given all-­out support and publicity for President Eisenhower’s letter to Bulganin,3 including his own long and favorable written commentary;4

El Salvador 567 Salvadoran General Staff said President Lemus had expressed his disappointment to the staff officer over the failure of the United States Government to invite President Lemus to Washington for a state visit.8 (2) The visit of Ydígoras Fuentes and the proposed visit of Echandi to Washington. While President Lemus has made no public comment on this score, he cannot have failed to be nettled at the extension of the official invitation to Ydígoras Fuentes to visit the United States, especially since the invitation was announced while Ydígoras was visiting El Salvador. It was a front-­page story in all the newspapers and the subject of radio announcement. It is small comfort to President Lemus that these visits have occasionally been referred to as informal or that the visits have been made in an individual capacity since the men in question have gone as president-­elect and not as chief of state. It is impossible to explain convincingly the difference between a formal and an informal visit when the news reels in El Salvador show Ydígoras Fuentes and his wife debarking from President Eisenhower’s plane, being met at the Washington airport by Secretary of State and Mrs. Dulles, and thereafter being escorted to Blair House. Furthermore, the newspapers have played up Ydígoras’ conversations with President Eisenhower and meetings with other high officials of the United States Government. They draw no distinction between the Ydígoras visit and that of other high dignitaries to Washington. Informal comments by private individuals, some with official connections, substantiate the above evaluation. “The forthcoming visit to Washington by President-­ elect Echandi is certain to increase the feeling of President Lemus and other Salvadorans that he is given unequal treatment or inadequate consideration by the United States.” (3) The state visit of President Ibanez of Chile. In this context the long-­ standing intention to invite President Ibanez to the United States loses its proper perspective. While the press-­announced invitation extended to Ibanez may not have been as irritating as the visits of Ydígoras Fuentes and Echandi, nevertheless, coming on the heels of the other invitations, it has served further to disillusion President Lemus with the United States. (4) Drafting of Salvadoran Citizens. Disappointments such as those recounted stir up other problems. We were unable to assure the Government that Salvadoran citizens resident in the United States would not be drafted except during time of war as provided for in the 1926 FCN Treaty.9 The Department agreed that such acts were in 8 No record of this conversation with Lt. Col. Robert S. Ferguson, USA, was found in Department of State files. 9 Reference is to the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce, and Consular Rights, signed at San Salvador, February 22, 1926; for text, see Charles S. Bevans, ed., Treaties and Other

El Salvador 569 Embassy, which informed Lemus that no funds were available for such a pact. As long as the neighboring countries, Honduras, Guatemala, and Nicaragua, have MDAP agreements with the United States and El Salvador does not, some residue of resentment on this score will continue to exist here. (8) United States Officers for the Escuela de Guerra. Some months ago officials of the Salvadoran Army put out feelers as to whether the United States could provide two officers to teach in the Escuela de Guerra as partial replacements for the departed Chilean Army Mission. The Chief of the United States Army Mission discouraged this request on the grounds that Salvadoran officers can be trained better in army schools located in Panama or in the United States. The United States Military Attaché informs us that two Chilean officers are en route to El Salvador, possibly to fill the positions mentioned. (9) Mrs. Lemus’ Welfare Program. Mrs. Lemus has been critical regarding failure of the United States to assist her in her welfare program, alleging that the Embassy promised to provide such help. The Embassy made no such promise but said it would see what could be done regarding any request she made. No such request has been forthcoming. Nevertheless, Mrs. Lemus again criticized the Embassy, along with other international agencies of the United Nations, for failing to help her with the program. (10) Development Loan Fund Application. We have had to be lukewarm in dealing with El Salvador on the $8,000,000.00 loan sought for improvement of the conditions of the campesino, primarily because many projects contemplated do not seem to fall within the criteria of the fund. This may account for the delay on the part of the Salvadoran Government in submitting a formalized application for the loan. This list of issues is not exhaustive. As already stated, the items taken together add up to a possible cooling off by the Lemus Government. Not only has this been reported by a member of the President’s Staff, but our own sources bear it out, and members of the Mission have sensed some change in attitude. The change in attitude is the result of what might be termed negative actions on the part of our Government rather than any sudden reversal based on any single item. As already noted, each United States action can be justified on political, legal, or other grounds, especially when taken in its individual context. Nevertheless, the net effect is adverse from our standpoint. Interpreted from the Salvadoran point of view, we are either lacking in understanding or out of sympathy with Salvadoran aspirations. It should be emphasized that the Mission here has at no time been in conflict with the Salvadoran Government on matters at issue. On the contrary, in spite of the unfavorable positions we have

El Salvador 571 President Lemus said that his administration was based on two principles: honesty in Government and better living conditions. He stated that neither he nor any of his Ministers were dipping into the public coffers. He could not say that Government officials might not try to do so in the future, but anyone who did would go to jail. The President expressed his feeling that the three biggest problems in El Salvador were housing, education, and public health, and he felt these really had to be considered as one single problem. His administration had undertaken a bold program to solve these problems, but they had not expected the world economic recession, with the consequent drop in commodity prices, and they hoped some way could be found to enable them to go forward with this program. The administration planned the construction of 2,000 more schools, and since his inauguration 40,000 additional children had been enrolled in the schools. The president said it was necessary to fight communism by accomplishments. The communists promised but did not fulfil their promises. They had ruled Guatemala for ten years but they had achieved nothing. However, in order to deprive them of arguments they could use, it was necessary to improve the living conditions of the masses. In addition to the Government’s bold housing program, it would likewise be necessary for the big landholders to build homes for their tenant farmers. A very few had done so, but not many. The Government was going to press them to do so and if they still did not the Government would find means to compel them to undertake programs of this type either by passing a law, or else by making it possible for them to deduct some part of the cost of construction of these workers’ homes from their taxes. The President on several occasions said tribute to the great assistance which the United States had rendered to El Salvador, particularly in the field of technical cooperation. He indicated a need for help at the agricultural school but at no time did he or any other Salvadoran official mention specific sums or loans, other than to say that they hoped to be able to go forward with their housing, education, and public health programs. The President spoke with feelings of the hardships caused in El Salvador by the drop in world coffee prices. He did not, however, as was frequently the case elsewhere, believe that the United States could correct this situation by some arbitrary action. The President indicated that he strongly favored the union of Central American states as a means of providing all the countries of the area with a broader market for the free government of labor and goods. This would contribute to raising the living standard of the inhabitants of all those countries. He spoke also of the problem of over-­population in El Salvador where 2.5 million people occupy some 8,000 square miles.

El Salvador 573 The presence of sixteen graduates of Johns Hopkins University highlighted further the close cultural connection between El Salvador and the United States. At the meeting with the businessmen at the Embassy, no translation was required as all of those present spoke English. Unlike other Central American countries, no specific program was submitted, nor were specific requests for assistance made.2 A general expression of need for assistance was made in the three fields referred to previously of housing, education, and health. The President spoke of his desire to complete the Acajutla Port Project. The Salvadorans in a note, now almost a year old, have asked the United States Government for a loan of $8 million,3 but they have never come up with any concrete projects for the rural improvement program in which Lemus appears so interested. We have on several occasions, without result so far, informally explained that before consideration can be given to their loan application, they must provide us with a detailed explanation of their plans for using the money. Without having their explanations, we now believe the DLF would be the only agency that could make such a loan to them, and we doubt present DLF policies would permit it to make such a loan. CONCLUSIONS:—In view of the fact that no specific program was presented in El Salvador, it is difficult to comment in a detailed fashion, but it appears that some of the factors mentioned in connection with other countries of the area would hold true in this country. These are: (a) The need for an inventory of the nation’s assets, both human and material; (b) The need for assistance in determining the feasibility of establishing new industrial enterprises and diversifying agricultural production; (c) An analysis and appraisal of the potentials of domestic and foreign markets, and a better understanding of the revenues that might be derived from tourism, and 2 At a meeting between members of Eisenhower’s mission and Salvadoran Government officials in San Salvador, July 28, 1958, concerning economic matters, Antonio Serrano Langlois, Salvadoran Under Secretary of Economy, distributed a memorandum of proposed development projects of the Salvadoran Government. He said the program required $191 million, including $84 million from his Government and $107 million in foreign aid. (Memorandum of conversation by W. Douglas McLain, Jr., Third Secretary of the Embassy in El Salvador; enclosure 1 to despatch 55 from San

El Salvador 575 ES–5. Memorandum of Conversation by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, March 11, 1959. SUBJECT Visit of President Lemus of El Salvador PARTICIPANTS President Lemus of El Salvador; Foreign Minister Ortiz Mancia; Minister of ­Economy Rochac; Minister of Public Works Parker; Economic Adviser Jorge Sol; Ambassador Castro; Acting Secretary Herter; Ambassador Kalijarvi; Mr. Rubottom The Acting Secretary, after greeting the President and his party, commented on how much Secretary Dulles had appreciated the indication from President Lemus of his desire to call on him at the Walter Reed Hospital. He added that the Secretary was still under treatment and had not actually seen any of the members of his own staff in the last few days; therefore it would not be possible for him to have the pleasure of receiving the President, as much as he would have liked doing so. Governor Herter then voiced his awareness of the excellent speech made the day before to the Council of the Organization of American States by President Lemus2 and offered to make arrangements for the President or any member of his party to meet with Allan Dulles, Director of the Central intelligence Agency. President Lemus indicated an interest, if time permitted, and added that he would like for the Foreign Minister to meet with Mr. Dulles, even if he were unable to do so. The President pointed out the relationship between the communist problem and the socio-­economic problem in his country and other countries. Mr. Rubottom mentioned that the whole thrust of the U.S. policy was designed to attack the communist problem at its roots by helping the governments and the peoples to raise living standards and offer hope for the future. Governor Herter expressed his hope that the President would express some of these same ideas in his speech before the Congress, and the President indicated that he intended to do just that.3 The President stressed his interest in the economic integration of Latin America, and especially the five countries of Central America, as

El Salvador 577 The Minister recalled how many civil wars had been fought in Central America toward the end of the last century and that these had been settled by the Pact of Washington in 1907,7 thanks to U.S. good offices. He hoped that we would be able to do the same in the economic field that we had done in the political sector back in that time. He stressed the need to raise living standards, since there is now no middle class in Central America. Governor Herter said that we had been somewhat distressed by some of the problems that have arisen in practice now that the European Common Market has actually been created. He said that Benelux had been a natural development, but that some new problems had been created or old ones accentuated, rather than helped, by the common market. Minister Rochac referred to the relatively stable financial situation of Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, adding that the other two (Costa Rica and Nicaragua) were not as well off. He thought it was advisable to start with three countries or two, just El Salvador and Honduras, and allow the others to come in gradually. Mr. Rubottom suggested that the future problems of the common market could be solved with good faith, hard work, and by devotion to sound principles in the beginning of the project, just as we are undertaking to do in the establishment of the Inter-American Bank. Governor Herter alluded to the United States’ interest in the Law of the Sea and the conference now foreseen a year from this month, expressing the hope that we would have the cooperation of El Salvador. The Foreign Minister, Sr. Ortiz Mancia, said that they thought we would have their cooperation. They have a constitutional rigidity with respect to the Law of the Sea, but they believe there is a way of harmonizing our two viewpoints. (Later on the Foreign Minister assured Mr. Rubottom that they would be able to do this.) The Economic Adviser to President Lemus, Mr. Jorge Sol, made a very strong plea for U.S. support of the economic integration of Central America.8 Without this, according to Mr. Sol, there is no economic future to Central America, since they are too dependent on just one or two products. 7 Reference is to the General Treaty of Peace and Amity signed at Washington by Representatives of Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador, December 20, 1907; for text, see William M. Mallory (Comp.), Treaties, Conventions, International Acts, Protocols and Agreements between the United States of America and Other

El Salvador 579 compartmentation was even more serious and was practically strangling them. The President recognized this and asserted that an integrated market would strengthen all of Central America without any one country needing to lose dignity or any part of its independence. What is needed is for it to get started. The Salvadoran President declared his optimism for the future, especially with U.S. cooperation. Going back to his experience ten years ago in Europe, the President recalled that he had preached the idea of economic integration there. Now, in spite of difficulties, the European countries are approaching their goal, placing greater importance on the advantages and less on the risks of integration. President Lemus said that it was precisely these examples which stimulated them. President Eisenhower recalled some of the cooperative efforts in Europe, in which the U.S. had participated, which had stimulated the common market, such as the European coal and steel community, Euratom, and NATO. He admitted that we had been motivated by our own interest as well as that of our European allies. Minister of Economy Rochac, at the invitation of President Lemus, described the one-­hundred-­year effort of Central America to achieve political union, followed by the realization about ten years ago that such union could come about only as a result of economic integration. These efforts have now resulted in two treaties subscribed to in Tegucigalpa in June 1958, the first designed to free trade,2 and the second designed to achieve industrial integration.3 He alluded favorably to Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s Report and its suggestion that El Salvador and Honduras might carry out a pilot project in economic integration which seemed a more practical approach than waiting for all of the countries to agree on a method. Mr. Rochac recalled the recent visit of Messrs. Frank and Turkel from the Department, which had stimulated still further interest in the subject in his country and in Honduras. The public is very impatient and wants results rather than more studies. The Minister went back to the Central American wars at the close of the last century and recalled the role of the United States in the 1907 pact which had brought peace between the five countries. Central America can do a great deal by itself, but the United States, acting as a big brother, can help to 2 Reference is to the Multilateral Treaty on Free Trade and Central American Economic Integration (with annexes), signed by representatives of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua at Tegucigalpa, June 10, 1958, and entered into

El Salvador 581 Both Presidents rose at 12:10 and, following the taking of pictures, President Lemus and his party departed for the Capitol. ES–7. Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge of El Salvadoran Affairs (Ross)1 Washington, April 1, 1959. SUBJECT Salvadoran Interest in a Mutual Assistance Agreement PARTICIPANTS Dr. Don Hector David Castro, Ambassador of El Salvador Mr. Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary Mr. Robert Ross, Officer-­in-Charge of Salvadoran Affairs Ambassador Castro said President Lemus had asked him to discuss informally with Mr. Rubottom the possibility of obtaining a U.S.-El Salvador mutual assistance agreement under the provisions of the Rio de Janeiro accord.2 He said that while the previous Salvadoran administration, under President Osorio, had been “disinclined” to sign such an agreement with the U.S., President Lemus believed his country’s inter American defense obligations and close friendship with the U.S. indicated the desirability of an agreement of this type. President Lemus would like to know, the Ambassador said, whether or not agreements were still being signed and the possibilities for consideration of one with El Salvador. Mr. Rubottom said that certainly the absence of such an agreement with El Salvador was not due to a lack of friendship between the two countries nor does it have any deleterious effect upon this friendship. He went on to say that the world and the future of its people had changed a great deal since the Rio agreements. The Assistant Secretary cited the new probability of any future war being an atomic conflict as an example of the changes, since 1945. He also pointed out the effectiveness of the Organization of American States as an instrument for the avoidance of inter-American wars and reminded the Ambassador of the small size of our mutual defense programs in Latin America, with

El Salvador 583 In this respect U.S. aid, both direct and indirect, would be of definite assistance. 4. The second aspect of Communism was the urban. In the towns and cities, workers were much closer together, better organized, in many instances more intelligent than the campesino, and were more easily influenced by subversive propaganda. He mentioned both the labor groups and the university students. In connection with the former, he referred to communist-­dominated organizations; in the latter connection, namely, the university, he was concerned about the perennial, as he described it, “eternal” student. Both he and the Foreign Minister appeared to have the same view as we do of the situation which confronts El Salvador. 5. He briefly summarized what his Government was doing. He spoke of his displeasure with the newspapers for permitting various Communist articles or Communist-­slanted articles to appear in their publications. He mentioned the column “Sputnik”, and the relative softness of Viera Altamirano, editor and director of “El Diario de Hoy,” toward Communists and Communist articles appearing in his paper. I was surprised at the emotion that he generated on this subject and the feelings he harbored with respect to certain writers. It was probably understandable because he took the articles as a personal affront, speaking of them as being anti-­government. 6. He referred to the ease of movement across political frontiers by agitators and Communists in Central America. He felt further international cooperation was necessary, that no single government could take care of the problem by itself. He said that people had been granted visas for the U.S., Canada, and other countries, and within a few days it was common knowledge that they had reached Moscow. 7. In this connection he spoke of Cuba in derogatory terms. He and the Foreign Minister were in agreement that Castro was following tactics, especially in the liquidation of opposition, that were typically Communist and un-Latin. He said he was disturbed about the ease with which invasion of Central American areas could be engineered from other countries, and concluded by pointing out that the problem of Communism was extensive and involved. 8. He went on to say that the Communist objectives with respect to El Salvador were not hard to discern. The Foreign Minister concurred in Lemus’ view that the number-­one objective of the Communists in Central America was El Salvador. He believed this was so because of the stability which this country has had for several years, politically, economically, and otherwise—a stability resting in part upon the liquidation in 1932 of the disturbing Communist element. Communist tactics aimed first at disaffecting all of El Salvador’s neighbors: Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica. (He said that Costa Rica was a hotbed

El Salvador 585 ES–10. Memorandum of Conversation by the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)1 San Salvador, November 20, 1959. PARTICIPANTS Lt. Col. José Maria Lemus, President of the Republic of El Salvador Thorsten V. Kalijarvi, American Ambassador President Lemus asked me to remain after the presentation of the parchment2 saying he had a problem he wished to discuss with me. He stated that he needed U.S. assistance. He had already requested a Military Assistance Program. Now, instead of making a specific suggestion, he wished to request such aid as could be given. The growing instability of the area, especially communist agitation and possibilities of attacks by El Salvador’s neighbors left El Salvador vulnerable. He referred to the despatch of a shipload of arms to an unknown destination from Mexico, to the invasions attempt from the sea, and to the constant disturbance of the whole area. Some time ago El Salvador had purchased a number of airplanes from the United States and then had bought additional planes to rehabilitate those already purchased. Some planes were lost on the way down and others had deteriorated in service. He referred to the five planes which are to be sent to Costa Rica for repair and rehabilitation. He contrasted these with the jets now contemplated for purchase by Cuba. He referred to some 50 pilots capable of flying the planes, but no planes to fly. He noted the lack of funds of the Government of El Salvador for the purchase of necessary military equipment in order to maintain itself in a strong defense position against possible attack. While his illustrations were drawn from the air force, he was general in his discussion, including the need for ships for coast guard purposes, for control against smuggling, and for guarding the coast against possible attack. He added that the problem confronting his government was grave and the need for U.S. assistance, while not immediately urgent, certainly was in need of prompt consideration. There was a strong implication that he was asking for military equipment financed by the U.S. Government as well as for assistance in organizing the military forces of this country. He voiced a desire to keep the budget in the black, maintaining the social and welfare projects that have been undertaken, and at the same

El Salvador 587

El Salvador 589 demonstrated willingness to do. With this: marrying of local with international uncertainty, an element of defeatism has spread which locals maintain is unlikely to be routed until U.S. alone or in concert other LA nations provides a lead. Although isolated and confronted with situation which seems to be snow-­balling, there are as yet no firm grounds for concluding that President Lemus has lost control of situation. Development of past week suggest, moreover, that he now fully realizes that maintaining status quo is no longer a viable policy and that he may be preparing to move more affirmatively. Has : (1) struck back at wealthy clique, (2) reshuffled some important military and national police posts (Embtel

El Salvador 591 Against this background of rapidly growing unrest stimulated by Cuban evangelism, we see the Salvadoran leaders—­the oligarchy of the Army, the so-­called 14 families and their gentry, and the church – ­divided among them­selves, unable to give adequate leadership to attack the fundamental causes of the unrest. President Eisenhower, the Secretary, Allen Dulles, yourself, and our Ambassadors to El Salvador have all previously indicated our concern about social conditions and communist activity in El Salvador to President Lemus, but without visible results. A very strong approach to Dr. Rochac at this time might reach both the President and the economic aristocracy. Rochac is of the middle class, with a liberal or radical background, and apparently without close ties to the gentry, so you might be preaching to the converted. However, it is well known that he is highly respected in his country and in the U. S., and this, together with his reputation for honesty and objectivity, would give great weight to any message from you he might take back to El Salvador. Recommendation That you call Dr. Rochac in for a forceful discussion along the following lines: 1. We have observed a deterioration of conditions in El Salvador which appear a serious threat to stability of the Government. Not only has the Government failed to take effective action against communist and Cuban subversion, but more important, it has failed to act to reduce the basic social and economic problems which create a climate favorable to revolutionary activity. 2. We consider that the current agitation in El Salvador is probably overdue, and should serve as a clear warning to the country’s governing groups. It is common knowledge that the campesino’s standard of living in El Salvador is almost the lowest in Latin America. It is only logical that communist and Cuban agitators realize this and concentrate their activities where the wealthy class is most vulnerable and where the chance of success is greatest. 3. We are reliably informed that agents of the Cuban government in association with communist groups are spreading the doctrine of violent social revolution in El Salvador and among other countries, and are directly interfering in the domestic political scene. Several of these same countries have urged that the U.S. act against the Cuban government unilaterally or through the OAS, apparently without being prepared to recognize that the interventionist extremism of the present Cuban government constitutes an even more imminent danger to them than to the U.S. We consider that those who are thus threatened by Fidelismo and Cuban subversive activities should feel no hesitance in bearing their share of responsibility for any collective action which

El Salvador 593 gave the ruling Partido Revolucionario de Unificación Democrática a total vote of 368,545 to 51,557 for the opposition, and control of all Legislative Assembly seats and all but six municipalities. In telegram

El Salvador 595 recounted his conversation with Ambassador Kalljarvi of last fall in which he had made a request for assistance from the United States.5 This assistance was now more urgently needed than ever. El Salvador’s borders and coasts were wide open to anyone who desired to penetrate them. For example, not a single boat was available with which to patrol the coast. Mr. Stewart said that in this connection, he wished to tell President Lemus that the question of possible military threats against the countries of Central American from external sources had been discussed prior to his coming here and that he had Mr. Rubottom’s authority to assure him that the United States, working through the OAS machinery, would come to the assistance of any Latin American government so threatened. Our assistance would be immediate and more than fully adequate. On this point, President Lemus could rest assured. Mr. Stewart then explained at some length the problems involved in concluding a mutual assistance bilateral, emphasizing the congressional aspects, etc.6 He told the President that we were now exploring the feasibility of utilizing other channels through which it might be possible to provide certain types of assistance to the public security forces. He pointed out that the Embassy had, some two weeks ago, requested the Minister of Defense to provide it with information concerning the National Police, the Guardia Nacional, the Customs Police, and the Treasury Police. This information would be of great assistance to the Embassy in preparing recommendations on such a possible program. The President reached in a folder and took out the Embassy’s Aide Memoire to the Minister of Defense,7 which he had obviously been holding. He telephoned to the Minister and asked him to prepare a reply on an urgent basis for his prior review.8 He reiterated his hope that some assistance would be forthcoming, repeating that it was impossible for his government to do all that had to be done in the social field and elsewhere without outside assistance. He explained what he hoped to accomplish with the new development project at Metalio. He said he knew that this would not solve the campesino problem, but it could serve as an example of what could be done, an example to the

El Salvador 597 sideration to the type of assistance that might best help to solve some of the problems faced by the Government of El Salvador. It now proposes that, in lieu of a Military Assistance Program, the United States, through the International Cooperation Administration, assist the government here in improving the capability of those units and organizations charged with public security and with control over the national frontiers. It is believed that this assistance can best be accomplished by: a. Bringing to El Salvador a well qualified consultant to survey, within the shortest order or time, the organization, operations and equipment of the public security forces and to recommend measures for improving their effectiveness. b. Providing through special assistance funds a modest number of light motor vehicles and the necessary communications equipment. The recommendation contained in paragraph a. above has been discussed with General Lopez Ayala, Sub-Secretary of Defense in charge of public security, by the USOM Director, who found the General warmly in accord. It has also been discussed with Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Ortiz Mancia, who on July 15 reported to the Chargé that the matter had been discussed with President Lemus. The latter was greatly heartened by this show of interest and, in giving his approval, expressed his hope that the specialist could arrive and the study be completed at the earliest possible date. Background As recorded in the referenced communications from this Embassy, President Lemus over the course of the past ten months or so has made several direct appeals to me for assistance from the United States in improving the capability of the internal and public security forces of El Salvador. This matter was raised by the President once again during the visit here on June 7 of Mr. C. Allan Stewart, Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs. Taken from a Memorandum of Conversation dated June 7, 1960,5 the conversation on this subject went as follows: [Here follows quotation from paragraph 3 of June 7 memorandum of conversation.] A few days following this conversation, President Lemus gave the Chargé a memorandum incorporating the requested information. A copy of this memorandum and a translation thereof are attached.6 As pointed out by the President at the time of handing over the memorandum, one of the greatest current threats to the security of El Salvador lies in the open possibilities for infiltration of national borders. This 5 See Document ES–16.

El Salvador 599 a consultant to El Salvador in its June submission of OPARs and E-I tables. An early decision on the recommendations contained herein would be greatly appreciated. Thorsten V. Kalijarvi ES–18. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi)1 San Salvador, August 24, 1960. PARTICIPANTS President José María Lemus Ambassador Thorsten V. Kalijarvi In response to the recommendations of the Acting Foreign Minister, President Lemus received me in his office this morning at 11:45. He apologized for keeping me waiting, but explained that he had been at the desk since two o’clock this morning; and as I could readily understand, the current situation called for a great many things to be done. He answered as follows to my inquiry of how he regarded the present situation. A number of developments have converged and resulted in the current disturbances. First, the next elections (for Presidents) are scheduled to take place in 1962 and a number of aspirants have become active with their eyes fixed on that event. Second, the Communists have become active and have caused the GOES increasing trouble since January of this year. Third, the OAS conference at San José2 has furnished the Communists throughout the hemisphere with a rallying point, and the order to create disturbances has been given affecting El Salvador along with the other countries. Finally, the Rector of the University,3 a notorious leftist, has political ambitions and is directly responsible for the student agitations. Lemus then gave me a telegram he had sent to Ortiz Mancia, the Salvadoran Foreign Minister, at the MFM in San José. He asked that it

El Salvador 601 Regarding his request for two security advisors to assist at the Casa Presidential, the President again expressed his urgent interest, saying he wanted to have the use of these advisors right now, rather than at some indefinite time in the future. On leaving I asked if he intended to remain firm regarding the students sent out of the country. He said he intended to exercise a firm hand. What was more, if the disorders did not subside, he would arrest the Rector and the Deans and throw them out of the country. All through the talk he received phone calls through [which?] he received information or issued orders. Among the former was a call from Rubio Melhado7 saying that the Rector had asked to see him. On laying down the phone Lemus said, “I think he is afraid.” Among the latter he gave orders for the distribution of government leaflets. While tired, he seemed to be confident and sure that he could control the situation. While waiting for my audience I talked with two of the Presidential aides, both major officers in the army. They agreed that underlying the present disturbance were the social and economic inequalities in the country. However, the students had no rallying point except opposition to the MFM in San José. Both confidently expected the present disorders to subside quickly and opined that the President had no choice but to exercise a firm hand. Following the meeting with the President I passed by the office of Rubio Melhado. Major Rubio asked why I was still in town and not on vacation as planned. I said that the nature of the current crisis indicated my continued presence here; Major Rubio agreed that the situation was serious [text not declassified]. We agreed I would not leave town until we were both certain that the situation was such as to permit my absence. 7 Maj. Alfonso Rubio Melhado was Secretary General of the Presidency and a member of the Central Committee of the Partido Revolucionario de Unificatión Democrática.

El Salvador 603 still supporting Lemus. Indeed evidence to support belief that Lemus spurred to forceful action in crisis by army. For full appreciation factors involved current situation see Embdes

El Salvador 605 ES–20. Telegram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi) to the Department of State1

El Salvador 607 2) In the event Lemus regime should fall would some kind of military junta be likely successor? If so, could we expect that such a regime would be basically friendly to West and hostile to Communism and Castroism? If not, what kind of regime would you expect to take over? In reference to preceding questions would appreciate your views re current attitudes of a) military establishment, b) 14 families and their supporters, c) church, d) PRUD party, e) Osorio clique, f) labor, g) congress and h) university groups. Foregoing questions do not imply any change in U.S. position re support of constitutional government in Salvador. We are however increasingly concerned about ability of Lemus regime to survive and wish to begin thinking in concrete terms of what we would be faced with if government falls. Department is pushing ahead on plans for Central American Bank and is willing to consider any specific action in economic field that you consider vital to our interests in Salvador. However whether this type of assistance would have any material influence on situation would seem to depend on length of time Lemus remains in power. Dillon ES–22. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of El Salvadoran Affairs (Gwynn)1 Washington, September 27, 1960. SUBJECT Political Situation in El Salvador PARTICIPANTS: Dr. Alfonso Rochac - Director, Inter-American Development Bank and former Minister of Economy of El Salvador ARA - Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary E - Mr. Turnage, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs OAP - Mr. Gwynn, Officer In Charge, El Salvador ARA - Mr. Pryce, Staff Aide While calling on Mr. Mann today regarding another matter, Dr. Rochac commented at some length on the present Salvadoran

El Salvador 609 ES–23. Airgram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi) to the Department of State1 San Salvador, September 27, 1960.

El Salvador 611 dissatisfaction and resentment, and patience with him among this group is beginning to run out. Most of those we have talked to see need for social reforms, etc., but they want them to be instituted in planned context, leadership for which Lemus government has thus far been unable to provide. If it comes to alternatives, majority appears to favor Osorio and we believe this element would throw its weight in his direction. 3. Church. Prodded by Nunciature and clearly more worldly wise to revolutionary type threats, church here is far out in front in pressing for social reform and has evidenced impatience with Lemus government on this score. By its attitude it has widened breach between itself and wealthy class, thereby weakening oligarchy’s foundation. Its basic aim, however, appears to have been to spur Lemus government into action rather than to contribute to its downfall. It has made public its support of Lemus during the recent crisis and can be expected to continue supporting the constitutional government. 4. PRUD Party. As a national party PRUD can be said no longer to exist. It is rent with dissension and is a skeleton without real substance. Much of the blame for this rests with Secretary General Rubio Melhado, who with high-­handedness has made many mistakes and continues to make them, and is strongly disliked by all but a few cronies. Historically, parties here have been formed around a man. Lemus, by abdicating in favor of Rubio Melhado as party manager, sacrificed his place as leader and it is doubtful that PRUD as it is now constituted will be vary decisive factor in current crisis. 5. Osorio Clique. Ex-President Osorio still represents strongest non-Communist political force in country. He has loyal adherents in all strata and his reservoir of strength runs deep. Close friends quote him as desirous of seeing Lemus complete term despite deep differences but there is evidence that his lieutenants have been exceedingly active since the present crisis began. We doubt Osorio will step forward until called but believe his ear is cocked to catch weakest summons. Osorio as a man is better known to several now in ARA than to us here. Our impression, however, is that Osorio would have liked to have been more reformist than he was during his term. He held back mainly by more conservative wealthy elements on whose monetary support he heavily depended. We do not believe the same situation will exist again and that Osario would be inclined to be rather liberal in his outlook and policies. This view reinforced by type people considered close associates such as Jorge SOL Castellanos. We would not expect Osorio to be openly antagonistic to U.S., or West. Neither would we expect him to be as openly pro-U.S. or as amenable to suggestions from us as has been Lemus government. While not favorable to Castroism we believe he would attempt to apply some Castro-­type reform measures here.

El Salvador 613 highly obtained purposeful and, unfortunately, extremely versatile and able student leaders in international communism’s pay. As a group, they still do not appear to have been completely disabused of their illusions with respect to Castroism and what it stands for. One thing is clear: Lemus is anathema to the large majority and is unlikely ever to re-­win students’ confidence or support. 9. Campesino. Thus far this overwhelming majority had taken no part in current disturbances. The campesino has [illegible in the original] some interest as a spectator but no propensity to include his voice of his “machete” in current happenings. Embassy knows that travelling pro-Castro/Communist teams have been proselytizing to the countryside but as yet they do not appear to have succeeded in setting imaginations afire. Lemus, as a President, is thought to be relatively popular among this class, but as a man, Osorio is still reversed by the campesino and the “little” man of Salvador. Thus, while dormant at the moment, the campesino is not happy or content with his lot and a spark in the right place could set this very volatile element afire. Moreover, should the situation in the capital become chaotic at any time, the campesino’s weight can be expected to make itself felt. While the fall of the Lemus government does not appear imminent, should it occur, it would in all likelihood take the form of a voluntary abdication or ouster. In case of the former, the Vice President constitutionally would succeed to office, i.e., in the following order: Costa, Esquivel, Alvarez, Escapini. None is a military man. While much would depend on attendant circumstances, there is a strong chance that the military would intervene and set up a governing Junta with the results described below. If Lemus were ousted, the Communists would not be in a position to seize control. The Osorio strategy and tactics to [illegible in the original] have been effectively hidden and would seem to indicate that he would continue to remain in the background and refrain from immediately taking over. However, the possibility should not be entirely discounted. The most likely development in case of an ouster would be a military Junta. In such case the odds are that the power would shortly thereafter be transferred to Osorio, who would seek to constitutionalize his tenure, possibly through elections. The advent of Osorio would still keep El Salvador oriented toward the West and favorable towards the Osorio but by no means as friendly as under the present government. I am not completely certain that Osorio would return to his former strong anti-Communist position although there is good reason to believe that in deference to the military he would do so. The winds of nationalism are blowing more strongly here than for some time. Criticism of the U.S. has been stirred from

El Salvador 615 ES–25. Editorial Note

El Salvador 617 We are convinced from pattern of coup, make-­up and early actions of government, Communist tones of decrees and announcements, and especially yesterday’s press conference by junta (EMBTEL 231)3 that military element no match for civilian leftists and that as matters now stand, we must regard coup as first step towards Fidelismo. For moment announcements seem calculated to lull us but clearly next stage will be struggle for power between Commies and more conservative element and military with odds favoring former. If remedial measures to be successful they will have to be taken within next few days while army still has control of arms. Reports reaching us indicate that while many viewed coup with approval at outset believing Osorio was the man, their ardor has cooled considerably after seeing make-­up of government. A counter coup effort, therefore, which our information indicates may be in making, may find more public support outside leftist elements than could have been hoped for earlier. View all these considerations and many still unanswered questions, believe strongly that our traditional policy of recognition should not be following in this instance. If our fears confirmed by subsequent action, major and practically only weapon available to U.S., since intervention renounced under international agreement, is recognition and/ or nonrecognition. Believe from talks with colleagues our action in this respect will be closely watched and followed by number of other countries. I urge with all persuasiveness at my command the Department go slow with recognition. Kalijarvi

El Salvador 619 Rene Fortin Magana—Lawyer, aged 30. As a University student was an active leftist, anti-U.S., an associate of Communists, and an alleged “Communist.” A Salvadoran source here, however, whose judgment I value, described him as young, honorable, violent, rich, and not left. In view of my personal knowledge of the University of El Salvador, I am inclined to the latter view. Ricardo Falla Caceres—Lawyer, aged 32. An active leftist at the University in recent years who has been consistently alleged to be a “Communist,” but is described as liberal by other sources considered reliable. The individuals comprising the Junta and the new cabinet appear to represent a cross-­section of Salvadoran political views. This is undoubtedly deliberate, in an endeavor to attract widespread support for the new Government. They are largely younger men who are relatively unknown politically. A tentative appraisal indicates that the new Government is nearer the “middle of the road” than to either extreme, with a definite tendency towards the left on the part of the civilian members. Ambassador Kalijarvi views a substantial proportion of the civilian members as being to the extreme left. The Department’s sources indicate many of them to be moderates, although preponderantly to the left. The new Government’s first actions have been to release political prisoners, lift the state of siege, cancel the law restricting the right of assembly, and to announce that it would hold free elections as scheduled in 1962 and would govern by means of decrees during the transitory period of government. Also, it has declared its firm intention to comply strictly with the political Constitution of 1950, to respect existing treaties and international conventions, to fulfill its obligations and commitments, and to respect human rights. These latter assurances have been given by the new Minister of Foreign Affairs in a note dated October 27 to our Embassy in San Salvador.2 Among the principal factors leading to the overthrow of the Lemus Government have been (a) his failure to carry out social reforms announced following his inauguration in 1956; (b) his failure to accept the advice of and delegate responsibility to the better-­qualified members of his cabinet; (c) his vacillation in controlling the increasing activities of pro-Castro and pro-Communist agitators, first by failure to act and later through strong-­arm suppression; and (d) his alienation of the military by his apparent intention to make his aide, Major Rubio Melhado, his successor to the Presidency.

El Salvador 621 ES–28. Memorandum for the President by the Secretary of State.1 Washington, November 1, 1960. SUBJECT Recognition of the New Regime in El Salvador The six-­man Junta which assumed power in El Salvador on October 26 is pressing for recognition by the United States. There is some evidence that this is a government somewhat to the left of that of former President Lemus and that a majority of the members of the Junta and Cabinet are anti-Communist, although a small minority are not particularly desirable from our point of view. Moreover, there is a report that a counter-­coup may be attempted. Nevertheless, the weight of evidence is that the majority of the Army and the conservative oligarchy support the present government. It is generally believed that the most prominent, if not the dominant, figure in this movement is former President Oscar Osorio, President Lemus’ predecessor, who has a long record of cooperation with the United States and of opposition to communist domination of El Salvador’s political life. The Embassy of El Salvador in Washington has issued a press release saying in part that the “Members of the Civic-Military Junta had emphatically declared in a press conference that the revolutionary movement they represent is strictly national and authentically democratic, consistent with the basic principles of Western democracy without any ties, whatsoever, with foreign powers or ideologies.” The Governments of Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Ecuador, Uruguay, Argentina, Spain and Mexico have already recognized, and it is probable that other recognitions will follow swiftly. All the elements required for recognition are present, and I recommend that we recognize the new regime promptly in order better to enable us to cultivate good relations with it and to influence it in the right direction.2 Christian A. Herter

El Salvador 623 next following, you may also wish inform Osorio of plan to approach key Army officers. If in your opinion split among officer corps is serious, we suggest an approach should also be made promptly to key officers in both Osorio and Lemus camps. These officers would be informed that while we have no desire to intervene in political affairs of Salvador and in particular no desire to take sides as between military groups, we believe that unity of armed forces in face of present Communist threat is both urgent and essential. Colonel Alberto Escamilla or Major Ruben Rosales or both may be best persons to approach in Osorio camp. General Molina or General Cordova or both might be best persons to approach in Lemus group. However, our information regarding military is fragmentary and we leave to Embassy’s and Mil Attaches discretion which officers should be approached and most appropriate person in Embassy family to make approach. Cable Niact results these conversations with any additional recommendations Embassy may have. Department suspending recognition until receipt your report. Ambassador Kalijarvi concurs. Herter ES–30. Telegram from the Chargé in El Salvador (Downs) to the Department of State1

El Salvador 625 We found Major Rosales straightforward, honest, pro-Western and friendly but a complete babe in the woods. He admitted military on junta consulting with Osorio and that civilian side probably not under Osorio’s direction. Clear he has serious doubts about Doctor Fabio Castillo; he asked whether we could confirm he had extreme leftist leanings. Said decision junta taken by majority vote and no one leader. Admitted that if disagreements occurred and could not be resolved through discussion, they put aside for later. Saw dangers in this arrangement but for moment junta working well together. Questioning brought out he totally ignorant re developments outside junta. When filled in he clearly taken aback and started taking notes. Said he did not know many of those appointed government positions, clarifying that Salazar Rodezno nominated for Information Chief Casa Presidential by junta member Falla Caceres. Asked whether intention existed apply any curbs Communist activities he parroted Osorio’s remark re strategy permitting open, unfettered operations until Communists identified. When asked who first presented the strategy he hesitated and then answered: “Rene Fortin Magana”. When pressed as to plans for controlling Communist movement Rosales reaffirmed that no plan existed. Said he was very inexperienced in this new assignment and would welcome any suggestions we might have to solve problem without being accused of curbing civil liberties. He stated that military members of junta felt that economic measures improve lot lower classes must be initiated immediately but that civilian members were standing firm in their position that political orientation of government must take precedence. He concluded that military members junta charged with security while civilian members dealing with political situation. Colonel Escamilla arrived and Rosales gave him straight forward account our talk to that point, including our concern re Communist infiltration and activities. Escamilla inclined at first brush these off saying most effective way handle these was through economic deeds rather than words or control measures. Turning to Quinonez he remarked that he and people he represented should immediately join government in these activities. Quinonez asked whether Escamilla aware type propaganda now being put out by Communists. I called for tape recording (Embassy telegram 248) and for first time Quinonez himself, Escamilla and Rosales heard what Communists saying. Reaction electric with much shaking of heads. All agreed this pure Communism rather than nationalism and that action some sort seemed called for, but they continued expound difficulties taking any ­direct action under existing circumstances. I suggested good place to start was with Salazar Rodezno. Rosales and Escamilla departed saying they would look into matter. Quinonez who in interim between Osario’s departure and Rosales arrival had made effort defend some of Osorio’s remarks made no

El Salvador 627 ES–31. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Mann) to the Acting Secretary of State1 Washington, November 5, 1960. SUBJECT Recent Developments in El Salvador. REF NSC paper dated October 30 entitled “Coup d’etat in El Salvador.”2 In the past week it has become clear that currently the most prominent if not the dominant figure in the revolutionary movement which overthrew the Lemus Government is ex-President Oscar Osorio who, while a complex individual, has a long record of cooperation with the U.S. and of opposition to Communist domination of El Salvador’s political life. In this coup he appears to have had the financial support of some of the leading “14 families.” There is, however, a question as to whether he is in full control of the situation with indications that the influence of the extreme left may be growing rapidly and unchecked. Also, there are reports of dissension in the military and plans for a counter-­coup by dissident officers. The question of the recognition of the new Salvadorian regime is being given urgent consideration in the light of these reports as this paper is being prepared. The most significant new indications of expanding Castro- Communist influence include: a) The appointment of more leftists to second and third echelon positions in the Government, particularly in the Attorney General’s office, the Ministries of Education and Labor, the Supreme court (two to three seats in nine seat body), and in the Junta public relations office. Among these are some extremists or Communists. b) The commencement of a daily half-­hour radio program carrying the straight Communist line, reportedly with the blessing of the new Junta public relations office, and the cancellation of a USIS daily prepared international newscast on the Government-­controlled station (since reinstated). c) The rapid resumption of activities by Communist-­dominated groups, including the reappearance of manifestos making demands on the Government apparently designed to foment unrest and keep

El Salvador 629 ES–32. Memorandum of Discussion at the 466th Meeting of the National Security Council1 Monday, November 7, 1960 [Here follows discussion of agenda items 1–4, concerning outer space programs, Cuba, significant world events affecting U.S. security (Sino-Soviet clash, Laos El Salvador), and Algeria. Portions printed below are from the merged discussion of items 3 and 4.] Dealing next with El Salvador, General Cabell said that the Communists and pro-Castro forces were making a strong bid for power. Ex-President Osorio, who had used these forces as a means of getting back to power, had appointed pro-Communists and pro-Castro individuals to the Cabinet and other posts. Osorio thought he could control these elements but they have moved quickly to reinforce their position. They have appointed Communists and pro-Communists to second and third echelon positions in the government and were moving in on information and propaganda media. They are also demanding removal of all Osorio’s supporters. Osorio hopes to rule El Salvador indirectly until the 1952 elections. He says that he cannot consider plans to restrict the extreme Left because he needs their support to get action on certain reform measures. The army was apprehensive and a group of officers had plans for salvaging the dominant position of the military. They must act quickly, however, if their action is to be effective. General Cabell suggested that control of El Salvador by pro-Castro elements would pose a series threat to Guatemala. [Here follows discussion of possible Soviet intervention in Algeria.] Secretary Merchant went on to point out that the U.S. had not yet recognized the new government in El Salvador although we are considering the matter on a 24-­hour basis. We had thought it unwise to recognize the government in view of the possibility of a counter-­coup by conservative elements in the army. This was a difficult choice. The question was whether recognition would strengthen the reasonable elements in the government despite the fact that Leftist elements were honeycombing the government. Secretary Merchant expressed the view that Osorio may well have been double-­crossed. He said that a decision would be needed within the next 24–72 hours. If we waited too long and there was no counter-­coup, we would lose our ability to influence those who are our friends in the existing government. 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret. Eyes Only. This memorandum was prepared by Robert H. Johnson, Director of the NSC Planning

El Salvador 631 ES–33. Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, November 8, 1960. SUBJECT El Salvador Attached as Tab A is telegram to our Chargé a.i. in San Salvador approved by Tom Mann instructing him to inform the Foreign Minister immediately that the United States has decided to recognize the new government.2 Although drafted for my signature, Mr. Mann feels that this should be approved before dispatch by you and the President. Attached as Tab B is a memorandum from Ambassador Kalijarvi opposing this course of action.3 At the NSC meeting yesterday morning raised this subject with the President and outlined the pros and cons of recognition with an indication that the Department expected to have a recommendation for his consideration within a day or two. Although the discussion was brief, the main points were covered. Tom Gates expressed himself forcefully as opposed to recognition at this time. The others were silent, and the President gave no visible indication of judgment in the matter. It is unnecessary to say that this is a very difficult decision with the factors pro and con closed balanced. I have in my own mind reached the conclusion that we should continue to delay according the junta recognition. The controlling reasons for this are: (1) Having delayed this long, it is difficult to represent that recognition now would be automatic and containing no element of moral judgment. The passage of time itself will be construed as our having weighed all the factors and finally having come down on the side of recognition. (2) Recognition now with a counter-­coup still in the air would inevitably be a discouragement to those contemplating such action. Certainly a counter-­coup by moderate and anti-Communist army officers would be in our interest.

El Salvador 633 ES–35. Letter from the Chargé in El Salvador (Downs) to the Ambassador in El Salvador, Temporarily in Washington (Kalijarvi)1 San Salvador, November 10, 1960. Dear Mr. Ambassador: I received your two letters2 and wish to thank you very much for them and for the advice and counsel which I can read between the lines. We have been exceedingly busy. What with the many discussions we have been having with almost everyone around the place these days, the telegrams that have had to be drafted and cleared and the other myriad of activities which always seem to come upon one, I must admit that I have had very little time for either eating or sleeping. It has, however, as you can probably gather from that end, been a very interesting period. I believe that the pieces of the puzzle are beginning to fall into place fairly rapidly these days and I must say that the picture which is outlined is much as we had thought it would be in the early stages. One thing seems clear: we are in for a very difficult period over the next couple of months. From all we have been able to learn to date I am now more convinced than ever that we will be making a very grave error to put our money on Mr. Osorio. The latest we have heard is that he is drinking very heavily and is now letting it be known among his very close friends that he has indeed been double-­crossed. It seems to me, therefore, that our best course of action for the present is to give every bit of under the table assistance we can to the moderate forces in the country—­both outside the government and where we can find them inside—­and attempt to awaken them to the danger which is clearly apparent and give all the help we can in organizing the fight against it. This I think can be done without recognition on our part and I continue to believe that we would be making a very grave error in recognizing this Junta as it is currently composed. I think you too would be amazed at the number of people who have been seeking us out in the last week to tell us of their fears and concerns. People who up to a week ago were insisting that we recognize and give this government our full assistance. Among them, I am sure, are a large number who contributed both financially and morally

El Salvador 635 Mr. Merchant said he would start with last [illegible in the original] about last night. Mr. Merchant had [illegible in the original] Gates through [illegible in the original] requesting that [illegible in the original] El Salvador until [text not declassified] was [illegible in the original]3 [illegible in the original] to arrive in [illegible in the original] Friday. Mr. Merchant [illegible in the original] so the situation has been held up. Although the Secretary has the President’s approval or discretionary [illegible in the original] recognize ES when it is timely and right. State’s [illegible in the original] yesterday was to recognize the country in a [illegible in the original] to watch developments. This decision was [illegible in the original] on the basis of findings of private emissaries [illegible in the original] advice from some of our top Latin American friends [illegible in the original] on balance that a counter-coup by the conservative elements in the army, contrary to our original hope was not [illegible in the original] for some months. One argument against recognition was that it would discourage any such movements by friendly [illegible in the original] There was also the question of how [illegible in the original] could best encourage and invigorate the friendly moderate element who are still in the junta before they are gobbled up by the dangerous elements. It is a delicate judgment. Mr. Gray said that Defense and others against it are entitled to make their strong views known, but he still felt it is the primary action of the State Department. A further development, Mr. Merchant continued [illegible in the original] of just a few minutes ago. The USIB met this morning, and it is the unanimous view of the intelligence community that this is predominately a very bad crowd. That is no news to State. The Secretary and he are getting a memo from Hugh Cumming,4 who attended the meeting; and that judgment, which was concurred in by Allen Dulles, would be taken into consideration by Mr. Herter and himself. It will come down to a close and difficult question of psychological and political consideration. Mr. Gray thanked him for the background information.

El Salvador 637 United States, and the vague promise of holding free elections two years hence, does not give an assuring picture of what future course of action the Junta will take. United States Government recognition at this time would discourage the hopes of non-Communist opposition to carry out a counter-­ coup against the Junta. Recognition would provide the Junta with the respectability they now desperately are searching for. This would allow the leftists the needed time to consolidate their gains and to seek outside support from other leftist oriented governments, such as Cuba. After they become well entrenched, El Salvador would probably serve as a base for similar movements in neighboring countries. This perhaps is the major risk involved to the political stability and future security of Central America. A leftist dominated El Salvador could serve as a vital wedge, resulting in an extension of Castro-­type Communism from Cuba to the Central American mainland. Castroism would then be provided with a West Coast opening—­a base for seaborne Communist access to Central America. The current unrest and instability of Guatemala and Honduras are such that even the presence of a leftist government in El Salvador would provide the necessary spark needed to topple these shaky governments. Nicaragua also would not long be able to resist the presence of leftist governments in three neighboring Central American countries. The effects of such developments on Panama and the security of the Canal Zone are self-­evident. A further problem would be posed to the U.S. Government in giving additional support to bolster countries thus threatened. As a final consideration, recognition of the present government of El Salvador by the U.S. would be widely interpreted throughout Latin America as well as inside the country, as approval of what could quite easily result in another Castro type regime. The foregoing has been jointly drafted by senior representatives of the intelligence community and the conclusions approved by all of them, including The Director of Central Intelligence. 2

El Salvador 639 posts. They are aware of background these people and reached unanimous decision appoint them after long debate. After conversing many serious Salvadorans I conclude there are sharply diverging opinions about whether doubtful individuals are Communists. In any event, Junta is aware our concern for some appointees and Osorio welcomed memorandum [text not declassified]4 When translated “Osorio suggested it be given to Minister Interior Escamilla. 4) Osorio and Junta are for free elections. They think Democratic forces can overwhelm Leftists at polls, and Osorio starts organizing new party to attract bulk of PRUD on Friday, with big convention around December 15. Civilian Junta members told me they discussed two types overthrow in first stages of plotting, namely à la Castro or à la Betancourt. Decided on latter because by Democratic forces in Venezuela won out later in free elections. Said this formula also had been successful in Guatemala and Honduras. Osorio said PRAM and CGTS will be controlled. Close friend one of military members Junta and of Minister Interior said these two strongly confirmed this fact to him. However, same source, evidencing his own concern, added that he had asked his friends if they sure they not being used. 5) Junta admits its functions as caretaker Government while Congressional elections prepared is not enough and must make start on social program. Osorio said he had ideas along this line. 6) Reaction among Salvadorans with whom I talked is regret for departure constitutional process but strong to mild feeling Lemus bungled student disturbances so badly his removal was logical aftermath. Return to constitutional Government is avowed unanimous desire. 7) Consensus opinion is that any succeeding Government would be rightist military Junta. Some observers viewed this with alarm, saying it would not be accepted by liberal elements and masses, with consequent trouble. 8) I am most impressed with attitude of intelligent Salvadorans who realize dangers of present situation and wish cooperate with Junta in finding solution along peaceful lines. Meanwhile working class continues at tasks without interruption. Cumbersome six-­man Junta may be streamlined but I believe only after satisfactory agreement between civilians and military. 9) Osorio made plea for recognition and Junta members were most eager get over point they wish to work with U.S. and need our support. Downs 4 The paper entitled, “Cuban Subersive Activities in E1 Salvador,” was not found in Department of State files.

El Salvador 641 ES–41. Letter from the Secretary of Defense (Gates) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, November 30, 1960. Dear Chris: Attached is the latest information available in Defense about the situation in El Salvador.2 The Defense intelligence holdings indicate a considerable Left activity by the Junta government, with confirmation of facts which have caused our previous concern. The confirmation includes information just received from General Alva Fitch3 who is in San Salvador now and who is well acquainted with Central American affairs. I wanted to be certain that this information was available to you. Since the question of recognition primarily is one of political judgment, I will leave this up to you. However, we are so concerned at the prospects of Communist take-­over, whether or not recognition is afforded the Junta, that I suggest the State Department, the Defense Department and CIA get together to determine what feasible actions can be taken to insure against the take-­over. Sincerely yours, Thomas S. Gates

El Salvador 643 ES–43. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in El Salvador1

Guatemala: U.S. Relations with Guatemala GT–1. Editorial Note General Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes, candidate of the right-­wing Partido Reconciliación Democrática Nacional (Redención), won a plurality of 190,972 votes in the Guatemalan Presidential elections of January 19, 1958. Colonel José Luis Cruz Salazar of the Movimiento Democrático Nacionalista received 138,488; Mario Méndez Montenegro, candidate of the left-­wing Partido Revolucionario, 132,824 votes; and Colonel José Enrique Ardón Fernández of the Partido Unión Liberal Nacionalista, 5,834 votes. The Guatemalan Constitution provided that the Congress would elect the President from the two leading candidates when no candidate received an absolute majority vote. Parties supporting Colonel Cruz had a majority

Guatemala 647 GT–3. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, February 24, 1958. SUBJECT Visit of President-Elect Ydígoras Fuentes on Vice President Nixon. PARTICIPANTS Vice President Nixon President-Elect Ydígoras of Guatemala Other present who did not participate in the conversation: Assistant Secretary of State Roy R. Rubottom, Jr. Chief of Protocol Wiley T. Buchanan, Jr. Ambassador Join Davis Lodge (invited by Vice President Nixon at time of call) Chargé D’Affaires Asensio-Wunderlich Señor García Bauer Señor Bapez Herrarte Señor Alejos Members of President-Elect Ydígoras’ Party. The Vice President expressed his great pleasure at being able to receive the President-Elect in his office in the United States, recalling his happy and unforgettable experience in visiting Guatemala in 1954 [1955].2 General Ydígoras responded with a warm greeting and expression of pleasure at being in the United States. The Vice President inquired as to what the President-Elect considered to be his number one problem in Guatemala. The President responded promptly, “communism”. He said that his country, after ten years of rule by Arévalo and Arbenz, had been hurt by communism and that he was going to attack it by trying to offer the people better work opportunities, better food, better housing and better clothing. The Vice President interjected that that sounded like a positive, straightforward campaign which should produce results rather than the usual campaign of being simply “against” something. The President-Elect referred to Guatemala as being like a young lady who has been ill with smallpox and is left with her skin pitted by scars. He said that Guatemala had many small scars left from the Arévalo-Arbenz regime and that these would take time to heal. He said that Castillo Armas had

Guatemala 649 GT–4. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, February 25, 1958. SUBJECT President Eisenhower’s Breakfast for President-Elect Ydígoras PARTICIPANTS The President Dr. Mariano López Herrarte President-Elect Ydígoras of Guatemala Assistant Secretary of State The Secretary of State Roy R. Rubottom, Jr. The Secretary of Defense Ambassador Edward J. Sparks Chargé d’Affaires Asensio-Wunderlich Dr. Milton Eisenhower of Guatemala Mr. Samuel Waugh, President of Señor García Bauer Export-Import Bank

Mr. George Allen, USIA The guests gathered in one of the drawing rooms. The President entered and, following introductions and greetings, led the guests into the family dining room. Secretary Dulles invited the attention of the President to the fact that he (the Secretary) and President-Elect Ydígoras had both attended the Versailles Conference in 1919. The President during the course of the conversation recalled that he had known some of our military officers who had been connected with the Guatemalan Military Academy which had always maintained a high standard. The President also recalled several of his experiences while serving in Panama and later in the Philippines. The President-Elect took the occasion to mention several of the problems which he faces in assuming office in Guatemala, including that of raising the health standard of his people. The Secretary also engaged in conversation on the same subject with Dr. Mariano López Herrarte, an outstanding Guatemalan physician who was trained in the United States. Attention was called to the very serious problem of parasites, especially hookworm, which affects most of the Guatemalan population, reducing the blood count of the individuals affected on the average by 40 to 50 percent. Both the President and the Secretary asked that prompt attention be given to this problem through the Health Servicio under the Technical Cooperation program, since it seemed to be something that could be attacked vigorously with our assistance. Dr. Lopez acknowledged the great progress that had been made in 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Confidential.

Guatemala 651 information regarding the health program and what the United States might do to be of assistance to Guatemala. Mr. Rubottom and Ambassador Sparks engaged Secretary McElroy in discussion regarding the oil problem, particularly the matter of off-­ shore procurement of certain types of fuel for the Defense Department needs. Mr. Rubottom told the Secretary that he was going to Venezuela tomorrow to consult with the Government there on the oil problem. The Chargé d’Affaires, Dr. Julio Asensio-Wunderlich, expressed to the President appreciation on behalf of the Government of Guatemala for the invitation to General Ydígoras to come to the United States with his party. He also thanked the President for making the President’s Guest House available as the group’s residence while here and expressed their appreciation for the cordial reception given them by the President at breakfast this morning. At the conclusion of the breakfast, the President led his guests to the portico of the White House where photographs were taken by assembled newsmen. GT–5. National Intelligence Estimate1 Washington, April 29, 1958.

Guatemala 653 could be carried to a point which would be contrary to U.S. policy inter-

Guatemala 655 the belief that the PR is the only effective representative of the ideals of the Revolution of 1944. 16. In the midst of growing public concern regarding the conservative composition of Ydígoras’ government, the PR is vigorously championing the still widely popular social and economic program of the Revolution of 1944. It is rapidly gaining new adherents and is likely to become the focus of opposition to the Ydígoras regime. The party is still a heterogeneous agglomeration, however. It needs time to organize and consolidate its strength. Fearing suppression by Ydígoras, its leaders, many of whom were prominent in the Arévalo administration, are pursuing a policy of moderation in order not to provoke him while they prepare for the 1959 congressional election. The PR publicly repudiates association with communism, but has not yet acted effectively to check Communist infiltration of the party’s lower echelons. 17. The clandestine Communist Party (PGT) probably has no more than 400 members and 2,000 sympathizers, but since the assassination of Castillo it has been working to reestablish its influence at the grass roots. Although many Guatemalans are now more aware of the Communist danger than previously, there is still widespread apathy with regard to communism. While there has been some reaction against excesses practiced in the name of anti-­communism, there has been no marked increase in sympathy for Communists. The PGT’s present capabilities are limited. Its most prominent leaders are still in exile. There are no known Communists or sympathizers among the leaders of legal political parties or in influential positions in the administration or the armed forces. The party’s efforts will be directed primarily toward further infiltration of the PR and toward regaining its former control of organized labor. The Communists are not likely to achieve control of the PR within the period of this estimate, but may gain control of some of that party’s more extreme elements, particularly if many more of the pro-Arbenz exiles are permitted to return to Guatemala. They have a better prospect in the field of organized labor, because of their experienced labor leaders and organizers, and because of latent rank-­and-­file support in unions which they formerly led, but are not likely to regain their former control of the labor movement. 18. The PR will offer stiff competition to the Communists in the labor field. The party is now making a determined bid to win over key unions such as those of the railroad workers and United Fruit Company employees. In this situation, the labor policy followed by Ydígoras will have an important bearing on the future strength and character of the leftist opposition and consequently on the stability of his regime. He will be confronted by wage demands, particularly from unorganized workers, who have so far gained little from the increase in economic activity. Ydígoras cannot meet the demands of the unorganized

Guatemala 657 personal safety. A military junta customarily assumes power, but with the purpose and obligation of establishing a new constitutional government at the earliest practicable date. 23. Going beyond the usual measures for ensuring the support of the military, Ydígoras has appealed to their professional pride and patriotism by declaring that Guatemala will recover British Honduras, “if not by reason, then by force,” and by proposing to organize parachute and ranger units for that purpose. These utterances are not so much a threat to the United Kingdom as assurances to the military that the government will take seriously the development of the professional competence of the armed forces and will devote resources to that end. The Economic Situation and Trend 24. Guatemala’s economic growth was stimulated during the Castillo regime by the encouragement of private investment as well as by large scale foreign grants, loans, and technical assistance, and by the use of government funds. Guatemalan citizens increased their domestic investments sharply during the period, reversing the heavy flight of capital which had occurred during the Arbenz regime. New foreign private investment also increased, amounting to $12,000,000 in 1957

Guatemala 659 impetus to this campaign, since the natural outlet for oil exports would be through the port of Belize. Ydígoras could count on considerable Latin American sympathy and support on this issue, but it would embroil him with Mexico, which also has a contingent claim to part of the territory, as well as with the United Kingdom. He is not likely to press the issue to the point of precipitating a crisis, but he might impulsively take some provocative action which would be contrary to U.S. policy interests in the area. The Outlook for Political Stability 30. The stability of the Ydígoras regime is not likely to be seriously threatened during 1958. It remains uncertain whether, before the 1959 congressional elections, he will be able to develop effective congressional and popular support for his moderate program. By that time a strong and vociferous political opposition centered in the PR will probably have developed. 31. The leaders of the PR, if permitted to develop an effective party organization, will probably take steps to minimize, and if possible eliminate, Communist influence. The degree to which they will succeed in this effort is uncertain. The Communists will almost certainly not have gained control of the PR prior to the next congressional election, although its opponents will accuse it of Communist tendencies in any case. 32. Should Ydígoras fail to muster sufficient party and popular support to cope with growing leftist opposition in Congress and in the country, he will probably resort increasingly to more authoritarian methods. He would probably do so reluctantly and with no greater repressive force than he judged the circumstances to require, but he is a strong man determined to rule and he would resort to outright dictatorship before he would permit political control to pass from his hands. The more repressive his regime becomes, however, the more popular disaffection will grow. 33. The armed forces will almost certainly support the Ydígoras government in whatever measures it finds necessary to maintain stability and order. They would turn against him only if popular resistance had reached such intensity that serious civil disorder was clearly impending. In that case, they would probably see him safely out of the country and set up a military junta to supervise a return to constitutional government. In the event of Ydígoras’ death, the army would probably support the interim administration of the presidential designate and the holding of new elections within the constitutionally prescribed four-­month period.6 6 A map, which accompanied the source text, is not printed.

Guatemala 661 5) U.S. takes such a serious view of this problem that you are being ordered to Washington for consultation concerning this among other problems. Ambassador should submit his report soonest together with his comments and evaluation, including any info re troop movements. Mexico and Belize informed.4 Dulles

Guatemala 663 GT–8. Summary of Discussions in Guatemala during Milton

Guatemala 665 In the meeting with the representatives of industry and commerce, the Guatemalans pointed up the lack of incentive for industrial development under existing legislation and a shortage within the country of long-­term credit. It was indicated to the Guatemalans that it was hoped that an official of the Export-Import Bank would be able to visit the countries of the region at least once a year.3 Again the matter of the price of coffee was brought up, and it was indicated that two years ago it sold for 70 cents a pound, whereas now it was selling for 40 cents a pound. Some thought was expressed that the U.S. might be discouraging oil prospecting in Guatemala, it was made quite plain to the Guatemalans that there was no such U.S. policy. At a meeting with the President and members of the Cabinet a formal program for continuing the social and economic development of Guatemala was presented. The President referred to the summary table which shows direct aid projects suggested for financing by currently available but unallocated ICA funds. This table lists $655,000 for agri-

Guatemala 667 constitution tutelage. The U.S. never aspired to nor had tutelage over any people. Conclusions Guatemalans felt that the period of Communist-­dominated rule entitles them to a special position. They frankly express their hope for a continuation of U.S. aid at approximately the same levels. The study presented in Guatemala appeared to be well coordinated and integrated and concisely presented. The program was presented as whole at a meeting with the Cabinet rather than in a series of separate requests. It was evident that in Guatemala as in some other Central American countries, there was considerable confusion as to the purpose and policies of the various lending organizations in the U.S. as well as a lack of understanding of the potential of private investment. No mention was made of attracting home large amounts of Guatemalan private capital held abroad. While perhaps more mention was made of the possible benefits of tourism in Guatemala than in other Central American countries, nevertheless it did not appear that the full potential that might be derived from the industry was realized. Considerably more seemed to have been done in Guatemala than in the other countries of the area towards evaluating properly the potentials of Guatemala in all fields. The effects of the Klein-Saks mission in the field of advising the Government on public administration was evident.5 The Government of Guatemala has very ambitious plans for the development of the country, and evidently feels that large-­scale U.S. assistance will continue (no grant aid is being requested for Guatemala in the Mutual Security Appropriation Bill for FY 1959). It has the largest population of any country in the area, and its potentialities are great (land, timber, possible petroleum, agriculture, light industry, some minerals, etc.). This appears to have made the size of the requests for assistance considerably greater than elsewhere encountered during the mission. Because of Guatemala’s past association with Communist-­type policies, and the Government’s tendency to try to regulate non-­ agricultural enterprises more and more, some many possible private investors may have been discouraged from placing their money in Guatemala, although the country’s official policy is to private investment, both foreign and domestic.

Guatemala 669 by private American activities. ICA and the Government as a whole undoubtedly have a right to speak in fairly decided terms in this matter to those companies which seek assistance from the U.S. Government in the form of investment guarantees. Two American companies in Guatemala have been objects of continued and effective public attack: The international Railway and the Empresa Eléctrica, a property of American and Foreign Power. A third major company, United Fruit, saw the light and improved its public relations. Compared with the job done by public utilities in the United States of building public acceptance or confidence, it can be said with truth that here nothing is done. Rather, continued refuge in a “legal” position has served to convince labor and the public of the validity of charges hurled. The companies’ attitudes and lack of action seriously counter efforts to improve relations or advance our cause. The subject has been raised with them here with negative results. The problem is serious in Guatemala and must exist elsewhere. It is hoped the question can be attacked positively on a base broader and more effective than can be done locally. I recommend that companies involved in the various countries be invited to send senior representatives to a conference where policies of the United States may be explained, the role of American companies emphasized, and the benefits of positive public relations made clear. (In the case of Guatemala, as matters now stand, our position would be better were the companies owned in some other nation.) At the suggested conference a strong effort should be made to make American companies operating in this area understand and cooperate with our labor policy. Even the United Fruit Company, whose public and personnel relations have greatly improved, has a dangerous short-­ sighted attitude toward unions.5 C. Unfair Charge of Development Aid Supervision to TCA. The TCA budget for Guatemala contains a heavy amount for supervision of Development Aid. Not only development aid, but likewise it is understood supervision of Development Loan Funds are chargeable to TCA. It would be possible to have a considerable TCA budget in a country and no technical assistance at all. The distortion to the general aspect, of this is bad enough but more important, it would appear, is the disruption within field organization and a proper askance by Congress. Moreover, there should be no covering up of the total cost of Development Aid or Loan Funds by charging part of the cost to TCA—­let their supervision

Guatemala 671 I submit we should look at the whole question as those in the other country do. If they feel they are really getting something because they must bargain for it—­then let us bargain. The Russians apparently don’t make the mistake of free-­handed gifts in Asia—­they attach some condition and are thereby respected. We in much of the area are looked on as easy marks, often with contempt. Here in Guatemala, and, as I understand it, from persons with whom I have spoken in other similar countries, it is recognized that we have engendered a very substantial feeling that we should support Guatemala out of some sort of undefined duty to the people and that if we do not do so, political blackmail will result. This I submit is not the purpose for which the aid was started. It is a very unhappy result. To counter this situation, there are two remedies. First, we need to forget our charity a little and adopt a pragmatic attitude, and, second, we should get away from grant aid and emphasize loans. The size of the loans, the freedom with which they are given and the rate of interest would appear less important than in having the purposes understood. Fostering the idea of some self help, some local pulling of the boot straps, some honesty and responsibility are important. Getting acceptance of the concept of the United States as a helper or partner is important—­getting away from the idea of Uncle Sam as someone to work as an easy mark is equally so. The latter sparks no effort at all to work against Communism—­it just lays us open to propaganda attack. If U.S. policy towards the underdeveloped countries were reduced to its bare bones, it could be defined as preventing the entrance of or to reduce the presence of Communism. As soon as we try to make that frame carry other burdens, or obscure its simple design by soft-­hearted accretions, we start to lose. Let’s keep it simple and direct; let’s work for our survival and not our conscience. The announcement of a possible Inter-American Development Institution may be the way out of our present approach in Latin America. It is to be hoped it can be framed in partnership and not paternalism. L. D. Mallory

Guatemala 673 Ambassador McIntosh said he knew that many in Washington felt the DLF should not make housing loans in Latin America, because the need for housing all over Latin America was so great that the lending resources of the United States could never fulfill these requirements. He said the same argument could be used against making loans for highways, where need was also great. However, Mr. McIntosh said he did not believe this was a valid argument against making such loans, that each case should be considered on its own merits, and that in the case of Guatemala he was in favor of making a housing loan. There followed a discussion of the rubber, industrial bank, and land purchase loan applications. Except for land purchase, Ambassador McIntosh was in favor of helping Guatemala in these fields as well. Although the DLF could not lend money to the GOG for land purchase, it was agreed that it might be possible to assist in the field of rural resettlement, possibly by lending Guatemala money for budgetary relief in the public works field or for construction of facilities on the lands to be acquired. Mr. Powell said it might be possible for ICA to reprogram some $8 million of pipeline funds toward purchase of land for resettlement. Ambassador McIntosh said he thought the DLF should lend Guatemala about $16 million in the near future from funds already appropriated to the DLF, and he tentatively suggested the following allocations: Housing $6 million Industrial Development 2 or 4 million Compensatory Funds for Rural Resettlement to be determined; possibly $3 million Rubber Development 5 million Mr. Conover said that he fully recognized the political necessity for making loans to Guatemala. In response to Ambassador McIntosh’s queries as to the merits of these particular applications, Mr. Conover said that, in economic terms, he felt housing construction was less significant for economic development than prospects which more directly and immediately contribute to balance of payments improvement. Ambassador McIntosh agreed with this economic assessment, but felt, the political considerations were overriding. Ambassador McIntosh said he wished to go ahead on these loans as soon as possible. He designated Mr. Ryan to go to Guatemala within a week to look into the pending applications and to work out with the USOM, the Embassy, and the Guatemalan Government, properly drawn-­up loan applications which would meet DLF criteria. This, he said, would constitute the first step and would show the Guatemalans that we were really taking an interest in their loan applications.

Guatemala 675 importance of extending DLF loan assistance to Guatemala at this time suggests the advisability of sympathetic consideration of an alternative to this present application. As currently cast, the housing loan application of Guatemala does not appear to me to merit DLF Board approval. It looks to the extension of a $12 million 30 year loan to enable the Central Bank of Guatemala to purchase first mortgages now held or scheduled to be field by private banking institutions. No evidence is presented that this action per se would stimulate further savings or investments within Guatemala in the housing field. While it would presumably make possible the financing of 3000 additional houses, this volume would appear only marginal in relation to the total volume of housing foreseen by the Government of Guatemala as likely to stem from governmental and privately sponsored housing activities in the next 5 years. It would not, therefore, appear likely significantly to contribute to Guatemala’s economic development. At the same time, it would saddle the Government with a substantial dollar repayment obligation and might establish an unfortunate precedent complicating DLF efforts to fend off voluminous loan requests for housing construction in other countries in Latin America and elsewhere. For these or those reasons, despite the high priority attached to this loan application by the Government of Guatemala primarily on political grounds, we would not favor favorable action on this present request. On the other hand, we would strongly recommend sympathetic consideration by the DLF Board of a loan to Guatemala of a sum approximating $2 million which might serve as a catalytic medium to foster greater housing construction and the accumulation of savings to flow into this field on a continuing expanding basis. Such a loan, matched in equal amount by the Government of Guatemala, might be used to create a mortgage credit institution. Such an institution would have features akin to the combined functions of the Federal Housing Administration and the Federal Home Loan Bank in the U.S.: the guarantee of mortgages on insurance principles and the provision of a credit pool upon which building and loan associations and insurance companies and savings banks might draw as occasion warranted to prime private housing financing. To the capital of such an institution these private lending agencies might also be called upon to contribute in an amount equal to the DLF-Government of Guatemala subscription. The primary purpose would be two-­fold: the creation of a more orderly, secure market for mortgage money and of institutions to attract savings to such a market. The precise pattern for such an institutional arrangement and related details require more discussions and study both here and in Guatemala. These have already been initiated. Experts of ICA’s Housing Division, the FHA, HHFC and FHLB hurriedly convened last Friday referred to the favorable experience with such institutions in the U.S. and Puerto Rico and are prepared to shape up a detailed program for DLF

Guatemala 677 you before his departure. An appointment, subject to your approval, was arranged for this afternoon. Although I pressed him for details of what he wished to discuss with you, Ambassador Antillón said that he had nothing special in mind and wished merely to exchange views with you on a variety of topics. I believe it likely that he may raise one or more of the following subjects: 1. Pending, DLF Loan Applications. I have had a talk with Mr. William Ryan of the DLF, who recently returned from a study mission to Guatemala. Mr. Ryan informed me that Hart Perry, Deputy Managing Director for Loans of the DLF, had informed him that only $5 million dollars of presently appropriated funds could be spared for loans to Guatemala. Mr. Ryan said he was favorably impressed by the rubber loan application, and that he was prepared to recommend putting the $5 million into this. Naturally, Mr. Ryan’s recommendations would require approval by his superiors and the DLF Board. Mr. Ryan felt that possibly more could be loaned to Guatemala out of new appropriations for the DLF. If the Ambassador inquires regarding status of the loan applications, you might tell him what you told the Minister of Education on December 223—­that you were sure something would be forthcoming for Guatemala in the matter of DLF loans, but that it was as yet unfortunately impossible to say for what or how much. 2. Training Planes for the Guatemalan Air Force. Sometime ago the GOG requested permission to purchase ten T-34 training planes for the Guatemalan Air Force.4 This request was approved by State and Defense, and the Guatemalans were informed that the price of each aircraft would be between $23 and $27 thousand dollars. The Ambassador has told me that these prices are far too high for Guatemala to pay and has presented a note formally asking for a reduction in the prices and special consideration for Guatemala in this purchase.5 In the note he alludes to the fact that we have a Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement with his country.6 He has told me that he cannot understand how we can charge such high prices for the trainers, 3 No record of Assistant Secretary Rubottom’s conversation with the Guatemalan Minister of Public Education, Col. Marco Aurelio Merida Sáenz, on December 22, was found in Department of State files.

Guatemala 679 quota for smaller producing countries. We understand that in January a review will be made of the first quarter operation of the quota system, and as the Guatemalan Director General of Mining was informed during his visit to Washington last month, consideration will be given at that time to Guatemala’s request for a specific lead and zinc quota. Guatemala is the largest of the producing countries included in the general quota. However, Guatemalan lead and zinc mining operations have been virtually closed down for several months, and it was the projected reopening of these mines that prompted a request for a specific quota.8 The Ambassador’s call might be a good opportunity to remind him of our disappointment over the Guatemalan position that the George B. Soto claim is a closed matter. You might say we are preparing a reply to the latest Guatemalan note on this subject. It is suggested that you ask the Ambassador to convey to his government, during his forthcoming trip, reiteration of our hope that the case may be reopened and a settlement negotiated between the GOG and Mr. Soto’s representatives.9 8 Documentation on the question of quotas for Guatemalan exports of lead and zinc to the United States is in decimal file 411.146.

Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes, President of the Republic of Guatemala Ambassador requested deliver following reply to President ­Ydígoras from President Eisenhower:2 January 19, 1959. His Excellency

General Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes

President of the Republic of Guatemala

Guatemala City I appreciate your kind New Year’s greeting. It revived the pleasant recollections I have of your visit to Washington last February, and of the talks we had at that time. You may be sure that the United States Government continues to devote careful and sympathetic attention to the questions which affect our two countries and to the problems which confront Guatemala. The requests which your Government has made are being studied here, and I hope it will be possible soon to inform your Government how, within 2 In a memorandum to Goodpaster, January 9, John A. Calhoun of the Executive Secretariat recommended that the White House authorize the Department to have Ambassador Mallory acknowledge President Ydígoras’ telegram, but in a note to Dulles, January 13, President Eisenhower stated he wanted to send a personal message. (Eisenhower Library, Whiteman File, Dulles-Herter Series).

Guatemala 681 the limits of our own capabilities and resources, we in the United States can be helpful. With warm regard,

Sincerely,

Dwight D. Eisenhower White House desires text this message not become public.3 Dulles 3 No publicity was given to this exchange of messages because no decision had yet been reached on the Guatemalan loan applications. (Memorandum from Dulles to

Guatemala 683 apparently either sent by President or wishing have discussions as excuse go back and carry some word to him. New Cabinet for March 1 rumored past few days. Also Roberto Alejos, Cabinet Coordinator, informed member staff he felt he should leave March 1. Yesterday British Minister2 informed me confidentially President’s son-­in-­law, Ian Munn, will probably be going Europe soon probably to stay. Yesterday President’s private secretary,3 talked with me suggesting need for pretty thorough house-­cleaning in government. And hoping I could tell President. I had talked with Minister Public Health4 over weekend whom I supported in suggestion for new Cabinet and to whom I also suggested idea of outstanding incorruptible person as Cabinet Coordinator. How much is chicken and how much egg is unimportant, but buildup of pressures has caused very considerable nervousness with President and within his immediate family and brought about decision make Cabinet changes. Today President called me to his office and talked at great length. In brief he said Guatemala has not been ready for his kind of democratic government, he being attacked on all sides, mostly unjustly, and feels he may have crack down in dictatorial manner. Said he had decided accept resignation of Cabinet but would reappoint members recently joined. He will try have fairly broad Cabinet. Said Coordinator of Cabinet had come in unjustly for attacks and he had decided let him go although decision not yet made known. He then stopped. I congratulated him on Cabinet decision and said with respect Alejos that one had to recall truth in old saying that one might as well hang dog as give him bad name. I said this respect I wished be very personal and frank with President and point out there was another person who had sufficiently bad name that he might as well be hung. President apparently was waiting for this one and asked me directly whom I meant. I replied [text not declassified]. I expanded on general unrest in area citing exalted spirits of opposition and mentioned there were number of plots being talked about. These plots I opined did not individually have much chance success but should groups ever get together, might prove serious. They were caused I though by deteriorating economic conditions and also by lack of calm and confidence on part of public. I said it was most important for President undertake course of action to restore confidence and that business generally, including foreign investors, needed reassurances. Such action as he took with respect Alejos could probably be helpful in this regard even though Alejos might have operated with purist motives. 2 Thomas Wikeley. 3 Carlos González Segui. 4 Mariano López Herrarte.

Guatemala 685 and was trying to be helpful to our Latin American friends in the cotton marketing problem. The Department was supporting the adoption of measures and procedures that would avoid the very wide fluctuations in the prices of commoditize produced in Latin America and consequent damage to Latin American economies. Mr. Rubottom said that while it would probably be impossible to avoid some fluctuations in the prices of these commodities, the object would be to hold them within reasonable extremes.

Guatemala 687 equipment. He said that in the matter of the two Bailey bridges, which had been pending since January, it was hoped that an early and favorable response to this request would be forthcoming. The Ambassador was informed that the Department understood that the two bridges would cost in the neighborhood of $120,000. Mr. King then raised the recent request of Guatemala for the use, on a loan basis, of a large sea-­going dredge,3 said to be in the possession of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in the Panama Canal Zone. Mr. King said this was a rather unusual request and it would be necessary to ascertain from the Department of Defense whether the United States Army Corps of Engineers had such a dredge available, where it was located, and whether it was feasible to move it by sea to Guatemala. The Ambassador said the Guatemalan Government would assume all expenses of moving the dredge to Guatemala, and returning it to the United States Army. Mr. King said the Department hoped to have further information in this connection for the Ambassador shortly. Mr. Leggett said he wished to raise another request of Guatemala which the Ambassador had not discussed with Assistant Secretary Rubottom on April 1. This was for six B–26 surplus bombers, Mr. Leggett reviewed the present tense situation existing in almost all Caribbean countries, and said that the United States, in the interest of relieving this tension, was not, at the present time, authorizing the shipment of certain combat equipment to the area. He said that the B–26s were considered in this category. Mr. Leggett emphasized that withholding approval of shipments of airplanes and certain other military equipment was merely a temporary measure dictated by the present situation in the Caribbean, and that it was hoped it would be possible at an early date to authorize resumption of shipments of military equipment legitimately needed. He said the Department felt it would not be helpful to relieving tension in the area if planes and other equipment were made available to the Caribbean countries at this time from United States sources, and that the United States chief interest in this matter was contributing to restoration of calm in the area. The Ambassador indicated that he appreciated the Department’s view regarding this matter, and inquired whether this policy applied to other countries as well as to Guatemala. Mr. Leggett said that it did, and that it in fact would normally apply to all countries in an area of tension. The Ambassador asked whether suspension of approval of sale of the B–26’s applied also to a number of training planes that Guatemala had requested. Mr. King said that he understood what had held up the training planes was that the Guatemalan Government had found that the prices asked by the Defense Department were too high. The Ambassador 3 Guatemalan request was not found in the Department of State files.

Guatemala 689 1. The question of how to help maintain President Ydígoras in office for his full term and of how, in so doing, to ensure his succession by elements friendly to or willing to work with, rather than against the United States. 2. The leftist swing of popular sentiment in Guatemala, and the problem of growing communist and pro-­communist activity. 3. The “Arevalo Problem.” 4. Inter-American Highway 1. YDÍGORAS: Ydígoras has not forgotten nor been allowed to forget we were lukewarm toward his plans to reach the Presidency of Guatemala in 1954, 1957 and 1958. He was somewhat placated during his post-­electoral visit to the United States and our relation ran fairly smoothly until a few months after the visit to Guatemala of the Dr. Milton Eisenhower mission. Despite all the efforts made to forestall such a development, Ydígoras wanted to believe and did believe that we would heed a large part of his requests for $95 million dollars in loans. Perhaps this belief was encouraged by the fact that his submissions were prepared with the assistance of Americans whom the Guatemalans consider “quasi official”, i.e. Klein & Saks experts.3 It now becomes apparent that in announcing that Guatemala wanted to shift from grants to loans Ydígoras did not mean quite what he said. He was playing up to growing nationalist sentiments and expected us to play along with him. His subsequent resentment over the “relatively high” interest rate assigned to the rubber development loan indicates he had hoped for token interest rates that would have turned grants only technically into loans. It must be recognized that Clemente Marroquin Rojas’ loud complaints that United States aid is a “national shame” have wide appeal even to persons who feel that United States aid must be continued.)4 These people therefore look for ways to remove the stigma attached to aid (i.e. the supposed 3 A report on Guatemala by the consulting firm of Klein and Saks is in decimal

Guatemala 691 with him while he remains in office.7 His “economic development” plans cover the field from housing, industrial development through electrification. To bolster national pride and armed forces support, he wants six B-26s, at least. For political reasons, he wants to put on a big show of developing the Peten region. We should think of what can be done for him within this framework. In discussing the overall question of aid, Ambassador Mallory no doubt will have strongly in mind the recent fracas between Clemente Marroquin Rojas (Minister of Agriculture and “La Hora” Editor) and USOM Director Oscar Powell. The Ambassador and Mr. Powell have somewhat different views on the future of aid programs, their usefulness, and the general political picture.8 Marroquin’s insistence that Powell and most of his staff be removed has reduced our flexibility for maneuvering. We should keep in mind that Ydígoras’ resentment toward the Department is currently reflected in his attitude toward other things American. Recent new regulations imposed on oil companies patently reflect suspicion that the companies are plotting to hide oil discoveries from him and so deprive his Government of the means for resolving all its problems. If he goes militantly nationalistic, it seems probable that the first to suffer will be American enterprises, beginning probably with the Empresa Electrica, and so on down the line. 2. SWING TO THE LEFT: The Embassy has reported a marked swing to the left in Guatemala and Ambassador Mallory has urged that we view this in its overall aspects, guarding, against any inclination to see it in terms of individuals on whom hopes and fears can be pinned. The objective to be pursued would seem to be the development of a moderate left capable of promoting a healthier social, political and economic climate than has been possible under the traditional ruling classes. Unfortunately, liberal elements in Guatemala seem to be almost as badly split (although perhaps not so violently at odds) as the right. The one element responsible for attempting to hold them together (for the time being) is the communist. 7 During a farewell visit of Ambassador Antillón of Guatemala on June 10, Assistant Secretary Rubottom told the Ambassador that “he confirmed fully the expressions of admiration and friendship for President Ydígoras that he voiced in December.” (Memorandum of Conversation by Gorrell in Rubottom Files, Lot 61 D 279, “Guatemala, 1959”) 8 Powell and Mallory had a disagreement over the administration of the ICA program, and Powell had questioned U.S. support of Ydígoras, but Mallory felt the United States should continue to support him. (Letter from Mallory to Stewart, May 27, 1959; ARA/OAP Files, Lot 61 D 473, “Guatemala”)

Guatemala 693 GT–19. Memorandum from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Mallory) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, June 24, 1959. SUBJECT Reconsideration of Assistance to Guatemala. At a meeting held in your office on Tuesday, June 16,2 it was decided that the policy of supporting President Ydígoras of Guatemala and his Government should be actively pursued. It was decided that on my return to Guatemala I should fully assure the President of the interest of the Government of the United States in supporting him. It was also decided that I should seek an appraisal of requests for loan assistance and an appraisal of the existing aid program to the end of presenting an assistance package on such terms as would appear most attractive. I have consulted with appropriate officers of ARA, with officials of the Development Loan Fund, the President and officers of the Export-Import Bank, and with officials of the International Cooperation Administration. Subject to your approval, the following package has been agreed to. 1. The DLF will complete details on the $5 million rubber loan to be administered through the Bank of Guatemala.3 In this connection, [illegible in the original] is in agreement that rubber technicians may be maintained on the staff of USOM/G for the purpose of providing technical advice and assistance to the Bank of Guatemala. 2. The Eximbank is completing consideration of the request of the Government of Guatemala for a loan of $5 million for industrialization projects to be made to the Bank of Guatemala. The Eximbank has authorized me to state to President Ydígoras that consideration of this loan is well advanced, that there are certain functional information, and request that Dr. Mirón, head of the Bank of Guatemala, come to Washington opportunely for this purpose.4 3. It has been agreed that an offer be made to President Ydígoras to re-­program the special assistance funds remaining unspent, that is,

Guatemala 695 GT–20. Despatch from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Mallory) to the Department of State1 Guatemala City, July 9, 1959. No. 14 REF.:

Guatemala 697 changes the President and his Government might wish to make in the program. The most extensive discussion occurred under the heading of Rural Development. This likewise has the largest amount of funds remaining, amounting to over $7 million. The President spoke at very considerable length contending that land distribution, or the promise thereof, is a principal weapon of the Communists or leftists, that nothing in this respect had been done by his immediate predecessors and that some vitality must be given the program even at the expense of handing out small parcels of land. He maintained that land ownership was a principal deterrent to Communist ideology. He agreed that the kind of land distribution or land resettlement with which the United States has assisted is important in the long run and in raising the productive level of Guatemala. However, he felt that urgent distribution of small tracts was needed on a political basis. After he had finished and before the head of the Agrarian Department could reply, the Minister of Agriculture took the floor and by the clock spoke for 18 minutes. This discussion has been aptly described as a sustained tirade damning the rural development program, American technicians, the direction of U.S. aid in Guatemala, improper budgetary practices of the Guatemalan Government, a defense of Indian farming practices and practically everything else in the book except a defense of oxcarts. His statement, if such it may be called, was greeted by others present with a mixture of curiosity and amazement. He finished without any comments by the President or anyone else present. Attempt was made to progress to the next item on the agenda when Colonel Peralta, head of the Agrarian Department, only after some insistence, was able to get the President’s permission to speak in defense of the Rural Development Program. This he did at some length refuting many points brought up by Lic. Clemente Marroquin Rojas, the Minister of Agriculture. When this was over, the President still made no comment. Before the day was finished, it looked as though the President was acting as umpire between the unruly members of his family, including a slightly weak-­minded member thereof. With respect to other projects under the subject of special assistance, such as housing, malaria eradiation, environmental sanitation, education, public safety, community self-­help, the various Ministers spoke in turn. Each expressed himself as very much satisfied with the program and demonstrated resistance to giving up any of their funds for the use of any other project. Certain worthwhile and revealing discussions ensued, for example, the desirability of combining work in environmental sanitation with water supplies in the Ministry of Communications and Public Works in order to avoid any duplication of effort. Following the discussion of these several programs, the

Guatemala 699 otherwise considerable delays might ensue. The suggestion was then reiterated that the President and his Ministers state what changes they wished to have in the program. There being no direct requests made at the moment, it was agreed that individual Ministers and program chiefs would meet early the following day with Mr. Atwood, Mr. Powell, and Mr. Colmenares, Coordinator for the Guatemalan Government, to review the programs in detail. The meeting was useful as it provided a substantial clearing of the air. It provided an opportunity of placing the responsibility for future conduct of the program, or changes thereof, squarely on the President and his Ministers. It settled the question of the Agriculture program in the best possible form. It is not expected that very substantial changes will occur in the aid program, except for agriculture. There may be some shifting about to make it appear more attractive to the present Government as both an administrative end a political exercise. This all appears to have been necessary and substantially worth-­while. Any significant changes will be reported.11

Guatemala 701 attendant on the throwing of bombs, some of which, he said, have been tossed by the extreme Leftist PR, others by the extreme Rightist MDN, in efforts to create confusion. Some, he said, have hoped to force Ydígoras to set up a dictatorship but the President has refused to do so because he is determined to upload democracy. However, the Minister continued, by their tactics the PR and MDN have unwittingly become tools of an international plot being stage-­managed by Betancourt of Venezuela and Fidel Castro of Cuba, in the interest of securing the return of Arévalo to the head of the Guatemala Government. Their purpose, the Minister stated, is to set up a network of Governments similar to their own, and Betancourt is the creature of Arévalo, who is serving as close advisor to him, as well as close friend. If elections were to be held next year in Guatemala, the Minister added, Arévalo would be elected by an overwhelming majority, with dire results for the country and great embarrassment for the United States. The Minister expressed indignation at the speech given in the UNGA by the Cuban Foreign Minister, Roa, especially at his having coupled Guatemala with Hungary and Tibet.2 He said he had felt that the Guatemalan Foreign Office could not reply to these remarks, but that the task had been undertaken by the Guatemalan Consul General in New York, who had made a strong reply, making it clear there had been no foreign intervention in Guatemala’s Liberation. Stating that he was doing so at the Secretary’s request, Mr. Rubottom told the Minister that in the Camp David conversations the “dead line” for settlement of the Berlin issue had been dropped and the way apparently opened for a Summit meeting.

Guatemala 703 El Espectador of this afternoon which apparently will point the finger of accusation against the Cuban Ambassador.6 President having thus laid groundwork for discussion re Department desires, I dilated extensively on Arevalo, pointing out his arrival physically or to political power in Guatemala would be nothing short of disastrous. From there discussion developed into activities of MDN, of PR and splinter parties of left with President stating flatly Arevalo on arrival would not only take over entire far left, but most of PR and a considerable portion President’s own Party Redencion, who would go out of fear. President said he had been endeavouring obtain at least tacit cooperation all MDN leaders and is meeting with them again tonight.7 His purpose is to have some sort of cooperation of anti-Communist political groups to which both he and MDN dedicated in contrast PR which is not anti-Communist. He did not offer estimate his chance of success. Admitted MDN leadership so continually divided as to be ineffective. He has however offered them in addition to present Minister of Finance and Under Secretary Communications one additional Cabinet post. He told them their hopes upcoming Congressional elections not realistic in expecting they can capture 14 seats. He willing endeavor assist them four or five seats providing they will cooperate in government. Both before and after taking up Department’s instruction, President brought up and I consciously stimulated considerable discussion of the moderate left PR. President said he is not only trying, but to certain extent is working with Galich, to take over leadership PR Party as Galich is old friend, anti-Communist, able, moderate and not tarred with brush of violence which is true of Mendez because of brutality practiced while Chief of Police under Arevalo. When I asked him for estimate chances of Galich’s ascendency and strength he might exhibit in event of resurgence of Arevalo, President offered no direct answer, only indicating he could work with Galich, but Arevalo’s return would 6 The referenced article, which appeared in the November 11 issue of El Espectador,

Guatemala 705 seemed to be taken in, whereas Latins were practical enough to know that no matter what arrangement was made, no matter what conditions were met, and no matter how we might comport ourselves, the Russians would continue working hard and actively to undermine the situation in Latin America. He related this to the Cuban and other situations and hoped that the United States would not prove gullible. President terminated discussion by saying he taking every possible step prevent Arevalo getting favorable position. He had caused to be instituted seven processes ranging from the murder of Arana,10 the violation of two girls, through robbery and other things. I remarked I understood a court action per se would not prevent Arevalo from returning, that such needed court judgment against him. President confirmed this saying he was pushing for action. He made it clear he wished avoid possibility of Arevalo either being nominated as a Congressman or getting a seat.11 Mallory 10 For documentation on the assassination of Col. Francisco Arana, Chief of the

Guatemala 707 effective and to wish for the happiness and prosperity of the Guatemalan people and their Government, including especially Your Excellency. In conclusion may I express to your Excellency the assurances of my highest esteem. Sincerely yours, Thomas C. Mann GT–26. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Irwin) to the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1 Washington, February 20, 1960. Dear Mr. Dillon: The Department of State authorized the sale of six B–26 aircraft to Guatemala in December 1958.2 Although the aircraft (configured as one VIP type, one photo-­reconnaissance type, and four light bomber type), have been earmarked for one year, implementation of the 1958 decision has been in a Department of State deferred status due to the tensions in the Caribbean and the Mexican–Guatemalan shrimp boat incident. On

Guatemala 709 Air Force on December 31, 1958, of a number of Mexican shrimp-­fishing boats that had ignored orders to leave Guatemalan waters. As a result of this particular incident, we were asked by the Mexican Government to withhold delivery of a number of surplus demilitarized B-26 bombers that we had agreed on December 5, 1958, to sell to the Government of Guatemala. Although we had already notified the Government of Guatemala orally that it could send a team to inspect the planes, we acceded to the Mexican request, predicating suspension of sale arrangements, in our conversations with the Guatemalans, on the then notable increase in Caribbean tensions. Although Mexico and Guatemala patched up their differences in September, 1959, we were forced to continue to ignore Guatemala pleas to effect sale of the B-26 bombers in the interest of securing British cooperation in restricting arms shipments to the Caribbean area. The Guatemalan Government has continued to press for delivery of the planes in question. These circumstance have served to irritate our relations with Guatemala and to weaken the influence of our armed forces with the Guatemalan military. One of the basic reasons for wanting to sell the B-26 planes to the Government of Guatemala is to prevent it from shopping elsewhere for armaments that it needs to replace depleted equipment. The maintenance of Guatemalan reliance on American equipment in essential to our retention of influence over its military. President Ydígoras, in January, let it be known that, should he have to shop elsewhere for planes, he would probably have to entrust training of his air force to other than a United States mission. Such a move would dissipate years-­ long efforts to establish close and friendly ties with the Guatemalan military, whose influence in local politics is traditional. The Department of Defense feels very strongly in this connection, and a communication to that effect was addressed to the Under Secretary of State by the Second

Guatemala 711 also pointed out anti-Ydígoras elements would seize on grant aid at this time as alleged evidence his laudable position on Cuba was sell-­out to U.S. Cruz and Chargé were told yesterday final approval of $3.5 million long-­term loan to Guatemala was imminent. Approval now has been granted and you may so inform Ydígoras.4 Telegraphic instruction will follow with terms to be subject to further negotiation.5 Herter

Guatemala 713 in an informal message to Mr. Mallory,4 warning that access to adequate funds might determine the success of his efforts to control leftist agitation. Ambassador Alejos has been extremely active in presenting, documenting, and pressing for approval of two road-­building loan applications now before DLF, but has repeatedly expressed dismay at the apparent unlikelihood that early action on them could be hoped for, much less anticipated. The Country Team in Guatemala, in evaluating the present tensions there, recommended on July 25 that, in order to encourage conservative and non-Castro, non-­communist elements toward unity, approval of the DLF Rio Hondo Loan application submitted to DLF should be announced immediately as a catalytic act to encourage and bolster conservative elements.5 In reviewing the Guatemalan situation, we feel that, should current agitation result in Ydígoras’ overthrow and in a take-­over by ­pro-Castro elements, the Department will be subjected to intense and plausible criticism, along the lines that it has been penny wise and pound foolish. It is superfluous under the circumstances to argue in favor of the positions we have taken thus far. Attacks on this position would probably center on the theme that we have been warned persistently that, unless large sums of cash could be furnished Guatemala to enable it to bring itself up to date in the payment of its obligations—­most notably of wages to Government employees and school teachers—­extremist agitators would stimulate resulting unrest to resuscitate nostalgia for “the good old days” of Arbenz. We have been warned that, as long as the GOG is held to an austerity program in the interests of financial stability, and can not undertake public works either to absorb unemployment or to satisfy expanding popular demand for greater living amenities, the pro-Castro and communist agitators will have an almost obstacle-­free field for operation. The charge would be leveled at us that we have underestimated the political dangers of the social-­economic problems surrounding Guatemala’s cash shortage, and insisted on adopting an orthodox, business-­like approach to an abnormal situation, with resulting disastrous consequences. The political realities are that the extreme left has received not only moral but financial and, reportedly, tangible encouragement in the form of weapons, from Cuba; that the adoption by Ydígoras, in recent months, of a somewhat harder posture toward the left has united extreme leftist elements, and that the recent Khrushchev statements 4 Not found in Department of State files.

Guatemala 715 Eximbank, which is now studying both applications, asked Ambassador Alejos for more complete data on them about two weeks ago. On the personal orders of President Ydígoras, the Dirección de Caminos in Guatemala dropped virtually all other work to concentrate on furnishing the desired information, and Ambassador Alejos submitted it yesterday, July 25. The President obviously wants no responsibility for delays in action on these requests. The direct implication is that, if action is not taken promptly, the fault will be ours. A third application, which our Embassy considers to have great merit, will reportedly be submitted to DLF next week, and will involve roadbuilding to the Cobán area, aimed at opening up what is potentially one of Guatemala’s richest provinces, one capable of absorbing much of the teeming population of the Indian areas. We recommend that, if at all possible, the two applications now being processed be handled expeditiously, and an announcement of their approval be made on the earliest possible date. Time is definitely of the essence, as events are moving very fast and we must not be caught in the position of having supplied too little too late. With the aim of reversing the trend of nostalgia for Arbenz’ day, we suggest also investigation of the rumored intention of the United Fruit Company to dispose of its large holdings in the Tiquisate area. Reports speak of the possibility of selling these, under a United States Government guaranty for UFCO, to workers’ cooperatives. If it should be found that there is, in fact, disposition in UFCO to do this, it would be highly desirable that the Company be urged to announce its plans quickly, and to develop the impression that it is not only under extremist regimes that agricultural workers can aspire to acquiring ownership of these valuable lands. OAP, in making the recommendations below, feels it necessary to point out that, while the loan applications described above are not considered top priority projects by Eximbank or REA, the Rio Hondo project is given No. 1 priority by President Ydígoras. It would seem logical to give considerable weight to this fact, in view of the President’s now acknowledged political acumen. Our relations with him have not been made easier by our apparent unwillingness to accept his own programs, which are normally predicated on political and sociological as well as economic considerations. It should be remembered that Ydígoras has received only two $5 ­million bank loans since he has been in office,6 both on the basis of programs favored

Guatemala 717 The Minister of Finance explained that it had been necessary for him to call today instead of on August 22, as had been scheduled, due to the necessity of his immediate return to Guatemala. He stated that he and Mr. Fernandes had just completed negotiation of a $10 million loan from the Bank of America in association with the Chase Manhattan Bank and other unspecified banks. Terms for repayment were five years at 5 percent annual interest. The loan agreement included a provision for the deposit of certain Bank of Guatemala dollar reserves in the loaning banks on a 6-­months call basis. The Minister explained that funds from this loan would be used to liquidate outstanding fiscal obligations, i.e. deuda flotante. The Minister stated that the Guatemala Government had recently

Guatemala 719 GT–31. Letter from President Eisenhower to President Ydígoras1 Washington, September 12, 1960. Great and Good Friend: I wish again to express my appreciation for your friendly letter of August twenty-­third delivered personally into my hands by your Ambassador, Carlos Alejos.2 I am indeed pleased to renew the personal exchange of views I first enjoyed with you during your visit to Washington in February, 1958. Your frank and comprehensive comments on the present situation in Guatemala have been studied with interest and sympathy by officials of this government. Your letter further confirms my conviction that the countries in this Hemisphere face, individually and collectively, a very definite threat to our democratic way of life and to our American system that requires our constant vigilance and resolute action. From the very inception of our independence we in the Americas have recognized that we share a common destiny and that a threat from without to any one of us is a threat to all of us. This firm belief and our determination to uphold it was overwhelmingly confirmed at San Jose just a few days ago. Your timely efforts in alerting others to the most recent threat to the American system merit special commendation.3 I have noted with particular satisfaction your account of your efforts to provide the benefits of economic and social justice to the Guatemalan people without sacrificing democratic freedoms and practices. This is particularly important since it describes exactly that which distinguishes our system from the doctrine some now are seeking to impose in this Hemisphere. This insidious doctrine proposes that our peoples must relinquish their personal freedom and their individuality in order to achieve the material progress we seek. In response to this challenge, our representatives at the meeting of the Committee of Twenty-One in Bogotá have proposed that the forces of domestic action and of international cooperation working hand in hand can achieve the economic and social advancement of our people without sacrificing the 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Delivered September 21, 1960. 2 Not printed; Ydígoras asked for a grant of $20 million in special assistance and left the details to be worked out by his Ambassador in Washington with a special mission from Guatemala, if necessary. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File.) 3 In a conversation with Secretary Herter at San José on August 22 regarding the Seventh Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Guatemalan Foreign Minister Unda Murillo outlined Guatemalan difficulties with Cuba which Guatemala had brought to the attention of the Inter-American Peace Committee. (Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 64 D 199).

Guatemala 721 GT–32. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Mann)1 Washington, November 3, 1960. SUBJECT Visit of the Guatemalan Ambassador with the President PARTICIPANTS The President The Excellence Carlos Alejos, Ambassador of Guatemala Mr. Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs Ambassador Alejos opened the conversation by extending greetings from President Ydígoras to the President. The conversation turned to the question of Salvador and Ambassador Alejos stated that Guatemala had already recognized the new regime. There was some discussion about development in Salvador. Ambassador Alejos then referred to the need of Guatemala for budgetary support and for loans for roads there, relating this to the problem of unemployment in Guatemala. The President stated that the difficulty with budgetary support was that it might create a continuing requirement and that he preferred to help with development loans. There was some discussion concerning the efforts which the Guatemalan government has made to balance its budget and the Ambassador stated this was a one-­time problem. The President then inquired whether this matter was being given prompt attention and on Mr. Mann’s reply in the affirmative the President said that he was sure a prompt decision would be forthcoming.2

Guatemala 723 support forthcoming and that Rio Hondo loan receiving positive action DLF. Johnston concurs. Muccio GT–35. Telegram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Muccio) to the Department of State1

Guatemala 725 not need it but it would be much stronger. The President agreed and said this would particularly be so if each country says there is external aggression. The President asked what we would do about the OAS, and the Secretary said the requests would also have to go to the OAS but the requests can be made both individually and collectively. The President said he approved in every respect. The President asked that the Secretary make a little note of the matter and send a report down to the President.5 5 Reference presumably is to the memorandum from Herter to Eisenhower November 16, see Document GT–42. GT–37. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Guatemala1

Guatemala 727 GT–39. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, Prepared in the Office of the Secretary of State1 Washington, November 14, 1960. The Secretary telephoned Mr. Gates who was then meeting with the JCS. Mr. Gates said they are ready to reload some Marines on a carrier and to sail the carrier the long way around Cuba to put it in the vicinity of Guatemala. Gates said the Marine amphibius group and the carrier can be in the area by the 17th or 18th and Gates said they were about to send a despatch on this giving the specific orders. Gates said this has all been done, but it can of course be cancelled. The Secretary said the situation has changed somewhat since the Secretary talked to Gates this morning. The Secretary said he had spoken to the President and got his approval to necessary actions so long as they do not get out of the OAS channels. [text not declassified] The Secretary said he had talked with Ambassador Muccio and then read Gates a report of Mr. Mann’s subsequent talk with Muccio.2 The Secretary said we had also sent telegrams to Nicaragua and Costa Rica so we might get requests for help from them as well as Guatemalan.3 The Secretary said on the carrier business, he felt there was no harm so long as it stays out of territorial waters. Mr. Gates said they decided to reload the Marines and tell them to sail in that direction. Gates said they will reload the carrier with propeller A-­d’s (?) with a half squadron of fighters and sail to Guantanamo through the West end of Cuba so it will be in the area by the 17th or 18th. The Secretary said we would know more in the morning, but this is a good precaution anyway. Mr. Gates said he would send over a copy of the actual despatch setting forth the specific orders on this operation.4 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, “Phone Calls & Miscellaneous Memos,

Guatemala 729 evidences leftist influence or exploitation movement, army and air force may close ranks. Next 24 hours should clarify situation and trend. Muccio GT–41. Telegram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Muccio) to the Department of State1

Guatemala 731 I have this morning discussed the foregoing with Secretary Gates and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and they are agreeable to the suggested procedure. General Lemnitzer has indicated that ships now available in the Florida area could arrive off the Guatemalan coast within 48 hours. The ships available include an aircraft carrier and a small amphibious force with a contingent of Marines. It is my own feeling that given the possibility of leaks, it would be just as well not to have Marines aboard any of the surveilliance ships. General Lemnitzer points out the Marines would be merely on what is a routine and normal training [illegible in the original] in that area and that, should it be necessary to use the Marines, several days would be saved by having them aboard. I nevertheless feel it would be better to risk a delay than to risk the serious reaction which would inevitably follow should the rumor spread that Marines are en route to Gautemala.5 Christian A. Herter 5 In a memorandum of conversation between the President, Secretary Herter, General Lemnitzer, and Press Secretary Hagerty at Augusta, Georgia, August 17, Brig. Gen. Goodpaster states that “one point of detail was as to whether a Marine battalion should be abroad the ships used in the surveillance operations. The President thought they should not be kept abroad, but should be left at the nearest suitable station. General Lemnitzer agreed that this could be done acceptably.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries) GT–43. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Guatemala1

Guatemala 733 GT–46. Letter from President Eisenhower to President Ydígoras1 Washington, November 28, 1960. Dear Mr. President: I should like to thank you for your very kind message of November nineteenth.2 The steps taken by the United States Government have enabled us to be in a position to respond to the request received from Your Excellency’s Government on November sixteenth for assistance in preventing Communist-­directed efforts to intervene in the internal affairs of your country through the landing of armed forces or supplies from abroad.3 I am gratified to learn that constitutional order is being maintained in Guatemala. The American people join me in expressing warm good wishes to the Guatemalan people and to Your Excellency personally. Sincerely, Dwight D. Eisenhower 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. The referenced letter was transmitted by telegram 374 to Guatemala, November 30, with a request for

Haiti: U.S. Relations with Haiti1

Haiti 735 Duvalier some of the factors which would be involved in reestablishment of normal, friendly relations between our countries if the Haitians give us satisfaction over this incident. These “factors” are in no sense a quid pro quo, and the Ambassador has no intention of describing them as such. Rather, the explanation of them would be presented as some of the elements of our relations which existed before Talamas’ death and which would exist now if it were not for that unfortunate occurrence. We believe the elements of such restoration are as listed below and, if you agree, the Ambassador will describe these factors to the President if he considers it appropriate in his discussions in Part-au-Prince:

Haiti 737 HA–3. Editorial Note

Haiti 739 but has been released, with the exception of a brother who is still in jail. The Colombian Minister informed me that the Assistant Manager of the Haitian-Colombian Bank, a known Jumellist, was savagely beaten in his home by a masked gang in an effort to force him to reveal the whereabouts of Jumelle. At last account he was recovering in a hospital from the beating which left him close to death. I would emphasize here that I am persuaded that neither Dejoie nor Jumelle have seriously conspired against the Government since the inauguration of President Duvalier, although it is probably true that some of their followers, particularly of Dejoie, may have engaged in conspiratorial plotting. A large number of political prisoners languish in jail with estimates ranging from 80 to 800 and the actual figure probably being somewhere in between. The Army, which under General Kebreau was at least a counterpoise to the civilian element of the Government, now appears to be under the complete domination of Dr. Duvalier. It is difficult to believe anything else when we have a photograph in our possession of the head of the Secret Police, Clement BARBOT, striding behind the President with a sub-­machine gun under his arm, his military escort bringing up the rear, during the Flag Day celebration at Arcaihaie on May 18. To the best of my knowledge the Secret Police continues to operate with the tolerance, if not the support, of the Army. The financial assistance to the Duvalier Administration which has thus far been forthcoming, or is in prospect, from United States and international sources will help to perpetuate the present regime. Looking at it for what it basically is, namely, aid to the people of Haiti, I find it entirely defensible and would even go so far as to support additional amounts of aid in the future. However, I think we should do some careful soul-­searching before we agree to send a Military Mission to Haiti, particularly one of such composition and size that it will practically guarantee the continuance in office of Dr. Duvalier to the end of his six-­year term in 1963. Of course, we want stability in Haiti but, particularly having in mind the critical examination of our policies in Latin America provoked by the recent incidents involving the Vice President, should we agree to the establishment if the Mission without establishing any conditions precedent? I find myself becoming increasingly repelled by the thought of sending a Mission in here when the jails are crammed with political prisoners, many presumably innocent and none of whom have been given the benefit of a fair trial; when defeated candidates and their supporters, many of whom have asked for nothing but peace and harmony, are beaten, tortured and hounded into exile; when a restrained opposition press has been ruthlessly snuffed out of existence; and when masked night riders, reminiscent of the Ku Klux Klan, operate from their headquarters in the National Palace. Aside from the question of our own conscience,

Haiti 741 and Minister Interior Duvigneaud he produced large volume miscellaneous identification papers and photos allegedly removed from corps of subjects thereof apparently establishing that four of seven members of rebel expedition were residents Miami and presumably U.S. citizens. At least two held deputy sheriff badges or commissions from Florida authorities. This in apparent conflict with information made available to Embassy representatives earlier in day who were invited view cadavers two participants said to be American citizens with explanation other two foreigners were Dominicans. However this conflict understandable view excitement and general confusion. Furthermore there are widely divergent accounts of events of day including version raiders were denounced in advance to GOH by army officers thought to be defectors and were shot on landing and bodies brought to Port au Prince where fighting at Casernes led by several army officers members of conspiracy. President agreed permit our Consular representatives examine and photograph papers to establish identify of alleged Americans. Results will be forwarded Department promptly. President further claimed papers, photographs, weapons et cetera found on auxiliary sail boat abandoned at Deluge south of St. Marc established its U.S. identify. However Haitian authorities unable identify boat either by name or number although claiming it flew American flag. In tone of exceptional gravity President reminded me of my previous offer to be of assistance which he had declined for time being by saying “I now formally request immediate expulsion Magloire3 and Dejoie from U.S. territory on grounds they have organized and launched armed expedition against my government with participation U.S. citizens”. He stressed his desire keep whole matter confidential in Haiti to avoid disturbing friendly relations between two governments but said he would expect favorable action on his request within 48 hours. I agreed forward his request to Department promptly. I endeavored explain that commission as deputy sheriff in many jurisdictions in U.S. was honorific title frequently bestowed for personal or political reasons and disclaimed it implied official knowledge of or support for expedition. When Thebaud said boat could only have sailed with connivance federal officials I entered strong denial indicating that boat could well have sailed clandestinely or from some point outside U.S. territory.

Haiti 743 HA–6. Memorandum of a Conversation, the White House1 Washington, August 7, 1958. SUBJECT: Call of Haitian Foreign Minister on the President PARTICIPANTS: The President Dr. Louis Mars, Foreign Minister of Haiti Under Secretary Herter William A. Wieland, Director, Office of Middle American Affairs During a call at 4 p.m., August 7, on the President, Haitian Foreign Minister Mars delivered a letter from President Duvalier saying that the Haitian Government hopes for United States military support.2 He recalled the efforts to overthrow President Duvalier during the last days of July and said the Government expects further revolutionary attempts. The President asked the Foreign Minister to convey his sincere regrets to President Duvalier that United States citizens had been involved in the plot and that the United States Government had not known this in time to stop it. In reply to a question from the President, the Foreign Minister said that the revolutionary plotting against the Duvalier Government has assumed serious proportions. He cited two clandestine radio stations broadcasting threats that the Presidential Palace will be bombed and 2,000 rebels will march on the capital. He said that President Duvalier has “knowledge” that President Trujillo of the Dominican Republic is financing the revolutionary attempts with a $500,000 fund established for the purpose. The Foreign Minister said that President Trujillo aspires “to be President of the entire island” and “does not like” that the Duvalier Government is attempting to build a sound economy in Haiti. 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Confidential. Drafted by Wieland. In a memorandum to President Eisenhower of August 7, Acting Secretary of State Herter recommended that the President meet with Foreign Minister Mars as it was “highly desirable that you receive the Foreign Minister in order to dispel any impression that we countenance the organization of revolutionary expeditions in the United States against Dr. Duvalier’s government.” (Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers) 2 In this letter of August 2, President Duvalier maintained that the attack on Haiti of July 28–29 was part of an international Communist conspiracy and requested U.S. military assistance to help defend Haitian territory. An unofficial translation of the letter is in the Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File.

Haiti 745 determine whether the United States should comply with this request. If the Haitian Government is given an affirmative answer, a supplementary question arises: should we make assignment of the mission subject to certain provisos, notably agreement by President Duvalier to provide satisfactory operation conditions for the mission and to take measures designed to allay current political tensions? Background: President Duvalier requested a Marine Corps Training Mission in late March and has become doubly anxious to have the mission arrive since the revolutionary attempt against his government on July 29. He desires the mission to bring about a permanent improvement in the status and sense of responsibility of the Haitian army as well as to help stabilize his Government and as evidence of U.S. support. A Marine Corps Survey Team which visited Haiti from May 18 to 31 concluded that there is a definite need for a military mission to improve the efficiency and capability of the Haitian army, and to promote stability within the Haitian army and in the Republic of Haiti itself. It recommended that a fairly large mission be sent (an initial minimum of 30 members to be increased to 50) as that advice could be given both at headquarters and field levels. The General Staff of the Haitian army has stated that Haiti’s economy could not support a mission of the recommended size but President Duvalier has privately assured us that the necessary funds would be forthcoming. Discussion: The charge that the U.S. supports Latin American dictators may be brought against us if we send a Marine Training Mission to Haiti. Duvalier’s government has taken on many of the characteristics of a dictatorship; abuses by the secret police, destruction of newspaper plants, arrests of labor leaders and journalists, persecution of political opponents, arbitrary arrests and prolonged imprisonment without trial. However, during the attempted coup on July 29 there was no disaffection in the Haitian army or the general population and the ability to hold power for the foreseeable future whether or not we send a training mission. He justifies his strong-arm tactics on grounds that the opposition is plotting his own violent overthrow and he cites the July 29 attempted coup as proof. Possible criticism of the Marine training mission as U.S. intvervention in Haiti is to be expected from various sources including the USSR propaganda apparatus which voiced this criticism against the recent brief protection of the Guantanamo Base water supply by 60 Marines. Moscow Radio has already taken the line that the involvement of Americans in the attempted coup on July 29 is evidence of U.S. intervention against the Duvalier government. The fact that President Duvalier has specifically

Haiti 747 be achieved at some cost in civil liberties; if this is accepted as a realistic working assumption, the objective of the U.S. should be limited to achieving a gradual amelioration of the situation. Our ability to use our influence to this end would be enhanced by the presence of a Marine training mission. The present status of U.S.-Haitian relations calls for a positive gesture on the part of the United States to effect the reverse practice of the Duvalier government to the participation of American citizens in the July 29 attempt and the fact that it was launched from U.S. soil. A few days after that even, President Duvalier sent his Foreign Minister on an urgent mission to Washington to deliver a letter to President Eisenhower requesting U.S. military assistance for Haiti. The arrival of a Marine training mission would be a timely, positive response to this plan for help. Further, this reassurance of our good intentions might render Duvalier more amenable to our influence in bringing about an improved domestic political climate. Conclusions: 1. We may be criticized for “supporting a dictator” if we send a Marine mission to Haiti, but it appears that Duvalier in fact has considerable popular support and the ability to hold power regardless of whether we send the mission. By sending a mission we may be able to influence Duvalier away from dictatorial methods. The Mission might be viewed by U.S.S.R. propagandists as evidence of U.S. intervention in Haiti but this charge can bee offset by the fact that President Duvalier has requested the mission. We should seek prior agreement that Duvalier will take steps to allay the political tension and that no advice or training will be given to the police. 2. The secret police have brought Duvalier into disrepute but they are his chief reliance in keeping power and it would be unrealistic to expect him to abolish them at this time. We should encourage Duvalier to bring the police under control but we should make it clear that we will not become involved in police training. 3. Haiti’s greatest need is a period of political stability and we can contribute to this by using a Marine training mission to influence the Haitian Army constructively. The Haitian army has been the ultimate and practically the only source of stability in the past year and a half although seriously weakened by purges. 4. The present status of our relations with Haiti calls for a positive gesture to offset the adverse reaction of Haitian officials to the participation of Americans in the July 29 attempted coup and the fact that it was launched from U.S. soil.

Haiti 749 HA–8. Record of a Meeting1 Washington, September 14, 1958 Meeting—September 14, 1958—Economic Program for Haiti PARTICIPANTS State Department: Messrs. Rubottom (ARA); Snow (ARA); Wieland (CMA); Warner (CMA); Conover (REA); Post (REA); and Favell (KD) Development Loan Fund: Mr. Rayan Treasury Department: Mr. Harley ICA: Mr. Atwood Export-Import Bank: Messrs. Kimball and Dennison Mr. Rubottom opened the meeting by pointing out that the economic situation in Haiti has shown no significant improvement and that a new look was necessary. He said that we should consider obtaining, in cooperation with President Duvalier, greater responsibility in economic affairs. Since the Duvalier government was freely elected and the best prospect we could see ahead, Mr. Rubottom was convinced that we should make efforts to intensify our cooperation. He believed that Duvalier wants to work with us and that we should try to convince him that we do likewise. Mr. Rubottom raised with Mr. Atwood the need for experienced ICA personnel at the top level to deal with the Haitian government in overall economic planning and implementation. Mr. Rubottom said that Messrs. Waugh, Dillon and McIntosh recognized the importance of completion of the construction work at the Artibonite Valley and that we should consider having the DLF supply the funds for this purpose. In addition, he said we should continue our grant food program there and indicated that perhaps a greater account could be shipped. Mr. Atwood stated that the problem was one of getting adequate distribution of foodstuffs. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that it was a matter of high priority to set up an inter-­agency committee to study the Haitian economic problem, Mr. Snow agreed. Mr. Rubottom then mentioned that a Marine Corps training mission was expected to go to Haiti shortly to train the Army. Mr. Atwood agreed that ICA experience showed that there was a need for proper advisors to the GOH. He mentioned in this connection

Haiti 751 Mr. Rubottom then reviewed the sense of the meeting as followed: (1) That the cost survey be top priority. (2) That ICA and State would look into the problem of economic consultants for the GOM. (3) That the Haitians be informed of the adverse aspects of nationalization of the power industry, without trying to sell them on any specific private power measures. (4) That the DLF then take up the financing of the Artibonite project completion.3 Mr. Kimball said that the cost survey would come to about $15,000. 3 On September 23, Samuel C. Waugh, President of the Export-Import Bank, advised the Department of State in a letter to Assistant Secretary Rubottom that the Haitian government was in default to the Bank for the sum of $500,000 in connection with the Artibonite loan and for the sum of $25,000 in connection with an additional loan. Waugh added: “It is our option that no assistance by other governmental agencies should be given to Haiti unless it maintains its debt payments to this Bank. Even though assistance may be coming from other agencies, we are strongly of the opinion that the sanctity of obligations should be preserved and such a concept impressed upon the Haitians. If a debtor is to be relieved of debt payments while receiving aid, it would create a harmful

Haiti 753 the Haitian President which, if complied with, should tend to stabilize the presently-disturbed situation in that country. A further consideration motivating my recommendation for the early assignment of a military training unit is that the experience of this temporary unit will provide a test of the probable effectiveness of the proposed full-scale training mission as well as a test of the Haitian Government’s ability to allay political tension, as agreed in the memorandum of understanding. A copy of that memorandum is enclosed.5 Sincerely Yours, Robert Murphy 5 The temporary Marine Corps training unit arrived in Port-au-Prince on October 31.

Haiti 755 in September 1957. Dollar reserves, however, failed to increase to former levels and by the beginning of the current fiscal year in October were only about $3 million compared with an average of over $9 ­million at the same date over the period 1950 through 1955. Thus Haiti was in a very vulnerable position when the present cof-

Haiti 757 also appear to be working in favor of a greater degree of responsible government in Haiti. We expect to reach agreement with the Haitian Government on procedures which will assure that U.S. financial aid will be utilized efficiently and effectively.3 3 On February 13, Atwood submitted to Acting ICA Director Leonard J. Saccio a separate memorandum addressed to Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Douglas Dillon, that recommended, among other points, that up to $6,000,000 of special assistance funds be made available to the Haitian Government as emergency foreign exchange and budget assistance. Atwood’s memorandum emphasized that the Haitian Government had “proved itself unable or unwilling to resolve its own administrative and budgetary problems” and that as prerequisite to receiving the special assistance, Haiti must accept a system of strict controls and supervision. On February 17, Saccio forwarded Atwood’s memorandum to Under Secretary Dillon with a covering memorandum indicating approval of Atwood’s memorandum with the provision that the proposed controls described in the memorandum be amended to obtain the approval of Haitian Finance Minister André Theard who was then in Washington. (Carbon copies of Atwood’s memorandum of February 13 and Saccio’s covering memorandum of February

Haiti 759 (3) The ill-­concealed hostility of Castro in Cuba and Betancourt in Venezuela is further comforting exiles those countries and opposition at home. (4) December 22 alliance with Trujillo is proving serious liability at home and abroad. Despite all the foregoing it must be recognized that Duvalier has skillfully concentrated power including arms and ammunition in Presidential guard and secret police with Army practically leaderless and powerless. It is obviously impossible forecast how or when his overthrow will occur but hostile landing on coast might well provide spark leading to mass uprising now only restrained by fear secret police. Given his fanatic character and messiah-­like complex I see no chance he will abandon reins of government peacefully. Also working his favor is absence any one political figure capable holding country together. While many names mentioned by opposition there is general feeling that neither Dejoie, Fignole nor Jumelle could stay in office long and that only a junta or committee public safety (U.S. support being assumed) following his overthrow could maintain order and hold new elections. Also strengthening his position are U.S. aid and recent developments in field foreign investment although generally believed this assistance will only delay his inevitable downfall. Director USOM and [text not declassified] concur. Drew HA–12. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Haiti1

Haiti 761 light September understanding and, in doing so, to point out again that growing adverse reaction in U.S. and elsewhere to such developments creates serious difficulties for U.S. in its efforts assist GOH to overcome pressing financial and economic problems. (4) Ambassador might also refer in course interview to adverse reaction in U.S. and elsewhere to unprecedentedly close rapprochement between Haiti and Trujillo especially view widespread and growing intensity of anti-Trujillo campaign in Caribbean and rest of hemisphere. Department understands President Duvalier plans major pronouncement at Cap Haitian March 5. (FYI Val Washington4 has told Department he plans arrive Haiti March 4 and have frank discussion with President Duvalier on situation). If Ambassador concurs in making approach to President along lines given above, Department believes most desirable this be done prior March 5 in hope President Duvalier might be guided by such views in making whatever pronouncement he has in mind. Department expressed views similar to paragraphs two and three to Ambassador Bonhomme here last week who promised convey to President Duvalier. 4 Member, Republican National Committee. HA–13. Despatch from the Ambassador in Haiti (Drew) to the Department of State1 Port-­au-Prince, March 11, 1959. No. 384

Haiti 763 have on our prestige in the emerging African countries, as well as the colored people of Asia. While very possibly few, if any, citizens of Ghana, Indonesia, or Thailand could identify the present Chief of State of Haiti, the existence of even a brief period of chaos in the oldest independent colored country located on our doorstep would be interpreted as a failure on our part in the field of international relations and would undoubtedly be exploited by communist parties in that part of the world. In other words, we cannot afford to let Haiti “go through the wringer”. It would be far too optimistic to forecast now that the aid we have already given will pull this Administration through its allotted course or that it will be the last aid we will be called upon to extend. However, it is my considered opinion that for better or for worse, both on grounds of moral principle and political expediency, we had no option but to follow the course we have elected to pursue up to now. To what extent we can continue to prop up this Government in the interest of both Haiti and United States is a question which will have to be answered when the time comes. Gerald A. Drew HA–14. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Haiti1

Haiti 765 HA–15. Telegram from the Ambassador in Haiti (Drew) to the Department of State1

Haiti 767 above. Request Embassy arrange clearance ship visit to Cap Haitian. Department passing similar info to Bonhomme Saturday3 morning. Herter 3 July 12. HA–17. Memorandum of Conversation, Department of State1 Washington, July 20, 1959 SUBJECT Delivery of note in reply to Haitian request for U.S. assistance PARTICIPANTS Ernest Bonhomme, Ambassador of Haiti ARA- Mr. Rubottom CMA-Norman E. Warner Ambassador Bonhomme was invited to call in order that Mr. Rubottom might deliver our note dated July 202 in response to the Haitian Embassy’s note of July 93 requesting United States assistance to safeguard Haiti’s neutrality and independence. Ambassador Bonhomme did not open the note and read it during the conversation and therefore did not comment directly on it. Mr. Rubottom opened the conversation by stating that we have fully shared Haiti’s concern over the Caribbean situation and reports of plotting directed against Haiti. He stated that the Ambassador and his Government may not have been aware of this but he, Mr. Rubottom, had many talks with officials of other Latin American governments during the past several months concerning the situation and particu­larly Haiti’s plight in being caught in the middle. He mentioned specifically having talked with the President and foreign Minister of Venezuela and with the Cuban Ambassador4 here. Mr. Rubottom said that we in the

Haiti 769 Ambassador Drew as very close and warm and said this applies also to relations between their respective subordinates and associates such as Foreign Minister Mars and the President’s “special assistant Barbot” on the one hand and Mr. Yoe and Col. Heinl on the other. Mr. Rubottom expressed gratification over the President’s recovery and the good working relations we have in Port-­au-Prince. Mr. Rubottom mentioned that we have heard rumors of impending Cabinet changes. Ambassador Bonhomme said he thinks a few changes may be made but that there will not be a general “shake-­up”. He thinks that Finance Minister Theard and Foreign Minister Mars will be retained. He remarked that Theard is under very heavy pressure because of the financial and fiscal stringency which he must impose. Referring to recent differences between the Senate and the Cabinet, Ambassador Bonhomme commented that some criticism is necessary and that he thinks is a healthy sign of vitality. HA–18. Memorandum of a Conversation, the White House, Washington1 August 4, 1959 SUBJECT Call on President Eisenhower by the Ambassador of Haiti, Ernest Bonhomme. PARTICIPANTS The President Ambassador of Haiti, Ernest Bonhomme R. R. Rubottom Jr., Assistant Secretary of state for Inter-American Affairs After being greeted by the President, the Ambassador handed him a note (in French only)2 in which President Duvalier expressed ­appreciation for the President’s efforts on behalf of world peace and offered military cooperation from Haiti in the form of military bases as well as such other

Haiti 771 HA–19. Memorandum from Albert Post of the Office of Inter- American Regional Economic Affairs to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, October 14, 1959. SUBJECT Additional Requirement for Special Assistance for Haiti for Period October 1959 - September 1960. (FY 60) Summary and Recommendations It is expected that Haiti will require reduced Special Assistance in FY 60 mainly owing to substantially larger coffee exports, which

Haiti 773 to force the resignation of key Haitian administrators and technicians engaged in the “Poté Colé” regional development project in northern Haiti. In scope and cost, this is the most important component of the grant-­financed cooperative program. The Haitian Government has not yet supplied us with a report as to the circumstances of these demonstrations (although this was immediately requested) or expressed regrets or official concern over the incident as would be normal if it had been contrary to the Government’s desires. Meanwhile the absence of these key Haitian employees has brought a number of the “Poté Colé” activities to a temporary halt and jeopardized the entire project. The most important loan-­financed component of the development program (the Artibonite Valley irrigation project) came to a stop in early March following unilateral action by the Haitian Government in dismissing one of the project’s top Haitian employees, an engineer, and installing as his replacement a discredited former Public Works Minister who had been fired for malfeasance. Persistent but inconclusive efforts have been made since March to arrive at satisfactory personnel and administrative rules to govern the project, with further disbursements from the Development Loan Fund suspended pending the outcome. On April 20 President Duvalier ordered the project shutdown temporarily; early in May the Haitian Director of the project was forced to resign; a now Haitian Director was then appointed and accepted by us but President Duvalier still has not indicated when he plans to resume work on the project. On May 20, President Duvalier indicated his displeasure over what he considered improper conduct by the senior ICA technical advisor on this project. We plan to withdraw this man from Haiti if the President confirms that he has lost confidence in him; we acknowledged that this technician was indiscreet but we also recognize that his abrupt removal will create serious practical problems in trying to resume work on the project. This man was so well qualified technically and by previous service in Haiti that President Duvalier had specifically requested his return to Haiti as advisor on the Artibonite project. We are deeply disturbed over various abrupt, unilateral and seemingly irresponsible actions taken by the Haitian Government with respect to these economic development projects which seem vital to the Haitian economy. A variety of motives has been suggested to explain such actions, ranging from a desire for political patronage and personal enrichment through venal appointees to ultra-­nationalist impatience over outside “interference” in the Haitian development program. There may have been a few instances of personal friction between American technicians and their Haitian colleagues although working relations have been generally good. We also know that the Haitian Government has become more and more impatient over what it feels are excessive delays in getting action on requests for United States assistance. These

Haiti 775 HA–21. Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State (Dillon) to the President1 Washington, June 9, 1960. SUBJECT

Haiti 777 in Haiti returned to Cuba following semi-­official Haitian charges of his complicity in the invasion. The Haitian Ambassador in Cuba also returned to Haiti and neither government has since maintained diplomatic personnel in the other’s capital (although both governments officially maintained the fiction that relations are normal). The provocative and irresponsible actions of the Castro Government in Cuba continue to be a source of concern and a serious threat to the security of neighboring countries. Haiti is in an especially vulnerable position because of its physical nearness to Cuba, its military and economic weakness, and its geographical attractiveness as a stepping-­ stone for a Cuba-­based expedition against the Dominican Republic. The Dominican Republic also poses a continuing threat to Haitian territorial and political integrity. Since 1937, when Dominican forces perpetrated a border massacre in which more than 10,000 Haitians were killed, Trujillo agents have persistently tried to intervene in Haitian affairs. Since the advent of Castro to power in Cuba (January 1959), Trujillo has sought to assure the benevolent neutrality of Haiti in his struggle with Castro and, if possible, to obtain positive support from Haiti against Castro. With United States encouragement the Government of Haiti has thus far resisted heavy pressures from both the Dominican Republic and Cuba. However, the marked increase in domestic unrest in the Dominican Republic in recent months may foreshadow violent political upheavals in that country in the near future. It is believed probable that the Cuban Government would try to take advantage of a revolutionary situation in the Dominican Republic to install a Castro-­type régime there. In such circumstances pressures on Haiti from both Cuba and the Dominican Republic would rapidly increase. The dangers to the United States security in the Caribbean are especially serious in view of the Communist influences now evident within the Cuban Government. It is considered to be in the United States interest to provide Haiti with the military equipment, materials, and services described above using up to $300,000 of funds available for military assistance in fiscal year 1960. The furnishing of military assistance on a grant basis to any Latin American nation is subject to several conditions. First, under Sections 105(a) and 141 of the Act, the President must determine that the increased ability of the nation to defend itself is important to the security of the United States, and that the furnishing of such assistance will strengthen the security of the United States and promote world peace. Second, Section 105(b)(4) of the Act provides that military equipment and materials may be furnished to a Latin American nation only in furtherance of missions directly relating to the common defense of the Western Hemisphere and that, unless the President determines otherwise, internal security requirements shall not be the basis for such a

Haiti 779 HA–22. Memorandum from the Acting Director of the International Cooperation. Administration (Saccio) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1 Washington, June 20, 1960. SUBJECT Budgetary Support for FY 1959–1960 to Haiti. The Haitian request for budgetary support for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1960 was submitted by a committee representing the

Haiti 781 HA–23. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State1 Washington, June 28, 1960. SUBJECT Haitian–United States Relations PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Ernest Bonhomme CMA – Mr. Wieland CMA – Mr. Warner Ambassador Bonhomme called at 4:00 pm by invitation and the ensuing conversation lasted an hour and a half. It was a wide-­ranging exchange of views on this United States assistance program in Haiti, with President Duvalier’s speech at Jacmel last week, as the starting point. Neither Ambassador Bonhomme nor the CMA officers had yet seen the text of President Duvalier’s remarks, but only newspaper articles concerning it. Highlights of the discussion are the following paragraphs. Ambassador Bonhomme was unable to explain why President Duvalier had chosen to express himself on United States assistance in this public way in Haiti. The Ambassador only commented that the occasion was the dedication of a wharf built with the assistance of private United States firms. His implication was that this occasion pointed up the contrast between private and official United States efforts to help Haiti. The Ambassador thought that press efforts to portray President Duvalier as calling for a choice between the United States and Soviet Union had been a misinterpretation of his words. Mr. Wieland asked what were the Ambassador’s views on how to put matters back on the tracks. The Ambassador paused, then replied that he supposed the President was awaiting some results from the “Special mission” he had entrusted to Ambassador Turkel when the latter visited Haiti.2

Haiti 783 reasons had been given to him (he was Haitian representative on the joint development council at the time) and he was assured that funds were available for repairing Hurricane Hazel damage but the result was that very little assistance was forthcoming. Mr. Warner assured Ambassador Bonhomme that this is not the case now and that the United States is prepared to cooperate with the Haitian Government to carry out an effective program. He said he was not familiar with the situation in 1956 but that it has been our intention and still is to do everything we can to be of assistance in overcoming the problem in Haiti which we recognize as being serious and urgent. He said that we assume, and hope that the Haitian Government assumes, as a basic premise that there is good will and good faith on both sides and that with such an assumption, we would like to get down to specifics, identifying what the specific problems are and trying to work out specific solutions. Mr. Warner stated that as we see the situation, the next step in the Poté Colé project and in the Artibonite valley is for the Haitian Government to nominate the key personnel who are needed before activities can be fully resumed. When asked again what specific problems he saw in the situation, Ambassador Bonhomme hesitated and then said that the question appeared to him to be one of general atmosphere. He thought that in some cases United States technicians had gone farther than they should in carrying out their advisory roles. The Ambassador thought that in a situation such as we have in Haiti, people should perhaps be allowed to make mistakes. The Ambassador seemed to be implying that United States advisors are sometimes paternalistic in their actions and that this had offended the dignity and self-­esteem of Haitian officials. The Ambassador was not specific other than to mention Mr. Yoe and Minister Philippeaux in this connection. Ambassador Bonhmme also remarked that some of the best-­ qualified Haitian technical and administrative personnel are not politically in sympathy with the Duvalier administration. He thought that part of the assistance program should be to train technicians rather than to expect to find technicians already qualified. Mr. Warner commented that we realize the program cannot operate in a political vacuum and we recognize that political considerations have to be taken into account by the Duvalier government. We consider that President Duvalier is the best judge of the Haitian political picture. However, if there are political objections to individual Haitian employees, we think it would be better to talk over the situation ahead of the time instead of having the man abruptly fired. In this connection, Mr. Warner asked the Ambassador whether he thought the basic principle of having mutually acceptable personnel working in the program was a desirable principle from a

Haiti 785 Mr. Wieland and Mr. Warner asked the Ambassador to inform us immediately if this Government’s understanding of what the next step is to be is not the same as ours; i.e., the Haitian Government should name persons to fill the key jobs still vacant in the Artibonite Valley and in the Poté Colé project. Mr. Wieland added that if the GOH had a different understanding of what the next step should be, we hoped the Ambassador would advise us at once so the issue could be clarified in the interest of getting on with constructive efforts. HA–24. Editorial Note July 21, 1960. The memorandum of discussion of the 452nd meeting of the National Security Council on July 21, includes the following exchange regarding the situation in Haiti which occurred during Director of Central Intelligence Dulles’ briefing on significant developments affecting United States security: “[Director Dulles reported that] Haiti was characterized as usual by a chaotic situation. The Duvalier regime was drifting Leftward. Duvalier was not well and had delegated much authority to a clique of Leftists. [text not declassified] The government has been attacking the U.S. and was pro-Castro. The use of U.S. aid for political patronage purposes had crippled the effectiveness of the aid program. [text not declassified] The army was the most important cohesive force in Haiti and was pro-U.S. It would probably be reluctant, however, to act against the government. Secretary Herter agreed that the army probably offered the best bet in Haiti. He stated that the U.S. was not enthusiastic about a proposal that Haiti contribute army units for the Congo because the U.S. prefers to have the Haitian army in Haiti.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

Haiti 787 revolutionary situation may be efforts by the Castro-­government or Castrophiles to form a leftist regime sympathetic to or subservient to the Castro regime. There was general agreement that the Government of Haiti is in a desperate situation at the present time, because of economic and financial difficulties as well as the political box in which she finds herself, caught in the middle between Trujillo on the right and Castro on the left. There was general agreement that the United States’ objective be to obtain enough leverage in Haiti to counterbalance pressures from Trujillo and Castro. President Duvalier’s request for budget support and economic aid must be considered in this context. In the ensuing discussion Mr. Mann stated that Haiti should not be rewarded for being irresponsible and that any sizeable projects financed with our assistance cannot be converted into political slush funds, although we must recognize that the desires of the host government with regard to individual employees must be taken into account. It was agreed that budget support should have priority over economic development aid, and there was some discussion of the desirability of tying budget support to specific items in the budget. Mr. Mann favored administering our assistance in such a way that we can turn it on and off in accordance with the degree of cooperation we receive from the Haitian Government. Mr. Mann also favored not embarking on any large new projects pending better indications of a cooperative attitude from the Haitian Government. Mr. Mann recommended that in offering budget support we urge the Haitian Government to give further consideration to carrying on construction in the Artibonite valley under contract. Mr. Mann had to leave the meeting early, but requested that he be given concrete recommendations (with justifications) along the lines suggested. In the latter part of the meeting, the possibility was discussed of “untying” the DLF road engineering loan from the Artibonite loan. Mr. Perry believed this might be possible. With regard to the suggestion that the DLF resume disbursements to pay for the engineering studies in the Artibonite valley, which have been largely completed, Mr. Perry stated that he would consult with others at the DLF concerning this possibility.

Haiti 789 5. The main threat to continued stability arises from the President’s ill health. Without Duvalier, a struggle for power would be certain to occur. The military would be likely to seize control, but probably would be unable to stabilize the situation. The outcome would probably be a prolonged period of instability in which pro-Castro elements would certainly strive to gain control. (Para. 22) Discussion 6. Background. Haiti is an overcrowded and impoverished country: its levels of production, income, health, and literacy are the lowest in the Western Hemisphere. Its politics are highly personal, but reflect underlying tensions between a long-­established mulatto elite, a rising Negro elite, and the city mob of Port-­au-Prince. The mass of Negro peasants is, for the most part, politically inert. 7. Since the end of the U.S. military occupation (1934), it has been normal for a Haitian President to complete his six-­year term of office, to seek to perpetuate himself in power, to be thereupon overthrown by a military junta, and to be fairly promptly replaced by a successor selected by the junta in private consultation with leading politicians. Following the overthrow of President Magloire in 1956, this customary though extra-­constitutional procedure broke down when the contending political factions could not agree upon a successor. After several interim governments had been overthrown by popular disorder in Port-­au-Prince, the army, in September 1957, finally procured the popular election of Dr. Francois Duvalier. He was bitterly opposed by the mulatto elite and by organized labor in Port-­au-Prince, but was enthusiastically supported by the Negro elite and was generally popular among the peasants. 8. The Political Situation. Until the spring of 1959, Duvalier’s tenure of power was precarious. Opposition leaders in exile were actively conspiring against him with some encouragement from the new regime in Cuba. An invasion of exiles with Cuban support was imminently expected. The army could not be relied upon to resist it. Duvalier’s control of the internal situation depended primarily upon the terror inspired by his notorious “secret police.” The Haitian treasury was virtually empty. At this point the situation was stabilized by the receipt of $6 million in U.S. budgetary support and by the arrival of a U.S. Marine Corps mission to reform and revitalize the Haitian military establishment. These measures were significant, not only for their direct effects, but more importantly as signs of U.S. interest in sustaining the Duvalier regime. This indication of U.S. support was largely responsible for the absence of an attempt against the regime in May 1959, when President Duvalier was incapacitated by a severe illness.

Haiti 791 expenses by about a million dollars in the fiscal year ending on 30 September 1960. 13. The regime has managed to keep afloat in the past year with the continuation of major outside assistance, a good coffee crop, above average tourist earnings, and the prospect of larger sugar exports to the U.S. Under terms of the IMF stabilization agreement, Haiti has been

Haiti 793 including one or two probable Communists.5 While it is difficult to assess the degree of influence exerted by these men, it is likely that they have considerable control over access to the President and over the information reaching him. However, the Haitian military still have access to Duvalier and influence with him. We believe that as yet the President’s leftist advisors can do little more than intensify his own prejudices, and that Duvalier—­a tough-­minded and suspicious man—­ probably still makes or approves of all major decisions himself. 21. For its part, the Haitian Communist movement, despite a modest revival, remains the smallest in Latin America, and is unlikely to be a decisive factor while Duvalier is in office. The Communist Party and the pro-Communist Popular Socialist Party have been outlawed for years and there is no evidence of an effective underground in Haiti or among Haitian exiles. While Duvalier harps on the potential threat of communism, he probably does not see it as an immediate threat to him. On the contrary, although he acts from time to time against Communist activities, he finds it necessary or useful to employ the administrative talents of individual Communists and has acquiesced in the return of key Communist figures from exile. Nevertheless, the Communists, who are chiefly mulatto intellectuals, are still few in number. Their influence and that of their sympathizers is as yet primarily as individuals in the government bureaucracy—­some in key posts—­and in the press, education, and intellectual circles. Their continued location in their present positions enables them to stimulate anti-American sentiment and to work toward the development of an effective Communist organization. 22. The main threat to continued stability arises from the President’s ill health. Still vigorous in appearance, Duvalier continues to suffer the bad effects of his severe heart attack. Should he die or be seriously incapacitated for a prolonged period, a struggle for power would be certain to ensue. There is no one leader who could command the quick and widespread support necessary for strong government. The military would be likely to seize control of the government, but probably would not be able to stabilize the situation. The result would probably be a period of disorder similar to the nine-­month hiatus preceding the installation of Duvalier, when six provisional governments rose and fell. In such an unstable situation, pro-Castro elements would certainly strive to gain control of Haiti. 5 Paul Blanchet, Minister of Coordination and Information and Secretary-General of the Cabinet; Herve Boyer, Minister of Commerce and one of Haiti’s few competent economists; Gerard Philippeaux, Minister of Finance and Agriculture; Michel Lamartiniere Honorat, Minister of Public Works; Clovis Desinor, director designate of the economic planning board; Jules Blanchet, Chairman of the Haitian budgetary and accounting institution. Honorat was an openly declared member of the Haitian Communist Party in 1946. Jules Blanchet, perhaps the ideological leader of the group, was a founding member of the marxist Popular Socialist Party in 1946.

Haiti 795 regards implementation balance of payments and budgetary support programs and U.S.-­financed economic development. Primary objective is preservation close cooperative relations based on mutual confidence and traditional Haitian-U.S. political alignment. U.S. assistance should contribute directly this objective in addition to advancing economic development Haiti and relieving critical financial problems. Mutual Security Coordinator has made following decisions: 1) commit $5 million from Contingency Fund for support Haitian

Haiti 797 stated those present would transmit note under reference to their governments. I expect see Minister Finance this afternoon on unrelated matter but shall endeavor let him know this type of procedure hardly conducive to sympathetic understanding to Haiti’s problem as far as U.S. Government agencies concerned. Newbegin HA–29. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Haiti1

Honduras: U.S. Relations with Honduras HO–1. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow)1 Washington, February 27, 1958. SUBJECT Call on the Secretary by Honduran Foreign Minister and Honduran Ambassador-­designate PARTICIPANTS The Secretary. Sr. Andrés Alvarado Puerto, the Foreign Minister of Honduras. Sr. Céleo Dávila, Ambassador-­designate of Honduras. Sr. Carlos F. Hidalgo, Chargé d’Affaires, Embassy of Honduras. Mr. William P. Snow, Acting Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs. Mr. Charles Spruks, Assistant Chief of Protocol. At 3:30 this afternoon the Honduran Foreign Minister, Sr. Andrés Alvarado Puerto, paid a courtesy call on the Secretary, accompanied by the Honduran Ambassador-­designate, Sr. Céleo Dávila.2 Having arrived in Washington only the day before, the ambassador-­designate had no official status until he had made the customary initial call upon the Secretary. It was therefore arranged for him to enter the Secretary’s office first accompanied by Mr. Spruks, to deliver copies of his credentials and related documents. The Foreign Minister was then brought in and introduced to the Secretary by Mr. Snow. The Minister brought friendly greetings from the President of Honduras, Sr. Villeda Morales.3 He said that President Villeda M. wished the Secretary to know that he shared his belief in the desirability of achieving a closer relationship between the North Atlantic Treaty 1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 64 D 199. Official Use Only. Drafted on February 28. 2 Dávila presented his credentials as Honduran Ambassador to the United States on March 10, 1958.

Honduras 801 of Honduras; it did not enter the capital or reach to the Caribbean coast. A good road from the capital to the north coast was definitely required. The Secretary spoke of the benefits which would accrue from a road system capable of attracting American tourists from the north, coming down through Mexico and Guatemala. The Minister agreed but indicated that his Government’s main attention at this time was centered on the development of Puerto Castilla, situated on the Caribbean shore, as a tourist resort. It was formerly a United Fruit Company port but had been abandoned by the Company. It could be reached by air, the flying time between that port and Miami being three hours or less. His Government was treating with Pan American Airways to see if an airport, hotel accommodations, and other facilities might be financed and developed there by that Company. The Minister also commented on the fact that Ambassador Willauer, at the inauguration of President Villeda last December, had announced the decision of the U.S. Government to assist technically and financially in developing an engineering unit in the Honduran Army which could be employed in building and maintaining highways. His Government was keenly interested in this and hoped that the project would move forward rapidly. (This is an ICA project.) Another of his country’s needs was money, by which he meant bank credit, available to small farmers and small industry. The Honduran banks had ample knowledge of the local situation but lacked the funds for such a loan program. His Government hoped to be able to borrow enough money abroad to make up for this lack. The Minister spoke of President Villeda’s contemplated trip through South America. He had been invited by President Ibañez to visit Chile in May and, when the other South American governments heard of this, they also had extended invitations. As a result Dr. Villeda planned to visit them all and to deliver lectures at leading universities, etc., lecturing being one of his fortes. At the conclusion, the Secretary expressed his pleasure at having had the opportunity to meet the Foreign Minister as well as to receive the new Ambassador, whom he wished to assure of a cordial welcome at any time during his tenure of office.

Honduras 803 in Tegucigalpa. The Nationalist Party, including the very large number of government workers (virtually the entire personnel of the Honduran Government) who were replaced en masse by Liberal Party members, can be expected to seize upon every opportunity to embarrass the new administration by drawing attention to the disparity between Liberal promises and Liberal performance. There are persistent rumors of dissension within the liberal Party itself; some of the radical Liberals have no feeling of loyalty toward Villeda and might well turn against him at an opportune moment. The military would probably abandon him in the face of any serious deterioration of his popularity. Finally there is already some indication that conservative elements in control of neighboring states are not well disposed toward Villeda’s brand of liberalism. As I see it, the only possibility of averting the threat of a political crisis in Honduras lies in assisting Villeda to make good on at least some of his campaign promises by improving the economic situation in Honduras. This would involve prompt and fairly large scale participation in economic development programs in Honduras. Some efforts along these lines (i.e., the Smather’s Amendment Loan program3 and the Engineering Construction Unit project) are already underway, but these will not be adequate to deal with the present situation. Also, as you know, several applications from Honduras for DLF and IBRD loans are being processed. It is my understanding that these are being pressed forward as rapidly as possible. Whether these will be approved soon enough to avert a dangerous political situation remains to be seen. Summary: 1. The Villeda government in Honduras will shortly be facing serious political difficulties which are likely to result in its downfall, unless it can do something to improve the economic situation in Honduras. 2. The only possibility of averting this threat lies in prompt and fairly large scale U.S. participation in economic development programs in Honduras. 3. It would seem essential, in trying to implement the objective outlined in the NSC paper4 to strengthen representative democracy, that we do what we can to strengthen the Villeda administration and help it to promote the sound development of Honduras and thus strengthen confidence in Honduran democratic institutions. 3 The amendment to the Mutual Security Act of 1956 named after Sen. George A. Smathers (D-Fla.), provided for the use of a portion of the defense support funds authorized in the Act for health, education, and sanitation projects, and for land resettlement programs in Latin America. For the text of the Mutual Security Act of 1956 (Public Law

Honduras 805 3. DLF loan to National Development Bank (Banco Nacional De Fomento). $2 million to provide credit to the private sector, principally agriculture.

Honduras 807 had at last leveled off and managed to govern effectively. In the case of Honduras, Mr. Stewart went on to say, we have seen some indications just within the last few weeks that the Villeda Administration had become fully aware of the magnitude of the dangers and problems facing them and had taken some important first steps toward effecting a remedy. He discussed the IMF program, which the Government now has under consideration and expressed the view that if the Honduran Government agrees to the conditions which the IMF program would impose, Honduras would have made a long step toward stability. Mr. Stewart then reviewed the events by which Honduras had instituted constitutional, democratic government in Honduras for the first time and recalled what a favorable impression this made throughout the hemisphere. He went on to say that he hoped that the understandable impatience of the Hondurans for more evidence of progress would not lead them to any act of force or violence, because, he said, that once such means were adopted, not only would Honduras lose a great deal of esteem in the eyes of the world but it might also precipitate a chaotic situation from which nobody would benefit. Colonel Lopez agreed that it would be unfortunate for the Villeda Administration to fail and he said that he intended to do everything he could to help it succeed. He then went on to describe what he conceived to be the role of the military as a guardian of Honduran democracy. He claimed that it was essential for the military to stand behind the Government to insure its stability. Mr. Stewart said that the role of the military in Honduras during the past year had indeed been highly constructive and said that he hoped it would continue its splendid record of maintaining order until the Villeda Administration could solve the current pressing problems. HO–5. Editorial Note February 9, 1959 On February 9, 1959, Honduran rebels, under the direction of Armando Velásquez Cerrato, the former Chief of Staff of the Honduran Armed Forces, initiated a revolution against the government of President Villeda Morales and invaded the Honduran province of Santa Barbara. Reacting to the attack, Honduran authorities dispatched elements of the Honduran Army to Santa Barbara and ended the rebellion. Documentation on the incident is in Department of State file 615.17 and

Honduras 809 wanted to return from Nicaragua. The President said he planned to make an earnest request of the emigres to return to Honduras and that he would arrange for air and truck transportation. However, Dávila indicated that Villeda would not make the call until the Nicaraguans expelled Colonel Velasquez.5 I told Dávila that I thought the Hondurans should live up to their word even though the other side might delay in taking action against Velasquez and his co-­conspirators. I informed Dávila that we had received reports that broadcasts from the clandestine radio had ceased. 5 On March 13, the Department of State informed the Embassies in Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Panama, and Honduras that Col. Velasquez had departed Nicaragua

Honduras 811 situation reference ratification Honduran-Nicaraguan Accord. Pointed out as previously failure to ratify has put Honduras in unfavorable international position and one where at least as far as outside opinion concerned Honduras could be accused of bad faith. Referred to Rubottom’s conversation with Foreign Relations sub-­committee (Department telegram 365)4 and increasing criticism of Honduran position in U.S. Suggested if any incident should arise resulting in Nicaraguan appeal OAS Honduran posture hardly favorable. Also pointed out that during Velasquez crisis both Department and I had done everything possible to assist Honduras and agreement with subsequent expulsion Velasquez was part of these efforts. I would undoubtedly be handicapped in future efforts to assist Honduras if no action taken. Not withstanding these and other arguments Rodas Alvarado made following points: 1) impossible because of technical requirements for Congress to ratify Accord before scheduled closing tomorrow even were deputies willing to approve. 2) He convinced that if agreement were submitted to Congress at this time would definitely be rejected. He, Alvarado Puerto and the President have all talked with various deputies trying to convince them of necessity for Honduran ratification but have not been successful. In addition to strong emotional prejudice against agreement with Nicaragua, Rodas said that a majority of the deputies had advised Villeda against signing the agreement and hence did not feel any obligation when he proceeded contrary their advice. Deputies felt that Nicaragua itself had been guilty of bad faith during whole Velasquez incident since she and Honduras were already bound by previous international agreements to prevent just that sort of activity. I am satisfied that President and Alvarado Puerto and possibly Rodas Alvarado have made genuine effort to obtain favorable action. Believe that if Rodas Alvarado’s conviction that Accord would be rejected is correct, lack of action is preferable such outcome, which could only further complicate Nicaraguan-Honduran relations. Alvarado Puerto has assured me as emphatically as he can that not withstanding lack of action on ratification, Honduras would act as though bound by agreement and would under no circumstances permit use her territory anti-Nicaraguan movements. He will also request Davila give similar assurances to Department. While Embassy distressed inability obtain ratification this time I consider inaction essentially reflection basic public opposition Somoza regime and not indicative any unwillingness observe existing nonintervention commitments. Newbegin

Honduras 813 objectives in Honduras, and the role of the MSP and other programs in achieving them. The basic objectives of U.S. policy in Honduras have not changed since the submission of the ICA Master Program Book in August 1958.5 At that time they were stated in the following terms: 1) Promote political stability and develop democratic and representative institutions; 2) Promote the sound development and expansion of the Honduran economy, with emphasis to the extent possible on private enterprise; 3) Eliminate and prevent Communist penetration and influence; 4) Strengthen inter-American relationships with a view to improving the security system of the Western Hemisphere. All agencies of the U.S. Government which are represented in Honduras are working toward the realization of one or more of these objectives, each in the manner dictated by its own authority and capacities. The U.S. Embassy, as the principal instrument of U.S. policy in Honduras, works through normal diplomatic channels and its activities are necessarily limited to indirect influence except where U.S. interests are immediately concerned. The Ambassador coordinates the program of the various U.S. agencies from a policy standpoint, but, normally, does not interfere with their specific operations. The Country Team principle has been observed for some time in Honduras; representatives of the ICA (USOM), Army Mission, and the USIS attend the regular weekly Embassy staff meetings, as well as specific conferences called to establish Country Team policy, or a unified approach to a particular problem. The Country Team this year includes one member having the dual capacity of D/USOM and Counselor of Embassy for Economic Affairs6, thus insuring a more closely coordinated policy Advisory group. The U.S. Army and Air Force Missions in Honduras, through the Military Assistance Program, are working especially toward the achievement of the Objective (4), referring to the improvement of the hemisphere security system. These Missions are relatively small. Their continuation in Honduras depends principally on regional factors and Department of Defense determination as to their necessity. The Embassy has recently received a formal request from the Honduran Government

Honduras 815 meet from present human resources. This appears to be the priority problem in Honduras, and this conclusion is reflected in the 1959 and 1960 Program submissions, which include a program for the building of school rooms under the “aided self-­help” system. Whereas this is a worthwhile effort and will coordinate well with the teacher education project, it is my opinion that it will be long range in its expected effects and will not be of sufficient impact to solve the problem. I have hopes that a more effective and immediate solution can be found for this grave situation, possibly a solution which will include adult education programs on a very broad scale. Incidentally, in order to achieve the greatest flexibility in the “aided self-help school program, I hope it can be approved in the category of Special Assistance rather than Technical Cooperation. There are other problems, however, which should be recognized if gains are to be consolidated, and if the country is to develop continuing institutions which will help it to help itself. I refer specifically to the development of a better public administration and a tradition of good government, and also to the activation of private enterprise to permit sound development of the national economy. The USOM, which has had a large scale turnover of personnel in the last year or two, has been in the process of re-­evaluating its program, and I am pleased to note that the above problems have been recognized in its current budget submission; the program for FY 1961 calls for a somewhat broader approach than before in the field of public administration, and there is a proposed industrial development project which has for its purpose the training of managerial skills and increase in industrial productivity. Both of these activities are small scale, which I believe is appropriate at this stage, until there has been more experience in local conditions. In the case of the industry project, one of the conditions to be observed is the effect of the recently adopted Labor Code, which may have an inhibiting effect on both new and existing industrial enterprise. A related project which has been rather successful in the past, and which will continue, is the training of labor leaders. Selected trade union officials have been sent to Puerto Rico and the United States for observation and training in the responsibilities and obligations of democratic labor leadership. This has been supplemented in the past two years by labor training seminars for leaders at a somewhat lower level, given to larger groups within Honduras. It is considered that these activities have been very helpful in combating Communist attempts to dominate the unions, and have resulted in more responsible trade union leadership and improved labor management relations. The project will be continued in FY 1961, but on a smaller scale than previously. In the field of agriculture, no major changes in program are foreseen, although the USOM in recent months has been making a

Honduras 817 In addition to its participation in the Pan American Highway project, for which it has received an Eximbank loan for $1.7 million, Honduras has obtained approval for a total of loans from IBRD for road construction and maintenance of $13.7 million, all obtained since

Honduras 819 carried on by the Servicios tend to become permanent through lack of a host institution which can take them over. In an attempt to break this state of only partially satisfactory equilibrium, the D/USOM will study possible methods of guaranteeing successful turnover of projects which are ripe for delivery and are operating successfully. The present outlook is far from favorable for such action, but it is felt that at least some intelligent trials should be made. The principal difficulty will be to keep trained personnel from being replaced by political favorites without qualifications. As stated above, Country Team coordination has been greatly improved, and I believe this improvement is due in considerable measure to the designation of the D/USOM as Economic Counselor. The incumbent himself feels that at this time, and with present personnel, he is unable to delegate USOM operational responsibilities without danger to those operations, and is, therefore, not fully complying with the requirements of both positions. Since the Embassy Economic Section is staffed with experienced officers, a great degree of accommodation has been possible, and I feel that for the present it will be possible to operate successfully. Robert Newbegin HO–11. Editorial Note October 26, 1959. In an exchange of notes between the American Embassy in Honduras and the Honduran Ministry of Foreign Relations on

Honduras 821 was widely known in Miami, and for this reason it became clear that if President Villeda were induced to refuse the invitation, his refusal would be seriously damaging to our relations with Honduras. Accordingly, our Ambassador was authorized to convey the Department‘s approval of the Miami visit. Also, for similar reasons, our Ambassador has been authorized to agree to the addition of New Orleans to President Villeda’s itinerary, emphasizing in both instances that his trip must be completely private and informal and that no question of official attention or a visit to Washington is to be raised. President Villeda understands this condition and accepts it.2 Although the duration of President Villeda’s visit is still somewhat indefinite, it is estimated that he will be in the United States about a week. Our Ambassador to Honduras, Ambassador Robert Newbegin, will accompany him on the entire trip, and Mr. C. Allan Stewart, Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs of the Department of State, will go to Miami to meet the group. While President Villeda does not expect any official attention, I believe it would be desirable for you to send him a short letter to be delivered personally by Mr. Stewart upon his arrival. Enclosed is suggested letter which, if you approve, we will be glad to transmit.3 It is recommended that this message, if approved, be released only on the initiative or President Villeda.4 DOUGLAS DILLON Acting Secretary 2 President Villeda arrived in Miami on May 30 and proceeded with his visit as planned. Documentation concerning Villeda’s visit to the United States is in Department of State file 715.11. 3 In the draft of this letter to President Villeda, President Eisenhower conveyed his greetings and welcomed Villeda to the United States; praised Villeda’s efforts to strengthen and defend Honduras’ democratic institutions and to improve the well-­being of the Honduran people; and expressed the hope that the close and friendly relations that existed between the United States and Honduras would continue to grow and prosper. 4 According to two handwritten notations on the source text, the signed original of this letter was received from the White House on May 27 and was given to Gawf for transmission to President Villeda Morales.

Honduras 823 HO–15. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Honduran Affairs (Chaplin)1 Washington, November 2, 1960. SUBJECT Political Situation and United Fruit Company Plans in Honduras PARTICIPANTS: ARA—Thomas C. Mann—Assistant Secretary AFL/CIO—Andrew McClellan ARA/RPA—Mr. Henry Hammond ARA/OAP—Mr. Chaplin—OIC­—Honduran Affairs ARA—Mr. Pryce Mr. McClellan, who had recently returned from a visit to Honduras, requested an appointment to discuss the political consequences of the reported plans of the United Fruit Company to withdraw from some public services on the North Coast of Honduras and to lease its banana farms to private Honduran producers. He said that if United withdraws from the hospital, the schools and the commissary, the Government will be unable to take them over, and the result will be their collapse. The prospect of this withdrawal is causing great anxiety in Honduras, and the plans to lease banana farms, to local producers are viewed by the Fruit Company union, SITRATERCO, as a maneuver to break the union. Mr. McClellan stressed the unemployment, economic stagnation, increasing political stability in Honduras, and the alarming growth of influence of the pro-Castro, communist, and extreme left-­wing Liberal groups. He said that, the Villeda Government is riddled with unreliable individuals, many of, whom are pro-Castro. He emphasized that the reported plans of the United Fruit company to disengage from its Honduran operations would have grave political consequences, which might force Villeda to compromise with the extreme left faction of his party, or might result in his replacement by a pro-Castro government. Mr. Mann expressed his concern over Mr. McClellan’s reports, and said that he would ask the Embassy to make an urgent assessment of the political trend in Honduras.2 Mr. Mann called Mr. Sunderland,

Honduras 825 ­airgram G-257. Latest information indicates company planning invest eleven million dollars in planting 32,000 acres with disease resistant banana varieties plus two million in paper box factory. Unknown whether additional land investment anything more than replacement for lands rapidly being abandoned to disease; and unknown whether investment to be for company or independent operations. Latter still primary labor concern. November 20. Hale told Labor Attache8 Sitraterco has lost approximately 1,000 dues-­paying members since 1958, probably half due to land turn-­over policies, remainder to other company disengagement practices. Resultant deteriorating labor situation places leaders under extreme pressure from membership. Labor’s immediate concern is fact GOH has not yet replied their petition to apply collective bargaining rights to independents. Meanwhile opportunists continue exploit situation, particularly Tegucigalpa labor advisor Reyes Ayestas. Most ORIT-­oriented labor leaders not likely to be seduced by Castro. Real danger is that there may be ousted by membership unless effective combination GOH and company policies and actions forthcoming soon. Moderate liberal GOH leadership has generally resisted extremist leftwing pressure, although always with indecisiveness which reflects essential political weakness. Embassy repeats loss of organized friendly labor support could well be critical in terms continuance present GOH policies or, ultimately in terms survival present administration. In latter circumstance only armed forces could save administration. These, although neutral in last 18 months vis-­a-­vis internal political groupings, are overwhelmingly anti-Communist and anti-Castro. Their minimum current requirements cited in points one-­three, paragraph 8, Embassy despatch 79.9 Burrows

Honduras 827 Cavendish varieties, and the associated boxing plants. It was emphasized that there are many shipping, marketing, and consumer acceptance problems to be resolved before the company could say that these varieties are the solution to the disease problem. Mr. Folsom said that the question of maintaining the various public services in effective operation was basic in the company’s plans, but that it was obvious that some of these operations were far more extensive than justified by the current scale of operations, or were businesses which the company should not be engaged. He pointed out that it was vitally important for the company to have the hospitals and railroads continue in operation, and the company was investigating every possibility for effective operation under private or public auspices. He said that United planned to send a team to Honduras to explain the company’s plans in the near future, and hoped that this team could allay the existing apprehension about the company’s plans. Mr. McClellan said that the union was in a position to take the place of the company’s commissary operation, and the union would be glad to cooperate in assisting the transfer of other public services. Mr. Folsom said that a mission of Mr. Albert Maverick and Mr. Giardino would go to Honduras in the next three weeks to explain the company’s plans to government and union officials. He said that some of the uncertainty reflected in the Honduran situation was a consequence of the uncertainty of the company’s own policies. He hoped that a wide range of firm programs would have been decided upon before the visit of the mission to Honduras. Mr. Mann said that Mr. Folsom’s exposition had been very reassuring, and that a similar discussion in Honduras should have desirable effects. He added that he was reassured that the farm leasing, or associate producer, program was being set up in such a way that the farms were large enough and potentially sufficiently profitable so that the operators would be in a position to pay normal wages to their employees. The urgency of the problem in Honduras was restated, and Mr. McClellan said that he would immediately cable the head of SITRATERCO that the United Fruit Company would be sending a mission to Honduras to discuss company plans in the next three weeks, and that he hoped this news would be reassuring. Mr. Folsom said that the company would proceed with its Honduran programs which had been deferred at Mr. Mann’s request, and would make every effort to present a complete, detailed exposition of company plans to interested groups in Honduras.

Honduras 829 President said that if he were to receive message from Somoza indicating readiness to participate in such orderly transfer of authority he would reply in like vein. Impression I received is that Villeda Morales would be happy participate in procedure which might be example for entire area and, perhaps, beginning of new era of improved relations between Nicaragua and Honduras. That, at least, was atmosphere in presidential palace today; a personal meeting on border between Somoza and Villeda Morales to formalize agreed procedure and to demonstrate spirit of collaboration was even discussed in my presence by several ranking officials of GOH. Now, it was also suggested, only dispute over Swan Islands is with U.S.6 Foreign Minister and others insisted to me that Swan Islands is basis for different kinds of disagreement which they satisfied can and will be resolved by friendly discussion. Meanwhile, however, there have been repeated references in radio broadcasts and by sound trucks to Swan Islands issue and even to protest meetings. “ICJ resolution calling for execution of royal arbitration award of 1906, which settled frontier dispute between our countries, is motive patriotic jubilation and Central Americanist satisfaction for the Government and people of Honduras because, in this manner, bonds of affection and understanding between two sister republics are fully restored. Justice never one-­sided, wherefore I am sure you will join our celebration of judicial sentence which definitely eliminates cause of resentment between our peoples and rebuilds between Honduras and Nicaragua bases of traditional and unbreakable friendship. I hope as we raise again symbols of Honduran sovereignty in localities which until now have been subject de facto occupation, our two peoples, united in brotherhood since their political emancipation, may strengthen their economic, social and cultural bonds in noble aim of Central American integration. I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to you (sic) the expressions of my high (sic) and distinguished consideration. Ramon Villeda Morales, President of Honduras.” Burrows

Honduras 831 HO–20. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Honduran Affairs (Chaplin)1 Washington, November 30, 1960. SUBJECT Financial Difficulties of the Standard Fruit Company PARTICIPANTS Acting Secretary Douglas Dillon Representative Hale Boggs Dr. Thomas S. D’Antoni—President, Standard Fruit Co. Mr. Robert Smith Standard Fruit Co. Mr. D. J. Kirchhoff Standard Fruit Co. Mr. Kenneth H. Gormin—Bauerlein Inc., New Orleans ARA—Deputy Assistant Secretary Milton Barall ARA:OAP—Mr. Chaplin Representative Boggs said that he had requested the appointment at the suggestion of Mr. Waugh of the EXIM Bank, who felt that the political implications of Standard Fruit’s financial problems should be brought to Mr. Dillon’s attention.2 Dr. D’Antoni related the history of the Standard Fruit Company, the circumstances of its critical financial condition, the fact that some 50,000 people in Honduras were directly or indirectly dependent on company operations, and presented a memo3 showing that the com-

Honduras 833 Mr. Keefe said that the Bank’s interest was not limited to the $5.6 million loan to the company, but included additional loans of over $1 million made to a Dutch corporation to finance refrigerated ships chartered to Standard. Standard is obligated to prepay charter fees if the borrower is unable to make payments on the ship loans. If Standard were to halt operations, there would be no charters for the ships, thus no payment on the ship loans, and the sale of the ships would not realize the amount of the outstanding loan balances on them. He added that the bank was looking for a purchaser for Standard’s collateral, stock in two breweries and a soap factory, but that it might take some time to find a satisfactory purchaser. He said that no matter how Standard’s financial problems may be resolved, he felt that the company should rid itself of the breweries and soap factory. The two crucial questions regarding Standard’s future in the bank’s eyes are how to overcome the political risks in Honduras, and will it be possible for Standard to stop its current losses. As matters stand, the company will be unable to meet its payrolls by the middle of January. Chase Bank itself does not engage in foreign loans, and the original loans to Standard were made against domestic assets which have now disappeared. Mr. Mann was then called away from the meeting. Mr. Donalson said that an examination of the cash flow projection for 1961 indicates that the company should show a slight cash profit on its Honduran operation over the entire year, but that exclusive of debt payments becoming due, the company would need approximately

Honduras 835 islands, and after careful study, we believe the U.S. has the better claim. A memorandum discussing more fully the dispute over sovereignty is enclosed.2 There is no way to resolve this issue by compromise, since each side believes that it has sovereignty. The only method by which it can now be resolved, in my judgment, is to have the question of sovereignty decided by an impartial tribunal, the International Court of Justice. High officials of the Honduran Government have given indications that Honduras would probably agree to this course. A statement regarding the relevance of the Connelly Amendment3 is enclosed.4 It is likely that the United States will win the case if it is submitted. However, even if this were not the situation, I believe it would still be highly desirable for the United States to manifest, particularly in its relations with a small country such as Honduras, its readiness in appropriate cases to accept the resolution of a dispute by an impartial tribunal in accordance with international law. Submission of the Swan Islands dispute to the International Court of Justice appears to offer the best available course of action for the United States in its relations with Honduras, and it has been the policy of the United States to support and foster the peaceful settlement of disputes by the International Court of Justice in appropriate cases. The Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency have no objection to such a course of action. I request that you authorize me to seek agreement with the Government of Honduras for the submission of this dispute to the International Court of Justice.5 Christian A. Herter 2 Not printed.

Nicaragua: U.S. Relations with Nicaragua NI–1. Letter from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to the Officer in Charge of Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1 Managua, February 11, 1958. Dear Henry: Bill Hudson will be getting out a despatch the last of the week on what I am telling you.2 President Luis and General Tachito are convinced that an attempted invasion from Honduras with a probable assist from Costa Rica will occur this month or in early March. They say that the invasion will be by ex-Caribbean Legionnaires and Nicaraguan exiles who now realize that since Echandi’s election they will no longer have it easy in Costa Rica. President Luis says that the election in Costa Rica3 handed them a jolt and that now they will not wait for Bautista’s downfall in Cuba. He also states that everyone is pretty much in agreement that success in Nicaragua would assure them a base of operations. As of now I do not believe there will be either an invasion or a revolution. There may be an assassination or an attempted one. I rule out the revolution because there are no empty bellies—a shortage of labor exists and the landowners, most of whom are in the opposition, want to market what has turned out to be a good crop. In addition to that, the little guys don’t want to fight and the big ones are too careful. The General thinks the Guardia are 75–80 per cent loyal to him and 95 per cent loyal to his brother Luis, the President.

Nicaragua 837 Our Military boys think that the appraisal is fair. The hierarchy of the Catholic church is satisfied and the Bishops are cooperating with the Administration. The Liberal Party - a tight, daily functioning organization, has plenty of money and a very efficient precinct setup. The publicity that President Luis has given the supposedly revolutionary and invasion plans and his calling of the contributors (of whom he has a list) and advising them to be careful because this time there will be no fooling in the way they will be treated, is having its effect. He seems to be doing all right with Labor. At a party of some 80 couples of the old-­time Conservatives last Thursday night, at which Mrs. Whelan and I were the only outsiders, we could see the evidence of Luis’s conferences with the opposition. Now, here are some thoughts on the negative side: We have had friends of at least five would-­be candidates for the presidency if Luis was overthrown, ask us what we thought of their boys. We also see where some of the people who secured visas before the 1954 attempted revolution are getting visas again, but it may be routine. In addition, there has been a stepped-­up press and radio campaign. I don’t know how I can be so far off in my appraisal as against that of the President, the General and some of the Cabinet members who have discussed it with me, but the solid members of the opposition cannot get excited about the rumors. I hope I am right. I have suggested to the President that when, as and if he has definite proof that an invasion is going to take place, he first try to prevent it by asking President Villeda Morales and President Figueres to meet with him at their respective borders and give them the information that he has. When are you coming down?4 Sincerely yours, Thomas E. Whelan 4 No record of Taylor’s reply was located in Department of State files.

Nicaragua 839 being correlated with those of the Honduran exiles and the plan of attack called for the two groups to move simultaneously against the Government of Nicaragua. The Ambassador also stated he had information that three airplanes would fly shortly from Mexico to Costa Rica with armaments for the Nicaraguan exiles. He said that two of the planes would leave from Miami proceeding first to Mexico to meet the third plane and then all three would fly to Costa Rica. Mr. Rubottom asked the Ambassador if he could give the Department any information concerning the reported two planes scheduled to leave from Miami in order that the Department could check into the matter. The Ambassador said he would give the information he had to Mr. Taylor. The Ambassador said his Government was concerned over the threat of a movement of exiles against it. He said his Government had expected the exiles to move on February 21, but thought perhaps they had delayed knowing that President Somoza was on the alert for such a move. He deplored the bloodshed and difficulties which would ensue if the exiles were permitted to launch an attack against Nicaragua. He then asked Mr. Rubottom if our respective Ambassadors in Honduras and Costa Rica could draw the respective Presidents’ attention to the dangers of permitting the exiles to prepare for an attack against the Nicaraguan Government. Mr. Rubottom agreed to inform our two Ambassadors, but said he would leave the action taken to their discretion. Mr. Rubottom informed the Ambassador that he appreciated the information he had given him. He said that we would continue to remain alert to such possibilities outlined by the Ambassador of an attack on his Government from Nicaraguan exiles. However, he pointed out to the Ambassador that the revolutionary exiles lived on such rumors and deliberately generated them without foundation in hopes of keeping Governments in a state of agitation. The Ambassador agreed that the Nicaraguan exiles had been generating like rumors for years. In closing, the Ambassador said he had heard it was the intention of the new Honduran Foreign Minister to renounce the agreement to have the Nicaraguan-Honduran border dispute settled in the International Court of Justice. However, he did not believe this could be true.

Nicaragua 841 NI–4. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan)1 Washington, April 7, 1958. Dear Tom: The always thorny question of a visit by President Luis Somoza to the United States arose last Thursday at lunch with Guillermo who took the initiative, both in the invitation and in the subject matter we discussed. I sat on him rather hard at first, saying that the visit was simply out of the question in the foreseeable future for a variety of reasons, several of which he knew. He looked quite unhappy and, having given him the medicine, I proceeded to sugar-coat it as much as possible for the next half hour. Actually, we discussed the kind of letter that I would write to you on this subject, so I suppose that this goes back to earlier conservations which the two of you have had in Managua. Luis has won commendation from all of us who are interested in Latin American affairs in Washington, and he has done surprisingly well in obtaining the respect and good will of most of his neighbors. However, most of the publicity media in the United States still tend to lump him with the other “dictators” of Latin America and the same treatment is accorded him throughout most of South America. In that continent, especially in Colombia, Venezuela, Uruguay, Argentina and Chile, the current against anything smacking of state control is very strong indeed, and Luis’ family name hurts him no matter what he does. I do not cite the above as reason for not inviting him to the United States, but it is an aspect of the problem which has to be considered. It seems to us in the Department that the following points should be given weight in any consideration of this problem, since they indicate both that Nicaragua and President Somoza are well regarded by the United States and also that there are reasons other than the one listed above for going slow on an invitation to him; (1) The treatment accorded President Tacho Somoza following his shooting and at the time of his death clearly revealed the extent of United States friendship toward Nicaragua (and has been used to our detriment by some elements);2 (2) The President’s brother, General Tachito Somoza, was invited to the United States last year and accorded full honors during

Nicaragua 843 for consultation during Dr. Eisenhower’s visit in June,4 but I doubt that we should make a request for such action. This, incidentally, brings up a point (7) which I should have included in the body of my letter in paragraph 2, i.e., the fact that Dr. Eisenhower is visiting Nicaragua should take some of the heat off Luis (and Guillermo) to have a visit to the U.S. While Guillermo hardly deserves credit for arranging the Eisenhower visit, although I believe he has spoken to Dr. Eisenhower several times about it, certainly no one else can take credit away from him for the idea. On the basis of my contact with Vice President Nixon and my knowledge of his tight schedule,5 Irving Davidson would have to pull something besides rabbits out of the hat to arrange for the V.P. to visit Managua. This is in response to your other letter of March 31 which arrived today.6

Nicaragua 845 NI–6. Editorial Note On April 25, 1958, a group of Nicaraguan exiles, led by Manuel Gómez Flores, launched a plot to invade Nicaragua. After stealing an aircraft in Miami, two Nicaraguan air force officers, already implicated in an earlier invasion attempt, flew to Honduras and rendezvoused with Flores and his followers. The plot was frustrated by units of the Honduran armed forces who seized the aircraft, an arms cache, and arrested Flores and some of his followers. Documentation on the inci-

Nicaragua 847 It was notable that members of the political opposition spoke quite freely and unrestrictedly to Dr. Eisenhower concerning the Somoza Government. On the first day, when Dr. Eisenhower visited the Bi-National Center, a small crowd carried posters denouncing the Government in various forms and General Somoza himself translated these signs for Dr. Eisenhower. Similarly, during the meeting with the University graduates, one of them, Dr. Zelaya, made a sharp attack on United States policy paralleling the Communist Party line. At first, it was alleged that he was speaking on behalf of the University graduates, but this was subsequently denied. Considerable reference was made by these same opposition groups not merely to alleged United States support for the Somozas but also to similar alleged support for other dictators. Among the points raised by the Nicaraguans were what they believed to be unfair competition regarding the marketing of cotton. Complaints similar to those encountered in other Central American countries were made regarding the instability of the coffee market and the low prices thereof. Some belief was expressed by Nicaraguan businessmen that the United States because of its enormous wealth could absorb the financial cost of lost cotton markets. Again there appeared the belief that the United States fixes industrial and agricultural prices. Some feeling was also expressed that through Marshall aid the United States had stimulated coffee production in Africa which was competitive with Central American coffee. Business and other private sectors expressed concern regarding the great increase in the Government’s expenditures without corresponding increase in the country’s productive capacity. Recognition was given of technical and other assistance rendered by the United States. These same circles complained that the persistent fear of Government interference, increases in taxes, bureaucracy, and scarcity of credit facilities, greatly hamper the economic growth of the country. The agricultural production which is the basis of the country’s economy was suffering severely from depressed international prices. Some complaint was made of the size of the military budget and President Somoza on two separate occasions referred to the fact that he had been able to reduce military expenditures on two occasions due to the cooperation of his brother who was the Commander of the National Guard. Coffee growers of Nicaragua presented a special memorandum to Dr. Eisenhower relating to the problems of coffee which earned approximately half of Nicaragua’s foreign exchange.3 There are some 4,800 plantation owners out of a population of nearly a million and a half. In the opinion of these coffee growers, the present difficulties were 3 No memorandum matching the description here was found in Department of State files.

Nicaragua 849 production and place its traditional crops in a better position to compete internationally. The ravages of the Panama disease practically destroyed banana production in the Atlantic Coast area and this is a seriously distressed area within Nicaragua. The Nicaraguans, in summing up, requested the United States to view the following favorably: (a) broad financial assistance in solving the problems confronting the country; (b) assistance in stabilizing coffee prices; (c) special consideration for the problem which confronts Nicaragua in the sale of its cotton; (d) help in securing a higher sugar quota for Nicaragua on the world market; (e) assistance to the Central American countries in moving toward economic integration. Request for assistance in a general way were as follows: $7,700,000 for economic development programs of the National Development Institute, $8,500,000 for special works such as hydroelectric power and water supply programs, and $10 million for school construction and an undetermined amount for public health. There appeared to be among Nicaraguans of all classes the usual misconception concerning the role of the United States in determining commodities prices and industrial prices. There appeared particularly on the part of opposition groups the same misconception regarding United States policy in regard to non-­democratic regimes. There was no recognition of any possible failure on the part of the Latin Americans in regard to their policies with respect to the United States. Where fault was found it was always with United States policy. CONCLUSIONS: — Requests for financial assistance were made as specified above. Requests were made for United States assistance in stabilizing coffee and cotton prices. Criticism was addressed by opposition groups to alleged United States support for the Somoza regime. Widespread support was found for the idea of Central American integration. The usual belief that the resources of the United States were unlimited and that all problems could be solved if only the United States would be less “stubborn” was encountered. There was some grudging consent on the part of the opposition groups to the idea that the President may be moving toward the democratization of the regime. Labor groups carefully took no position for or against the Government and there seemed to be a generalized feeling that United States assistance thus far had not filtered down to the masses. In Nicaragua, as in other countries visited, there seemed to be a need for a broad inventory of national resources, both human and material. Similar needs exist for adequate study of the feasibility of agricultural diversification, for an analysis and appraisal of the potentials of domestic and foreign markets, including tourism, for more organized planning with respect to government policies in the economic field, for a review of the tax and trade policies of Nicaragua, and for an examination of the structure and functioning of governmental agencies.

Nicaragua 851 NI–10. Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, November 26, 1958. SUBJECT Our attitudes toward a possible U.S. visit by President Somoza In connection with Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa’s recent approach to Dr. Eisenhower concerning the desire of President Somoza to receive an invitation to make a formal visit to the United States next spring,2 it is the recommendation of OAP that no such invitation be extended. Despite President Luis Somoza’s trend towards a more democratic type of Government and public declarations that he will not succeed himself in the presidency, he is still viewed by many Latin Americans as part of the dictatorial “Somoza Dynasty”. Undoubtedly if he were to receive such an invitation from President Eisenhower, Latin American liberals would accuse us of favoring a dictatorship or the remnant of one. Such accusations would probably be fanned by communist elements, and the end results of such an invitation might well prove detrimental, at this time, to our efforts to assure the Latin American people that the United States has a real interest in improving their welfare. On the other hand OAP has no objections to informal arrangements being made for President Somoza to see President Eisenhower, should he come to the United States for a medical checkup. In view of his recent illness3 it would not appear unusual for Somoza to come to the United States for a medical examination. The fact that while in the United States he called on the President and other Government officials, should not lend credence to any accusations that the United States favors the “Somoza Dynasty,” as might be the case if he were to receive a formal invitation to make such a visit. In view of the constant support we have received from Nicaragua in the UN and the OAS, the official informal visits of Ydígoras and Echandi prior to their inaugurations as Presidents of Guatemala and Costa Rica respectively, and the forthcoming official formal visit of

Nicaragua 853 your experience and advice is needed to assist us in adopting a policy that will be best for United States interests. We have been impressed by President Somoza’s sincere desire to lead the Nicaraguans to a type of government more democratic than that which existed under his father. If Luis is able to continue his present policy of ample civil liberties, and adheres to his promise of ending the so-­called “Somoza dynasty” when his term is completed on April 30, 1963, I think our interests and those of Latin America as a whole will be served. However, the emergence of the Betancourt and Castro Governments has created a new situation. Tacho’s campaign against Betancourt while the latter was in exile in Costa Rica, and the sale of armored cars to Batista by the present Government have not endeared Luis’ regime to the current rulers in Venezuela and Cuba. Nicaraguan exiles who worked closely with Cuban and Venezuelan revolutionaries are already clamoring for help to overthrow the Somozas. We are receiving reports that Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic are likely to be targets of revolutionary groups which may assemble either in Cuba or Venezuela. We have reports that men are being trained in Cuba now for an invasion of Nicaragua and we are making a check. This seems unlikely; nevertheless, when the new Venezuelan and Cuban Governments become organized they may do so, or at least encourage and supply arms to anti-Somoza groups. Castro already had made threats against the Nicaraguan Government. We will attempt to dissuade these or any governments from encouraging armed attacks against friendly regimes in this hemisphere and if Nicaragua should be invaded we would support, of course, the immediate application of the provisions of the Bogotá Pact2 and the Rio Treaty.3 If we have judged President Echandi’s policies correctly, I doubt that he will permit any invasion to originate on Costa Rican soil. The obvious staging point, it would appear, will be either of the two ­countries above named or Honduras. I think the Somozas would be making a grave error if they interfered in Honduran affairs in an effort to overthrow President Villeda and see installed a government considered more friendly. These are my reasons: 1. The United States has gone on record in support of Villeda, since he is a symbol of a new era of constitutional Government in Honduras. 2 The Charter of the Organization of American States was signed at Bogotá,

Nicaragua 855 the approaching inauguration of Betancourt.4 I have the uneasy feeling that Nicaragua is in for serious trouble which will be accentuated if it attempts to counteract the balance of power by mixing into the internal affairs of any central American country, especially with more and more attention being paid the Somoza regime by the roving groups of revolutionaries who have been invited, in Castro’s own words, to come to Cuba and receive haven and assistance. It would be a shame if the progress made thus far by President Somoza should be undone and the country thrown into confusion and chaos. Incidentally, I think that President Somoza used good judgment in turning down the request for assistance from Generalíssimo Trujillo. I wonder why the Somozas do not let it be known that they are not in the Trujillo camp? Sincerely, R. R. Rubottom, Jr. 4 No record of Whelan’s reply was found in Department of State files. NI–12. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Costa Rican and Nicaraguan Affairs (Taylor)1 Washington, March 30, 1959. SUBJECT NICARAGUA: Visit of General Somoza PARTICIPANTS General Anastosio Somoza – Director of the Nicaraguan Nacional Guard His ­Excellency Dr. Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa, Ambassador of Nicaragua ARA—Mr. Rubottom ARA : REA—Mr. Turkel ARA : OAP—Mr. Taylor Nicaraguan-Honduran Relations General Somoza said he was very pleased to see Mr. Rubottom again and that he wanted to express his appreciation for the Department’s part in the signing of the recent Nicaraguan-Honduran refugee

Nicaragua 857 stirred up in the area. He remarked on Castro’s declaration that Cuba would assume a neutral position in the cold war between the U.S. and Russia. He said this was contrary to the Rio Pact. He then said he had been asking himself what was the reason for the downfall of Batista. He observed that a small group headed by Castro had landed in Cuba and had been able to build up their forces to a point where they had become powerful enough to cause the fall of Batista. Mr. Rubottom said that he would give him his opinion as to how this had occurred. He said that the Batista Government had been in reality a house of cards; that venality had existed from the top officials to the lowest; that the army had no motivation which would inspire a will to fight, it was ill-­trained and poorly led and had no deep-­seated loyalty to the Government; and that the Government did not truly represent the will of the majority of the people. The General remarked that Batista had no real political party structure and that he had not been the head of a political party such as President Somoza is. He observed that the Government of Nicaragua did not parallel that of former President Batista. He remarked that he thought Betancourt had changed for the better since 1948. Internal Affairs The General then turned to Nicaraguan affairs. He said there were 3,500 members of the Guardia Nacional, who were well trained and loyal to the GON. He said they had been training in guerilla warfare tactics and were well prepared to handle any invasion attempt made against the country. He observed there was no place for an invasion force to go, once it had landed, except back to sea again. He did not appear to be worried about any such attempt taking place in the near future, and indicated his Government was well prepared to take care of itself. He said the majority of people were with the Government. The General then said presidential elections would take place as scheduled in 1963. He remarked that the members of the ­opposition party (Conservatives) did not turn out to vote in the last ­elections, because they knew they would not win. He stressed that his Government was interested in the welfare of the Nicaraguan people, and said he had learned from his civic courses, while studying in the U.S., that a ­successful Government must cooperate with its people and be constructively interested in their welfare. He pointed out that in Nicaragua there was freedom of the press, freedom of expression, and freedom of assembly. He remarked that the reporters of opposition newspapers were not permitted by the owners to report the news in an ­unbiased manner. He said owners of the opposition papers did not want to give the Government credit for any good acts. He added that on the other hand the pro-­government newspapers swing too far over in the other direction. He said there was really no newspaper reporting in an unbiased manner.

Nicaragua 859 country. Mr. Rubottom informed the General that he was aware of this, as well as some of the projects for which the GON had submitted loan applications to the EXIM and IBRD for economic improvements within the country. The General said his Government had plans to reduce the area planted in cotton by 30,000 to 40,000 manzanas. When asked if this area would be planted in corn and beans, he replied that it would probably be used for raising cattle. He said that owing to the drop in the water table it was difficult to get products other than cotton to grow on much of this land. Mr. Rubottom said he understood that the GON had been circumspect in its financial policies. He said that, although he could not speak for the various loan entities, he could assure the General that careful and sympathetic consideration would be given the loan applications. Future Political Plans The General than said that he wanted to mention that he and President Somoza felt that at the end of the President’s term somebody other than a Somoza should be the next President. He said that during this month the proposed amendment to change the Constitution to prohibit a President from succeeding himself or any member of his family succeeding to the Presidency would be passed through the Congress a second time and then become law. He said that he had no idea who the next President would be, but thought he would come from the Liberal Party. He based this on the observation that the majority of Nicaraguans were traditionally Liberals and for this reason he doubted if the Conservatives would poll enough votes to win the election. He stressed that the 1963 elections would be absolutely free. He said there should be a new name in the Presidency, which would give the people a chance to compare his effectiveness with that of the Somozas. He said that, speaking as a politician, this would be a sacrifice, but as a student of civics in the U.S., he felt a change would be in the best interest of the country. Interest in Engineering Battalion The General then expressed interest in the possibility of setting up, under M&P, an engineering battalion similar to that in Honduras. Mr. Rubottom said that we have set up only two such battalions on a trial basis, and that we would look into the matter. The General said an engineering battalion would be helpful in the construction of roads and would provide opportunities for some of the unemployed. Mr. Rubottom thanked the General for his visit and expressed appreciation for his frank and interesting remarks. He asked the General to give President Somoza his regards.

Nicaragua 861 On June 4, the OAS approved sending a fact-­finding mission to report on the situation. Neither the Nicaraguan Ambassador nor President Somoza formally charged the Costa Rican Government with complicity in the invasion, but instead levelled charges against the Government of Cuba. By June 12, after several engagements with the Nicaraguan National Guard, the invaders either surrendered or were isolated and driven into the jungle. Documentation on the invasion attempt is in file 717.00. The text of the OAS resolution on Nicaragua is printed in the Department of

Nicaragua 863 expedition led by Velasquez to strike at Honduras in order to remove threat of invasion from that country. Philosophy behind General’s planning revolves around thought that Nicaragua would be unable resist undisturbed concerted onslaught assisted or engineered by enemy governments and that he and his brother in that event might as well at least go down fighting. [illegible in the original] and MA both report overhearing General’s portion of telephone conversation with President from which it appeared latter does not subscribe to General’s views. It was also observed that apparently President’s counsel still prevails. Embassy believes President’s moderation will continue over rule General’s impulsiveness as long as President feels there is some hope U.S. Government and OAS are not determined because of supposed unpopularity his regime to disregard availability evidences of foreign plotting and actions against GON. Should his remaining doubts be dispelled that OAS and USA intend to give him no assistance it is very likely that President may authorize General to take some form of retaliatory action calculated to give GON at least temporary advantage of fighting outside Nicaragua. In view Figueres, Marshall, Aguiluz insubordination to GOCR directed against GON and reasonable conclusion that Cuban, Honduran and Venezuelan elements closely associated with governments those countries are actively assisting and conspiring current anti-GON movements Embassy believes only forthright statements by OAS and USA can now avert INTL hostilities the result of which would be disastrous regardless of winning side. In Embassy’s view U.S. Government would now be fully justified in urging OAS investigating committee in the interest of area peace to make speedy declaration that the case of Nicaragua clearly comes within the provisions of Article 6 of Rio Treaty. Following closely on such a declaration U.S. could announce its intention fully to support collective assistance to the attacked state in the event of an armed attack. Urgently recommend action along foregoing lines before it is too late. Whelan

Nicaragua 865 their aspirations. Because they have shown themselves so resentful of U.S. dealings with GON in minor matters, it is inconceivable to Embassy that these groups would not as full resent EXIM loan under any conditions approximating those now applying to Nicaraguan situation. On occasion recent contemplated $12 million bond issue to be underwritten by U.S. banks spokesmen this group publicly said new government would not honor debt. Such statements would seem good indication irresponsibility. 3. Independent Liberal Lacayo Farfans violent reaction to loan negotiations set forth Department telegram 383 can be taken as reliable indication dedicated opposition Independent Liberal faction. In this connection Embassy reasonably certain that lacking issue of loan, Lacayo Farfans’ supporters would seize upon any pretext attack U.S. if they feel would help their cause against Somoza psychologically. Embassy does not regard Lacayo Farfans group responsible as presently constituted. 4. In Embassy’s opinion balance opposition composed adventurers clearly linked with foreign international schemers and Communists and devoid any claim responsibility. Many of this group working with classification three above. Their attitudes toward loan will of course be completely adverse to U.S. Despite general impression of considerable opposition to loan created by foregoing evaluation Embassy wishes emphasize its conclusion that substantial majority Nicaraguan people who have not abandoned task of forming nation through constructive effort would welcome loan as measure greatly needed bolster economy in difficult circumstances. It is this majority which in last analysis will eventually assert itself in present difficulties and for benefit of which Embassy strongly recommends loan be granted soon. These views offered as careful evaluations based on Embassy’s intimate knowledge opposition motivations rather than as result current inquiries. Embassy convinced that any inquiry to groups above mentioned however discreet in present circumstances would be taken as opportunity wage anti-­loan campaign in which U.S. would be prominently featured and as result of which country’s future economic prospects would be further aggravated. For this reason Embassy earnestly recommends it be excused from requirement making inquiries to ascertain viewpoints.

Nicaragua 867 Lainez, to Mr. Rubottom. The Ambassador said these two men were representing Nicaragua at the current IMF and IBRD meetings, and that Dr. Lugo Marenco had signed last Friday a loan agreement with the Eximbank in the amount of $8 million for agricultural diversification projects. The Ambassador then expressed his appreciation on behalf of his Government for the favorable consideration which had been given this loan application. Mr. Rubottom said he was pleased that the loan agreement had been worked out to everybody’s satisfaction. He then pointed out that such a loan was to help the people of the country. He said that Nicaragua’s economy, like that of many other Latin American countries, would be benefitted by some diversification. Mr. Rubottom then made reference to the fact that Argentina had recently received a $10 million Eximbank loan, (constituting a specific portion of EXIM assistance to Argentina) to be utilized through the Banco Industrial for small and medium Argentine business loans. He stressed that equal opportunities and consideration would be given to all categories of businessmen with regard to availability of the money for loan purposes. He said he hoped the same would be true with regard to the EXIM funds made available for agricultural diversification in Nicaragua. Dr. Lugo Marenco said there was no limitation as to whom agricultural loans were available and that the “little man” would receive the same consideration as the “big man”. Dr. Delgado then said that Nicaragua was making all out efforts to develop a sound agricultural program, and pointed out that the loan from the EXIM bank would be put to good use in enabling a switch-­ over to crops other than coffee and cotton. Dr. Lugo Marenco said he anticipated that 1960–61 would be a hard year for Nicaragua and added, however, he did not think Nicaragua would need a stand-­by drawing at the end of this year from the IMF. Mr. Rubottom asked about President Somoza’s health. He was informed that the President was getting along very well. In this respect Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa remarked upon how appreciative President Somoza was of the recent visit of Dr. Dudley White. He said Dr. White had examined him and had recommended that he reduce the number of pills he was taking and increase his amount of exercise. The conversation was concluded with Mr. Rubottom expressing pleasure over the Ambassador’s courtesy call.

Nicaragua 869 accomplishment this aim. To cite only few examples for purposes illustration this conclusion borne out by following factors: (1) Administration of assistance as well as counsel and training accorded by MAAG and military missions to national guard consistently reflect institutional, representative, apolitical character of ideal military establishment thus contributing to fulfillment of essential role in achievement objective (A) in important military segment. This program of course primarily seeks objective (D) and modest FY 1961 plan estimated to provide adequately for fair gains in both principal and contributory roles. (2) Capital loans, present and in prospect for FY 1961 are deemed essential for accomplishment objectives (B) and (C) and important in pursuing objective (A). Export Import Bank and IBRD credits for agricultural diversification and hydroelectric projects for instance should assist towards both political and economic stabilization through development of new or improved sources production with consequent appreciation of U.S. interests in solution of country’s problems. In same connection technical cooperation programs in agriculture, transportation, health, education and housing are each in their respective fields cooperating toward achievement objective (A) (B) (C) and (E) with FY 1961 program seen as no exception. UN, UNICEF and MASB programs in equivalent projects are viewed as useful in light Nicaragua’s needs and as generally contributing to fulfillment final U.S. objectives through improvement social standards. (3) Information, cultural and educational exchange programs for FY 1961 regarded as logical continuation present efforts achieve ­objective (E) and greatly contributory to progress in attaining all other objectives. This especially exemplified by enthusiastic response to teacher and ­student grants, workshop projects and consistently pro-U.S. press. To date there has been no indication of ineffective coordination among MSP elements or between MSP and other programs and FY 1961 programs show no such conflicts. Whelan

Nicaragua 871 that an erroneous interpretation had been placed on the Secretary’s remarks and hoped this would be a passing thing in our friendly relations. Mr. Rubottom spoke of the friendship we had for the Nicaraguan people and asked the Minister to express this feeling again to President Luis and to let the President know we felt he was doing a good job. He asked the Minister to convey to President Somoza his warm regards as well as those of Secretary Herter. The minister expressed appreciation for Mr. Rubottom’s remarks and said he would convey the above to his President. Mr. Rubottom also mentioned to Quintana the fine work Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa was doing not only in the capacity as Nicaraguan Ambassador, but as Dean of the Diplomatic Corps. He told him that Sevilla was held in high esteem by his colleagues. Mr. Rubottom then asked if it was correct that Quintana had been working to bring about an understanding between the Government and the opposition parties. Quintana said this was true and mentioned that he had been working particularly with the Independent Liberal Party prior to his automobile accident. He said that the situation had been complicated by the Micro parties (four small political groups) joining in a coalition with PLI, in that one group in particular, the Movilizacion Republicana, was communist lead. He mentioned the leftist swing of PLI leader Puenaventura Selva and Icaza Icaza and spoke of the trip they had made to Costa Rica a few months ago to talk with Lacayo Farfan (Nicaraguan exile opposition leader) on this matter. He said the PLI leaders were not in complete accord as to what policy they should adopt, but that he would continue in his efforts to bring about an understanding, wherein the opposition would agree to work peacefully toward their objectives. Mr. Rubottom told the Minister he hoped that he would continue with his efforts to effect a conciliatory understanding between the opposition and the Government. Dr. Quintana reiterated Nicaragua would have free and honest elections in 1963 and that the Government would be turned over without any question to the winner. In answer to an inquiry from Mr. Taylor, he said the electoral law was in the process of being changed to enable the political parties to register more easily as legal parties, but added that of course those which were communist dominated would not be permitted legal registration. Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa then went into a rather involved discussion of the history of the PLI, which became a splinter from the Government party (Partide Liberal), and mentioned President Somoza’s progress and serious intent in trying to bring democracy to his country. Minister Quintana concluded the conversation expressing again his appreciation for the medical attention given him at Walter Reed Hospital.

Nicaragua 873 as a base of operations. However, Mr. Rubottom emphasized that, even though sorely tried by these provocations, it is hoped that President Somoza will bear in mind that Hemispheric obligations constrain all of us to exercise infinite patience and forbearance rather than jeopardize the notable gains we have thus far achieved. This applies particularly to Central America which has experienced during the past few years a series of minor miracles in evolving toward stable, democratic governments. Mr. Rubottom illustrated these gains by pointing out (1) that Honduras now enjoys a stable government after years of near-anarchy, (2) that Panama has just experienced the most exemplary election in its history, (3) that the democratic system in Costa Rica continues to flourish in spite of President Echandi having to face a majority opposition in the Costa Rican Assembly and (4) that Guatemala had rid itself of a Communist government and together with Nicaragua and El Salvador are all progressing toward more democratic forms and practices. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the patience of the United States was also being sorely tried in our current relations with Cuba but that we have chosen the path of patience and forbearance, rather than a course of direct action. He expressed the hope that President Somoza would bear all of these things in mind in his current relations with President Villeda and that he would not resort to withdrawal of his Ambassador or of the Nicaraguan members of the Mixed Military Commission. In the meantime, as we have done in the past, the United States will continue to use its good offices in behalf of resolving frictions between Nicaragua and Honduras. The Ambassador thanked Mr. Rubottom and promised to inform President Somoza of our views. 2. Request for Asylum by Pro-Batista Exiles Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa said he would also like to mention another matter not related to Nicaraguan-Honduran relations but a matter which had been brought to the fore by the request for asylum in Nicaragua of a group of pro-Batista Cubans now in the Dominican Republic. He stated he had been told by the Dominican Ambassador in Washington, Dr. Luis F. Thomen, that as a result of an “understanding”, or “truce”, between Trujillo and Fidel Castro, some sixty pro-Batista exiles in the Dominican Republic had been given the choice of either leaving the country or being placed in prison. A group of twenty or more of the Cubans have requested President Somoza to grant them asylum in Nicaragua, which request Somoza is reluctant to grant. Another development of which Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa was also informed by the Dominican Ambassador, is that Aureliano Sanchez Arango, a Cuban exile, formerly pro-Castro but now in Venezuela, is making a visit to the Dominican Republic. Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa stated he was at a loss as to how to interpret such a trip by Sanchez

Nicaragua 875 Nicaraguan revolutionary group led by Alejandro Martines Saenz. He considered this was an act of desperation on the part of the group since he felt that the group was on the point of exhaustion from lack of supplies. Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa stated that while his government was fairly well satisfied with the recent actions taken by the Government of Honduras in this matter, he still believed there should be additional forceful and coordinated action by the two governments to eliminate these rebel groups which constitute a threat to the good relations of the two governments. He stated that President Villeda was being misled at times in the matter of these rebel groups by his Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andres Alvarado Puerto, whom the Ambassador claimed had Castro leanings—­feelings which he felt President Villeda also shared. With regard to the charges made by Castro regarding the activities of Chester Lacayo, the Ambassador stated that if the Unites States presented the matter to the IAPC, then Nicaragua was ready to state how absurd was the Castro charge that the United States was a participant in any revolutionary plot directed against Nicaragua and that this was merely another attempt by Castro to upset the Caribbean. He added that the Lacayo affair was another example of abuse of the good faith of the Unites States by such people as Chester Lacayo. He described Lacayo as crack-­pot with visions of grandeur as evidenced by his adopting the title of “Colonel”. At this point Mr. Stewart interposed the observation that the Department also had considered Lacayo to be an irresponsible trouble-­maker and for this very reason we had refused to receive a visit from him here in the Department. According to Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa, the recent bombing incident in Managua which caused the death of a watchman had been perpetrated by four teenage students. He claimed the students had been indoctrinated with such ideas by the recently ousted Cuban Ambassador to Nicaragua, Pinoa Machado. The ambassador stated that Nicaragua was prepared to present these facts to the IAPC as additional evidence of Cuban meddling in the internal affairs of Nicaragua. Mr. Mallory expressed his agreement that such evidence should be presented to the IAPC by Nicaragua and stated that he hoped the other Central American countries would do likewise. With further reference to the Chester Lacayo affair, the Ambassador claimed that Fernando Arguello, a Nicaraguan leader of the “Sandino revolutionist movement” in New York, had induced his brother-­in-­ law, Francisco Cardona of “La Prensa” in New York, to have published in his paper certain statements about Chester Lacayo’s contacts with Department of State officials. According to the Ambassador, these published statements by Cardona in “La Prensa” tended to substantiate the Castro charge that Lacayo had in fact maintained such contacts as had

Nicaragua 877 same as those used in Cuba itself. They seek to provoke incidents which will create mass repression. He said he found it necessary to explain constantly to the police who is truly responsible for these incidents in order to avoid taking rigorous action against those who are merely being used to perpetrate them. In General Somoza’s opinion Castro exercises a great influence in Central America and he must be stopped. The General realizes that denunciations of the Somozas propounded by pro-Castro elements are in themselves unimportant and, in fact, are to be expected by a person in political life. He considers the supplying of funds to these people through Cuban sources a much more serious matter and stated that Cuba is furnishing about $100,000 per month to pro-Castro people throughout Central America. General Somoza states that the pro-Castro opposition has adopted the flag of the late opposition leader-­bandit, Sandino, as its symbol and pays homage to Lopez Perez, the assassin of his father, as its leader. He estimates that the strength of this group once reached about 4,000, but since the shooting of a policeman and subsequent uncovering of a plot he feels that the number has dwindled to about 600. Mr. Mann stressed the importance of timing in the matter of taking action against Cuba. He feels that public opinion in Central America is beginning to turn against Castro, an opinion with which General Somoza agrees. The General thinks the other Latin American countries will follow the sample of the U.S. in respect to trade controls on Cuba. General Somoza also noted that the U.S. has done a very fine service to the hemisphere through training Latin American military officers at the U.S. Army School, Fort Gulick, C. Z. He stated that Latin Americans appreciate the opportunity it affords and as a result of its successful operation the U.S. now has 2,000 propagandists throughout Latin America. NI–24. Editorial Note On November 11, 1960, a group of Nicaraguan insurgents, estimated between 150 and 300, staged a number of armed attacks against administrative and National Guard facilities in the towns of Jinotepe and Diriamba. Within the next twenty-­four hours, the Nicaraguan National Guard retook the two cities and were engaged in subduing the insurgents. By November 15, about fifty rebels, pursued by the National Guard crossed the border into Costa Rica. Documentation on the uprising is in file 717.00.

Nicaragua 879 Re DEPTEL 1365 Department will observe [illegible in the original] clear indication existence proveable Castro Cuban Communist participation or [illegible in the original] in olive green uniforms with insignia “Patria Orpto Muerte”. In radio address to nation evening 14th President also stated no foreign elements involved in [illegible in the original] internal actions. He has however informed Embassy statements made by captured Communist or Communists participating these internal actions establish Communist purpose to use conservative and other opposition groups and when GON overthrown latter would be liquidated. In common with opening statement DEPTEL 134 President is known to regards simultaneous character CA disturbances as part of systematic Cuban Communist plan, see EMBTEL 142,6 but Embassy [text not declassified] unable cite single instance Cuban involvement. Lastly GON desire for U.S. patrol of borders appears logical in view Costa Rica’s inability pérform this function and its reluctance to have GON do so effectively. Some situation in much more aggravated form applies Honduran border where boundary dispute would render any independent attempt at effective surveillance entirely impractical. GON awaiting Department’s decision. Whelan 5 [illegible in the original] “In face widespread public assumption Castro responsibility or complicity in revolutionary activities your area and in anticipation early investigation through OAS Dept. urgently needs your current evaluation of evidence tending show Cuban involvement. Sources of information and basis for Embassy’s appraisal will also be useful in consideration here of likely credibility in international forum. Request roundup all information this nature coming available through November 15 by cable to be received here

Panama: U.S. Relations with Panama PM–1. Editorial Note On May 2, 1958, Panamanian students entered the Panama Canal Zone and planted Panamanian flags in front of the Administration Building and other predetermined public places in Balboa in support of their “Operation Sovereignty” and urged Ernesto de la Guardia, Jr., the President of Panama, to initiate negotiations with the United States to have the Panamanian flag flown in the Canal Zone. President de la Guardia, in an effort to appease student demands, sought the advice of Panama’s National Council of Foreign Relations concerning the most convenient approach to such negotiations. Representatives of the Republic of Panama, however, did not initiate a request to negotiate. Documentation concerning these events is in Department of State files PM–2. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Panama1

Panama 883 Reference was made to the fact that in Panama the rate of population growth was higher than the growth of national income, thus a climbing index of productivity was coupled with a drop in real per capita income and this was resulting in a deterioration of the standard of living. Similarly, the Panamanians pointed up the fact that the proximity of the Canal Zone should be an additional stimulus for the United States to render special assistance to Panama. President Guardia made passing reference to the internal political situation by saying that 60% of the population were under 25 years of age and with the impatience of youth coupled with the drop in per capital income to which he had previously referred, this created an atmosphere propitious to fanning anti-U.S. sentiments. The Panamanians broadly indicated there were two classes of things the U.S. should do, some in the political field and some in the economic field. In the political field were some matters which really belonged in the economic field. Among these were the matters relating to making the Canal Zone market available exclusively to Panama and the United States. They mentioned the discontent created in Panama by the purchase of Australian and New Zealand meat and felt that the wording of the 1955 agreement should limit the Canal Zone market to the United States and Panama. When it was pointed out that the amount of meat purchased from abroad was extremely small, the Panamanians indicated that it was not the quantity but the fact of purchase from abroad that aroused resentment. In the political field, the President mentioned two further items which he brought up with some embarrassment. They related to the flying of the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone and the use of Spanish as an official language in the Canal Zone. The President emphasized that if the U.S. would offer to do this spontaneously, the overall effect would be far more beneficial than if it were done grudgingly at a later date. The President then made a statement that if the U.S. might have to do more than Panama, Panamanians would nevertheless try to reciprocate as they felt a moral obligation on their part to assist in preserving the free way of life. Passing to the economic area, the President said that he felt there were no real problems in the economic field if time were not a factor. However, the young people who make up such a large part of the national population, particularly the University youth were impatient for speedy solutions. Education—In the field of education, which was an extremely important area in Panama, they would like to secure a loan for $12 ­million to push through a school development program. The rent now being paid-on leased schools could service the amortization of

Panama 885 be sold for some $10 million and credits to finance this operation would be a sound investment. Extension of Tocumen Runway—The Panamanians had been notified by the Civil Aeronautics Authority and a number of U.S. airlines that Tocumen airport would soon begin to be used by jet transports. This would require an extension of the present runways there and the cost of this extension will approximate $530 thousand. They felt that as the U.S. Armed forces would have the free use of this airfield in time of war, that it was only fair that some share of the cost of construction be borne by the United States. Point 4—The President expressed a desire for a broadening and enlarging of the Point 4 program. The Panamanians recognized that Point 4 has made a great contribution to the economic progress of the country and are anxious that this program be broadened in scope. There were many fields of endeavor where prospective profits were too small or too insecure to justify investment, nevertheless, many of these activities were vital to the further economic development of Panama and they would hope that an institution such as Point 4 would be available, capable both of assuming risks and making grants. Quotas and Preferential Tariffs—Panamanians felt that with a limited economy of their type it was not unreasonable to hope they would be given a larger sugar quota then they had at present (3,000 tons). Similarly, they hoped that they might be made the beneficiaries of any preferential tariffs permitted by the laws of the United States. Telecommunications—It was indicated that as a result of a study4 conducted by Col. Grey, it appeared that the telecommunications network of the Republic of Panama was nearing a total breakdown. The study recommended the construction of an open wire network at a cost

Panama 887 PM–4. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Panama1

Panama 889 I assure you that my Government appreciates your comments on the implementation of the recently signed Act concerning employment and wage practices in the Canal Zone, and they will be kept in mind while preparing the regulations under which the Act will operate. It is the intention of my Government that the interpretation and application of the Act will be one more step by which we strengthen the ties of friendship which already unite our countries. Dwight D. Eisenhower” No public release this message planed here. In view Department’s decision not to release text de la Guardia message delivered Department August 5 believe decision should be left to GOP whether release this message. If GOP decides release, please advise 2 hours in advance release time.2

Panama 891 The Foreign Minister asked Ambassador Arias if he would not like to expand upon the problem involved in imports of merchandise from third countries for sale within the Zone. The Ambassador began by saying that the Panamanians did not question the U.S. interpretation of the 1955 Treaty as being perfectly logical and consistent, from our point of view. However, he said, Panama regarded the matter from a different angle. Panama was a small state which, although having benefited greatly from the Canal, nevertheless felt itself entitled to, and of necessity was obliged to obtain, even greater benefits. With no minerals or other natural resources apart from its geographic position, Panama was obliged to rely very heavily on revenues derived directly and indirectly from the operation of the Canal. He stated that he was absolutely convinced of the correctness of this view, despite the theory advocated by some prominent Panamanians that the country should endeavor to develop other sources of income in order to lessen its dependence upon the Canal. He went on to point out that the Canal had been constructed with United States resources, in Panamanian territory, and was, in his view therefore, an entity which was effectively the concern of our two nations alone. For this reason, he said, the Canal Zone market should be reserved for Panamanian and U.S. suppliers, and the introduction of Australian beef and Ecuadoran rice, for example, encroached on Panama’s right to supply this natural market. Panama’s was a dollar economy, he added, and could not hope to achieve the low-­production costs of such countries as Ecuador. In short, the Ambassador said that frankly what Panama considered itself entitled to was a “captive market”. The Secretary observed that we did not subscribe to this theory with respect to our own domestic market and mentioned the Reciprocal Trade Agreements policy3 as evidence of our attitude. The Foreign Minister replied that nevertheless the United States found it necessary on occasion to take protectionist sentiment into account, citing the recent imposition of quotas on lead and zinc imports as an example.4 In a brief digression, the Foreign Minister and the Ambassador both complimented the Secretary on his decision to announce the lead-­zinc quotas before the recent Washington meeting of Foreign Ministers5 convened,

Panama 893 evident, he added, that the various United States Government agencies concerned were giving the most serious consideration to the matter. The Foreign Minister spoke again briefly, making particular mention of imports of such luxury items as diamonds, French perfumes, and Persian rugs for resale in the Zone, from which Panama derived no financial advantage. The Ambassador commented on the vast contrast in the standard of living in the Zone and that in the Republic and the impression this contrast made on the people of Panama. The preferred position in supplying the Canal Zone market, together with other benefits being sought, should be financed, in the Ambassador’s opinion, from the revenue derived from the operation of the Canal. He pointed out that Canal tolls had not been raised since 1914, despite increases in freight rates, wages, and so forth in the interim, although he admitted that any increase in the tolls which we might decide to make would become a major international problem. The Secretary concluded the discussion by pointing out that the Department and the White House had been much concerned over the delay in the passage of legislation implementing the 1955 Treaty. Now, he said, it appeared that the problems posed by the Foreign Minister concerning interpretation of the provisions of that Treaty were not of a legal character, but dealt rather with the manner in which the Treaty provisions were applied in detail. No immediate reply could be given, he added, but he said that he and Mr. Rubottom would undertake a serious study of the points the Foreign Minister had raised and would ascertain if something could not be done. On his departure, the Foreign Minister handed the Secretary an envelope which, he stated, contained an Aide Memoire7 on the subjects discussed.

Panama 895 at Tab B)2 In his letter President de la Guardia refers to Item 1 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached attached to the Treaty of Mutual Understanding and Cooperation of 1955, between the United States and Panama (Tab C)3 and expresses his concern and apprehension as to the manner in which the United States is implementing its provisions. President de la Guardia claims the administrative Regulations do not properly implement the provisions of Item 1 of the Memorandum and he specifically cites several points which he considers to be at variance with, and some even in violation of, the provisions of Item 1 of the Memorandum. In summary these are: 1) a dual wage scale system still prevails for Panamanian employees in certain categories and is discriminatory; 2) the merit system is incorrectly administered; 3) the unlimited use of the “security” concept unduly excludes Panamanian employees from positions classified as security positions, and 4) the establishment of other unauthorized exceptions violates the principles of equality of compensation, opportunity and treatment to Panamanian employees. The memorandum attached to the presidential letter sets forth in some detail additional cases of alleged violations. Because the substantive matters raised in the letter and memorandum require detailed study, a suggested reply has been prepared for President Eisenhower expressing his interest in the matters brought to his attention and assuring President de la Guardia that a reply will be made later through regular diplomatic channels after the specific problems have been studied and determinations made by this Government.

Panama 897 PM–13. Despatch from the Chargé in Panama (Acly) to the Department of State1 Panama City, April 9, 1959. No. 519.

Panama 899 of opportunity to citizens of Panama for employment in the Canal Zone, save for security positions. Further, the United States agreed to evaluate, classify and title all positions in the Canal Zone without regard to the nationality of the incumbent or proposed incumbent and provide opportunity for participation in any training programs. The necessary legislation was passed by the Congress (Public Law 85–550,

Panama 901 Item 9 of the Memorandum of Understandings Reached: I refer to Your Excellency’s note P.r.e.u. 505/1021 dated September

Panama 903 expressed concern about the proposed location for the new passenger terminal and has asked my Government, not as a treaty obligation but as a measure of cooperation, to reconsider this matter. Your Excellency’s Government is informed that the passenger terminal will not be located on the site originally intended. Current plans contemplate its location on a site considerably closer to the new freight terminal now in course of construction. Your Excellency may be assured that my Government will continue to have an active interest in the economic and general well-­being of the Government and people of Panama. Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my most distinguished consideration. PM–14. Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow) to the Acting Secretary of State1 Washington, May 1, 1959. SUBJECT Resume of Panamanian Situation. A group of some 80 armed revolutionaries, mostly Cubans, landed on the north coast of Panama in the Mandinga Bay area on April 25. The invaders thereafter moved west and captured the village of Nombre de Dios. Prior to the invasion, the Panamanian Ambassador in Washington had been receiving reports of invasion threats through his and our sources and had been keeping the Organization of American States informed of developments on an informal basis. On April 27 he appeared before the OAS, apprised the member states of the situation, pointed out that this action posed a threat to hemispheric peace and asked for invocation of the Rio Treaty.2 On April 28 the OAS passed a resolution in which it recognized the immediate threat to Panama

Panama 905 PM–15. Memorandum from John O. Bell to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Irwin)1

Washington, May 13, 1959. SUBJECT Determination of Eligibility for 120-­day Credit Terms under Section 106(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended2 Panama. Reference is made to the recent request of the Government of Panama to purchase certain military materiel under Section 106 of the Mutual Security Act in connection with its efforts to buttress its defensive capabilities in the light of the present unstable situation in the Caribbean area. The United States has indicated its readiness to meet this request. The Panamanian Government has requested credit assistance in making such purchases, which have been valued at approximately $100,000. Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me and under the legislative provisions of Section 106(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended, I hereby determine the Government of Panama eligible to pay for purchases of military equipment from stock up to 120 days after delivery. This determination is limited in application to the purchases described in the paragraph above. John O. Bell

Gen. Persons—­in part Sec. Anderson

Gen. Goodpaster Actg. Sec. Thomas S. Gates for

Mr. Hagerty—­in part Sec. McElroy

Maj Eisenhower AG Rogers

Mr. McPhee—­in part Dep. PMG Edson O. Sessions

Mr. Kendall

for PMG Summerfield

Mr. Robert Gray Sec. Seaton

Capt Aurand—in part Under Sec. True D. Morse for

Mrs. Wheaton Sec. Benson

Mr. Morgan—in part Under Sec. James P. O’Connell for

Mr. Merriam Sec. Mitchell

Mr. Randall Under Sec. Frederick Mueller for

Dr. Paarlberg Sec. Strauss

Mr. Harr Sec. Flemming

Mr. Siciliano

Mr. Patterson Amb. Lodge

Mr. Minnich Gov. Hoegh

Asst. Dir. Elmer Staats, BoB for Mr. Stans Dr. Saulnier, CEA Gen. E. R. Quesada, FAA Mr. Gordon Gray Mr. McCone, AEC Asst. Sec. George H. Roderick Mr. George V. Allen, USIA Mr. Abbott Washburn Mr. Chad McClellan Mr. Franklin Floete, GSA Mr. Edward K. Mills, Jr. Mr. Norman Mason, HHFA Dr. Glennan, NASA Mr. Merrill Whitman, Canal Zone Government [Here follows a discussion of the Federal Emergency Plan D-Minus that provided for certain actions in case the United States was confronted 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Cabinet Series. Confidential. L. A. Minnich, Jr., the President’s Assistant Staff Secretary, prepared and signed this memoran-

Panama 907 with the threat of an imminent attack as well as a final review of the plans for United States participation at the Moscow Fair.] Panama Canal2—Mr. Roderick first noted that since 1951 the Canal had been a self-­supporting operation and has made payments to the United States Treasury in recompense for past funding. Mr. Roderick outlined the anticipated great increase of traffic through the Canal and the ensuing requirements for modernization and expansion of facilities. He stated that this can be accomplished out of current earnings up until about 1975 but for the period beyond that consideration would need to be given to the possibility of constructing a third set of locks which would handle the largest existing ships, or the possibility of a sea level canal, at a cost of $700 million–$1 billion, and with the possibility of utilizing nuclear energy for cutting the canal. He noted that the Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee of the House has appointed a good study group headed by General Leslie Groves to go into this. Mr. McCone cautioned that the nuclear aspect would need much more study before it would be anything other than an academic question. Regarding the sea level canal concept, Mr. Gates pointed out that any canal would be vulnerable to attack with or without locks. Mr. Roderick said that he would want to rely on a military decision as to that question, but that a sea level canal could be reopened much faster than one where the locks had been destroyed. The President ascertained that the immediate question at issue was one of authorizing a $28 million modernization program and further planning towards the 1975 requirements. The President thought this much certainly to be in order. He believed also that eventually it would be necessary to dig a new canal because the trend is more and 2 In a memorandum dated May 21, the Secretary to the Cabinet, informed the President that the agenda for the Cabinet meeting of May 22 included a consideration of problems concerning the Panama Canal. According to Gray’s memorandum, “There will shortly be issued from the House Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee a report about the Panama Canal—­its traffic problems, the improvements which are being made there, and the desirability of a second canal which might be constructed, possibly with the aid of nuclear explosives.” “Chairman Roderick has asked to make a report so that these new ideas and developments will not catch the Administration unawares. Although the report will be highly informative, no specific recommendations for action will be presented.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Cabinet Series)

Panama 909 from President de la Guardia4 objecting to certain features of the new merit system and wage scale procedure put into effect by Canal Zone authorities in February. Our Chargé reports that the Foreign Minister privately stated that the contents of the Aide Memoire appeared to offer little or no satisfaction to the Panamanian Government and the Chargé believes that objections were raised on procedural grounds solely in order to forestall criticism of the Government when the contents of the Aide Memoire are eventually made public. I believe that the transmittal of your reply, dated April, 1959, to President de la Guardia5 and the subsequent delivery of the Aide Memoire were entirely correct and appropriate. However, rather than permit this incident to be further distorted out of proportion, I believe it advisable and would suggest that you approve the enclosed letter stating that the United States Government’s study of the points raised by the Panamanian Government’s memorandum has been completed and is being delivered in the form of an aide memoire through the usual diplomatic channels. If you approve this suggestion, I will instruct our Chargé, on presentation of the letter, orally to inform the Panamanian Foreign Minister that, although the Department regards the delivery of the Aide Memoire on July [illegible in the original] to have been correct diplomatic procedure, you are pleased to send another letter to President de la Guardia on this subject. It is recommended that this letter, if approved, be released only on the initiative of the Panamanian Government. Douglas Dillon Acting Secretary [Enclosure] Suggested Letter to the President of Panama6 Dear Mr. President: I stated in my letter of April sixth, 1959 that I would direct a study to be made by competent experts in my Government of the points raised in the Memorandum accompanying your letter of March seventh, 1959. The results of this study are contained in an Aide Memoire which is being delivered through the usual diplomatic channels. 4 For further information concerning the contents of President de la Guardia’s letter of March 7, see Rubottom’s memorandum of April 1 to the Acting Secretary of State, Document PA-11. 5 See Document PM–12. 6 Drafted by Leggett on July 10.

Panama 911 jects: (a) Mexico (in preparation to President Lopez Mateos visit;3 and The President said that when the problem of Panama had come up a few months ago he had told the Department of Defense he did not agree with the way they were operating in that area. Since then, the President had talked to Milton Eisenhower, who had expressed his alarm over what he believed to be a worsening of the situation. This morning, the President said, Milton Eisenhower had a two-­ hour meeting with Secretary of the Army Brucker, who had agreed that some action should be taken on the Panamanian situation. The President went on to say that, after he and the Secretary have had their discussion, he would want to set up a meeting of himself, the Secretary, Secretary Brucker, Export-Import Bank President Sam Waugh, and the Chairman of the Development Loan Fund Corporation.4 At this further meeting the President hoped they could come up with a coordinated plan of action. The President commented that he is concerned that we continue to rely on a strict interpretation of the Treaty of 1903.5 He said there have been many changes since that time and that we must bear in mind that we have a large stake in the Panama Canal and that, in protecting it, we are up against a people who are uneducated, ill-­informed, and easy prey to Communist propaganda. The President mentioned particularly his understanding that Panama still owes the United States Treasury a tremendous amount and that the Panamanian Government has barely been able to keep up the interest payments. The Secretary commented that he had understood that Panama had been doing quite well on repayments but that, in any event, he would look into the situation thoroughly and carefully and would be ready to talk with the President in greater detail at the President’s convenience. 3 Mexican President Adolfo López Mateos made a state visit to the United States

President of Eximbank Waugh The Secretary

General Manager, DLF, Mr. Brand The Secretary of the Army Assistant to the President Rocco Siciliano The Under Secretary

General Goodpaster Assistant Secretary of the Army Roderick Assistant Secretary Rubottom The meeting started with a presentation by Secretary Brucker of the problems which the Panama Canal Company, of which he is the President, has encountered in its relations with the Government and the people of Panama. He was assisted by Assistant Secretary of the Army Roderick who used charts to describe the problems principally related to: (1) Equal pay for equal work (single-wage scale) and (2) Area of procurement of goods sold in the Canal Zone. Details of this presentation are available in the attached memorandum.2 Following the presentation of the Secretary of the Army the President said that he had heard from Panamanians on several occasions three principal complaints: (1) Unfair wages paid to Panamanians due to failure of the United States to live up to its 1955 Treaty obligations; (2) Purchases by the Canal Zone authorities of goods outside the United States and Panama, especially New Zealand beef and Ecuadoran rice; and (3) Sale of luxury goods in the Canal Zone commissaries and PX’s. (Secretary Brucker said that orders had already been issued to the PN’s to stop the sale of goods costing more than $50.) The President told the group that the United States had come a long way since the days of laissez-­faire and he referred as an example to our own agricultural subsidy program. He felt that it was time for the United States to decide what is in the best interest of all the United States and not just to look at the “mathematics” of our jobs or our treaty obligations. He opined that the Governor of the Canal Zone3 was perhaps the best that we have ever had but that he could scarcely be expected to judge the Panamanian situation “objectively.”

Panama 913 With respect to sovereignty it is clear that residual sovereignty still rests with Panama, but actually the Panamanians had not mentioned this problem to him, their principal complaints being the points listed above. Secretary Brucker stated that the sovereignty problem did not seem to be too serious to him. Secretary Herter raised the question of the “security” jobs which are held exclusively by Americans and which is a serious point at issue there. Secretary Brucker replied that they were reviewing these assignments now, that all teachers had now been removed from the security list, and that 300 other security jobs had been removed from the lists. Mr. Rubottom recalled the clipping given to him by the Panamanian Foreign Minister in Santiago,4 following the latter’s open attack on the U.S. policies in the Canal Zone at the Foreign Ministers meeting, which consisted of two job descriptions, in English, which were word for word the same and which offered slightly over a dollar to a Panamanian and approximately $2.30 for an American doing road machine work. Assistant Secretary Roderick said that the Canal Zone authorities were “caught in this middle” between the U.S. objectives on the one hand and the requirement to cut costs on the other. He acknowledged that they might actually pay a U.S. wage under the terms of some of the contracts awarded there, while the contractor himself would ultimately pay the going Panamanian wage for the work prescribed. The President referred to his philosophical approach to all these problems. He said that times had changed since the 1903 Treaty was signed and that the United States could not operate the Canal Zone as though it were “an island.” The Secretary said that we should place a more favorable interpretation on our treaty commitments, in accordance with their spirit, wherever possible. Mr. Siciliano reverted to the discussion on labor problems, and said that, unless more incentive could be given to Panamanian workers, fewer and fewer Panamanians would be hired in the future rather than more of them. Assistant Secretary Roderick said that it would probably be necessary to guarantee Panamanian apprentices certain jobs at the end of their training period. There ensued a discussion of third-­country purchases which was acknowledged by Secretary Brucker to be one of the principal problems with Panama. He pointed out the high-­quality New Zealand beef could be purchased more cheaply than the same quality from the United States. He said that Panamanian beef was not of the same quality. He seemed to acknowledge that, if instructed to do so, the Canal Zone could purchase all of its beef from the United States or Panama. He also pointed 4 For documentation on the fifth meeting of consultation on Ministers of Foreign

Panama 915 President make clear that we intended to treat Panama fairly but that continued public attacks on the United States would have the effect of tying our hands and reduce our capacity to cooperate with them in the future.5 The President at the close of the meeting said that his orders were to have the Panama Canal Company desist in its purchases from third countries and to reduce to the greatest extent possible the handling of luxury goods in commissaries and PX’s. 5 The President conveyed this message to Ambassador Arias in the course of their conversation. A memorandum of the conversation, dated October 12, is in Presidential Memoranda of Conversation, Lot 66 D 149. PM–21. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, undated. SUBJECT Implementation of Decisions Taken on October 12 at White House Meeting on U.S.–Panama Relations. In accordance with the President’s wishes expressed at his meeting on October 12, and responsive to Brigadier General Goodpaster’s memorandum of October 14 to you (Tab B)2, a meeting was held at the Pentagon on October 14 during which plans were discussed for implementation of the President’s desires for improvement of U.S.–Panamanian relations. Attached at Tab B3 is a Memorandum of Understanding as agreed to by State, Canal Zone Government, and Army representatives present at that meeting. You will have already

Panama 917 At the Pentagon meeting agreement was reached on the following points, which had been discussed previously at the White House: 1. Housing Project With regard to the proposal for the construction of “middle class” housing located in Panama for Panamanian employees of the Canal Zone, the Department of the Army representatives discussed the possibility of financing this project along the lines set forth by Mr. Dillon at the White House, i.e., one thousand dwellings costing approximately $5 million to be financed directly from Panama Canal Company funds. Governor Potter stated that the Canal Zone Government did not have sufficient funds available for this purpose and that a direct Congressional appropriation for housing would be required unless another source of funds was found. The Department of the Army agreed to seek means for financing such construction. 2. Third Country Purchases The Department of the Army representatives agreed to change existing procurement procedures to eliminate insofar as possible further purchases from other than United States or Panamanian suppliers of imports for resale in this Canal Zone. (This would raise questions of compliance with United States obligations under Article XVII of the GATT.7 In the past, we have taken the position that limitations on third country purchases by the Canal Zone authorities do not contravene Article XVII.) General Gaither pointed out that those principally affected by this change would be his troops and United States employees of the Canal Zone. 3. Sales of Luxury Items The Department of the Army representatives agreed to establish a uniform definition of “luxury items” and the price limits of these items which may be sold in commissaries, post exchanges and other sales outlets in the Canal Zone. There was considerable discussion as to what should be considered as a “luxury item” and a list of such articles is being prepared for guidance. General Gaither was not convinced that the maximum value of PX items should be less than that prevailing at other overseas bases. 4. Single Wage Plan The Department of the Army representatives (1) agreed to institute an incentive program to attract Panamanian participation in an apprentice 7 Article XVII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, concluded at Geneva on October 30, 1947, dealt with non-discriminatory treatment on the part of state-trading enterprises. For the text of Article XVII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, see 4 Bevans 664.

Panama 919 ARA will maintain continuing liaison with the Department of the Army’s representatives to assure that the President’s wishes are carried out. Recommendation: That you sign the attached Memorandum for the President (Tab A), submitting for his consideration a letter addressed to Panamanian President de la Guardia, starting that he has approved certain changes in operating policies of the Canal Zone authorities and recommending that the message be released to the press upon delivery by our Ambassador in Panama. PM–22. Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the President1 Washington, October 28, 1959. SUBJECT Recommendation That You Sign A Letter To President de la Guardia of Panama. In view of the decisions taken at your October 12 meeting on United States-Panamanian relations, which has resulted in revisions in certain operating policies of the Canal Zone authorities, I recommend that you approve the enclosed letter addressed to President Ernesto de la Guardia of Panama. The proposed message refers to a meeting on September 1, 1959 of United States and Panamanian representatives2 in which President de la Guardia actively participated. At that time steps were discussed which would help minimize certain sources of friction between our two countries. As a result of your October 12 meeting, the Canal Zone authorities have begun to take the necessary action to implement the steps discussed at the September 1 meeting, i.e. that the Zone revise the third country purchasing practices, and that luxury item sales through Zone outlets be limited insofar as possible. This information would be conveyed orally to the Panamanian President at the time of delivery

Panama 921 deter our efforts to achieve over-­increasing understanding between one and two countries. For my part, accordingly, I have approved a number of revisions in operating policies of the Canal Zone authorities which result from a meeting of representatives of our two Governments in which you actively participated. I trust that these actions, the substance of which will be communicated to you by Ambassador Harrington, will redound to the benefit of the people of Panama. I am confident that it is your desire, as it is mine, that our two countries should continue their traditionally close cooperation to insure the efficient operation of the Panama Canal for the benefit of the entire world.5 Sincerely,

Panama 923 the Canal Zone. The then Secretary of War William Howard Taft’s 1906 statement on titular sovereignty3 is cited and quoted, as is the reference in Mr. Merchant’s departure statement of November 24.4 The note states that since the United States recognizes Panama’s titular sovereignty over the zone it is natural and logical to fly the Panamanian flag on a regular basis in the zone. The note further states that such action would have a favorable impact in Panama and throughout the world especially in Latin America. The note closes with the reiteration that it is desirable that the local authorities of both governments in Panama reach agreement as to places and procedure for flying the Panamanian flag in the Zone. Ambassador Arias told me when he handed me the note that while he realized what our reply would be, he had to present his government’s position on flying the flag in the Canal Zone.5 3 For William Howard Taft’s statement on the theory of titular sovereignty that he made to the Senate Committee on Interoceanic Canals, see U.S. Congress Senate, Committee on Interoceanic Canals, “Hearings Related to Panama Canal,” S. Doc. 401,

Panama 925 October 21,3 called Panama’s attention to the march once more, and asked the Government to take all action to avoid untoward incidents which might occur. Notwithstanding assurances, the Zone authorities made plans to protect the security of the Zone and Canal. On November 3, after a peaceful demonstration by Boyd, Castillero and a small group of sympathizers, an unruly mob attempted to force entry of the Zone to plant the Panamanian flag and apparently spontaneous violence took place at the Canal Zone border. Rebuffed at the Zone, about 150 people went to the Embassy and desecrated the United States flag, causing damage to other United States installations, public and private. When Zone police and firemen were overrun by the mob, Governor Potter called on CINCARIB to protect the Zone. No further incidents occurred, but approximately 80 people were injured on both sides. Our Embassy protested the flag incident4 and Panama counter-­protested5 that a prior analogous incident to its flag caused the mob to get out of control. Analysis of the events disclosed that Panama’s Guardia National, its sole law enforcement agency, was conspicuously absent from the scene of violence until late on November 3, but from then on controlled Panamanian crowds well. Radio intercepts made on November 3 reveal that the Guardia was instructed to avoid the areas where the crowds were rioting. The Government apparently was unwilling or unable, or both, to control the situation. From November 4 on the Panamanian press and radio undertook a massive vilification campaign against us, which the Government felt would be turned against it, if attempts were made to tone it down. The highly emotional populace was apparently in command of the situation and reports were received of further riots against the Zone scheduled for November 18 and 28. (None materialized on the 18th.) In spite of demarches to President de la Guardia and to Ambassador Aries (who had returned to Washington), it was still apparent that the Panamanian government feared for its future if it were to act forcefully to prevent further anti-United States demonstrations, fanned by press, radio, and demagogues. In order to strengthen President de la Guardia’s resolve and for other reasons, Mr. Merchant went to Panama November 20–21,6 and discussed outstanding issues with Panama. A device for the Government to attempt a pacification of the people was afforded by the statement reaffirming titular sovereignty,7 3 For the text of the United States’ Aide-Memoire, see the Department of State

Panama 927 and had left them, I believed, with a clear impression of three points: first, that the Panamanian government had a responsibility and a duty to protect American lives and property; second, that the United States government would not negotiate under the threat of disorder and violence; and, third, that with the restoration of calm there were certain measures which could come into effect which would be beneficial to the Panamanians and which had been already decided upon prior to November 3. This together with the statement on titular sovereignty provided the Panamanian government with something which they could use if they were disposed to take a firm line on the maintenance of order. The government, however, is weak and there is some doubt as to the reliability of the National Guard. Under the circumstances President de la Guardia’s radio address last night,2 I thought, had been quite good and it seemed clear that an effort was being made through the press, radio, the faculty at Panama University and in the provinces to hold demonstrations on Saturday3 to a peaceful purpose and character. If we got by Saturday without real trouble when I said I thought we should be looking ahead with a view to correcting any justifiable sources of complaint and grievance. The President said that three years ago after the trouble at Suez4 he and Secretary Dulles had talked about the situation of the Panama Canal many times and had sought to ensure that steps would be taken which would head off any developments in the Canal Zone comparable to what had occurred in Egypt. He spoke of the discrepancy in wage rates and said that he had not felt that we had done all that we should have in this regard under the agreements of 1955. The question of third country purchases also had needed fixing and he had been anxious to see a training and apprentice program put into effect. Considerable progress had been made on these last month but then the inability to get his letter to the Panamanian government before trouble clearly threatened had resulted in the Panamanians not being aware of these corrective actions already decided upon. The President asked me to follow the situation closely with the Department of Defense and make sure that with a return to more normal relations and a better atmosphere that there was no foot-dragging anywhere and that we consider constructively and sympathetically Panamanian requests. The President then volunteered that he thought we should have the Panamanian flag flying not all over the Zone, as 2 The Embassy at Panama City transmitted the text of President de la Guardia’s radio address to the Department of State under cover of despatch 337, November 27, not 3 November 28. 4 For documentation on United States policy with respect to the Arab-Israeli Dispute

Panama 929 for injuries caused by stone-­throwing and tear-­gas burns; at least 150 persons were arrested. Documentation on these incidents is found in deci-

Panama 931 It is the considered opinion of the Defense officials most familiar with this problem that after carefully weighing the pros and cons of flying the flag prior to the elections, there is too great a risk that the results, if any, to be achieved by acceding to the Panamanian request can well be dissipated or lost by permitting our yielding on this question to become a subject of campaign oratory, and possibly stimulating demands for additional concessions. Additionally, I am attaching a memorandum setting forth our position on the remaining differences between our Departments with respect to third country imports3 for such use as you care to make of it. As you are aware, our principal concern is the effect which a ban on third country imports into the Canal Zone would have upon our post exchange and commissary relations in other countries of the world. Local competing commercial entities always have a selfish interest in curbing these facilities at the expense of United States personnel serving overseas. While I am informed that the amount of commerce about which our representatives differ amounts to less than one percent of total third country purchases for resale, a total ban in the Zone might well form a basis, somewhat justifiable, for increased agitation for similar bans elsewhere. Sincerely yours, 3 Not printed. PM–30. Memorandum from the Secretary of State to the President1 Washington, January 22, 1960. SUBJECT Recommendation on Third Country Imports and Luxury Item sales by Canal Zone Agencies. You will recall that at your meeting on October 12, seeking means for eliminating frictions in United States-Panama relations, you instructed the Panama Canal Company to desist in its importation from third countries of merchandise for resale in Canal Zone sales

Panama 933 PM–31. Letter from the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Knight)1 Washington, January 22, 1960. Dear Bob:

Panama 935 I shall be grateful if you would inform me when the necessary steps have been taken to implement this request, in order that I may inform the President of the resolution of this problem.4 I am sending a copy of the letter to the Secretary of the Army for his information. With warmest personal regards, Most sincerely, Christian A. Herter 4 Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Knight informed Under Secretary for Political Affairs Merchant on February 24 that the Department of Defense was ready to implement the new policies governing third country purchases and asked the Department of State if the new instructions could go into effect on March 15. Merchant concurred in the Defense Department’s request. (Memorandum of Conversation, by Merchant,

Panama 937 PM–35. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, March 18, 1960. SUBJECT White House Meeting on March 21 to Discuss Panama Policy On February 16 the President addressed a memorandum to you with an attachment containing a summation of complaints by Panama, together with some suggestions as to ways to ameliorate the situation. The President stated that he was sending the same document to the Secretary of the Army and that following his return from South America he hoped to have a conference with a view to finding better solutions to outstanding problems than those thus far developed (White House Memorandum, February 16, with its attachment is at Tab A)2 Secretary of the Army Brucker and Assistant Secretary of the Army (FA) Roderick are scheduled to be present for the meeting with the President on March 21. You will be accompanied by Mr. Merchant, and me if you so desire. Discussion: We understand that Secretary Brucker will present to the President a ten point program, largely based on the February 16 memorandum. We have been unable, however, to find out precisely what this program calls for and therefore list below the points of the February 16 memorandum and our comments thereon. 1. Discrimination in Wages Paid Panamanians Since signing of the 1955 Treaty the Panamanian Government has complained that the United States has violated “in spirit” the “equal pay for equal work” commitment. Government officials refer to the fact that the United States pays workers at United States and local rates, with most of the Panamanians receiving the lower local scale of wages. This is not a violation of the Treaty but the practice lends itself to unjustified charges. To narrow the gap between the two rates, the Department has suggested to the Department of Defense that an increase of around 10 cents in hourly pay to local rate employees might be beneficial at this time.

Panama 939 jobs. Many of these jobs are passed from father to son, thus perpetuating a practice that was abandoned years ago by United States private industry in Latin America. 6. Widespread Poverty and Unemployment Among Panamanians The memorandum that this is partially due to the fact that the Company and the Armed Services here discharged about 10,000 employees during the last ten to twelve years. It suggests that a study be made to work out the basis for treaty provisions which might bring about an approximation of the tariff advantages which have enabled Puerto Rico to establish so many small industries exporting to the United States and therefore increase employment. [illegible in the original] An early start on an “Operation Boststrap“ might make negotiation of a new treaty with Panama much easier. As you are aware, the United States will require the consent of Panama to abandon its present Canal operation. A study of feasibility of making tarris concessions to Panama is at Tab A.3 7. Increased USIA Propaganda Activities The Department has instructed the Embassy to take steps leading to establishment of a daily radio commentary program to present the United States viewpoint in Panama. USIA is favorably disposed and is awaiting a recommendation from its Public Affairs Officer. The Panama Canal Company directors discussed this matter at their last board meeting and decided there was a need for some medium to get the United States point of view to the Panamanians. While Mr. Roderick is aware of the Department of State’s efforts, you may wish to mention the above details at the meeting if the subject arises. 8. Better Rates for Water Charges to Panama This is a technical problem which the Defense representatives may discuss. It is recommended that States defer to their judgement. 9. United States Loans for a Reasonable Housing Program in Panama The Panama Canal company has drafted a bill which will provide congressional authority to proceed with a housing program. It is believed the proposed bill will be discussed by Defense representatives at the meeting and the President’s approval sought to introduce the skill. Senator Murray (D-Mont) has introduced a bill calling upon the Development Loan Fund to guarantee loans for housing in Panama. The Department has drafted a letter to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee indicating that the housing plan under the direction of the Panama Canal Company is preferable to the Murray proposal (Tab C).4 3 Not found. 4 Not found.

Panama 941 military government is offensive to peoples who consider the governed territory to be their own. A military organisation operates on the basis of command rather than persuasion. Military officers grow accustomed to obedience, and are concerned primarily with matters of their internal command rather than with those of external interests. Accordingly, a military command is seldom an instrument for civil administration under which civilians and foreigners can comfortably live or work. An individual commander may avoid arbitrariness but his military status projects to foreign people more of an aura of colonialism than would adhere to a civilian. The Panamanian press campaign against the “military mentality” of the present governor suggests that the Panamanians would welcome civilian governance of the Zone. It is believed that the Zone’s government should be civilianized by the appointment of a capable civilian governor. He should in his dual role as governor of the Zone and president of the Company be responsible to the Ambassador on all matters affecting the Republic. A civilian governor should not report to the Department of the Army but to the Department of State and to the White House through the Department. It is our understanding that the appointment of a civilian governor could be effected by the President, subject to confirmation by the Senate, without further legislation. It is our Legal Advisor’s opinion that there is no legal impediment to naming a civilian Governor but the statutes call for the Governor and the President of the Panama Canal Company to be the same person (Tab B).5 Mr. Brucker, in a [illegible in the original] with Mr. [illegible in the original], indicated his view that by statute the Governor and the President of the Company must be an (Army) engineer. In the event a civilian Governor, reporting to the President through the State Department or directly to the Department, is named, it would be desirable to have the stock of the Panama Canal Company transferred to the Secretary of State. At present the President has delegated the Secretary of the Army as sole stockholder. 5 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of the Legal Adviser’s opinion, as conveyed in a memorandum on March 18 to Merchant, is in ARA/PAN Files, Lot 65 D 176, “Policy - Panama 1960.”

Panama 943 ICA has been requested by Mr. Dillon to examine the feasibility of such a hospital-medical training program at Canal Zone and also look into the form the program might take. It is recommended that no decision be taken on this matter until ICA completes its study. 16. Other Policy Matters Secretary Brucker’s anticipated proposal is good from our standpoint but still doesn’t go far enough in meeting other perhaps more important short and medium range problems requiring either a change of policy or at least a change in emphasis. These problems are described in Stage I of the S/P study (Tab E)9 on Panama and include the following: 1. Civilian Governor (if not discussed by Mr. Brucker) 2. Primay of United States Ambassador over [illegible in the original] 3. Civilianization of the Panama Canal Company 4. The flag (which requires further study as mentioned in item 14) 5. Formalization of policy planning within NSC structure 6. Decision on Isthmian sea level canal. Mr. Merchant and I agree in principle with this program as outlined by S/P but do not believe that it should be presented unilaterally to the President, that we should discuss it first with Defense and Army. We therefore recommend that you suggest to the President that we have several other policy matters which we would like to discuss with Defense and Army during the next week or ten days after which we would hope the President could receive us again to discuss these longer range aspects of the problem. 9 Not attached to the source text. The record copy of the Policy Planning Staff’s study on Panama, entitled “A Three-Stage Approach to the Panama Canal Problem”,

Assistant Secretary Roderick The Secretary

General Persons The Secretary of the Army

General Goodpaster The Under Secretary for Political Affairs Assistant Secretary Rubottom Secretary Brucker referred to the President’s memorandum of one month ago2 as providing the basis for the meeting and then distributed copies of a paper “Proposed Action by Panama Canal Company and Canal Zone Government,”3 listing a ten-­point summary of a more detailed paper which he handed to the President4 which the latter began to read. Secretary Brucker retained a copy of the detailed proposal for his own reading but did not have other copies of the basic paper to distribute. The President, after a few minutes, inquired about the apprentice plan, recalling that he had heard from an American source regarding their poor treatment in the Canal Zone training school. General Goodpaster said that Robert Burroughs had been the source of this report. Mr. Roderick said that Panamanian apprentices received the same wages as Americans (except the regular 25 per cent foreign residence differential), starting at approximately $1.00 per hour and increasing gradually over the four-­year apprenticeship to almost the maximum wage paid to skilled Panamanian workers. He averred that the real

Panama 945 problem was that Panamanian apprentices could not compete with the American beginners. To meet this, the new plan proposes that the Panamanian apprentices compete among themselves. The President thought that the wage structure was certainly sufficient to disavow any complaint on that basis. Secretary Brucker pointed out the link between points 1 and 9 of the proposed action, i.e. increasing wages of Panamanian employees 10 per cent and increasing the pay of teachers in Latin American schools; he referred to the link between items 6 and 7 having to do with the installation of a new water main to supply Panama and a reduced charge for water furnished to Panama; also, items 3 and 4 were related, having to do with the replacement of 500 substandard houses in the Zone and the construction of 500 low-­cost houses in Panama for Zone employees. The proposed wage increase of 10 per cent had been recommended deliberately, rather than the 5 per cent increase originally suggested, and the company was thinking of making this an annual increment which would, therefore, eliminate a wage differential between Panamanians and Americans in 10 years. Mr. Brucker said that the company had also deliberately increased the number of apprentices from 20 ­to 25 per year in its proposal; since the training period is 4 years, there would be 100 Panamanians in the school at all times, a rather impressive figure, he thought. The President inquired about the U.S. treaty obligations to the world regarding rates charged ships transiting the Canal. Wasn’t there some way we could increase the rates so as to amortize the original building costs for the Canal? Mr. Roderick explained that there was in effect a formula with the Congress which works in the following way: if the Canal Company books show that the rates are too low or too high, the Executive Branch could, after a six-­month waiting period, recommend a reduction or an increase in the rates in order to balance the books. The Administration tried in the 83rd and 84th Congresses to include original building costs in the financial base structure of the Canal Company accounts, but the pressures on the Congress were sufficient to nullify the government’s recommendations. The President noticed that there was no mention of third country purchases or the sale of luxury items in the PX’s. Mr. Brucker declared that the measures affecting these points had already been placed into effect. Mr. Merchant commented that this action had had favorable repercussions. Secretary Brucker said that his Department was prepared to move ahead on all points in the company proposal although enabling legislation would be required for point 4, covering construction of housing units in Panama, and point 8, an increase of pensions paid disabled

Panama 947 General Persons asked the President whether the various items should be given to the Budget Bureau for consideration. General Goodpaster asked whether steps should be taken with the Congress to permit the company to amortize the original construction costs. The President gave an affirmative answer to General Persons but recognized that there were problems with the Congress and with the shipping interests on the second point. The President pointed out that, with respect to any long range decision on a sea level canal, it should not be built in Panama if that country is uncooperative. Secretary Brucker alluded to the subject of rates charged transiting ships and said that a very careful review would have to be made before attempting to obtain approval of an increase. Assistant Secretary Roderick said that a study was now being made, looking toward legislative action, to enable the company to pay the government of Panama out of its own funds the $1.5 million increased annuity, resulting from the 1955 Treaty, since the authorizing legislation flowing from that treaty had required that the State Department seek an annual appropriation to make this increased annuity, although the original $430,000 annuity is still paid out of company earnings. The company is also considering steps enabling it to add $20 million to the financial base of the company, this being the cost of the bridge now under construction, in order that this might be chargeable against earnings, at least insofar as interest, which is now being charged on the base annually, is concerned. PM–37. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, March 29, 1960. SUBJECT PANAMA - Policy Recommendations for Discussion with Secretary of the Army Brucker. You attended a meeting at the White House on March 21, together with Mr. Merchant and me, on the subject of short-range policy

Panama 949 for the Ambassador, it is not considered appropriate that he serve on the board.6 It is recommended that you seek Secretary Brucker’s concurrence that a joint State/Army recommendation be made along these lines to the President.7 2. Civilian Governor of the Canal Zone The February 16 memorandum suggests that the next Governor of the Canal Zone, to be appointed in May of this year, “be a different man from the President of the Panama Canal Company and a civilian selected partly for qualities of tact and diplomacy”. He should sit with the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal Company, the memorandum adds. The United States military plays a triple role in the Zone and vis-avis Panama: it supplies the governor of the Zone, manages the Panama Canal Company, and protects the Canal. The Corps of Engineers, which has a brilliant record in operating the Canal, has traditionally furnished the governor, who by statute serves also as ex officio president of the Company. There seems to be no compelling reason today, as opposed

Panama 951 all matters affecting11 United States relations with Panama. This, in addition to the appointment of a civilian governor responsible to the Ambassador, would simplify the problem of coordination and reduce the military and “colonial” coloration of the Zone.12 It is recommended that you seek Secretary Brucker’s concurrence that Executive Order 10575 be recognized as applicable to the Canal Zone vis-avis the Republic of Panama as it is elsewhere in the conduct of United States foreign relations.13 The appointment of a State Department representative to the Canal Company Board, the appointment of a civilian governor and the establishment of the primacy of the Ambassador would have two immediate effects: It would (a) “civilianize“ the Panama Canal Company and (b) ­supplant the present primacy of the Department of the Army by elevating the Department of State to new responsibilities vis-a-vis the Zone and the Canal. Civilianization of the Company would still permit the special competence of the Corps of Engineers vis-a-vis the Canal to be available to the civilian management. The result of appointing a civilian governor would be to reduce the role of the Department of the Army in the Zone to that of furnishing technical acceptance in the operation of the Canal and of maintaining a security force. 4. [illegible in the original] It is believed that the forthcoming meeting with Secretary Brucker would be the appropriate time to raise once again the Panamanian request that the United States fly its flag in the Zone. As you will remember, a decision on the request of November 25 has been delayed on a result of Congressional opposition. However, Governor Potter’s precedent of March 1 in displaying ceremonial Panamanian flags received no unfavorable comment from Congress, which leads to the belief some of the “sting” of this issue may have been drawn. The House Foreign Affairs Committee as yet has not made public its attitude toward flying the Panamanian flag. Moreover, it is understood that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee does not intend to take action on the flag issue. 11 At this point, an unknown hand inserted the following in the source text: “the Govt. of.” 12 At this point the following handwritten notation appears on the source text: ”(see Mr. Merchant’s comment, Tab F, para. 2).” Merchant, according to his memorandum or March 30, suggested that, in the interest of clarity, the reference to the Ambassador’s responsibility “on all matters affecting United States relations with Panama.” Should be amended

Panama 953 manner, all parties to recognize that the socio-economic evolution of the Isthmus is upon us for the period being considered. It is recommended that you explore with Secretary Brucker the possibility of setting up a task group to commence formulation of a joint State/ Army policy. [illegible in the original] This group would draft recommendations for ultimate submission to the President for decision. The President would indicate at what time study of a revised policy on the Isthmian Canal and related matters mentioned in this S/F paper would be referred to the National Security Council.16 16 According to a handwritten notation on the source text, Herter accepted this ­recommendation on April 1. PM–38. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of State1 Washington, April 5, 1960. SUBJECT Press Release on Program for Improvement of Relations with Panama Secretary of the Army Brucker has presented to the Department for concurrence a press release (Tab A)2 outlining a nine-point program for improvement of relations with Panama (the original release had ten points but relocation of the Panama Railroad terminal, presently in Panama City, has been held up at the request of the Panamanian Government as a result of opposition from Harmodio Arias, who interposed objection to any arrangement which might assist the railroad when a Foreign Office Note was presented to the Foreign Relations Council for approval (Tab B).3

Panama 955 PM–39. Memorandum of Conversation, by Edward T. Long1 Washington, April 6, 1960. SUBJECT Long-Range Program for Panama PARTICIPANTS State: The Secretary Under Secretary for Political Affairs Livingston T. Merchant ARA - Assistant Secretary Rubottom S/P - Assistant Secretary Smith OAP - C. Allan Stewart M - Mr. Long Defense: Secretary of the Army Wilber M. Brucker Assistant Secretary of the Army George H. Roderick Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) Robert Knight Colonel-George M. Seignious II - Aide Nine Point Program The Secretary opened the meeting by expressing his delight at the nine point program for Panama which the Department of the Army had prepared and which was to be announced by means of a White House press release. He expressed the hope that the Department of Defense would be able to find the money for pay increases for Panamanian employees of the U.S. armed services. Mr. Roderick said that there was now no problem on this issue and that he was hopeful it would be resolved by the end of the week with the press announcement coming out some time before April 15. He said the pay increases would go into effect on May 1. He also proposed a new sentence in the draft press release which would highlight the fact that this program was not an afterthought and reflective of submission to Panamanian pressure but was something which was in train before the November riots and would have been implemented before if the riots had not taken place. The Secretary agreed with this change with the addition of the thought that the delay was also caused by our own legislative procedures.2

Panama 957 Governor of the Canal Zone The Secretary said that we had given careful thought to the problem of the Governor of the Canal Zone and it was our firm opinion he should be a civilian. Secretary Brucker observed that there was nothing in the statutes which would prohibit this but stated the Governor of the Canal Zone, who was also the President of the Panama Canal Company, had traditionally been a Corps of Engineers officer. He thought this precedent was a good one, that it should be continued and that it was very proper. The Secretary said he knew that the leading candidate for nomination as the new Governor next month was an engineering officer of great stature and that he would have no quarrel with his designation. However, the problem was one of principle and he thought that, in principle, the Governor should definitely be a civilian. Secretary Brucker said that it was such an important thing to have a Corps of Engineers officer heading up the Zone and Company, that the Corps of Engineers’ tradition was a great one in Panama. He said that certainly we would not want to have a run-­of-­the-­mill politician as Governor and that we would not want to have two civilians, the Ambassador and the Governor, involved in Panama and Canal Zone problems. It was most important to have a professional engineer giving professional advice on the Canal Zone. The Secretary responded that he did not quarrel, of course, with the efficient operation of the Canal itself but that he might argue on the issue of a military officer as Governor and involved in relations with the Government of Panama. He said that, while he took absolutely no exception to the prospective nomination from the Corps of Engineers for the new Governor, he thought we would have to reserve our positions on this issue. He said that, assuming a civilian candidate and a military candidate were of equal stature, we would prefer the civilian. It was a question of judgment. Secretary Brucker responded that the nominee for Governor would have to be confirmed by Congress where of course the Corps of Engineers was very powerful. The Secretary then said “we agree to disagree”, that he thought it important that we settle this matter in principle for the future. Mr. Merchant said the problem essentially was that the U.S. exercises sovereignty over a narrow strip of land bisecting the Republic of Panama. In these modern times it was essential from the standpoint of our political relations with Panama to avoid the image of military occupation, which the concept of a military man as Governor of the Zone represented psychologically. He said that certainly the Corps of Engineers would continue in its respected technical capacity. The Secretary agreed that the problem was essentially a psychological one. Secretary Brucker replied that he just did not agree with the Department of State’s position on this and he strongly recommended reconsideration of it. He stated

Panama 959 PM–40. Letter from the Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Army (Brucker)1 Washington, April 8, 1960. Dear Wilber: It was good of you to come over on Wednesday2 to discuss Panama with us and I found the meeting most helpful. I have been pondering the various problems since our meeting and would like to set down my view as to where we stand and where we should go. We weren’t able to come to a meeting of the minds on the civilian versus military Governor issue. Although the President has now nominated a military officer for a new term as Governor of the Zone, I think we should still establish the principle that the Governor of the Canal Zone should be a civilian. I was delighted that you accepted my informal suggestion of Livie Merchant as the Department of State representative on the Board, when a vacancy appears, but I am not quite clear whether you accepted Livie as an individual or as a position. I think it important that the principle be established that the Department of State will be permanently represented on the Board of Directors at the Under Secretary level. You said that you anticipated no difficulty in affirming the primacy of the Ambassador in matters relating to the government and people of Panama. I hope that this can be regularized by an executive order something along the lines of Executive Order 105753, and I plan to send you in the near future some draft language on this for the President’s subsequent consideration. I think we neglected to pin down the procedure for securing a policy decision on the sea level canal. It is most important that we agree to put this problem into the NSC machinery as soon as possible. On the matter of the flag, I understand that we were agreed that no decision be taken at this time with respect to its daily display in the Zone but that on all suitable holidays the Governor should exhibit the small ceremonial crossed flags as he did on March 1.

Panama 961 PM–42. Editorial Note The National Security Council, at its 441st meeting held on April 14, 1960, concurred with a proposal submitted by the NSC Planning Board that: “A U.S. policy should be developed during this Administration on the long-­range national security interest in inter-­oceanic canals across Central America, including consideration of the future of the Panama Canal, a possible new sea-­level canal, the question of internationalization of such canals, and the appropriate assignment of responsibility within the U.S. Government regarding such canals.” On April 23, 1960, President Eisenhower approved this paragraph as NSC Action 2219–­b–(3). (S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files, Lot 66 D 95, NSC Records of Action) PM–43. Minutes of Cabinet Meeting, White House1 Washington, April 29, 1960. The following were present: President Eisenhower Vice President Nixon Mr. Loy Henderson

Sen. Morton, RNC for Sec. Herter

Sec. Brucker, Army (in part) Sec. Anderson

Mr. George Roderick (in part) Sec. Gates

Amb. Julian Harrington, Panama (in part) Mr. Lawrence Walsh

Dr. Edward Teller, AEC (in part) for AG Rogers

Dr. Gerald Johnson, AEC (in part) Mr. John McKibbin

Mr. Merrill Whitman, Panama Canal for PMG Summerfield Company (in part) Mr. Royce Hardy for Sec. Seaton

Mr. Morgan Sec. Benson

Mr. Kendall Sec. Mitchell

Mr. Merriam Mr. John Allen (in part) Dr. Paarlberg for Sec. Mueller

Mr. Harlow Sec. Flemming

Mr. McCabe

Gen. Goodpaster Amb. Lodge

Mr. Robert Gray Gov. Hoegh

Maj. Eisenhower Mr. Stans, BoB

General Bragdon (in part) Mr. Staats

Mr. Harr (in part) Mr. John McCone, AEC Mrs. Wheaton Dr. Saulnier, CEA

Mr. Patterson

Mr. Minnich 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Cabinet Series. Confidential. Minnich prepared and signed this memorandum. The meeting began at 9:04 a.m. and concluded at

Panama 963 The President stated that anything that binds Mexico closer to the United States is in itself worth a billion. The Vice President added that the matter of stability of local government is a question with which State would have to be concerned and is of very great importance. Sec. Benson asked if it was planned to discontinue the present canal. Mr. Roderick replied that this also is a question for determination through State Department. Mr. Brucker inquired about informing Congressional Committees of this proposal and of publicizing it. Mr. Henderson asked that the question of publicity be deferred until Mr. Herter’s return on May 6th.3 Mr. Brucker felt some urgency with regard to Congressional hearings. The President thought that no great problem was involved in the basic report submitted by the Panama Canal Company, rather it was in the things the State Department needed to consider. He directed Mr. Henderson to take it under study and discuss it with Mr. Dillon in the absence of Mr. Herter.

Panama 965 PM–45. Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the President1 Washington, May 4, 1960. SUBJECT Recommendation Against Release of Text of CP–60–108, “Isthmian Canal Plans—1960” With reference to Secretary Brucker’s recommendation at the cabinet meeting of April 29 that favorable consideration be given to releasing the text of “Isthmian Canal Plans—1960’ and/or a related interim statement in the very near future, I recommend that, on foreign policy grounds, an embargo be placed on release of the contents of this report until a long-­range Isthmian Canal policy has been formulated in the National Security Council for your review and approval. I understand that current plans call for this matter to come up in the NSC this summer. Premature release of information contained in “Isthmian Canal Plans—1960” would greatly complicate our problems in establishing favorable preconditions to satisfactory negotiations for a new Canal at whatever location may be decided upon as a result of NSC consideration. Release of the document at this particular time would also be likely to adversely affect our posture in the nuclear test ban negotiations. Therefore, I recommend that the question of how and when this report might be released should be considered at the same time the Panama Canal paper comes before the NSC. If you should wish, Secretary Herter or I would be happy to discuss with you in more detail the foreign policy considerations involved in this matter.2 Acting Secretary

Panama 967 PM–48. Memorandum from the Acting Secretary of State to the President1 Washington, May 20, 1960. SUBJECT Diplomatic Considerations in Negotiating An Isthmian Sea Level Canal Route (CP-60-108) With reference to your request at the Cabinet meeting of April 29 that you be advised of diplomatic considerations involved in negotiating a route for an Isthmian sea level canal to be constructed by nuclear excavation techniques outside the Canal Zone, I present some conclusions for your consideration. Mexico: While it is difficult to predict accurately what the state of our relations with any of those countries will be a decade hence, Mexico has made it clear that it would require complete control over a Tehuantepec canal free from any foreign influence, including the United States. Mexico’s well-­known sensitivity on sovereignty matters and its extreme reluctance to cooperate in common defense problems are other factors which must be considered. Its present policy of friendship toward us is relatively recent and not necessarily permanent. Colombia would almost certainly want sovereignty over a new canal, a substantial share of the profits, and a strong voice in its operation, with the defense responsibility primarily ours. Nicaragua: We have treaty rights in Nicaragua but negotiations for a canal route would be required not only with that country but also with one or more of the neighboring states of Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Honduras concerning any rights they may have in the area of the selected route. This was specified in the United States Senate’s consent to the ratification of the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty in 1916.2 It is therefore clear that acquiring the right of way for a Nicaraguan Canal would involve very complex negotiations affecting four countries—a ­most difficult undertaking. Panama: Based on our half-­century experience with Panama, it is clear that we will never be granted the same broad rights we now have in the Canal Zone. Additionally some mutually satisfactory arrangement would be required to permit abrogation of our present treaty structure with that country. This should preferably be an economic assistance program to assist Panama toward political and economic stability and to reduce its dependence on canal revenues. Such is clearly within our capabilities, if undertaken and pursued with resolution and adequate resources.

Panama 969 gone, a new President, the Governor gone and Gaither gone, maybe this would be a good time to make a little arrangement, beginning on such and such a date, to start the custom of flying the flag all the time over our Embassy and to fly both the American and the Panamanian flags from poles of equal height at the Headquarters of the Panama Canal Zone to demonstrate our recognition that residual sovereignty rests with Panama. The President said he told Farland to ask the Secretary to look this idea over to see if the Secretary thinks it is a good thing, and if the Secretary does think it is good, he could check with the Army and then the Secretary could put out a directive or the President could, he didn’t care which. The President said perhaps we could just make it the day after Congress which would keep Flood from going crazy. The Secretary said Flood is threatening all sorts of things; The President said Farland might, although we don’t have the authority, make the proposal to the new President and see if it couldn’t be worked out so this could be accomplished—­not announce it, but just see if we can just do it. The Secretary said he would give this the most careful consideration. The Secretary then said he hoped the President had liked Ambassador Farland, and the President said he did; that he had met him before. The Secretary said he has done so well that we hope he will permanently join the ranks of the Foreign Service. PM–50. Letter from the Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Army (Brucker)1 Washington, August 12, 1960. Dear Wilber: Following the discussion on Panama at our meeting of April 6, I wrote to you on April 82 outlining my understanding of the conclusions we reached in the hope that we could get together soon thereafter on the four points we had under review, prior to seeing the President. Unfortunately, due to my very busy schedule in the ensuing weeks, it was impossible to give attention to the matter, and Acting Secretary Dillon wrote you on May 43 to inform you of the delay which had been encountered.

Panama 971 President, the possibility of a joint Army-State-Defense recommendation to the President that, as of November 3, 1960, the flags of the United States and Panama be flown on a daily basis in the Canal Zone in a special location, readily visible from the Republic of Panama, in recognition of Panama’s titular sovereignty over the territory of the Canal Zone. Our idea is that the notification to the Government of Panama would be explicit in setting forth our understanding of the significance of this act, that our treaty rights in the Zone would remain unaffected by the joint flag display. We would certainly indicate that in its reply the Government of Panama should acknowledge that the proposed action would only be in recognition of Panamanian titular sovereignty over the Zone. I hope that we can arrange to meet soon with the President on the matters outlined above and, when an appointment has been made, I will be in touch with you so we can discuss them together a day or so beforehand. With warmest personal regards. Most sincerely, Christian A. Herter PM–51. Memorandum from the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Calhoun) to the President’s Staff Secretary (Goodpaster)1 Washington, August 22, 1960. SUBJECT Senator Green’s Letter on Implementation of Nine Point program for Panama.2 In accordance with your request of August 15, I am enclosing a suggested reply to Senator Green for Mr. McCabe’s signature. Senator Green’s letter is returned for your files. Walter J. Stoessel. Jr. John A. Calhoun3

Panama 973 Point 9. A continuing review at the highest levels of the list of jobs reserved for citizens of the United States has been undertaken by the U.S. agencies in the Canal Zone. I hope that the foregoing information will satisfy your request as to the progress which has been made on the President’s program.5 Kind regards, Sincerely, Edward A. McCabe Administrative Assistant to the President 5 No evidence has been found to indicate whether McCabe signed this draft reply and sent it to Senator Green. PM–52. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1 Washington, September 1, 1960 SUBJECT Various Problems Relating to Panama Including the Flag Issue PARTICIPANTS The President Secretary of State Herter Major General Wilton B. Persons, Assistant to the President Livingston T. Merchant, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Wilbur Brucker, Secretary of the Army George H. Roderick, Assistant Secretary of the Army Lt. Col. John S. Eisenhower, Assistant Staff Secretary (The attached memorandum for the President2 which had been intended to be jointly signed and jointly presented to the President by the Secretary and Governor Brucker as being reflective of the talk yesterday between Messrs. Herter and Brucker, was not given to the President in light of Governor Brucker’s unwillingness, expressed just prior to going into the President’s office, to concur in item IV “Flying

Panama 975 any way our treaties in force with Panama. The Secretary added that he believed Secretary Brucker, who would wish to speak to this point, thought the flag should be flown, if such was the President’s decision, only on national holidays. The Secretary went on to say that time was important since agitation was beginning to build up on the issue in Panama, looking toward their national holiday on November 3, and it was important that the decision on our part should not be announced under circumstances of any apparent pressure on us. The Secretary indicated also that we should simultaneously start flying our flag daily in front of our Embassy. He concluded by pointing out that the so-­called Gross Amendment to the Department of Commerce appropriations bill prohibited the use of such funds for the erection of flag poles for this purpose and recommended that the necessary funds for construction be provided from the President’s own special projects fund. The President said that he thought only jingoistic criticism in this country would be aroused by this act on our part, and he saw no reason for being deterred. He admitted that there was some merit to the argument that if we flew the flag the Panamanians would interpret this as a concession on our part and demand further concessions from us. He felt strongly, however, that it was the right thing to do and said he would welcome the opportunity to defend the decision under political attack. He mentioned, however, his strong belief that we should fly our flag daily at our Embassy and that the Panamanians should understand in this general connection that we would do so. On the question of frequency of flying, he said he thought that if it were flown on holidays the principle was thereby established, and that there was no reason why it should not be flown on a daily basis. Governor Brucker then launched a long argument against flying the Panamanian flag under any circumstances. At the outset he noted that in his view it would be undesirable to give them any implication that we would be trading our right to fly our own flag at the Embassy for the flying of the Panama flag in the Canal Zone since this would look like a reciprocal agreement and not a voluntary act of grace on our part. (The President agreed on this point.) The Governor stated that newspaper editorials throughout the country were running 20 to l against the flying of the flag. He referred to the Gross Amendment and Selden Resolution4 in the House. He thought that the injection of this issue in the campaign in this country this fall would be emotional and

Panama 977 PM–53. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Panama1

Panama 979 Mission in Panama over the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone in matters affecting the relations between the United States and the Republic of Panama or any other nation. We said further that we would submit for your consideration draft letters to be sent by you to each of us confirming this relationship. I enclose for your consideration these draft letters.2 Secretary Brucker concurs in this memorandum. CHRISTIAN A. HERTER Christian A. Herter [Enclosure 1] Draft of a Letter from the President to the Secretary of the Army (Brucker)3 Dear Mr. Secretary: It is my desire that there should be clarification of the relationship between the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in Panama and the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone in matters affecting the relations between the United States and the Republic of Panama or any other nation. I therefore direct that in the exercise of his functions the Governor of the Canal Zone shall consult with the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of Panama on all matters which may have foreign affairs implications, and with respect to such matters shall be guided by the foreign policy considerations set forth by the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of Panama. In the event of their failure to agree with respect to any proposed action to which the chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of Panama shall object for reasons of foreign policy, such action shall be deferred pending a mutual decision thereon by the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of State. I would appreciate it if you would issue appropriate instructions to the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone. I am sending a copy of this letter to the Secretary of State for his information. Sincerely yours, 2 On September 12, the President signed and transmitted the texts of these letters to Secretary of State Herter and to Secretary of the Amy Brucker. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series) 3 Drafted by Long.

Panama 981 [Here follows a discussion of the President’s address which he was

Panama 983 considerations set forth by the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of Panama. In the event of their failure to agree with respect to any proposed action to which the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of Panama shall object for reasons of foreign policy, such action shall be deferred pending a mutual decision thereon by the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State.” If you agree with this draft, I would suggest that we two send a memorandum to the President requesting his approval and suggesting he issue us confirming instructions. If you have difficulty with this, I would be delighted to discuss the matter with you.3 With warmest personal regards, Most sincerely, Christian A. Herter

Panama 985 the genuine friendship existing between our two Governments and peoples, my Government has determined that as a voluntary act on the part of the United States, and in recognition of the titular sovereignty residing in the Republic of Panama with respect to the Canal Zone, the Panamanian flag will hereafter be flown together with the United States flag on a daily basis in the area known as Shaler’s Triangle in the Canal Zone. This determination is in nowise to be considered as modifying in any way the treaties and agreements in force between the United States and Panama. “Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.” Excellency: I have the honor to refer to the Panamanian note

Panama 987 and help from us this regard would be valuable. Initial reaction of diplomatic corp highly favorable. Discussions with Carter have been cooperative. Flags will be flown on or before September 20. Carter desirous formal but simple flag raising ceremony with President De la Guardia in attendance. Instructions in this regard desired at once.3

Panama 989 PM–62. Editorial Note In an exchange of notes on October 31, 1960, between Joseph S. Farland, the American Ambassador in Panama, and Galileo Solís, the Panamanian Minister of Foreign Relations, the United States Government and the Republic of Panama concluded an agreement that entered into force on October 31, 1960, whereby the Canal Zone Government and the Republic of Panama established procedures for the reciprocal recognition of motor vehicle operator’s licenses. For the texts of the notes exchanged, see 12 UST 301. Documentation concerning the negotiation of this agreement is in decimal file 611.1913. PM–63. Memorandum from the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Stoessel) to the President’s Staff Secretary (Goodpaster)1 Washington, November 2, 1960. SUBJECT Recent Developments in U.S. Economic Assistance to Panama Under Secretary Dillon has suggested that the President might be interested in recent developments concerning United States economic assistance to Panama. At his request, the enclosed brief summary has been prepared which, if convenient, you may wish to bring to the attention of the President. Walter J. Stoessel, Jr. [Enclosure] RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN U.S. ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE TO PANAMA Upon the recommendation of all interested agencies, on October 31 Under Secretary Dillon approved an allocation from FY 1961 Contingency Funds of $6.0 million for emergency assistance to Panama, of which $5.0 million is to be a fifteen year loan to help the recently

Paraguay: U.S. Relations with Paraguay PA–1. Letter from the Ambassador in Paraguay (Ploeser) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Asuncion, March 21, 1958. Dear Dick: It is generally understood that Paraguay is certainly in a transitional period. Paraguayan politics, as you know, are rarely dull. At the moment, the Colorado Party has a factional fight, and the Liberals and Fehreristas and elements of the Catholic Church are all showing activity which tends to cause unrest and uncertainty. In each of these segments of activity, we find active support of the Communist groups, even in the case of the Priest Ramón Talavera. He has had among his principal advisors a well-known Communist, Miguel Chasse Sardi. These have all been reported to the Department, and there will be more to come. All of this puts the political sagacity and astuteness of President Stroessner to the supreme test. It is our opinion here that any disorderly change in the Government might, at least for a substantial period, be an open door for Communist infiltration of the government, and that the Communists, by their infiltration technique, are in a position to act quickly. The Stroessner government believes, and so do we, that there are some Communists who have already infiltrated. While we have some suspicions as to who they may be, the Government of Paraguay is not always in a position to have documentary proof or adequate evidence to make a dismissal in the face of opposition to such dismissal. The pattern has been clear in certain instances. The action of the President in some of his very important decisions shows a total unwillingness to yield to the influences of these people.

Paraguay 993 enterprise operation only. In my opinion, the government of Paraguay would give this their blessing. (2) A grant which would complete the Chaco Road connecting Bolivia and Paraguay to be done as a U.S. gesture to the economic benefit of the two nations – Bolivia and Paraguay. This should be tied into the use of whatever funds are to be extended to Bolivia so that the road (a portion of the Pan-American highway) properly ties into the capital of Bolivia and the capital of Paraguay. Bolivia imports a substantial part of her food. Paraguay has fertile soil and could well feed many times its population. The economy of the two countries are in many ways complementary. They are also the only two land-­locked nations in South America and should pose no problem to those in the Department who might be understandably concerned over the problem of precedence insofar as grant aid to Paraguay is concerned. This is an international, two-­nation plan. I want to make clear that there is no present request on the part of Paraguay for grant aid or charity in any form. If we make such a grant, it should be done in adequate amount, in a manner to emphasize the international aspect, and with every precaution to avoid the appearance of being a reluctant giver. I am not talking about an exorbitant amount of money. I believe that with the start that has been made on the Chaco Road, with the help of the ranchers in the area and of the Mennonites, and with the use of the military, which is important, on the construction, that the amount would not be excessive. I would want to get these figures for you; perhaps $5 million could accomplish what we want insofar as the Paraguayan end is concerned. This gesture might well be timed with the Nixon visit,2 ­probably just prior to his arrival so that he may take the bows when he gets here. This is particularly beneficial to Bolivia because it means cheaper food and a higher standard of living as a result. As it is now, I understand that most of Bolivia’s food is imported from the Argentine, none competitively. While this would not be detrimental to the economy of Argentina, which has a worldwide market, it would be a new life line for Bolivia and Paraguay. Storm and the other solid people within the government of Paraguay are extraordinarly strong advocates of access to the Bolivian market and the use of Bolivian minerals. (3) The quick approval of the public works program which we have presented to the DLF, (Additional supporting technical information is being prepared.) (a) The Brazilian road, (b) the Ayala-Oviedo road, (c) telecommunications. All three of these projects are of equal economic growth benefit and constitute the unlocking of Paraguay to other sections of the world – not Bolivia.

Paraguay 995 Maintain policy of strict non-­intervention in Paraguay’s internal affairs, but a. Encourage leaders of Government to move toward more democratic forms. 2. Economic Continue to support Paraguay’s stabilization program with financial assistance for sound development projects but with emphasis on finishing projects now under way. Export-Import Bank Loans: Sympathetically consider applications for specific documented development projects with Paraguay’s debt carrying capacity. Specifically, support Paraguay’s request for additional $917,500 to complete waterworks project. Development Loan Fund: Support Paraguayan requests for loans to a. cover local currency costs of Export-Import Bank projects already under way. b. cover both dollar and local currency costs of a basic communications system and surfacing of road to Brazil. c. cover dollar costs of expansion of electric power facilities at Asunción, Encarnación and Villarrica. d. provide small dollar credits of developmental nature to business and industry through a development bank-­type institution. P.L. 4802 Agreement: Support sale of surplus agricultural products to Paraguay when this will not interfere with normal marketings of other supplying countries. 2 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of

Paraguay 997 Washington visit,3 that unjustified insinuations and veiled threats are not repeat not conducive to cooperation toward solution Paraguay’s economic problems. Meanwhile will appreciate cable summarizing your responses to FM on above aspects of his statements4. ACTING 3 Rubottom met with [illegible in the original] in New York and later reported to Ambassador Ploeser in Paraguay that [illegible in the original] had expressed views similar to [illegible in the original] described in Embassy despatch 111, but that he has not pressed them in any objectionable way. Rubottom also indicated that he made no com-

Paraguay 999 last July, and subsequently to reorganize itself throughout the country; municipal elections, with opposition participation, would be held soon; the electoral laws were to be liberalized; and constitutional reform would be carried out. Mr. Rubottom commented that Mr. Herbert L. Matthews, editorial writer of The New York Times was planning to visit Paraguay for several days in mid-October. Mr. Rubottom suggested that Mr. Matthews’ presence would afford an excellent opportunity for the GOP to demonstrate its sincerity about liberalizing the regime. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the press of this country is wont to describe the GOP as one of the three remaining dictatorships in the hemisphere. Mr. Rubottom said that he knew the Paraguayans would accord Mr. Matthews their renowned hospitableness; but he hoped the government would also encourage Mr. Matthews to go beyond official circles and out among the people of Paraguay, and even among the political opposition. The Minister intimated that the GOP has nothing to hide, would warmly welcome Mr. Matthews and would be glad to have him know, and to publish the truth about, Paraguay. Mr. Rubottom said he thought that it would be extremely important to Paraguay at this juncture for it to become widely known that the GOP is seriously working to eliminate its authoritarian character. The Minister noted that the August 15 inauguration of President Stroessner for a five-­year term went off smoothly except for one discordant note which disappointed the President considerably. The ­opposition Liberal Party directorate had been invited to participate in the ceremonies. Instead of graciously accepting like good Paraguayans, or at least sending calling cards to the Presidential Palace, they had transmitted a long, rude, manifesto denouncing the Stroessner government. The Minister implied that while the government is ready to do its part toward establishing political harmony in the country, it cannot go far without the cooperation of the opposition. Returning to economic matters, the Minister said that he wished to express, in behalf of President Stroessner and himself, Paraguay’s heartfelt gratitude for what the United States has done to assist the country. However, Paraguay desperately needed, and had to have, more help. While remarkable economic progress had been achieved in recent years, Paraguay was still lacking adequate roads and river transportation facilities to get her products on the markets of the world. Besides acquiring better transport, the country also needs to increase production, and in order to do this its people must have farm implements, machinery, fencing material, silos, warehouses. Paraguay had every reason to be proud of its unfaltering effort, with U.S. aid and guidance, to carry out a currency stabilization plan. However, stable currency, desirable though it may be, is meaningless to the average

Paraguay 1001 it was to the interest of the entire hemisphere that the malignancy be speedily removed. Should Bolivia be permitted to fall into chaos and its evil effects spread, as they most surely would, Paraguay would probably be the first of Bolivia’s neighbors to suffer. Mr. Rubottom suggested that Bolivia was to be pitied, rather than envied, by Paraguay. The Minister was in agreement with both observations. He went on, nevertheless, to note that following the Paraguayan-Bolivian war over the Chaco, the various nations participating in the settlement had agreed to help toward the economic recovery of both countries; but those which had actually contributed anything had given much more to Bolivia. He said the United States had been particularly generous to Bolivia, to the discomfiture of Paraguay. The Minister emphasized that Paraguayan-Bolivian relations are good at present. There remained, however, the question of a border settlement on the northwest boundary. The Paraguayans fear the Bolivians will cause trouble if oil is discovered in the Chaco. Therefore, the United States should try to understand Paraguayan alarm when the United States grants large-­scale assistance to Bolivia—­including arms. Mr. Rubottom said that he was under the impression that the subject of arms to Bolivia was cleared up when Paraguayan officials mentioned it to him and other U.S. officials who accompanied Vice President Nixon on his South American tour last spring. Mr. Rubottom recalled that earlier this year the United States had given Bolivia an insignificant amount of military assistance, solely for internal security, and consisting only of technical advice and a handful of weapons for the Palace Guard. He said he would be glad to provide the Minister with precise data in the matter if he wanted it. The Minister declared that he himself believed what he had been told, and had only wanted to point out that the Paraguayan masses, who are not acquainted with the facts, are naturally disturbed when they hear of U.S. arms and large sums of money going into Bolivia. The thought of U.S. arms and money falling into the hands of irresponsible Bolivians such as Juan Lechin, the leftist labor leader, was particularly disturbing to Paraguayans. Mr. Rubottom returned to the idea that Paraguay is not, and would not want to be, in the same position in which Bolivia finds herself. A for Bolivia’s Lechin,3 he said he understood that his influence in Bolivian affairs had been on the wane for some time [and amounted to practically nothing at present.] Mr. Rubottom stressed that U.S. activities in behalf of Bolivia are solely for the purpose of helping a member of the Latin American community that has fallen into dire distress, and that to bring that country back to economic health and self-­respect would mean strengthening the hemisphere, and indeed the free world, as a whole. With regard to any Paraguayan fears of an armed attack by 3 [illegible in the original].

Paraguay 1003 of this country. He mentioned the tremendous cost to the U.S. public of our foreign aid efforts since the last war and the fact that protests from the overburdened taxpayers are making it increasingly difficult as the years go by for the government to secure Congressional appropriations to continue the assistance programs. Mr. Rubottom stressed that we are together in the hemisphere and in the free world. He also stressed the gratitude which the United States feels toward Paraguay, a valued and respected partner, for her cooperation and support toward the realization of common ideals. Mr. Rubottom praised the high moral standards of the hard-­working Paraguayan people and their ability, in the face of adversity, to uphold the good name of their country. Mr. Rubottom thought the Minister would agree (and he said he did) that in the past the United States had demonstrated its willingness to help Paraguay solve her problems. Referring to the Minister’s earlier allusion to what Paraguay regarded as slowness on the part of the Development Loan Fund in attending to Paraguay’s requests, Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the DLF is a new organization which has encountered a number of delays in getting under way. Nevertheless, the DLF had already definitely committed $6.1 million for use in Paraguay which placed Paraguay in the forefront among the Latin American countries which had obtained benefits from the DLF. Furthermore, the DLF was actively considering additional loans for Paraguay. Mr. Rubottom said that there is no doubt in his mind that Paraguay will, in the coming years and as she grows, continue to qualify for loans from the United States, although we naturally could not commit outselves to any projects or amounts in advance of dear justification by cases. The Minister laughed and said, “There you go, speaking as a banker!” The Minister then described what Paraguay is doing with regard to the problem of river transportation. He told of a $1.9 ­million agreement signed recently with Spain for the purchase of three river ­steamers and five barges; and of current negotiations with Japan over a proposed $3.8 million deal for the purchase of five cargo ships, a refrigerated barge and a cattle boat. He stated that if an agreement is consummated as expected, it will mean the entry into Paraguay of

Paraguay 1005 PA–8. Despatch from the Ambassador in Paraguay (Ploeser) to the Department of State1 Asunción, September 9, 1959. No. 100. SUBJECT Ambassador’s Report on the Objectives, Progress and Projections of the American Mission in Paraguay2 CONTENTS 1. Objectives in Paraguay 2. Economic 3. Political 4. United States Information Service 5. Army Attaché 6. United States Air Force Mission 7. United States Army Mission 1. Objectives in Paraguay The objectives of the United States Embassy, as pursued during the past two years in Paraguay, have been: to stabilize the economy and to lay a sound base for development; to establish a mutuality of understanding and confidence so that economic assistance could be programmed with the common purpose of supporting both U.S. policy and Paraguay’s national self-­interest; to educate the political thinking of the Government to cooperate with United States objectives in regional and world organizations; to nurture in the people of Paraguay an attitude of friendship and respect for the people of the United States and for our Government; to avoid all appearances of condoning the dictatorship of General Alfredo Stroessner and letting it be clearly known that similar cooperation would be extended to any other non-Communist regime which might come to power in Paraguay; and to initiate and foster steps toward democracy in a way that would give no honest pretext for charges of interference. Measure of Achievement We believe that: the measures taken to bring about monetary and fiscal stability have been uniquely successful;

Paraguay 1007 inflationary pressures had to be resisted, and that a sound foundation for development had to be laid down. This Embassy has [text not declassified] supported the contract for continuing monetary stability between the GOP and the IMF.4 Our dealings with the Government have been a synthesis of respect and firmness, and we believe that it is not egotistical to suggest that this relationship has been one of the fundamental reasons for the unique success of the stabilization program in Paraguay since its inception in late 1957. At the risk of interrupting the narrative here, we want to make a point of the fact that the Resident Representative of the IMF in Paraguay, Kemal Kurdas, has cooperated with the Embassy so effectively and continuously [text not declassified] What has been said of Kemal Kurdas can also be said of Ing. Gustavo Storm, until a few days ago, President of the Central Bank. Ing. Storm has been a strong rampart of support for the stabilization program. His policies were formed in constant consultation with the Embassy, with the USOM/P and with the IMF. It can be added that there has been an atmosphere of complete integrity maintained between the Ambassador and President Alfredo Stroessner. It has been this pattern of honest and open dealing with the President that has made it possible for the Ambassador to obtain his cooperation with the stabilization program in the face of violent attacks—and there have been many violent attacks—by certain members of the Paraguayan cabinet. The credits extended in the public sector, e. g., the $2,500,000 for the Brasil Road in 1958 and the $1,000,000 for telecommunications in 1959,5 were timed so as to influence the renewal of the stabilization agreements of those years. [text not declassified] This avoided a crisis at the time the stabilization agreement was up for renewal and this action appears to have successfully forestalled the devious efforts of the communist organization to unleash a general strike. The Embassy received praise from the IMF representatives,

Paraguay 1009 5. American Business Group The Ambassador believes that a U.S. Embassy represents not alone the Government of the U.S., but also the people and that it is the responsibility of the Embassy to have helpful contact with Americans abroad. It has been his policy to receive visiting Americans and to emphasize to those having business in Paraguay that it is the duty and pleasure of the American Mission to serve them. It is suggested that we hope their interest is to develop, not to exploit, and to make friends for the U.S. business generally. Twenty-­two months ago the Ambassador organized on an invitation basis occasional group meetings of Americans doing business in Paraguay. These meetings were held approximately once monthly in the office of the Ambassador. The current economic conditions were discussed as well as the current American program and policy. On September 4, l959, the group gave the Ambassador a farewell asado and a silver tray as a memento of appreciation. The group has an excellent spirit. To qualify for attendance the guest must be a citizen of the United States. It has been mutually beneficial. In September 1956, while the State Department inspectors were working in Paraguay, the Ambassador held a meeting so as to permit them to attend and observe for themselves. This practice should be continued. 6. Private Development Bank7 Second only to monetary stability, it has been recognized that the most important economic fact in Paraguay is the unavailability of equity and loan capital for private enterprise. As is true of the Latin American complex of nations, Paraguay has a few people of sizeable wealth and many who live just above the subsistence margin. A history of revolutions and inflations has always carried in its train a sequence of uneconomic investment, hoarding and capital flight. In May l956, the U.S. Ambassador proposed to a representative group of businessmen that a privately-­owned development bank be established. The idea was enthusiastically received. But being Paraguayans, they conceived of a bank in which Paraguayans would not have to invest any money—it would be totally financed by capital pledged from the United States and/or international sources. We have changed that idea! Through several open meetings and through the establishment of a voluntary businessmen’s committee, the Ambassador made it clear that help would be given only provided Paraguayans put up a substantial equity investment. It took more than one year to effect an organization,

Paraguay 1011 accommodate intermediate—and long-­term development loans of a modest size, and it could serve as a vehicle through which future loans could be channeled and most effectively applied in Paraguay; (2) Premised upon the elimination of the existing restrictive controls in cattle raising and meat processing, that a line of credit be extended to the larger cattle raisers whose needs would outrun the near-­term loan capabilities of a development bank; (3) That an objective but generous attitude be applied to loan applications to assist in feasible industrialization of forest products, milk processing, fruit packing, sugar-­mill renovation, cement plant and fiber development and utilization, and electric power facilities; (4) In the event the Government’s electric generation and distribution facility (Administración Nacional de Electricidad) is sold to an outside capable and experienced utility operator, that a loan for its renovation and expansion be seriously considered, if needed. b. To the Public Sector Géneral: (1) A basic need of any economy is transportation and communications. In this we must, of course, deal directly with the government. Under the present telecommunications program of Paraguay, ­completion will give the adequate communications facilities for the foreseeable future, but Paraguay needs roads and more roads to open up the country. This need, which is natural, is made all the more acute with the breakdown of the present antiquated railway system. In this regard we have been negotiating an engineering unit arrangement between the Paraguayan government, ICA and the United States Army, which will be most helpful but not enough. Paraguay will need loans for new roads and for the improvement of old roads. (2) The airport, because of its 9,000 ft. runway, is a suitable “Jet” station and Asunción is coming in for more and more air travel. Within two years a new hotel in down-­town Asunción should be completed. Then Asunción will definitely become a tourist attraction as the original “colonial city” (still colonial) and a most suitable location from which to visit Falls Iguazú. Apron and parking facilities at the airport should be given attention. (3) Loans to the public sector should be extended in harmony with the general philosophy, conditions and cautions set out in the Report of the Survey Team of the IBRD dated March 17, 1959,8 which lays 8 A summary of the report is contained in a memorandum from Carson to Rubottom,

Paraguay 1013 came to power in 1954 by a coup and was elected in a plebiscite and was re-­elected without opposition in 1958, for a five-­year term to expire on August 15, 1963. The GOP’s political weaknesses and instability in the inter-­ American system are of vital concern. All U.S. economic assistance and counseling has the basic objective of promoting its economic development and thereby political stability which will provide a favorable ­climate for the establishment of a more democratic government so that it may be a greater force for strength in the Western hemisphere. Stroessner, a so-­called “strong man” governing under the 1940 constitution has indicated that he would like to move towards democracy. The Ambassador in various speeches has encouraged Paraguay to take steps towards democratic reforms particularly in his April 13, 1959 speech in which he forcefully stated the U.S. position concerning democracy in the Western hemisphere and made clear that the U.S. position towards Paraguay is not in support of dictatorship as against democracy. In many private conversations the Ambassador has urged Stroessner to move toward democracy and has even made suggestions as to laws for free elections, free press, etc. In early 1958 President Stroessner promised Municipal elections and allowed the two opposition parties, Liberal and Febrerista, to hold conventions. Due to a political disturbance, these were nullified. Later, on May 29, 1959, the uni-­cameral Congress was dissolved due to a serious open split in the Colorado Party. The Colorado Party and the Army have been the base of Stroessner’s political strength. However, Stroessner’s waxing and waning of democratic moves now include the convocation of congressional elections in February 1960 in which the two opposition parties may participate. [text not declassified] The Embassy has concentrated on “the people of the U.S. to the people of Paraguay” theme in order not to appear that the U.S. is supporting “dictatorship” in Paraguay as against democracy and also to continue to lay a basis of friendship and cooperation between the two peoples in case of future changes in governments which may occur. In this regard, Embassy officials have kept contact not only with the Colorado Party and government officials but also with opposition party leaders whose members have been received and welcomed in the Embassy. The Embassy has continued to encourage free labor movement in labor circles in its personal contacts [text not declassified] The Communist Party (PCP) is small, disorganized, and illegal. Its principal threat lies in its penetrations into the various political parties, including the ruling Colorado Party, through which it contributes to political instability. The PCP has been active in the student and labor movements but has not gained a dominant position. Most of the PCP

Paraguay 1015 University of Texas in September. First time Paraguay has complied with IACC obligation. Two American professors are in National University, one lecturing in Economics, one advising on complete administrative and curricula revision to “Americanize” higher education in Paraguay. American professor budgeted for 1960 FY to aid Engineering faculty. On the darker side: PL–480 funds of Fullbright Commission will be spent in FY 1960; need more sales of excess agricultural products to finance long-­range educational program launched in 1958–59. Commentary The Embassy believes that the Bi-National Center in Paraguay is very important undertaking and that every effort should be made to expand its activities and coordinate them more in the public-­relations sense than in the purely academic sense, and we have really not begun to realize the full potential of this Center. Every effort will be made with the changing of the Director to set up a program which will comply with this goal. The Embassy believes that public relations, including the facet of publicity, is a two-­way street. A constant flow through the two main channels available in Paraguay’s controlled radio and controlled press of American information and propaganda has been extremely helpful here. It is in good hands, and we are enjoying good, voluminous copy. In the past two years we have also tried to pump into the U.S. press accurate information regarding Paraguay, its opportunities, and its relations with the U.S. While Paraguay is a small nation and does not deserve much space, we feel quite satisfied that it has had its amount proportionately for the first time in history. This channel should be kept open. It benefits our economic opportunities here for American enterprise and benefits Paraguay and certainly benefits relations between the two countries and U.S. objectives abroad. [5 pages text not declassified] Walter C. Ploeser

Paraguay 1017 PA–10. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Managing Director of the Development Loan Fund (Brand)1 Washington, November 17, 1959. Dear Vance: For about six weeks now Dr. Gustavo Storm has been in Washington conducting negotiations with U.S. Government agencies and the IBRD for a loan for a Paraguayan economic development bank which he is to head. I understand that the IBRD after consideration of Dr. Storm’s ­proposals has now made conditions that would preclude them from participating in the loan at this time. It is my understanding that the IBRD set up-­criteria which were beyond the capacity of the organizers of the bank. In view of the limited financial resources available in Paraguay it is clear that the IBRD requirements for additional capital participation by the Paraguayans and a substantial amount of junior capital from other sources could not be realized. There is an important need for a banking establishment in Paraguay dedicated to economic development loans. For over two years the government of Paraguay has adhered to a stabilization agreement which has called for a large degree of financial austerity. It has become the tendency of political and economic leaders in Paraguay to associate stabilization with reduced economic growth or even stagnation. An economic development bank could do much to allay the fears of Paraguay that the U.S. Government supports stabilization programs but is not as sympathetic to their economic development aspirations. In addition, there is a real economic justification for a development bank which would devote its resources to productive loans which cannot be made by the present banking system. ARA, therefore, supports the Paraguayan efforts to obtain a loan for each bank from the DLF. Since the IBRD has now decided not to participate at this time, we urge you to press forward with an arrangement with Dr. Storm on a more limited scale without the IBRD. ARA would envisage a bank which might have an initial Paraguayan capitalization of about $1 million and a loan from the DLF of about $2 million.

Paraguay 1019 PA–12. Memorandum of Conservation, Department of State1 Washington, September 29, 1960 SUBJECT U.S.-Paraguayan Relations PARTICIPANTS Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs Ambassador Harry F. Stimpson, Jr.2 C. A. Boonstra, Director, Office of East Coast Affairs, ARA Charles C. Carson, O-in-C, Paraguayan Affairs, ARA/EST William T. Pryos, Staff Aide, ARA Ambassador Stimpson reviewed his conversations regarding Paraguay’s political-­economic situation over the past two weeks with officials of the Department and other U.S. agencies and of certain international agencies. He stated that, out of those talks and out of his experiences in Asunción during the last twelve months, he had come to the conclusion that, the troublesome stigma of dictatorship of the Stroessner government notwithstanding, the U.S. should pursue a policy of working with the regime. [text not declassified] Meanwhile, he continued, we should encourage Paraguay to move forward with the nationwide municipal council elections slated for October 16 and, subsequently, with other steps toward more representative government. We should, for example, try discreetly to foster an agreement between the GOP and the opposition—­including the Liberal Party, the Febrerista Party and dissident elements of the ruling Colorrdo Party—­so that the latter, with guarantees of a free press and other civil liberties, could be persuaded to take part in the next congressional and presidential elections. The Ambassador noted that, the Paraguayans have amply demonstrated their friendship for the U.S. Surely it is in our best interests to try to preserve that reservoir of good will in the area. One of our primary political objectives in Paraguay should be to make certain that it continues to cooperate with U.S. policies in the OAS and in the UK. By diplomatic efforts we should do everything possible to maintain political stability in Paraguay—­and in the River Plate region generally—­and help to prevent any further communist and leftist infiltrations into the country from neighboring states. Our next step, once the threat to internal security is eliminated, should be to try to convince Paraguay of the wisdom of reducing the size of its armed forces and of using its now

Paraguay 1021 with the IADB’s subsequent operations in Paraguay, to include feeder roads off the Brazil hold and other developments aiding the exploitation of the newly-­opened fertile area of eastern Paraguay. 4. Special emphasis of the ICA should be on increasing production in the fields of stockraising and agriculture, with education and health being given second and third priorities respectively. (The Ambassador noted that in the field of education he favors more scholarships for Paraguayans to study in the U. S. and financial assistance for the construction of some normal schools in the interior of the country. He also noted that he favors the proposed ICA aid to a new public health center in Asunción but not at the expense of the more important priority of increased agricultural and pastoral production.) 5. If an expanded economic aid program becomes a reality in Paraguay, [illegible in the original] activities should be closely coordinated with the aim of making an appropriate impact on the population. The Ambassador said that in his talks with officials of the IADB he had found great sympathy for the current economic plight of Paraguay. He noted that Mr. Roger Williams, loan officer for the region, is planning a trip to Asunción about mid-November and that the Paraguayan Ambassador in Washington is returning home for consultations about the same time. He was hopeful that these consultations will result in some definite priorities and planning for Paraguay. The Ambassador said it is his impression that IADB officials are thinking of assistance to Paraguay during the first year of operations to the extent of some $5 million—with perhaps about $1 million for the National Development Institute and rest of the remainder for the hydroelectric project. It might also be necessary for the Bank to expend something on feasibility studios. [text not declassified] The Ambassador notes that save for the continuity of regular ICA technical assistance and a small food distribution program under Title III of P.L.-480 the U.S. has not given new help to Paraguay over the past twelve months. Meanwhile, most serious deterioration of the economy had occurred. He said he felt that the time is long over due for getting U.S.-Paraguayan relationships out of the doldrums. The Ambassador reiterated that he feels very strongly we ought to proceed without delay to assist the GOP with the two banks, the hydroelectric project, further road construction and with other credits as may seem appropriate to increase national production and exports. He concluded by saying that he wished to receive guidance from the Department before returning to his post since he did not wish to be placed in the position of having definite recommendations by the Embassy along the above lines repeated in Washington on grounds of the dictorship issue.

1023 Peru: U.S. Relations with Peru PE–1. Editorial Note In a letter of January 27, 1958, to Per Jacobsson, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Peruvian Minister of Finance and Commerce Augusto Thorndike proposed a $25 million standby arrangement. The Embassy in Peru transmitted a copy of this letter

Peru 1025 further information, see International Bank for Reconstruction and

Peru 1027 that this credit, the largest single military credit extended to any Latin American government, was arranged at the request of the Peruvian Government at a time when the U.S. was unable to agree to the loan or sale of any naval vessels from its Reserve Fleet. He also pointed out that the U.S., at the request of the Peruvian Government, recently agreed to the postponement of payments on the principal of this loan for three years in order to ease Peru’s balance of payments problems.4 Mr. Rubottom said that, for the purpose of developing Latin American anti-­submarine warfare capability, two destroyers are earmarked for Peru under the pending naval ship loan bill. Under the same program, Chile is scheduled to receive two destroyers and two submarines, so that it can improve its ability to defend its long sea lines of communications. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that this information had long been known to Peru and had been the subject of discussions between Prime Minister Cisneros and Ambassador Achilles a year ago. With regard to the maintenance work being done on the two Chilean cruisers in U.S. shipyards under the Mutual Security Program, Mr. Rubottom said that it would cost not $10 million but approximately $4 million. He also pointed out that we similarly assist Peru in the maintenance of units of its Navy—for example, the three destroyer escorts it obtained from the U.S. in 1951. He said that the Chilean cruisers had been brought to the U.S. because the maintenance could best be done here, whereas the maintenance of Peruvian vessels could be done in Peruvian shipyards with spare parts furnished by the U.S. He said that it would seem to be advantageous to Peru to have maintenance work on its vessels done in Peru rather than in the U.S., thus providing additional work for its shipyards. Referring to the rumors that Chile might be obtaining an aircraft carrier, Mr. Rubottom said he could assure the Ambassador that Chile was not getting one from the U.S. and that, so far as he knew, was not obtaining one elsewhere either. As for the cancellation of arrangements for Peru to purchase destroyers from the UK, Mr. Rubottom said that the Peruvians themselves had informed the U.S. that they had decided not to buy the vessels. He pointed out that Admiral Llosa had given Admiral Peterson this information on August 5, 1957, and Ambassador Berckemeyer acknowledged that this was correct. Mr. Rubottom said that, if the Peruvians had agreed to buy the destroyers from the UK, he felt sure that the latter would have sold them, whether the U.S. felt it to be desirable or not. 4 The agreement under reference was concluded by a note of January 9 from Finance Minister Thorndike to Ambassador Achilles in Peru. A copy of that note was transmitted

Peru 1029 conscious of your deep personal concern with international affairs and of the steadfastness with which you and your representatives have supported constructive measures to advance the cause of world peace with justice. I have also followed with great interest the impressive progress made during your administration in the consolidation of true democracy in Peru and in the maintenance of a free and stable economy. Peru and the United States share a firm dedication to the principles of liberty and freedom, and we have also dedicated ourselves with high purpose to the Organization of American States, an inspiring example of peaceful regional cooperation among nations. Long united by bonds of closest friendship, our countries will, I am confident, work together with even greater good will and understanding in the years to come. In extending my personal regard to Your Excellency, I desire to convey to you and to your countrymen the sincere best wishes of the people of the United States for the continued welfare of your great nation.5 Sincerely, 5 In his reply of May 13 to President Eisenhower, President Prado commented favorably on the subjects raised in President Eisenhower’s letter and he stressed the need for U.S. participation in efforts to achieve [illegible in the ­original] in Latin America. PE–6. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles)1 Lima, May 7, 1958. SUBJECT Political and Economic Situation PARTICIPANTS Manuel Prado, President of Peru Raúl Porras Barrenechea, Foreign Minister (last part only) Richard M. Nixon, Vice President of the U. S. Roy R. Rubottom, Asst. Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs Theodore C. Achilles, Ambassador to Peru

Peru 1031 to trade unions but included politicians and students. Twenty of the latter had recently returned from a visit behind the Iron Curtain. President Prado mentioned his long-­standing antipathy to Communism and his efforts in 1942 to persuade President Roosevelt that Communism would be a major threat after the war. Neither Roosevelt nor Mrs. Roosevelt had agreed. In response to the Vice President’s request, he agreed that the latter might refer in his press conference tomorrow to President Prado’s long-­standing antipathy to Communism and that he continued to hold the same views. In concluding the conversation, the President stated that Peru shared U.S. principles on both economic and political matters and that Peru could always be depended upon as a friend of the U.S. in the UN and elsewhere. He mentioned his initiative for coordination between the OAS and NATO in dealing with the world Communist threat. The Vice President expressed appreciation for Peru’s cooperation. PE–7. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor for Economic Affairs of the Embassy in Peru (Linville)1 Lima, May 8, 1958. PARTICIPANTS Mr. Augusto Thorndike, Minister of Finance and Commerce; Mr. Federico Hilbok, Minister of Development & Public Works; Mr. Andres Dasso, President Central Reserve Bank; Mr. Hipólito Larrabure, General Manager Central Reserve Bank; Mr. Fernando Berckemeyer, Peruvian Ambassador to the U. S.; Rud. Carlos Jurgens, Archbishop of Cuzco; Mr. Herbert Havlik, I.B.R.D. Mission to Peru; Mr. Roger Chaufournier, I.B.R.D. Mission to Peru; Mr. Samuel G. Waugh, President Export-­ Import Bank and Francis A. Linville. SUBJECT PERUVIAN ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND POLITICAL PROBLEMS. Mr. Thorndike said that Peru’s need for economic assistance from abroad is very great. Something must be done to improve the economic position of the Indian population, especially in the South of Peru. In that area the Communists have become very strong. He asked the Archbishop of Cuzco, who had played a vital role in maintaining peace

Peru 1033 The Archbishop said that the basic cause of the serious situation in the South is economic - too little work and too little income. Mr. Waugh spoke of the active role being played by Communist groups in Uruguay and Bolivia and of the determined anticommunist activity by the Government in Paraguay. He commented on the need to work against Communism through the schools, labor unions and the church. Financial Problems of Peru Mr. Waugh said that the Exim Bank had decided a few years ago that the greatest help it could give to Peru would be by making loans to private companies, especially in the field of mining where large investments are needed. Later the Bank began to make numerous equipment loans to sugar mills, chemical plants, etc. It also made a loan to finance hospital equipment, though it is not particularly interested in loans of this type. He said he believed that more small loans had been made to finance supplies for Peru than for any other Latin American country, except perhaps Mexico or Brazil. He said he had been discouraged by Peru’s failure to pass legislation which would make it feasible for the Marcona Mining Co. to expand its operation. The Exim Bank is prepared to loan about $10 million for this purpose, while $15 million or more would come from other sources. This would help Peru’s foreign exchange situation both immediately and in the long run. He said he wondered if it had been a good idea to include the legislation for the Marcona project in a bill covering an entirely unrelated irrigation project. The Minister of Finance said that there was strong political backing for the irrigation project but that it had run into some difficulties since congressmen from other regions had raised objections to the use of all the Marcona royalties for this project. However, he thought the bill in question would have been passed by Congress if the session had not come to end so soon. He anticipates that the bill will be passed quite promptly by the next session of Congress. Mr. Waugh said that the United States makes funds available through the Exim Bank and, as one stockholder, through the I.B.R.D. The two banks try to coordinate their programs. They exchange information regularly. Mr. Waugh said that Peru badly needs coordination of its development programs. It is very difficult for the Exim Bank to know what projects to assist because Peru has worked out no system of priorities. It shifts from one project to another in accordance with political pressures of the moment. Peru should have an inter-­agency planning group with a small staff. Some of the political pressures to which the individual

Peru 1035 PE–8. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles)1 Lima, May 8, 1958. SUBJECT Anti-Nixon Demonstrations, Boundary Dispute and Armaments PARTICIPANTS Sr. Raúl PORRAS Barrenechea, Foreign Minister Dr. Augusto THORNDIKE, Finance Minister Vice President Nixon Assistant Secretary Rubottom T. C. Achilles Col. Walters (Interpreter) Contrary to his established custom of not making calls on Foreign Ministers, the Vice President called on Sr. Porras this afternoon on the advice of the Embassy and at the insistence of the Finance Minister, in view of the delicate psychological situation arising from the anti-American demonstrations this morning.2 The Foreign Minister opened the conversation by advising the Vice President of the Peruvian Government’s regret at this morning’s incidents and of his action in ordering that the floral tribute containing the American and Peruvian flags be reproduced and replaced at the statue of San Martin. The Vice President expressed appreciation and understanding that the incidents in no way reflected the true feelings of Peru. He hoped that they would serve to alert Peru to the extent and immediacy of the danger. The Foreign Minister then discussed the Ecuadoran frontier problem along the lines he had taken with me on May 6,3 namely that it was both important to settle the problem quickly as this matter of demarcating a few kilometers was poisoning the atmosphere of the whole continent and promoting a chain reaction of armament increases. The Vice President and Mr. Rubottom reiterated the interest of the United

Peru 1037 have come to Catholic University and found that there is such freedom.” During meeting Communist demonstrators from San Marcos set up rival loudspeaker but students severed wires. In meantime, Communist agitators led group from San Marcos to Plaza San Martin where they marched around Plaza changing “no se vende Peru.” Police kept crowd from hotel and it gathered around statue San Martin. Crowd took floral offering VP had placed hour earlier and tore off U.S. flag done in flowers as well as part of center depicting U.S. leaving only Peruvian flag and SA. Police made no effort prevent desecration U.S. flag. Wreath was replaced by government at 7:30 p.m. under police protection. VP party returned hotel from Catholic university 11:30 a.m. and crowd upon seeing his car broke from statue and surged toward hotel. Traffic prevented VP car proceeding to hotel and he descended and walked remaining 200–300 yards. Crowd shook fists, spit and threw leaflets and some fruit, while shouting and waving placards. Police conducted VP hotel and demonstration continued another 15 minutes when assault guard finally moved in swinging clubs and crowd scattered. Possibly 50–75 students represented nucleus demonstration with maybe 400–500 more curious onlookers. Police chased leaders all way back to San Marcos. Remainder VP schedule rearranged because these events. At press conference VP said he was advised not go San Marcos but decided he should because important not allow minority element deny freedom expression in great university. Stated principal concern safety innocent students and had cautioned police against pushing students. Said he was touched by Peruvian expression regret including Foreign Minister, VP, etc., and desire of Rector San Marcos apologize. Said no official protest made and none necessary. Had not had contact as yet with President. Said it was not personal affront but demonstrators were spitting on Peru, on ideals of San Martin and millions who have fought for liberty. Regretted effect on San Marcos because no university great that cannot assure freedom of expression. Said the day will live in infamy in history San Marcos. Demonstrators he said [illegible in the original] not physical but intellectual cowardice because they are afraid of truth. They thought they had won victory [illegible in the original] suffered defeat because they had shown [illegible in the original] they [illegible in the original]. Peru now knows what would [illegible in the original] most [illegible in the original].

Peru 1039 military aid also needed to maintain armed forces as strong stabilizing and anti-Communist element. (4) Pain of favorable reaction diminished by wide criticism here, and reprinting of criticism in U.S. press, over sending U.S. troops to Caribbean. (5) Events here and at Caracas dramatically revealed ability of Communists in LA to arouse mob support and cause trouble. This demonstration of Communist strength has obviously caused jubilation in Moscow and presumably impressed uncommitted peoples everywhere. (6) Immediate effect in Peru has been in some respects strongly favorable to U.S., in other unfavorable. Long-­term effect here and elsewhere will depend upon whether (1) Communists are emboldened to stir up even stronger anti-U.S. feeling and obtain wider support in doing so, or (2) public opinion in the Americas is sufficiently alerted to Communist threat to their own freedom to check further Communist proselyting and assure effective government action. This presents real challenge to all of us, particularly in field. (7) More fundamental problem is how U.S. can overcome latent antipathy aroused by its power and periodic resentment over its policies or action, from which Communists get wider support, or preferably transform these feelings into friendly ones. We occasionally get credit for our unselfish and altruistic use of our mighty position but only occasionally. This requires good presentation abroad but, more fundamentally, avoidance of any moral basis whatever for criticism. (I recall Secretary’s simile of “spot of coal dust on face of movie actress far more conspicuous than same amount on face of miner”). It means not repeat not preaching but making obviously clear in deeds as well as words our devotion to our basic ideals. Among other things it means finding better answer than we have in past, and VP in statements here, Caracas and elsewhere has made much progress toward it, to problem of making clear our antipathy to dictatorships without slipping into intervention. It means, without in any way impairing our policies of developing individual and collective strength, de-­emphasizing as far as possibly military aspects of our policy. This involves maximizing civilian, and controlling military, influence on foreign policy. It means making our economic policies and actions conform to those we profess, those we know to be in real national interest, and avoiding insofar as possible damage to friendly countries. This involves obtaining frequent majorities in Congress along lines of national rather than local or sectional interest. This presents even greater challenge to us all, particularly to those at home.

Peru 1041 democracy in Peru. France was not the only country struggling at the moment with a “crise de regime”. Peru was too and for the same reason, a very wide-­spread feeling that the Government did not or could not exert sufficient authority to deal with the country’s pressing problems. I said that until a few months ago most of the dissatisfaction in Peru had been directed not toward revolution but toward more or less complete Cabinet changes. This was encouraging evidence of a growing maturity of democracy in Peru. At the present time, unfortunately, many people, and not just habitual conspirators or malcontents such as the Miro Quesadas,3 junior Army officers or the Accion Popular but honest and substantial people, were saying that it was too late for the situation to be solved by a Cabinet change since the President himself was unwilling sufficiently to face up to the problems involved. I hoped profoundly that they were wrong and that Peru could still show that political maturity which I believed it was capable of showing and which I knew was his primary objective. I hoped that the situation could still be saved but believed that the hour was already very late. It would be presumptions for me or any foreigner to offer him advice but I hoped that he could profit from the advice of the wisest, most honest, strongest and most patriotic Peruvians he knew, particularly those outside the Government, since there were always more good men outside any Government than in it, and that he would then act as his conscience dictated, but firmly. To my surprise the President both listened to what I had to say without interruption and took it in good part. He launched into a long discussion which he continued for half an hour, although he was repeatedly interrupted by telephone calls and his aides advising him that others were waiting. He began with a diatribe against Pedro Beltrán. During his previous Administration4 he had offered Beltrán various Cabinet posts but the latter had declined and accepted only the Embassy in Washington.5 During his present Administration he had again at various times offered Beltrán Cabinet posts but the latter, while incessantly criticizing, refused to accept responsibility. Beltrán was playing a double game, accusing the Government of not exercising authority and at the same time stirring up dissatisfaction against it. He turned to attack the leading bankers, particularly Enrique Ayulo, President of the Banco de Credito, and Alfredo Alvarez Calderon, principal lawyer for the Bankers Association. He recounted their past 3 Reference is to the Miro Quesada family which stood on the extreme right in Peruvian politics. 4 The previous administration of President Prado was during the period December

Peru 1043 against Communists but that in each case he had been widely accused of incipient dictatorship. I reiterated the hope that he could find answers to his pressing problems which would be both democratic and effective and that he could obtain the advice, assistance and support of the best men he could find outside as well as inside the Government. He thanked me and said that he would be glad to receive me at any time I wished to discuss such matters with him. I said I had nothing further to say at this time but that I understood the French Ambassador,9 wished to talk with him along similar lines. (I learned later that he has asked the French Ambassador to see him at 7:00 p.m. tonight.) Our conversation concerning Mr. John R. Neale has been reported separately.10 9 Léon Brasseur.

Peru 1045 being granted an increase for their products?” I said no; that first it was forcing a 15 ­per cent wage increase on them4 and then not allowing them to increase the price on their products. I explained that IPC was partially owned by Standard Oil of New Jersey which was not only influential in the U. S. financial circles but also has holdings throughout the world; therefore, any adverse decisions affecting the company is quickly known throughout the world and carries great influence in financial circles. Gallo Porras said that I had seen what the local effect of an increase in price granted to the retailers of gasoline had been. He said he didn’t see how an increase could be granted to IPC at this time. I said the company was making no money. Gallo Porras acted rather surprised and said, “No?” I said, “Very little, if any.” As a result I felt certain it would be necessary for IPC to curtail activities (Mr. Ashworth, the manager of IPC, had already informed me that he was closing six of his eleven drilling rigs and laying off 560 workers but that IPC had not yet informed the Government.) and cut personnel. Gallo Porras said, “Well, they have too many workers anyway.” I said I didn’t know, but laying off personnel would cause a problem— which Gallo Porras admitted. I told the Minister I was leaving him copies of two notes which we had sent to the Foreign Office regarding taxes which affected Americans.5 The “foreigners tax” was causing us a great amount of difficulties and was a source of constant complaint by American citizens. I said we felt the tax unjust and discriminatory and that it should be repealed, I showed him the Foreign Office reply6 received today saying our Note had been referred to Congress for appropriate committee handling. I stated that was not satisfactory since time was a factor and Americans would have to pay the tax before July 1. I stated what we desired was an immediate suspension of the law until Congress could repeal it. I said we would appreciate a decree by the President or if proper, one by him as Minister of Treasury. Gallo Porras said he didn’t know anything about this but would look into it.7 The other note we wore leaving with him concerned the increase in taxes on American firms - the complementary-­tax. I pointed out to

Peru 1047 PE–13. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of West Coast Affairs (Silberstein)1 Washington, June 24, 1958. SUBJECT Peru’s Financial Problems PARTICIPANTS Sr. Pedro Beltran, Editor and Publisher of La Prensa, Lima W – Mr. Dillon OSA – Mr. Silberstein Sr. Beltran referred to conversations he had been having with Mr. Waugh and his staff at the Export-Import Bank,2 and also with Mr. Rubottom,3 concerning Peru’s financial problems. He said he was very encouraged by the reception he had had. He thanked Mr. Dillon for giving him the opportunity to acquaint him directly concerning these problems. Peru is now facing a critical balance of payments situation, similar to that of Colombia and some of the other Latin American countries. Colombia’s crisis came upon it rather precipitously, while Peru’s developed more gradually because of the substantial exchange reserves built up in 1956. However, as world prices of Peru’s raw materials exports declined, these reserves had been consumed during the last half of 1957, because of the mistaken policy of trying to hold the rate firm at 19 soles to the dollar. By February of this year the acuteness of Peru’s balance of payments problem had become evident. It is estimated that foreign exchange income this year only from lead, zinc, copper, cotton and sugar will be $85 million less than last year. Sr. Beltran expressed appreciation of the constructive advice he had received at the Export-Import Bank. The Bank officials had carefully explained to him all the data which Peru would have to develop and present to document a request for a balance of payments loan. When he returned to Peru he would explain this to the Government. The trouble with balance of payments loans, however, is that they are understood only by bankers and businessmen, and have no meaning for or impact on the people in general. Peru has two serious social

Peru 1049 the Embassy to offer two destroyers to Peru for $7 million rehabilita-

Peru 1051 PE–16. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Peruvian Affairs (Pringle)1 Washington, September 25, 1958. SUBJECT Peruvian Reaction to U.S. Imposition of Lead and Zinc Quotas. PARTICIPANTS Dr. Rául Porras Barrenechea, Foreign Minister of Peru Dr. Juan Bautista de Lavalle, Peruvian Ambassador to the OAS Sr. Miguel Grau - Minister Counselor, Embassy of Peru ARA – Mr. Rubottom WST – Mr. Siracusa; Mr. Pringle Foreign Minister Porras2 said that resentment against the U.S. was very strong in Peru as a result of the imposition of quotas on lead and zinc. He said that newspapers and labor organizations were urging him to leave the U.S. immediately and return home. The resentment extended to the very top of the government. He emphasized that President Prado had cooperated closely with the U.S. since the beginning of his first term of office (1939–45) and that this cooperation had been outstanding during World War II. More recently, however, the President had felt disillusioned with the United States and had noted its coldness toward Peru. Dr. Porras said that other Latin American countries had received much more consideration and aid from the U.S. than Peru and that the time had come for the U.S. to demonstrate its friendliness by helping Peru to solve certain problems. He said Peru was suffering a political crisis, due largely to social discontent arising from the economic situation, fanned by Communist agitation, and that some military plotting was taking place. After speaking of the democratic nature of the Prado Administration, he said he assumed that the U.S. considered it in its best interest to have Peru governed by a democratic president rather than a military dictator, to which Mr. Rubottom indicated firm assent. Dr. Porras then said that he did not want to go back to Peru empty-­handed, that, politically, he must take back some concrete demonstration of continued U.S. friendship and cooperation. (Here the Foreign Minister brought up the Peru-Ecuador

Peru 1053 Mr. Rubottom mentioned the recent $40 million Eximbank loan as a very concrete demonstration. He said that the loan constituted one more example of the fact that the U.S. was always ready to consider appropriate and well-­documented Peruvian requests for assistance. (Subsequent to the above conversation, Minister Grau asked Mr. Pringle to assure Mr. Rubottom that all of the officers of the Peruvian Embassy in Washington fully understood the U.S. reasons for imposing the quota, that their position was an awkward one in view of the very strong reaction in Lima, but that the Embassy’s very close working relationship with the Department would be in no way affected.)5

Peru 1055 PE–18. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Peruvian Affairs (Pringle)1 Washington, October 15, 1958. SUBJECT Peruvian Desire for Economic Assistance PARTICIPANTS Dr. Raúl Porras Barrenechea, Foreign Minister of Peru Sr. Miguel Grau, Chargé d’Affaires, a.i., Embassy of Peru Sr. Guillermo Hoyos Osores, Counselor, Peruvian Foreign Office Admiral Luis Llosa, Naval Attaché, Embassy of Peru ARA – Mr. Rubottom WST – Mr. Siracusa; Mr. Pringle Dr. Porras referred to his September 25 conversation with Mr. Rubottom on the subject of economic assistance and spoke once more of his need to take back to Lima some new and specific evidence of U.S. willingness to assist Peru. He said that President Prado had instructed him by telephone to call on Mr. Rubottom for this purpose and particularly to seek immediate approval of a credit to the Banco Minero for small loans to Peruvian mining companies. Mr. Rubottom said the Department had received a message from Embassy Lima outlining this proposal in broad terms2 and that the Eximbank was prepared in principle to consider such an application. He added, however, that considerable detail, including information on the types of loans the Banco Minero proposed to make, would be required in order for the application to be properly evaluated. Mr. Siracusa observed that the assistance should probably not be sought for lead and zinc, already in overproduction, but for other minerals. Dr. Hoyos then gave a long, rapid-­fire description of Peru’s exploding population, deep poverty, Indian problem, social unrest, communist agitation, and political instability, concluding with a plea for substantial U.S. assistance to help it overcome these problems. In the course of the description, he observed that Latin American dictators had happened to be in power during the good economic times of the post-Korean War period, while democratic regimes such as that of

Peru 1057 Government loan applications for sound projects, and Mr. Rubottom said that he wished to give the Foreign Minister his personal assurance: that this was the case.5

Peru 1059 Lima despatches report Ambassador Achilles’ serious concern over increasing disintegration of the political and social fabric. Signs of this disintegration include the seizure of property by landless persons, near-­chaos in most universities, a bitter and prolonged doctors strike, and public demonstrations reflecting growing disrespect for law. Similar situations in Peru’s past have usually led to military coups, and the Ambassador believes the likelihood of such a development in the near future cannot be excluded. Although high military officials appear determined to maintain constitutional processes, Peruvian military coups usually come from the middle ranks rather than the high command. Looking further into the future, the Ambassador does not exclude the possibility of a bloody social uprising of the poverty-­ stricken highland Indians unless the ruling elite takes far more action to raise the masses’ standard of living than it has shown any intention of doing. While communist activity has so far played a relatively minor role in Peru, the field for its development is becoming increasingly fertile. This potentially explosive situation comes at a time when our ­lead-­zinc quotas have severely exacerbated U.S.-Peruvian relations. The Ambassador foresees no improvement in Peru until that nation begins to experience a greater measure of prosperity and of firm governmental leadership. PE–21. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs (Siracusa)1 Washington, January 20, 1959. SUBJECT IPC Problem in Peru PARTICIPANTS Mr. Michael L. Haider, President of IPC and a Director of Standard Oil of New Jersey Mr. Milo Brisco, Vice President of IPC Mr. Martin Jones, Director of Public Relations, Standard Oil of New Jersey Mr. Siracusa, WST; Mr. Silberstein, WST

Peru 1061 The relationship of IPC’s problem to the Peruvian balance of payments was also discussed. Under the present circumstances, IPC is not disposed to make additional investments needed to increase production and believes the day will soon arrive when Peru will be a net importer of petroleum. If, however, it can obtain satisfaction on the pricing problem, IPC would make investments in secondary recovery which it would hope would maintain output and possibly make a modest increase. This would maintain Peru’s ability to export petroleum for a longer period and put off the day when Peru would become a net importer of petroleum products, which while probably inevitable, would still be perhaps eight or ten years in the future. IPC does not, however, expect any major discovery which would alter the long-­range prospect that Peru would eventually become a net importer. In addition to the affect it is having on Peru’s balance of payments situation, Mr. Brisco pointed out that the unrealistic petroleum pricing policy is also serving to discourage development of Peru’s hard fuel sources. Peru, he said, has ample coal resources, but there is no inducement to develop them. He pointed out that at the Chimbote steel plant, they find it cheaper to use kerosene in the coal drying operation than coal. Mr. Brisco then went on to review the proposal which IPC has made to the Peruvian Government, which the Government has so far not acted upon. In return for an adequate pricing policy, IPC has offered to place its operations under the 1952 Petroleum Law and give up its present fee-­simple status for a 40 year concession and to pay the GOP a 50 percent tax on all its profits in Peru. It has further offered to extend $25 million in low interest loans to the Government for road building, housing and other projects. When asked, based on their experience in the country and knowledge of its political problems, what might be the reaction to the kind of relief which IPC seeks, Mr. Brisco responded as follows: He said that the inefficiency and vacillation of the Prado administration has clearly cost it much of its support and in fact generated much opposition to it. He realizes that a sharp increase in petroleum costs would have a major public impact and said that he would not attempt to predict that this act might not be the straw that would break the camel’s back and bring about the overthrow of the Prado regime. On the other hand, he pointed out that many of the features of IPC’s offer to Peru are such that the Government could make a strong logical case to defend its actions and point out how it would serve the interests of the country. In response to Hr. Haider’s request for comment on the proposals made by IPC, Mr. Siracusa suggested that, while he could not evaluate them from an expert point of view, he did recognize, consistent with what Mr. Brisco had said, that the proposals contained many points

Peru 1063 outlining the proposals made to the GOC, and also one made in 1954 by an independent consultant.3 3 The referenced study was not found in Department of State files. The Peruvian Government raised petroleum prices and granted compensatory increases in transportation tariffs and wages on July 26. When an ensuing protest strike by chauffeurs unions became violent, the Government suspended constitutional guarantees on July 30 and broke the strike

Peru 1065 and desperately needs for internal political reasons to be able to point its finger at some worth-­while project it has initiated. Despite some of its obvious weaknesses, the Prado Administration was democratically elected and is trying to give Peru democratic Government. I believe it would be in the United States’ interest to strengthen it by granting the loan. 3. Having embarked upon a stabilization program, the Government has expected that as a consequence it would be eligible for loans from the U.S. for economic development. It has complained that such loans have not materialized; the Aguaytía-Pucallpa loan application offers the opportunity to grant a sound loan and to overcome those complaints. 4. Although the Peruvian Government did not formally present the application to the DLF until May 19, 1959, it was long under the mistaken impression that it had done so as of late January 1959. Peruvian officials have been extremely displeased over the delay resulting from this unfortunate misunderstanding, especially since they understand that the IBRD had been prepared for some time to finance the foreign currency costs of the road, providing that Peru could arrange the local currency financing. Request for Action:2 In view of the urgent political considerations in favor of this loan and of the difficulties which have so far beset the Peruvian application, I would greatly appreciate anything which you may be able to do to assure favorable consideration of the Peruvian request by the DLF Board as soon as possible. 2 There is no indication on the source text of Under Secretary Dillon’s action on this request. The Development Loan Fund signed a $4.5 million loan agreement with the Government of Peru on December 19, 1960, for improvement of the Aguaytía-Pucallpa

Peru 1067 [Enclosure] Memorandum of Conversation August 3, 1959. SUBJECT Beltran’s Program PARTICIPANTS Sr. Pedro Beltran, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance T. C. Achilles Over the week-­end I was the only guest at Beltran’s hacienda and he and I spent Saturday afternoon and evening and all day Sunday discussing what he hoped to achieve, how he hoped to do it, and what assistance from the U.S. might be practicable. His hopes from us are much more modest and much sounder than those of his recent predecessors. Why He Accepted Office Having participated in 48 hours of soul searching with him last year before he turned down the same two positions, I was surprised that he had accepted them this year. He said that a month ago he had been convinced that Prado was about to fall, that no successor to the President or Prime Minister was in sight who could hope to change the three-­year drift into inflation and economic stagnation and the centuries-­old resistance to social progress. He foresaw nothing but accelerated deterioration, with or without a military government, and probably an early Communist-­fomented social revolution. He believed that the President would not have turned to him except from similar acute pessimism. The friends he had consulted had urged him to accept as a patriotic duty. He had debated waiting until after “one more government had fouled things up worse” but concluded that might be too late. The President had promised him full support. He did not count on this except insofar and as long as the President considered their fortunes linked. He had been assured of full support by the military and believed them. (Top Army and Navy sources have confirmed this to me.) He had not sought APRA support but had been assured of it at least on a trial basis. (Prialé4 has confirmed this.) He could count on the support of the wealthy class in their own interest, except for the Miro Quesada group. (Presumably correct.) In Congress the MDP would have to support him in their own interest. They with APRA constituted 4 Ramiro Prialé, Secretary General of APRA.

Peru 1069 tax enforcement measures recommended by Costa6 and approved by Gallo Porras, many of which have not yet been given effect, and was delighted to hear about them. Ending price controls on meat and raising the controlled price on bread and rice to a realistic level should ease the deficit by from 100 to 200 million soles. Nevertheless he believed he would need an additional one billion soles (roughly $40 million) for operating expenses until next June 30. He was determined not to resort to the Central Bank. IPC had agreed to lend $20 million for this purpose. He wondered whether IPC could make it $40 million. I said the Company’s manager7 here had had difficulty persuading the head office to approve the $20 million and felt that one company alone should not be called on for the whole amount. He thought small amounts might be raised from others such as Grace, Cerro de Pasco, Southern Peru Copper, and the Telephone Company (he volunteered that he hoped for an early solution of the telephone problem) but probably not much.8 Could the U.S. Government make a loan for operating expenses? I suggested that we first explore the possibility of using the existing EX–IM credit for this purpose. He readily agreed. He would agree to any reasonable conditions attached to any U. S. loan and could write some himself. He recalled his article in “Foreign Affairs” in 1956 in which he had written that the conditions attached to U. S. loans were of more value to the recipients’ economy than the loam itself. He realizes that the 1960 budget will be a major problem and battle. He does not think he can reduce it below this year’s total and believes that, given this year’s wage increases, it will be a major victory to hold it to that level. He is counting on increased business activity, some based on renewed confidence and some otherwise stimulated, and non-­inflationary financing to provide the revenue. His social program, particularly in housing, should also stimulate business. Social Program Beltran feels strongly that unless the reactionary feudal attitude of the Government and ruling class is changed quickly, there will be a social explosion, sparked by the Communists but participated in by most of the underprivileged 95 per cent of the population. He hopes to follow the British pattern of “social progress by conservative 6 [illegible in the original] United States Operations Mission in Peru. 7 Jack Ashworth. 8 Compañía Peruana de Teléfonos (Peruvian Telephone Company), a subsidiary of International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, sued the Government over a December 23, 1958 decree setting up a committee to establish new procedures for rate

Peru 1071 go there or stay if they did. He stated that most of the Indians who had migrated to the upper Huallaga (between Tingo María and Tarapoto) had stayed less than a year. The South was urgent. He gave first priority to a road from Sandía to the Tambopata. The Indians were already moving into the Tambopata area in large numbers even though they had to go and come and carry their produce by trail. The terrain was difficult but the distance short and the Indians had proved they wanted to settle there. He would like to see the road built as a dramatic example of U. S.-Peruvian cooperation, surveyed by U. S. Army engineers using helicopters, jointly financed and built by the Peruvian Army with the engineering equipment already furnished by the U. S. (Beltran is keenly interested in using the Army, and other services where practicable, for constructive development of the country and also in popularizing it, within the Army and without, to bulwark the country’s future internal order. He also shares our views on the value of using the conscription period for civic and technical training.) I shared his interest in the dramatic but reminded him that no real engineering studies had been made of a Tambopata road, of the time it took to get from conception through studies, financing and construction to completion, and the slow progress being made on the nearby, similar purpose, Smathers-­financed Macusani-San Gabán road. He agreed to expedite progress on the latter but insisted on the advantages of a dramatic approach to the Tambopata road and of constructing it “a la Yanqui” rather than “a la criollo”. I agreed to look into the possibilities, primarily of ICA financing a study by U. S. and Peruvian engineers of the practicability of the road. He is now pushing his Commission on Housing and Land Reform to complete its study on the latter subject by the end of this year and hopes to be able to take specific measures next year. Livestock Development I told him that former Minister of Agriculture10 had nearly completed studies of a program designed to make Peru self-­sufficient in meat and that I had found Washington favorably disposed to consider a loan for this purpose, provided the price of meat was freed from control as had now been done. He had not known of this and was delighted. He thought the first step should be studies of pasturage, on the coast, in the Sierra and in the jungle, and then the importation of improved breeds. Technical assistance would be needed. I asked about the financing of the local expenditure. He thought it should be done by the Banco 10 Reference presumably is to Emilio Foley, Peruvian Minister of Agriculture, March

Peru 1073 Mr. Rubottom and to convey the latter’s reactions to Lima. General Van Oordt said he planned to leave for Lima on or about August 11. Mr. Rubottom congratulated the General on his important assignment. Ambassador Berckemeyer said that some time ago, through his Air Attaché, he had asked his Government to review its request for aircraft. Immediately after his conversation with Mr. Rubottom of August 4,3 he had again asked for a review of the matter, and he and his Air Attaché had just received replies – ­the latter from the Air Ministry – ­asking them to press the existing request without any reduction. The Ambassador then asked General Van Oordt to explain the matter more fully. General Van Oordt expressed the opinion that this request was not extravagant. He argued that the planes were necessary to keep the Peruvian Air Force in existence and that they were the minimum needed for defending Peru’s frontiers, not to speak of hemispheric defense. He claimed that this request conformed to the views of the U.S. Air mission to Peru. He then went into the details of the request as follows: 12 T–37’s—These jet trainers were needed to replace obsolete T-34’s which were uneconomical to maintain, and to provide necessary jet training for Peruvian pilots. General Van Oordt estimated that the planes would cost about $1.5 million. (While the General did not make this clear in his talk with Mr. Rubottom, he explained to Mr. Poole afterwards that the Peruvian Government’s request for T–34’s in its note of June 94 was incorrect and that it should have read T–37’s. He said that on his return to Lima he would see to it that Ambassador Berckemeyer received the necessary amending instructions. Thus, he said, the total cost of the Peruvian Government’s request was actually considerable higher than originally estimated. He stated that the Peruvian Government wished to purchase these T–37’s on three-­ years credit.) Eight F-86-F’s—These would be strictly replacements. The Peruvian Air Force originally had 14 F–86–F’s, of which eight had been wrecked. General Van Oordt said that these were nearly obsolete in the U.S. and hence available. He estimated the total cost at $200,000. When Mr. Rubottom asked for a clarification of the June 9 Aide Memoire which simply said “acquire” without specifying terms, General Van Oordt 3 In a memorandum of the August 4 conversation, Assistant Secretary Rubottom asked that the Peruvian Government reconsider its request for aircraft in view of Prime

Peru 1075 Mr. Rubottom said he appreciated General Van Oordt’s speaking with such frankness and that he would like to reply with equal frankness. He agreed that the needs of hemispheric defense and the desirability of standardization made it far preferable to purchase military equipment in the U.S. rather than elsewhere. He explained, however, that the U.S. felt the need to hold down the level of military purchases to what appeared really necessary, although, naturally, we could not interfere with a country’s sovereign right to decide for itself how it was to spend its money in accordance with its own judgment of its needs, capabilities and resources. He added that the Department of State is under constant pressure from certain sectors of the Congress to limit military equipment going to Latin American countries. Additionally, he continued, we are often accused by the Latin Americans themselves of unnecessarily arming the Latin American countries. Mr. Rubottom then referred to Prime Minister Beltran’s talk with Ambassador Achilles about his new program, some of which had appeared in the press, and he referred particularly to Beltran’s desire to reduce military expenditures. Mr. Rubottom said we were particularly disappointed that the Peruvian Government should be pressing its request for aircraft without a downward revision as we had urged, and despite Peru’s difficult economic and financial situation. However, we now had no recourse, he continued, but to process the request in its present form, although we were very doubtful of favorable action. He explained that there were other government agencies involved in the matter and that their decisions on possible Peruvian request for economic and financial assistance might well be prejudiced by any such commitment of funds or credit to military expenditures of this magnitude.7

Peru 1077 problems. You may inform Beltran USG views his objectives with sympathy and desires to cooperate with him in his efforts restore financial stability, improve climate for private investment, and create conditions favorable to national economic growth. Beltran, of course, should understand that basic stabilization effort will have to be made by GOP itself within limits of current balance of payments availabilities including existing EximBank credit. As for loans for development assistance they will, of course, have to be considered on case by case basis. “EximBank probably prepared amend loan agreement permit Treasury drawing soles provided Exim satisfies itself not inconsistent with stabilization program Peru is developing with IMF. Bank would, however, like have explanation rationale of this operation since using counterpart only different in form from any other recourse to Reserve Bank and since apparently necessary in any event obtain approval Peruvian Congress for changing loan agreement. We dubious about any attempt make the/use of counter-­part appear to be method of avoiding inflationary impact direct borrowing from Bank. We note Beltran expects one billion sol budgetary deficit to mid- 1960. Would appreciate your explanation gap this magnitude, which equal that anticipated 1959, in view anticipated additional tax revenues and economies.”5

Peru 1079 everything possible to help the Beltran Cabinet succeed. This means primarily consistent encouragement of the Peruvian Government to develop an effective economic and social program and prompt favorable action on our part on soundly conceived development projects which require foreign financing. 2. Some way must be found to give the Indians and mestizos a stake in the free enterprise system. The Indians are more contented when they have their own land—the Vicar General of the Catholic Church in Puno asserts that the higher incidence of land ownership among the Indians in Puno as opposed to that in Arequipa and Cuzco is one of the primary reasons communism is not making as much headway in Puno. Such measures as agrarian reform, housing, and highway construction to open new areas as proposed by the Beltran Cabinet, will help considerably. These and other programs that will demonstrate that the free enterprise system will assure a higher standard of living and a better distribution of the wealth will do more than anything else to make communism less attractive as a solution. We should encourage such programs and identify ourselves with them. We should encourage not only Government officials to adopt such measures but also opinion leaders whenever the opportunity presents itself. 3. The cooperative agriculture program (SCIPA) should be strengthened, especially its program of supervised credit. The credit program of the Maryknoll Fathers in Puno and the SCIPA supervised agricultural credit program in general have been successful and opened up an avenue for improvement of the standard of living which as a practical matter has not existed for the lower classes. We should not make the mistake of expanding too rapidly and possibly discrediting the program, but we should broaden this program as rapidly as is consistent with sound management. Other ICA programs are making a sound and welcome contribution, but increased and better production is needed more than anything else in Peru not only to raise the standard of living but to combat communist activities. 4. Our information effort should be concentrated primarily on identifying the United States with the aspirations of Peru and creating a climate for economic measures and reforms that will achieve these aspirations. This can probably best be done by U.S. officials encouraging the Government to adopt such measures and, once proposed, helping through our information program to develop a favorable atmosphere for them. Some of the unpopularity of the Prado Government during its first three years has rubbed off on the United States because of our support of his administration. Our reputation is even more at stake with Pedro Beltran as Prime Minister because he and his announced policy and his actions are closely identified with the United States. This will be a distinct advantage to us if he succeeds and we should help build a climate to help him succeed. At the same time we do the constructive job

Peru 1081 housing program by sponsoring community action on this subject. In general we should seek to have the Church throughout Peru carry out a program along the lines now being pursued by the Maryknoll Fathers in Puno. At the same time we should encourage the Church to take a vigorous stand against communism. 9. We should encourage the military in Peru to support a positive program to improve the standard of living of Peruvians, including the necessary social and economic reforms. We should support the general desire of the Peruvian Government and the military to have the military take a more active role in the economic development of the country and agree to the use of MAP furnished equipment for this purpose provided this can be done in keeping with commitments under bilateral military arrangements. We should lend our support to the announced desire of the military to indoctrinate recruits in civism and against communism and to provide them agricultural, mechanical and trade training. Within available resources, we should provide material and technical resources toward that end. The military should be encouraged to carry out its anti-­communist policy with more vigor. 10. We should keep in mind that anti-­communist legislation is required in Peru and bring it to the attention of the Government at appropriate opportunities, but until the Beltran Cabinet has made an effective start on its program and has solidified its position better, we should not press on this point. When this subject is discussed with Government officials we should seek legislation in terms of strengthening the Penal Code, and not a separate anti-­communist law which would be an open target for the communists and easily repealed. 11. We should encourage the Government to eliminate communists from the Government. Wherever possible we should identify such persons, but this should always be done on the basis that the Peruvian Government itself must investigate to determine the facts. 12. We should seek termination of Government support, in whatever form, to communist-­led labor unions. (It is not sound practice in any case for the Government to be subsidizing labor unions, but it is especially wrong when this involves communist-­led unions.) For the Ambassador: Robert M. Sayre Second Secretary of Embassy

Peru 1083 3. Under these circumstances it is likely that the Prado government will serve out its term and that there will be reasonably free elections and an orderly transfer of power in 1962. All the presidential candidates in such an election will be likely to be members of the oligarchy, but the candidate supported by APRA will almost certainly be elected. 4. If, on the other hand, Beltrán’s program should fail, he would probably resign, and another serious effort to curb inflation and to deal with long-­range problems would be unlikely prior to the elections. Under these circumstances, Prado would have to rely more heavily on military support to serve out his term. Should there be severe and persistent economic difficulties, the outcome would probably be a return to at least provisional military rule. (Paras. 35–36) 5. Even if the Beltrán program succeeds, it will only provide a basis for long run development measures. In the long run the dominant position of the politico-­military elite will probably come under increasing attack from the lower classes. If basic measures for economic development and accommodation to popular pressures are delayed indefinitely, it is probable that violent social revolution will eventually take place. (Para. 38) 6. Since 1956 the Communist Party in Peru has grown in membership and in influence in student and labor organizations, especially in the south (Cuzco and Arequipa). During the next few years the Communists are likely to play an influential but not decisive role. However, the Communists are still far weaker than APRA in strength and influence, and the latter will remain the more effective competitor

Peru 1085 President Bustamante,6 owed his election to APRA’s organized political support. APRA also elected a congressional majority and gained representation in the cabinet. However, its alliance with the Bustamante faction of the elite soon broke down as a result of growing conservative fear that APRA was becoming too strong. In 1948 APRA was again outlawed and soon thereafter a military regime headed by General Manuel Odria seized power. However, Odria’s authoritarian methods resulted in growing opposition, first at popular levels and eventually within the military and the upper class. Under pressure from these elements for a return to constitutional rule, elections were held in 1956, in which APRA and most of the upper class leaders supported the election of ex-President Prado. Upon his election, Prado again legalized APRA, which had before this been able to seat significant minorities in both chambers by running its candidates as independents. II. Political Situation 13. The Prado government, essentially conservative in leadership, has proven until recently to be a weak administration, even though it has managed to preserve constitutional order. The 70-­year old Prado has become increasingly unpopular because of his failure to assert firm leadership in the face of deteriorating economic conditions which have led to considerable labor discontent and subversive activity. To cope with unrest, the government has suspended constitutional guarantees on several occasions and made a series of cabinet changes. In the most recent of these—­in mid-1959—Prado felt obliged to appoint Pedro Beltrán, one of his strongest critics and a forceful leader among less conservative elements in the oligarchy, as Prime Minister and Finance Minister. Beltrán’s determined approach to Peru’s economic difficulties has restored confidence, to some degree offsetting his lack of organized political support, and is a major stabilizing factor in the current situation. 14. The Prado government is basically dependent on the cooperation of the country’s diverse political forces and on the acquiescence of the military. The political base of Prado’s government is an uneasy working relationship of political opposites: APRA and the Movimiento Democratico Peruano (MDP), which is a loosely organized group of conservatives and other Prado supporters. The principal bond between them is the common desire to avoid a return to military rule. Fearing repression and seeking respectability, APRA has followed a policy of moderation and cooperation with Prado, even though this policy has placed increasingly heavy strains on party unity and has caused a drain on its popular support. At the same time, the government and the MDP

Peru 1087 two until the government can bring in additional security forces. They demonstrated this capability in Cuzco in 1958. 18. Communists have been less successful elsewhere. They have had little direct influence on the government, although there are a few Communists in Congress and a number of Communists hold secondary or minor government positions. Most of Acción Popular’s congressional representatives have or have had Communist ties. However, the PCP has publicly broken with Acción Popular’s leader Belaunde. While they control a large minority in the labor movement, Communists have failed to break APRA’s hold on the central labor confederation. They have demonstrated only limited capability for gaining influence among the rural Sierra Indians in central and southern Peru, largely because of the isolated and self-­contained nature of the rural Indian society. 19. The major area of political agitation in Peru is organized labor. This force of roughly 400,000, mainly affiliated with the central labor organization (CTP), is overwhelmingly urban and is largely engaged in white collar and service activities, principally in the Lima-Callao area. APRA supporters control the executive committee of the CTP and the majority of its most vigorous member organizations. However, APRA’s entente with the government has resulted in a weakening of its revolutionary coloration and a reduction of APRA’s freedom to press labor demands. This has been of direct benefit to the Communists, who have been able to consolidate their position in Arequipa and Cuzco and have also made some progress, in competition with APRA, in organizing miners in central Peru. The Communists have also benefited from upper class disposition to encourage them as rivals to APRA. 20. Another, though less important, arena for political agitation is among university student groups, principally those in Arequipa, Cuzco, and Lima. Although Peruvian student groups, like their counterparts in other Latin American countries, are generally a breeding ground for radical ideas and action, they suffer from factionalism and generally have little voice in national politics. However, they have contributed substantially to political and social unrest, and with the decline in APRA’s traditional popularity among student groups matched by a rise in Communist influence, the potential for Communist-­inspired student agitation is on the increase. This potential was manifested in the riots attending Vice President Nixon’s visit in May 1958. III. Economic Situation 21. Despite the abundance and variety of its resources, Peru is a largely undeveloped country in which up to two-­thirds of the population (including most inhabitants of the Sierra and Montaña) live at a bare subsistence level outside the money economy. Rail and road links between the coast and the interior are few and far between and even

Peru 1089 U.S. banks.10 its efforts to maintain purchasing power and consumption in the face of this worsening of the terms of trade led to a progressive depletion of Peru’s foreign exchange reserves—­a downward trend accelerated by a weakening of the position of the Peruvian sol and a consequent flight of capital. By the end of 1958 official gold and foreign exchange reserves had fallen to less than half of the $67 million on hand at the end of 1956, and by mid-1959, when Peru halted its borrowing from the IMF, reserves were reportedly down to $20 million. Although Peru still had $25 million in unused EXIMBANK credits, the availability of all but $5 million was contingent upon restoration of Peru’s credit with the IMF. 26 Meanwhile, the government and most private employers were forced to yield to labor demands for higher wages to counter increasing living costs. Inflationary pressures were further increased by the liberal credit extended by the banks in an effort to maintain business momentum and by the fact that the government, faced with increased costs and lowered revenues, increased its borrowings from the Central Bank. Although the government made some efforts to check these inflationary trends, it made little headway in the face of continuing heavy demands for private credit and the government’s need to pay its own bills. 27. With the appointment of Beltrán as Prime Minister and Minister of Finance in mid-1959, Peru is now committed to a far more vigorous attack on these problems. Emphasizing the need to balance the government’s budget, stabilize prices, and restore Peru’s international credit and exchange position, Beltrán has called for the cessation of government borrowing from the Central Bank, more rigorous tax collection, the restoration of the 18 percent legal reserve requirements for commercial banks, and other measures to curb inflationary private lending. He has already embarked on some curtailment of government payrolls and military purchases abroad, has removed costly food subsidies, and has permitted increases in prices for petroleum. Previous low ceilings had contributed to a decline of oil production in recent years to a level little over that of domestic requirements. Longer range objectives

Peru 1091 increases. In addition, the Peruvian Government is negotiating: (a) a PL 480 Title I Agreement which would make available local currency for development purposes; (b) a DLF loan to provide initial capital for a savings and loan association, which will make loans to finance housing construction; and (c) IBRD and DLF loans for various road building and irrigation projects. This group of loans could total as much as $20 million. 31. Foreign assistance for this program may enable Beltrán to appease most significant political and economic elements and to succeed in his monetary stabilization effort, thus preserving the country’s free exchange system, which has been a model for similar efforts in other Latin American countries. Under these conditions he could move on to developmental measures and take some steps toward resolving the long-­range problem of the social and economic integration of Peru. An important problem is that of increasing agricultural output of the country, which will require heavy investment in transportation and irrigation in order to open presently unsettled lands. Execution of such measures would create favorable conditions for a resumption of growth in the modern sector of the economy, thereby providing additional employment opportunities for Indians from the Sierra. IV. The Domestic Outlook 32. Barring a general worsening of Peru’s terms of trade, which we consider unlikely, we believe that Beltrán’s program will succeed over the short run. The measure of Beltrán’s success will in part be related to his ability to obtain the foreign financial assistance he seeks. There will probably be some rise in the production of Peru’s food supplies and exports, and prospects are good for increased efficiency in fiscal management under Beltrán’s guidance. Hence, the outlook for foreign and domestic investment will be favorable. 33. Under these circumstances, it is likely that the Prado government will serve out its term and that there will be reasonably free elections and an orderly transfer of power to a duly elected successor government in 1962. Although APRA may feel compelled to press its social and economic demands more vigorously in order to avoid loss of lower class support to Acción Popular and the Communists, it will probably seek to avoid going so far as to invite military repression. The military, for the most part, will probably be reluctant to return to authoritarian rule unless it believes this necessary to maintain the dominant position of the elite. 34. The result probably will be an electoral campaign in which class lines are blurred. All the presidential candidates will probably be members of the conservative elite. The real contest will be between the candidate supported by APRA and the one supported by Acción

Peru 1093 A similar reaction against the U.S. would probably occur, especially in Congress, should Beltrán fail to obtain the U.S. and international financial assistance which he seeks. Should APRA or Acción Popular gain strong influence in a successor government, Peru probably would be more assertive in its dealings with the U.S. and more prone to take an independent position in international bodies. However, in neither case would there be likely to be a major change in Peru’s relations with the U.S., with which Peru has its strongest trade and investment ties.11 11 A map of Peru in the source text is not printed. PE–30. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Chilean Affairs (Phillips)1 Washington, October 26, 1959. SUBJECT Acquisition of Vessels by Peruvian Navy PARTICIPANTS Assistant Secretary Rubottom, ARA Ambassador Fernando Berckemeyer of Peru Mr. Miguel Grau, Minister-Counselor, Peruvian Embassy Admiral Luis Llosa, Naval Attaché, Peruvian Embassy Robert M. Phillips, WST After the usual amenities, Ambassador Berckemeyer stated that he had come on orders of his Government to explain with complete frankness the attitude of the Peruvian Government (i.e., the President and his Cabinet) with regard to the purchase of a cruiser from the U.K. Many units of the Peruvian Navy were becoming obsolete and needed to be replaced, and the most convenient and economical way this could be done was to take advantage of the availability of a cruiser from the U.K. The price of the vessel was only L–1 million sterling, payable in five annual installments of L–200,000. Payments would be made from funds available only to the Navy on the basis of a special law, and the Navy’s funds might be supplemented by a special public collection of voluntary donations which might total as much as 1 million soles

Peru 1095 When Mr. Rubottom asked whether the Peruvian Government had already contracted for the cruiser, Ambassador Berckemeyer replied in the affirmative. Mr. Rubottom then asked whether there was any truth in rumors we had heard that Peru might acquire a second cruiser from the U.K. Admiral Llosa said that there appeared to be some substance to these rumors and that it was his understanding that if the U.K. were to offer a second cruiser on the same conditions as the first, the Peruvian Navy would probably make an effort to obtain the second ship. He indicated that a specific vessel—not named—now in service under the British flag was involved. Ambassador Berckemeyer, however, said he wished to make it clear that he had received no official notification regarding the second cruiser.2 Mr. Rubottom told his callers that he could only say that the news of the cruiser purchase contract had been very badly received by himself and all his colleagues in the Department, including Secretary Herter and Assistant Secretary Mann. He was also sure that Undersecretary Dillon, presently away from the Department, would not be pleased by this development. Even taking into account all the arguments advanced by the Ambassador, it would be impossible for the Department to attempt to reconcile the cruiser purchase with the policy of austerity proclaimed by Prime Minister Beltrán. It was paradoxical that Mr. Beltrán, who was well-­known and well-­liked in the U.S., had often criticized our Government before U.S. audiences for giving military assistance to Latin America. Mr. Rubottom himself had debated this issue in public with Mr. Beltrán. Ambassador Berckemeyer said he agreed but pointed out that Sr. Beltrán was in a most difficult position. In any event, there was no escaping the fact that the obsolete vessels had to be replaced. When Mr. Rubottom asked whether we had been advised concerning just which ships would be replaced, Admiral Llosa said that this information had already been supplied to the Department. Admiral Llosa then went on to say that one important factor remained to be considered. This was that as a consequence of the lack of support for the Peruvian Navy by our own Navy and the Department of State, particularly in relation to the aid extended to the navies of neighboring countries, the naval equilibrium in the area had been upset. In fact, the situation was continually becoming worse due to the unequal treatment received by Peru. National pride, and the Navy’s pride, had been wounded by the favoritism shown to Chile, Ecuador and Colombia. Even the continental defense program was working

Peru 1097 PE–31. Editorial Note A controversy arose in Peru over possession by the Texas Petroleum Company in Peru of aerial photographs of Peru received from the United States Government without clearance from the Peruvian Government. The problem was taken up by the Peruvian Chamber of Deputies and publicized in the Peruvian press. The Peruvian Government made representations to the American Embassy in Lima and fined the company. Documentation on these developments is in Department of State file

Peru 1099 PE–33. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Peru1

Peru 1101 second cruiser—whether it would serve our interests in Peru and the hemisphere as a whole now to deny Peru the loan and rehabilitation of the Ship Loan Act destroyer earmarked for Peru in the grant military assistance program. I have concluded, for the reasons specified below, that we can find no position that would adequately justify our denial of the destroyer to Peru while to do so would greatly prejudice our relations with Peru and our ability to carry out basic constructive programs in that country. I have therefore concluded that we must implement the program as originally planned. Our Position re Naval Vessels for Other Latin American Countries Neither Peru nor other Latin American countries have assumed bilateral or multilateral commitments which impose limits on the size or character of military forces they may maintain for hemispheric or national defense. In the absence of any such agreement, Peru obviously has the sovereign right to determine unilaterally its military requirements. We have not withheld, nor made known any intention to withhold, U.S. naval vessels from other Latin American countries which have acquired or are in process of acquiring naval vessels considered by us to be militarily and economically unjustifiable. After U.S. representations to the Brazilian and British Governments had failed in 1957 to prevent Brazilian acquisition of a British aircraft carrier, we found it necessary (in connection with the maintenance of a USAF missiles tracking facility on Brazilian territory) to agree to provide Brazil with about $87 million in military equipment, including four destroyers. One of these ships was delivered this year; the others are to be delivered during the next two years. Subsequent to Argentina’s acquisition of a British carrier in 1958, we found it in our interest to comply with President Frondizi’s personal request that we help him assure continued Argentine military support for his forward-­looking economic policies, which serve U.S. interests, by extending Argentina a sizable credit for the procurement of U.S. military equipment, including two submarines scheduled for delivery this fiscal year. Now Argentina is reportedly planning to purchase three British destroyers as replacements for old vessels. We imposed no penalty when Chile purchased two British destroyers (to be delivered in the near future), Colombia two Swedish destroyers or Ecuador two British frigates, and we have earmarked one ship loan vessel, or its equivalent in the case of Ecuador, for each of these countries in the FY 1960 program. Although Venezuela has acquired eleven European destroyers since 1953, we have considered it necessary in view of our special defense and military credit arrangement which bears upon the security of the Venezuelan oil fields, to approve the sale to Venezuela of one submarine and two destroyers. Probable Consequences in Peru if we Deny Destroyers In the light of the instances described above, Peru would be certain to regard the withdrawal or deferral of a programmed naval vessel as discriminatory and retaliatory.

Peru 1103 (2) Include one destroyer for Peru (in addition to the two MSFs) in the Circular 175 memorandum which has been transmitted to the Defense Department. (In order that the final U.S. decision regarding the FY 1960 Ship Loan Program may be conveyed concurrently to Peru and all other participating countries, it is essential that Circular 175 approval for the complete Latin American Ship Loan Program be obtained in one single memorandum.) PE–35. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles)1 Lima, December 26, 1959. SUBJECT Budget, Financial and Social Matters PARTICIPANTS Sr. Pedro Beltrán, Prime Minister & Minister of Finance T. C. Achilles Beltrán has for some time been working day and night with Congressional committees and party groups on the budget but came up for air for a family Christmas dinner and long talk afterwards. He is distinctly encouraged by the extent to which he has met with cooperation rather than partisan politics. While the Christian Democrats will continue publicly to express opposition they are in fact working closely with him and being of considerable help with other groups. He expects to obtain approval of his financial measures without major changes or too much opposition. Barring unexpected logrolling, he expects the budget to be passed with a paper deficit of only $100 million. Since revenue is calculated strictly on actual 1959 returns and conditions are improving he confidentially anticipates ending 1960 with a slight surplus. (However, the budget apparently does not provide for inevitable wage increases during 1960 and substantially increased revenues will be necessary to cover these. They have been costing the Government roughly $500 million annually in recent years.)

Peru 1105 He agreed. Housing and land reform were the two keys. He hoped that our early participation in the Savings & Loan Association, either through P. L. 480 or DLF funds, would begin to get housing off the ground.4 The Government had no funds yet for land reform and grandiose projects such as Tinajones must be avoided but the problem was clearly urgent. I suggested that the most important single step toward land reform might be simplification and decentralization of the process of acquiring title to land and that this should cost the Government little if anything. He said the housing legislation already covered this for urban areas and the land reform legislation next year would cover it for rural areas. The above is a condensed summary of a leisurely two-­hour talk. During it Beltrán referred at least 20 times to the fundamental necessity of balancing the budget. Each time I agreed fully but reverted to the importance of the social problem as well. Each time he agreed but reverted to the budget.

Peru 1107 PE–37. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1 Washington, January 23, 1960. SUBJECT Peruvian-U.S. Relations: U.S. Commercial Policy; U.S. Role in Peru-Ecuador Boundary Dispute; President Eisenhower’s Visit to Latin America. PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Guillermo HOYOS Osores, Adviser, Peruvian Ministry of Foreign Relations. Ambassador Juan Bautista DE LAVALLE, Peruvian Ambassador to the OAS and Delegate to the UN. Miguel GRAU, Chargé d’Affaires, Peruvian Embassy. Rear Admiral Luis Edgardo LLOSA, Naval Attaché, Peruvian Embassy Mr. Rubottom, ARA Mr. Coerr, ARA/WST (*Ambassador Hoyos Osores is carried as third man on the Peruvian Foreign Office list, immediately after the Secretary General,2 although the Peruvian Embassy has explained that he is, in effect, second in command to Foreign Minister Porras. The Embassy also explains he is traveling as “Ambassador-­at-Large”.) Ambassador Hoyos Osores—I am not here to recite affronts (“agravios”) but to explain certain realities of inter-American relationships. The responsible element in Peru believes the destinies of Peru and of the United States are conjoint. This element desires friendly Peruvian-U.S. relations not only in general terms but also as an essential to its own security within Peru. But, in Latin America there is widespread resentment and suspicion of the U.S., whether or not justified, that stems from many and complex causes of which the following are the most important in Peru: (1) In recent years U.S. commercial policy has dealt Peru repeated blows, damaging Peru’s major exports—lead and zinc, cotton and sugar—and aggravating Peru’s economic problems so that Peruvians feel they can count on U.S. friendship only “relatively”. (2) As a guarantor of the Rio Protocol, the U.S. has not collaborated to produce a guarantors’ statement that would disauthorize the absurd position Ecuador has taken (in its boundary dispute with Peru).

Peru 1109 might do in Lima, and that the Congress as a whole had not spoken. I understand that the efforts of Peruvian leaders to improve Peru’s standard of living through encouraging the investment of local and foreign capital may suffer in an atmosphere of popular resentment against the United States. Peruvian leaders might more effectively point out that the United States has long advocated a multi-­lateral approach to the problem of excess lead and zinc production, as it has in the current coffee arrangement; that the United States Executive and many groups in the United States work constantly on behalf of free trade; and that the lead-­zinc market has strengthened considerably. You can be certain that my Government is very conscious of Peru’s interests in the products you have mentioned, and also in fishmeal exports that are becoming so important in Peru’s economy. President Eisenhower has been most disappointed at not being able to visit Peru, as he has told President Prado in a personal message.9 Your Ambassador has presented your attitude on this matter most effectively, and I can only emphasize that President Eisenhower’s decision was based on the limitations of time available for his trip. (Mr. Rubottom then discussed the inter-American Conference and arms limitation, and replied to Ambassador Hoyos Osores on the border question—see separate memoranda of conversations.)10

Peru 1111 bringing the International Petroleum Company’s La Brea y Pariñas concessions under the Petroleum Code.5 I said I felt IPC would be willing to give up certain privileges in order to adapt its operations to the Code.6 He said this solution would never be acceptable to the opposition. He stated Pedro BELTRAN had suggested this but it was not acceptable and such a move had no chance at all for approval. I asked why he was so certain of this. Sr. Ortiz de Zevallos said (IPC’s) La Brea y Pariñas concession terminated in 1972.7 On that date, “Talara (the Company’s refinery and installations) will belong to Peru.” The opposition realizes this and if a bill is presented “adapting” IPC to the Petroleum Code it would call for an extension of IPC’s concessions for an additional 20 or 30 years. He said “IPC does not have a friend in Congress, not one, therefore they are not going to be allowed to extend their concessions.” I then asked him whether Peru intended to operate its own oil industry. I said if IPC realized it was not going to obtain an extension of its concession rights then I could imagine the company would cease its investments, terminate its exploration and development operations, and that by 1972 the industry would be in such condition that it would be very difficult for the Government (if it failed to renew the concession before that date) to assume responsibility for operating the industry. I said if the Government did have to take over the industry one of the first necessary moves would be to increase the price of products—a step which would be most unpopular with the people. Sr. Ortiz de Zevallos said, “The company will have to keep the industry going during this time—why shouldn’t it, it has made so much money in the past and with its latest price increase, why shouldn’t it?” The President of the Chamber of Deputies spoke again and again about the unpopularity of IPC. He said the company had no friends anywhere in the country. He said not a Member of Congress or a Cabinet

Peru 1113 Several times, he told me “the opposition” was going to delay the problem as long as possible because it will make a great “banders” (issue) in the 1962 election. He said with all the opposition to IPC this is something which will appeal to the people. I told the President that 1972 was going to roll around quicker than he thought and that no large concern was going to wait until the last minute to attempt to negotiate a contract on an oil concession or monopoly with a nation. I said I felt certain it would be necessary to start negotiation on a settlement before 1972 and this would not only be in the interest of the company, but also beneficial to the people of Peru. He admitted this. I stated that if IPC is as unpopular as he feels it is (I personally believe he has the correct feel on this because it has become a real popular subject with no IPC backers), I was certain the shareholders would want to do something to correct the situation, therefore what was the answer? He said that expropriation was not the solution because Peru knew better than to try to buck the big international oil concerns. He realized that Peru would need foreign markets and that it could not compete with the big companies if Peru tried to take over alone. He said he saw a partnership deal as now exists in other countries. I stated that as he already knew IPC was owned almost wholly by ESSO and that ESSO is acquiring sole ownership; and that maybe the solution would be to take the name of IPC entirely out of the picture and make it ESSO of Peru. He said, “something like that.” I told the President that our concern over La Brea y Pariñas did not center altogether around IPC, but that we were worried about the adverse effects an unfavorable decision would have on the climate for foreign investment in Peru. Any discriminatory action here would make us start worrying about other United States investments such as Toquepala, Cerro de Pasco, Marcona, etc., etc. Sr. Ortiz de Zevallos said I need not worry because IPC was a case within itself—“an isolated case.” He stated several times that this matter had nothing to do with anti-American sentiment. He said, “if you will think back on all the discussions and debates in Congress you will note that not once was the name of the United States mentioned—no U.S. imperialist talk—no anti-American sentiments.” He said he was afraid the Eisenhower visit to Chile was going to be mentioned and touch off remarks of ill feeling but this did not happen. Jack D. Neal

Peru 1115 PE–41. Editorial Note In a note of April 6, 1960, to Ambassador Berckemeyer, the Department of State replied to a Peruvian request for an increase of Peru’s sugar import quota to 250,000 tons. The Department informed the Ambassador that it had received many requests for sugar import quota changes which would entail major revision of the Sugar Act of

Peru 1117 Ambassador Berckemeyer (who had earlier reported to the Department that he had heard this was the case) said he could confirm the report. He said his original report came from a director of the company and that he had confirmation from an executive of the company. Mr. Rubottom felt that Mr. Holland would be especially aware of the potential serious consequences of this case. He mentioned Mr. Holland’s present interests in promoting American investment in Latin America. Ambassador Berckemeyer agreed. Mr. Rubottom said he would explore the possibility of a renewed approach on the subject.3 3 Ambassador Berckemeyer had mentioned to a Department officer in a previous conversation that he had some shares in Cerro. On that occasion he said that, while he had not heard from his Government about the dispute, Robert Koenig, President of Cerro, had given him a full rundown. [Footnote is in the source text] PE–43. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, June 9, 1960. SUBJECT Call of Prime Minister Beltran of Peru on the President PARTICIPANTS The President Prime Minister Pedro Beltran2 Counselor Theodore Achilles Assistant Secretary Rubottom

Peru 1119 cabinet minister did resign. In Ecuador an unpredictable man has just been elected President (Velasco Ibarra). The Prime Minister said that the communists complained about Berlin, but Cuba is much worse from the standpoint of the free world. The President stated that the combination of government assistance and private investment in Latin America from the United States had been substantial, yet that message seems not to get across. The Prime Minister reflected for a moment, and said that perhaps we had concentrated too much on major capital investments and that we should now devote our assistance to projects going directly to the people so as to capture public opinion. The Prime Minister recalled the great western immigration in the United States. The Latin American people must now move to their unused land for the new opportunity they seek. The President said that the communists seem to concentrate their efforts in the cities. He said that it was not an easy matter to settle new residents on land and that careful training was required. The Prime Minister referred to the great opportunity for Peru east of the Andes, a region which could offer a new life to their illiterate indigenous population. The Prime Minister said that he understood from the press that the Bolivian President (Siles) had said, following the Khrushchev press conference in Paris, that Bolivia would be glad to have Khrushchev visit that country. He had been shocked by this. The President stressed the need to get the best possible representatives assigned to the Council of the OAS, to give them additional work and opportunity, and to try to mold opinion throughout Latin America. He compared the OAS unfavorably with NATO, saying that perhaps we don’t take the OAS as seriously as we should. Our effort is designed to save a continent. We are not Latins, perhaps we don’t understand Latins as well as we should, but we are trying and we are willing to do more. Still there must be a joint determination to be free and to remain free. The Prime Minister recalled his visit to Puerto Rico in 1958 at the time of Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s visit there9 and the sharp contrast which he noted as compared to the earlier visits he had made to Puerto Rico. The improvement was due largely to Mufioz Marfn’s having helped the lowest social levels. The Prime Minister returned to his line that “A showdown has to come with Cuba”.

Peru 1121 PE–44. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Peruvian Affairs (Poole)1 Washington, June 21, 1960. SUBJECT Assistance for Prime Minister Beltran’s Program PARTICIPANTS Pedro Beltran, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance of Peru Douglas Dillon, Under Secretary of State Theodore C. Achilles, Counselor of the Department of State Edwin M. Martin, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs Richard A. Poole, Officer-­in-Charge of Peruvian Affairs, WST Summary. Prime Minister Beltran explained that, having concentrated his first year in office on the re-­establishment of financial stability, he was now turning to the urgent problem of developing programs which would bring direct benefit to the underprivileged people, especially in the fields of land and housing. In the former his principal emphasis was on the resettlement of new lands, which he described in some detail, although he was not opposed to breaking up unused or under-used large landholdings. He emphasized the urgency of the problem in the face of Castro and Communist agitation of discontent. He explained that his problem was to find financing for roads to resettlement areas, resettlement costs and housing, including the establishment of new savings and loan associations. Beltran said that the IBRD seemed very interested in studying ways of assisting, but that immediate financing was needed from U.S. sources, over the next six months— perhaps $20 million—with more during the next two years. Mr. Dillon replied that the atmosphere in Washington was receptive to more assistance in Latin America, including the fields of agrarian reform and housing, and he indicated that roads and savings and loan associations would seem to be particularly susceptible of U.S. assistance. He said that extra priority would be given to countries such as Peru which had done a conscientious job of helping themselves. He stated that our current thinking is along the lines of projects in which the DLF would meet local currency costs in conjunction with the Eximbank (rather than the IBRD) to meet dollar costs, with the IBRD operating independently. He

Peru 1123 subdivision of large landholdings, since the land in these new regions does not belong to anyone. Mr. Dillon asked whether it would not be quicker and easier to break up some of the large landholdings so as to settle people in that immediate vicinity, since the opening of new regions required new roads, new communities, new everything. Sr. Beltran replied that, in his view, it would be easier to start on new lands since these are better and more productive lands. He said he is not opposed, however, to subdivision of large estates, particularly unworked or underworked landholdings. He recognized, additionally, the political and social need to deal with this aspect of the land problem. Turning to urban problems, Sr. Beltran referred to the new Savings and Loan Association which would encourage both savings and low-­ cost, private housing on a long term loan basis. With the help of the DLF loan to the Association a start can now be made in housing in the Lima area, but new home loan banks are needed in other departments. Other approaches must also be developed. With these programs, Sr. Beltran stated, he hoped to win over the vast majority of the common people from the appeal and influence of Communism. He emphasized the very real danger of Communist agitation amongst the masses, such as the recent riots in Tokyo2 and the terrible riots (“Bogotazo”) in Bogotá twelve years ago.3 He mentioned that Fidel Castro had been involved in those riots and alluded to the fact that, when an American plane evacuated wives and children of Cuban officials, Castro and another agitator made their escape as stowaways. Castro is now intensifying his agitation throughout Latin America. There is less and less outwardly Communist agitation and more and more Fidel, with his claims of being the standard-­bearer of economic independence, non-­intervention and the welfare of the masses. In fact, however, he is serving the purpose of Communism and it matters little whether or not he himself is an actual Communist. Che Guevara’s recent speech is additional evidence that the Cuban Government’s philosophy is Communist.4 The Communists are ready for new Bogotazos and we therefore must act fast. 2 Documentation on anti-U.S. demonstrations and the decision to cancel the projected visit of President Eisenhower to Japan in June 1960 is presented in Volume XV. 3 Reference is to the uprising after the assassination of Liberal Party leader Jorge E.

Peru 1125 Mr. Dillon then emphasized the need for adequate planning. He asked what specific plans had been made for Beltran’s program, whether goals had been set on resettlement, whether roads had been planned, and so forth. Sr. Beltran replied that a start must be made gradually. He has engaged an Italian firm, Italconsult, to take charge of planning and directing the resettlement program and which would work closely with the World Bank. This firm can draw on its considerable experience in land reform in Italy as well as abroad. He was also making arrangements on other aspects of his program with the firm Arthur B. Little of New Haven and with a Canadian firm, which would start next week. Beltran explained that the planning of roads was not so difficult and that he already had two principal areas in mind where roads had been started but had stalled— that is, in the North and South where the best colonization areas were to be found. In answer to a further question from Mr. Dillon, Sr. Beltran said these roads were distinct from the Aguaytia-Pucallpa road for which a DLF loan had been approved and which his predecessors had promoted primarily as the only road connection to an Amazon port, although it did pass through some areas suitable for colonization. Mr. Dillon then remarked that the discussion seemed to point to roads as the main field in which the United States might be of assistance in resettlement. Sr. Beltran replied that although Peruvian companies could build the roads, Peru needs local currency for this purpose which is not available locally and hence must seek foreign currency for conversion. Funds are also needed for foreign exchange costs of road construction, particularly machinery. In addition to roads, the Government will need funds to finance actual resettlement, including payment for land. It is contemplated that the settlers will eventually repay the Government for the land, following a period of grace of from one to three years, at a rate set by the value of crops, e.g. 20%, which would thus gear payment to good and bad yields. Nevertheless, the Government does not really expect to get all its money back for resettlement costs. Mr. Dillon remarked that the big problem seemed to be time. We had already approved loans for the Savings and Loan Association and for one road, and we could find other projects. We could possibly help in land reform, which is a necessary thing and which would seem to be easier in some ways than the opening of new lands. However, this is a complex problem which we have not gotten into before and which is largely for the country itself to handle. Hence, we don’t know yet what we can do in this field. However, Mr. Dillon continued, Mr. Brand6 and the DLF are ready to look into new ways of assisting. We plan to be more active in Latin 6 Managing Director, Development Loan Fund.

Peru 1127 Upton had been very helpful and had indicated DLF as the principal source of the needed funds for local costs. Mr. Brand had also been most receptive and helpful, saying it was possible to start right away in housing and resettlement if ways could be found to provide such assistance. He had earlier seen Mr. Waugh of the Export-Import Bank, who was very sympathetic, and would be seeing him again. Mr. Dillon said he was delighted that these talks had gone so well. He reverted to the need to work out a pattern for Beltran’s programs, since the law requires adequate plans in order for the DLF to make loans. He suggested that the ICA could provide technical assistance in working out such plans and in drawing up applications to the DLF. In addition to technical assistance, it is possible that ICA special funds could be used next year. Sr. Beltran replied that this type of assistance would be most helpful and important. He mentioned, however, the livestock development program in which ICA had assisted in drawing up the program and the loan application, which had just been turned down by the DLF. Sr. Beltran then reverted to his need for financing over the next six months. He said he had been mentioning $25 million for this period, although he actually thought that about $20 million would meet his needs. With this he could start on some projects right away, while others would take time to develop. He stressed again the need for speed in face of the threat of Castroism and Communism to aggravate an already unstable political and social situation. PE–45. Editorial Note A study mission, consisting of Vance Brand, Managing Director, Development Loan Fund; Hawthorne Arey, Director, Export-Import Bank of Washington; John W. Johnston, Jr., Deputy Regional Director for Latin America, International Cooperation Administration; and Theodore C. Achilles, Counselor of the Department of State, visited Peru in mid-July to consider Peruvian loan applications for jungle colonization and low-­ cost housing. They met with President Prado, Prime Minister Beltrán, Cabinet Ministers, and other Peruvian officials. In telegram 41 from Lima, July 16, they recommended $50 million credit for Peru divided equally between the Development Loan Fund and the Export-Import Bank.

Peru 1129 Commanding General Armed Forces and Chief of Staff.5 Was informed Army, aware Cubans attempting disaffect non-­commissioned personnel, was therefore watching their activities and has Cuban Embassy under surveillance. There has been no known infiltration among the troops by Fidelistas. Army solid against Castro and has standing order there be no

Peru 1131 Mr. [illegible in the original]: [illegible in the original] must be [illegible in the original] of [illegible in the original] aspects of the United States proposal concerning [illegible in the original] the Dominican Republic [illegible in the original] be considered during the [illegible in the original].3 Minister Porras said that there was [illegible in the original] civil [illegible in the original] Latin America, and that all of the [illegible in the original]. Minister Porras said that the [illegible in the original] received by the masses in Latin America [illegible in the original] from the [illegible in the original] that even among [illegible in the original] circles, that is, the Catholics, there were firm supporters of Castro. He said that he had received a telegram from students of the Catholic University demanding that he not participate in any anti-Cuban actions. Minister Porras said that, however, the upper hierarchy of the armed forces, financial circles, the government, and a majority in both houses of the Peruvian Congress were in favor of acts of repression of Communist influence in Cuba. He said that he would have to proceed with great caution in the Seventh Meeting, for fear of touching off a revolution in Peru similar to the ones that had taken place in Bolivia or Cuba. Minister Porras said that he believed sincerely in a policy of cooperation with the United States and in the defence of Western principles, but that he would have to be careful not to support any measures that might incite the Cuban people to break Latin American unity. He said that Cuba had broken its ties with the United States by its violent attacks on the latter country, but that Cuba had no reason to break its ties with the other Latin American republics. He said that he hoped that Cuba would remain in the OAS for the sake of Latin American unity, and that Cuba would realize that the OAS represented the best safeguard of the Latin American countries. Minister Porras said that the world was divided into regional system, and that Cuba belonged in the inter-American system for historical, geographic, and cultural reasons. He said that Cuba, although it had insulted a number of Latin American countries, including his own, would not, in his opinion, dare to abandon the OAS. Minister Porras said that Peru had been accused by Cuba of accepting a large sum of money from the Unites States as a price for proposing the Seventh Meeting. He explained that Prime Minister [illegible in the original] been consulted by him about requesting the Meeting; he had decided to request the meeting after he had received United States Ambassador Chaplin and had [illegible in the original] not presented to him by the Ambassador.4 3 The referenced proposal was made by Secretary Herter in a statement at the Sixth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of American States at San José,

Peru 1133 Minister Porras said that Peru rejected the interference of extra-­ continental powers in the hemisphere, not to serve the interests of the United States but to defend itself. He said that although he believed that the Monroe Doctrine had failed on occasion, there was a permanent time of events in history that showed its efficacy. [illegible in the original] almost all of the political parties in Latin America, and was warmly accepted by the masses. He said that therefore the measures taken by Castro should be viewed not as to their effect in Cuba but as a part of the international picture. Minister Porras said that he was convinced that the impact of Fidel Castro on world and Latin American public opinion was the result of the work of American newsmen. He said that what would otherwise be a case of a cardillo of a small Caribbean island with a ridiculous beard had been made into an idol by American correspondents exploiting the Cuban revolution. PE–49. Telegram from the Chargé in Peru (Neal) to the Department of State1

Peru 1135 to President Prado concerning bills on La Brea y Pariñas oil fields. IPC gravely concerned over nationalist and leftist campaign against Government bill4 and worsened climate for passage as result introduction six expropriation bills; believes Beltran and Grieve will be effective in defending bills when called for interpellation October 11 but that only Prado has sufficient political influence to master congressional majority;5 also believes now best time make representations before opposition campaign makes further headway and since attitude successor Government unpredictable. This view seems coincide generally your reports. In your discretion seek audience Prado, taking following general line: USG concerned over bitter campaign against Government bill seemingly directed as much against USG and U.S. investment in general as against IPS and bill itself. Expropriation would of course be very detrimental to climate for U.S. and other investments and credits in Peru. To substantial albeit lesser extent, continued irresolution and controversy over La Brea y pariñas, even without actual expropriation, harming investment climate. While not appropriate USG express opinion on details Government bill, it presumably meets GOP requirements, is acceptable to company and appears best hope for settlement this long standing issue. View uncertainty congressional support for bill in face heavy attacks by opposition, we hope Prado will make every effort mister support by pro-Government majority.6 Dillon

Peru 1137 requesting authorization to purchase these aircraft. I promised that we would send a written reply as requested.5

1138 Uruguay: U.S. Relations with Uruguay UR–1. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1 Washington, March 12, 1958. SUBJECT Uruguay; Proposed Approach to Economic Cooperation. It is paradoxical but true that with no country in the Hemisphere do we have more difficulty in our relations than with Uruguay – ­traditionally the most stable and democratically-­oriented nation in Latin America. For a variety of reasons, detailed below, the adverse drift in our relations in the past few years has now reached a critical stage, and the time has come when Uruguay, politically in a state of near-­paralysis (Tab A)2, and economically in a state of increasing deterioration (Tab B)3, needs help from us. Help, which can most fruitfully be accorded in the economic sphere, will have a resultingly beneficent effort in the political sphere. If, on the other hand, no tangible form of assistance is forthcoming, we can look forward with assurance to worsened economic conditions and correspondingly more difficult political relations. Already the Uruguayan Government – tolerant of native Communism to the point where infiltration is a serious problem – is looking to the Soviet bloc for markets, and no one can say with certainty that, in the event of further economic deterioration, Uruguay could withstand more serious economic and financial penetration. The purpose of this paper is to set forth some of our salient problems in connection with Uruguay and to suggest certain steps which I believe must be taken.

Uruguay 1139 Among these problems the following specific irritants have rendered our relations most difficult. Our countervailing duty on Uruguayan wool tops, imposed in 1953, when it was determined that Uruguayan exchange afforded a subsidy to tops exporters, has still to be removed, not necessarily because the subsidy still exists, but because the Uruguayans have failed to maintain a relatively stationary set of rates under which they could establish statistically that the duty is no longer justified. Another source of irritation to Uruguay has been our P.L. 480 Program, which, whether in actual practice it has harmed Uruguay’s experts or not, has provided a convenient whipping boy. Uruguayan leaders have thus been reluctant to accept a program for their country, but in the past year somewhat hesitantly sought Congressional authority to enter an agreement. The bill remains in Congress, with prospects for immediate passage poor. What the Uruguayan economy clearly needs is a series of domestic reforms coupled with a regime of austerity internationally, the whole to be accompanied by a stabilization program. Recognizing the economic need for these steps, but unwilling to face the political price, Uruguayan officials have several times expressed their guarded desire for a sizable United States loan, and have not hidden their pique that one has somehow not been forthcoming. They have never, however, defined their desires in terms of specific projects. The fact that Uruguay has been unable to unwilling to complete its membership in the IMF, and that, even if it did, Congressional ratification of a Government-­to- Government loan would be most difficult to obtain, seem insufficient to relieve us, in some Uruguayan eyes, of our imagined responsibility in this field. Uruguayans have also been critical of our failure to implement three tariff concessions (canned meat, pickled meat, and meat extract) negotiated under GATT in 1949. While Uruguay delayed several years in ratifying these negotiations, and while Uruguay has subsequently violated some of its own commitments, the fact nevertheless remains that Uruguayans believe that we have legal and moral obligations either to proclaim the items or to proceed to re-­negotiation. To counteract this unhappy combination of circumstances, ARA has recently been holding discussions with Uruguayan Ambassador Lacarte with the object of exploring what could be done to increase economic cooperation between the two countries. The Ambassador has followed up these talks with full discussions of potential assistance at the Eximbank, the IBRD, the DLF, and ICA. He now has an excellent idea of just what, from the point of view not only of legal restrictions but also of policy, these institutions can and cannot do in relation to the present Uruguayan situation. This he is reporting to his Government. Equally important, perhaps, will be his report to the effect that not only

Uruguay 1141 GATT Meat Items. Our failure to put into effect the concessions granted Uruguay during the 1949 GATT negotiations is clearly a breach of faith. Whether or not the Department will be able to overcome the opposition of the Department of Agriculture to honoring our commitment I do not know, but I believe we are morally obligated to try. I am, therefore, preparing a letter for your signature to the appropriate official of Agriculture which will set forth our case as forcefully as possible. Ambassador Lacarte has talked informally at the D.L.F. about two possible projects, one to expand the port of Montevideo and one to drain a section of coastal swamps. Technicians of the IBRD and the ICA, who are familiar with these projects, feel that these projects are not of first priority. The IBRD, however, is preparing to move ahead with a loan of $8–10 million for livestock and pasturage improvement, and Bank officers have indicated informally to ARA that, since the Bank loan would be largely for imported equipment, it might be possible for the D.L.F. to participate in the operation by making a loan to cover local currency costs. In the negotiations for this loan it was contemplated that the Government of Uruguay would meet the local currency costs of this project, and at the moment it is not established that the Government itself cannot do so. We are continuing to look into this, and if it appears to be a practical possibility I would appreciate your support of it in the D.L.F. UR–2. Letter from the Chargé in Uruguay (Espy) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Montevideo, April 1, 1958. Dear Dick: I wanted to write you earlier but I thought I had best wait until we received the memoranda of the follow up conversations on March 6 and 12 which Ambassador Lacarte held with you subsequent to your meeting of February 21 with him. As I wrote you in my letter of March 25, copies of them were inadvertently delayed in reaching us. Now

Uruguay 1143 the economy of this country obviously needs as we here in the Embassy recognize, is the same as that which the Department also appreciates. In summary, it is a definite and possibly drastic program for Uruguay to come to grips itself with its economic plight for which it almost entirely is solely responsible. The adoption of a free exchange rate for exports, the sale of its products at realistic world prices, the improvement of its production, the devotion of more of its efforts to the land rather than merely trying to build up more industry and create more uneconomic urban occupations, the restriction of its imports and the balancing of its budget are obviously the ways it ought to take to cure its economic ills. It still looks as though none of these will be done, at least immediately. Now the Government wants one or both of two things: The United States purchase at a high price of the remainder of Uruguay’s wool clip and/or a stabilization loan. We realize that our Government cannot in all probability do either and even if it did so, without drastic conditions attached we would only be postponing the inevitable day of reckoning. However, the three possibilities that seem to have come out of the conversations in Washington are something concrete and seem to be along the lines of the suggestion made in our Despatch 683 that we at least express to Uruguay our willingness to help. We have heard that Ambassador Lacarte will be coming here next week or the week after and I certainly hope that he will be prepared to explain fully to his Government the whole situation. By several communications, particularly our telegram 369 of March 31, we reported that Uruguay through its newly designated Ambassador to Venezuela, is going to attempt to persuade Venezuela to supply Uruguay with petroleum on a credit basis in the amount of approximately $40 million. If that does work out of course it will help to tide this country over its immediate difficulties. Naturally, we have no idea here what the reaction of the Venezuelan authorities would be to any such approach. Should all go well, with assistance from ourselves and from Venezuela to Uruguay, the picture here will certainly greatly brighten; but, of course, this is all still very “ify”. Now may I refer back to Vice President Nixon’s visit and my telegram 373 of March 31. I mentioned therein that Battle’s newspaper “Acción” reported as a rumor that Batlle would take a leave of absence immediately after Holy Week which would mean he would be away from the official score here both over the Frondizi and Nixon visits. As I see his strategy, perhaps in the first instance he does not wish to play second fiddle to President Fischer when the president elect of Argentina comes here. In part there may be the same motive inducing him to be away when Vice President Nixon comes to Uruguay. On the other hand, however, I have a strong feeling that as regards to Vice President Nixon,

Uruguay 1145 United States either by implication or outright commitments that may not be fulfilled, then our relations being pretty much at the bottom, Bob can weather them for this year without any stigma having fallen on him through no fault of his own and with the hope that later the skies will brighten so as to enable him to accomplish his mission eventually with success. In the meantime, we can quietly be working on the problems, trying to develop a sound basis for their eventual resolution. Sincerely yours, James Espy P.S. Enclosed is a copy of a letter I wrote to Chuck Burrows on the subject of the mission of the newly designated Uruguayan Ambassador to Venezuela.7 7 Not printed. UR–3. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of South American Affairs (Bernbaum)1 Montevideo, April 28, 1958. PARTICIPANTS Luis Batlle Berres, Member of the National Council of Government Richard Nixon, Vice President of the United States Maurice M. Bernbaum (Interpreter)2 SUBJECT Disposition of Swift and Armour Packing Plants. Batlle Berres brought to the Vice President’s attention during dinner the recent action of the Uruguayan Government in taking over the Swift and Armour Meat packing plants.3 He stated vehemently

Uruguay 1147 as did the attitudes of responsible and important American firms. What concerned him was that their attitude was based on the apparent facts involved which did not permit as much stress on the political factors as was the case in Uruguay and which he, the Vice President, understood as a man in public life himself. He emphasized that it would be most unfortunate for the impression to become current in the U.S. that Uruguay had changed its policy and friendly attitude toward private enterprise. He hoped that this could be averted by a prompt and equitable solution to the problem. Dr. Batlle Berres assured the Vice President repeatedly that there was no basis for such concern—­that Uruguay’s tradition and reputation for fair dealing themselves represented a guarantee against such unjustified fears. He stated that he personally guaranteed to the Vice President that the companies would be fairly treated and that he was always ready to speak to them. He just hoped that they would not convey a misleading impression in the U.S. since they themselves understood the necessity for the action taken and the certainty of fair treatment. The conversation continued in this vein until terminated by the commencement of after-­dinner toasts. Dr. Batlle Berres and Ambassador Lacarte later continued the conversation with Mr. Bernbaum. Dr. Batlle asked for confirmation that the Vice President has assured him that the U.S. Government would not intervene in the matter. Mr. Bernbaum stated that this was his understanding. He added, however, that the Vice President’s assurances had been accompanied by Dr. Batlle Berres’ assurances of fair treatment for the companies. It was his impression that the Vice President considered that Dr. Batlle Berres’ assurances represented a guarantee of fair treatment to the American firms. Dr. Batlle stated that this was a justified assumption. The companies were going to receive fair treatment, and he was ready to discuss the problem with them. He confirmed, when asked, that the Government’s proposal in Congress for authorization to pay the companies for their properties, would remain in Congress with the expectation of passage and eventual payment. He was most categorical on this point. The conversation terminated with Mr. Bernbaum’s request for Dr. Batlle’s authorization to convey his assurances to the companies. Dr. Battle gave that authorization with the statement that he had already conveyed such assurances directly and would continue to do so.

Uruguay 1149 he was talking with Mr. Waugh of the Eximbank. He noted that this subject had been raised when Mr. Waugh was in Montevideo, at which time it had been discussed in terms of loan with full gold collateral. The Uruguayan Government now felt, however, that for political reasons it would be impossible to offer this collateral, and he was exploring the possibility of an unbacked loan such as he understood had been granted other, including Latin American, countries. He pointed out that Uruguay’s financial affairs were in the hands of responsible people, and that Uruguay’s reputation for the payment of obligations was excellent. Moreover, he said, he hoped that the present period of exchange stringency would be resolved toward the end of this year, at which time Uruguay would have for sale abroad a full year’s wool clip plus one half of this year’s currently unsold clip. The Ambassador mentioned also that he was holding discussions on the possible financing of different proposals with the Development Loan Fund, and indicated that he thought some of those discussions might bear fruit. He added that Uruguay was also currently hoping for some U.S. actions which would permit increased U.S. imports of certain Uruguayan products, such as wool tops, canned meat, and woolen textiles. These items, he said, would in due course be the subject of communications to the Department. In conclusion, the Ambassador again stressed the friendly atmosphere engendered by the Vice President’s visit to Uruguay, and said that he believed that this atmosphere was an excellent one in which to proceed to greater U.S.–Uruguayan cooperation. The Secretary commented that he could not, of course, give immediate answers to the questions raised by the Ambassador. If the answers could come from the heart, he said, it would be simple enough, but the questions raised had of course to be considered thoroughly from a financial viewpoint by various U.S. Government agencies. He said that, as he had mentioned in an OAS meeting recently, the U.S. Government was aware of the marketing problems faced by countries producing a few basic commodities, and that he was also aware of the evident Communist intention of making capital out of these difficulties. Moreover, he continued, this awareness ante-­dated some of the less pleasant incidents which took place during Mr. Nixon’s tour of South America. He mentioned that the free world had experienced cycles of prosperity and depression for a long time, and commented that some governmental attempts to counteract depression conditions, as in the case of agriculture in the U.S., had raised additional problems. Now, however, there was the added danger that the Communists, who could implement their policies without regard to factors such as costs and profits, were obviously endeavoring to take advantage of cycles of depression to destroy both the economic and political structures of free world countries. Finding a solution to this problem was not as easy as

Uruguay 1151 on a strong quid pro quo basis, Mr. Rubottom believed that the interests of Mr. Taylor’s company and of the United States as a whole would best be served by a solution of the political problem.2 Having said this, Mr. Rubottom said he had heard from Mr. Dillon regarding the outcome of his conversations a few days earlier with Mr. Waugh. This indicated an agreement between the two that the Bank was ready to announce a $25 million line of exporters credits contingent upon a settlement of the meatpackers problem. After a discussion of the matter, Mr. Dillon had authorized Mr. Rubottom to let Mr. Waugh know that he had misunderstood the primary importance of the balance-­of-­payments loan, the granting of which would, in accordance with conversations in the Vice President’s office, be made contingent upon settlement of the meatpackers claim. Mr. Rubottom stressed that the line of exporters credits represented normal business and should be handled without any reference whatsoever to the meatpackers problem. Mr. Rubottom then made the following specific proposed in response to Mr. Waugh’s request: 1. That the Bank agree to announce a line of exporters credits. 2. That the Bank agree to consider a balance-­of-­payments loan on the basis of partial gold coverage and commitments by the Uruguayan Government to undertake necessary stabilization measures. He added that the Department was, in the meanwhile, working strenuously on other aspects of the Uruguayan problem, including elimination of the countervailing duty on wool tops and compliance with our agreement in GATT to make concessions on three canned neat items. Mr. Waugh stated that he agreed thoroughly with Mr. Rubottom’s analysis of the political problem. The only area in which he differed was the amount of reliance to be placed on Uruguayan promises. He

Uruguay 1153 by the Uruguayan Government. Mr. Rubottom interjected that Lacarte was one of the best Ambassadors Uruguay had ever sent to the United States, that he had a great deal of confidence in Lacarte, and that one of his fears regarding the present situation was that the failure of the negotiations might lead to Lacarte’s recall. M. Waugh agreed with this estimate of Ambassador Lacarte. Mr. Bernbaum stated that Lacarte was to visit the Department on Friday June 20 and inquired whether Lacarte should then be asked to resume his conversations with the Bank. Mr. Waugh said that he certainly hoped that would be the case and that no commitments would be made by the Department. UR–6. Letter from the Ambassador in Uruguay (Woodward) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1 Montevideo, July 22, 1958. Dear Mr. Dillon: The Matter discussed in the attached despatch2 is of such importance in United States relations with Uruguay that I am taking the liberty of calling it to your attention. Such I know how busy you are, I suggest that you read the first paragraph of the despatch which summarizes the reasons for which I believe prompt action should be taken. With the hope that you will agree that action3 should be taken promptly in this matter, and with best wishes, Sincerely yours, Robert F. Woodward

Uruguay 1155 (6) The original application of the countervailing duty appears, in any event, to have been not entirely consistent with the spirit of United States fundamental laws. (7) The United States can now gain an additional good-­will benefit by taking the initiative and not awaiting a formal Uruguayan request for the countervailing duty to be removed. (1) Careful calculation reveals that the average weighted exchange rate for all Uruguayan imports and exports is at present and for some time has been substantially above the officially established exchange rate for exports of Uruguayan wool tops. Therefore it is clear that the basis no longer exists, under the provisions of United States law, for considering that the officially established export rate for Uruguayan wool tops constituted a “subsidy” against which a countervailing duty is applicable. It appears that no basis has existed for the countervailing duty at least since November 11, 1957 whom the overall exchange rate structure was sharply depreciated; and, although no calculations have been made to prove it, any basis for the duty may have been eliminated even earlier. In other words, the U.S. Government appears at present to be in a dubious situation in applying this countervailing duty. Not only should our Government properly take initiative in complying with United States law but further delay in corrective action may create additional problems. There is enclosed, as Enclosure 1, a calculation by this Embassy of the average weighed Uruguayan exchange rate for all Uruguayan exports and imports together with an indication of the comparison between this average rate and the existing officially established exchange rate for exports of Uruguayan wool tops. The calculation above that the current official tops rate is roughly below the weighted average rate for all Uruguayan exports and imports. (2) It has become increasingly apparent that the U.S. Government has been permitting itself to suffer unnecessarily a serious disadvantage in its relations with Uruguay by awaiting an official request from the Uruguayan Government for removal of this countervailing duty. The Uruguayan Government has, for several years, apparently encouraged the widespread impression throughout Uruguay and in other countries that Uruguayan export trade and the Uruguayan economy have been suffering a more serious disadvantage than has really been the case, from the countervailing duty on wool tops applied by the U.S. Government. This impression has now gained such widespread currency within Uruguay that the removal of the countervailing duty would result commensurately in much more favorable publicity for the United States then the practical effect on Uruguayan trade would justify. The removal of the countervailing duty would, in fact, probably not work any appreciable benefit at this time to Uruguayan exports or the Uruguayan country. The Uruguayan Government and wool merchants know this but the Uruguayan public have an unclear understanding

Uruguay 1157 we await the time when the Uruguayan Government may finally take constructive economic measures that are increasingly needed, including solution of the packing house problem, we can reduce the extent to which our relations suffer by taking advantage of the very fact that the Uruguayan Government has, for several years, been encouraging the public impression that the countervailing duty on wool tops has had a more deleterious effect than has been the case. The U.S. Government now has an opportunity to gain disproportionately from public opinion from removal of the countervailing duty. (4) There appears to be very little possibility that any significant quantity of Uruguayan wool tops would be exported to the United States in the predictable future if the countervailing duty were now removed. In the absence of the duty, according to competent experts, the price of Uruguayan wool tops would still be above the world price. Furthermore, viewed in terms of relative importance, even in the peak year of 1958, when imports of Uruguayan tops into the United States amounted to home 14 million pounds (valued at slightly over 16 million dollars) quantitatively these imports amounted for only about 3 percent of total U.S. wool consumption. Since 1958, Uruguayan tops exports to the United States have dwindled to only a few hundred thousand pounds annually, and it is very unlikely that the relatively high 1952 volume could ever be repeated. (5) The number of U.S. companies which are dependent to an important extent upon the combing of raw wool into wool tops as a large part of their manufacturing operations has evidently diminished since the countervailing duty went into effect in 1953. The number of U.S. plants in which this is now a large part of total operations is probably less than ten. The possibility of complaints or criticism from there plants is further reduced by the fact that there would probably be no increased imports of Uruguayan wool tops into the U.S. in the predictable future if the countervailing duty were removed. Moreover, the convincing indication that the officially established exchange rate for Uruguayan exports of wool tops can no longer be continued as a “subsidy” as compared with the average exchange rate for all other Uruguayan exports and imports, oil [illegible in the original] the basis for complaint from those factories that imports of Uruguayan wool tops should legally be subjected to a countervailing duty. The large number of complaints received by the U.S. Government prior to the application of the countervailing duty against wool tops in 1958 suggests that a preponderant majority of those complaints came from wool manufacturers and wool producers in the United States who may not have been directly affected by the importation of Uruguayan wool tops, but whose organized associations were acting in sympathy with the small group of manufacturers who were dependent upon wool combing operations.

Uruguay 1159 Government would require a formal request from the Uruguayan Government for removal of the countervailing duty, supported by a thorough Uruguayan official calculation of the average weighted exchange rates for Uruguayan exports and imports over a representative period, to enable the United States Government to give official consideration to the possibility of actually removing the countervailing duty. The fact that this [illegible in the original] has been given now provides the United States Government with the opportunity to gain additional good-will by taking the initiative without awaiting a formal request from the Uruguayan Government. Moreover, it would seem entirely logical and proper for the United States Government to take action under a United States law if the United States Government perceives on its own initiative, or received a convincing indication from any reliable sources, that such action should be taken in order to bring about [illegible in the original] with the law or eliminate positive action that the United States Government has not into effect and which is no longer required by the law. Also, since it is conceivable that the Uruguayan Government would actually present a formal request for the removal of the countervailing duty in the future, I believe we should now seize the opportunity to take action before it is requested. In this respect, there is opportunity, in publicity or comments to the press concerning action removing the countervailing duty, to relate this action to the special determination of the United States Government at this time to demonstrate its intention to do everything possible to cooperate with the Latin American Government including the Government of Uruguay in the promotion of mutually advantageous international trade and economic development, with particular reference to the reappraisal of inter-American relations which has followed upon the visit to South America of Vice President Nixon. For all the reasons set forth in this despatch, I earnestly hope that action will be taken as soon as possible to remove the countervailing duty on Uruguayan wool tops. Robert F. Woodward UR–7. Editorial Note On October 20, 1958, two contracts of sale were signed transferring all of the assets and liabilities of the two U.S. meatpacking plants, Swift and Armour, to a workers’ cooperative known as Establecimientos

Uruguay 1161 commitments would do the job. We explained to Lacarte that the Bank was reluctant to define its requirements in the manner desired for two reasons, (1) it did not want to become involved in an essentially Uruguayan-IMF problems; (2) many of the Directors were fearful of the effect on the overall policy of close collaboration with the IMF of a deviation from that policy in the case of Uruguay. Given the general desire to do something for Uruguay, the consensus in the Bank was that they could not go beyond receiving commitments voluntarily entered into by the Uruguayans without in any way participating in the formulation of such commitments. For this reason they didn’t even want to let Lacarte know informally what they would expect to find in a letter of commitment from the Uruguayan Government. While unhappy over this turn of events, Lacarte appeared to understand the Bank’s position. Our various efforts to obtain formal cancellation of the countervailing duty this much appear to have failed. After speaking with Secretary Anderson early this week, Dick wrote him a letter explaining why it would be important for the Department of the Treasury to waive some of its requirements and cancel the countervailing duty promptly. A copy of the letter is enclosed.4 This letter produced a meeting in the Treasury Department which I attended and at which time we made all of the points we could in favor of prompt action.5 We found the Treasury people sympathetic but not ready to take action without the complete elimination of the differential. The reasons given were legal and political. They felt that the law very specifically prohibited the Treasury Department from eliminating the countervailing duty as long as there was a differential between wool tops and the general average as defined in the Treasury Department’s formula. They could not see their way clear to get around this provision of the law. They also felt that violation of the law, even if feasible, would entail unacceptable political risks. They felt that cancellation would inevitably be followed by the prompt demand of the wool industry for an explanation of the basis on which cancellation was made. Since the formula and the facts involved were already known to the wool industry it would be easy for them to verify the violation. The net result could easily be renewed pressure from protectionist groups to put teeth into the countervailing duty legislation and enforce it all across the board. As it is today, the Treasury Department has adopted a passive attitude toward reported violations and takes action only when forced to do so by the industries concerned. Until now the only action has been the one against Uruguay. They shudder to think of anything forcing them to take further action of this nature. We then went through the exercise of recalculating the formula on the basis of giving the Uruguayans the benefit of the doubt in all 4 Not printed. 5 No record of the meeting has been found.

Uruguay 1163 now an effective realization of the political importance of stabilizing and improving our relations with Uruguay. Given this situation, our failure to get positive action this month before the elections should not be taken as indicating failure in the future.6 I hope and expect that most of our problems will be settled during the next few months. With best Regards, Sincerely, Maurice H. Bernbaum

Uruguay 1165 It is more likely, by its nature, to be anti-Communist than the List 15 Government, although several Nationalists, while in the opposition, have been notably friendly with the Soviet Legation. However, it is not likely that the Communists will be dealt with sufficiently drastically to give them a phoney “aura of persecution” which would actually help to strengthen them. In general, the broad middle-­class element that has been revealed in this election will be a very important bulwark against drastic change in policies in Uruguay—­and the unusual governmental system which gives the opposition unique opportunity to influence policies will help this. Leaders of the Nationalist Party have shown, individually, a courteous and friendly personal attitude in conversations with officers of the U.S. Embassy and U.S. citizens. The 85-­year old leader, Herrera, has been very cordial. He made a distinct effort to be friendly in greeting Vice President Nixon during the Vice President’s visit to Uruguay

Uruguay 1167 have both this equipment and the Mission for the purpose of giving the Governmental leaders a feeling of security with respect to unpredictable developments in Argentina. This latter feeling was, of course, particularly strong during the Peron era, but developments in Argentina continue to inspire a feeling of uncertainty, and it seems likely that the Herrerista Government will have similar motivations. This reassuring defense tie has no doubt been, tacitly, in the minds of leaders of the Uruguayan Government, as powerful a political factor as exists in Uruguayan relations with the United States. We can no doubt thank our defense relationship as well as our fundamental ideological relationship for the Uruguayan measures of cooperation with the United States in international matters, particularly at the United Nations. It can be hoped that this relationship will continue. While the Herreristas, in the opposition, have been unenthusiastic about this “defense cooperation”, their attitude twenty years ago toward the militaristic regimes in Italy and Germany and their subsequent attitude toward the Peron regime in Argentina would not indicate any fundamental antipathy to “militarism” per se. All indications we have received so far from the Herreristas are to the effect that they intend to adopt a clear policy of cooperation with the United States and the Western world and that they hope to have our friendly assistance. There would seem to be no reason why we should adopt any change of attitude whatever in our relations with Uruguay, as we wait to see what concrete measures the new Administration will undertake and what general attitudes it will adopt. I believe that we should continue the efforts we have been making to resolve the old grievances and work toward new, modest measures of economic and financial cooperation. We should assume that the new Administration will have as much interest as (or more than) the present Administration in such measures as possible Eximbank assistance and possible DLF loans, both for the UTE telephone equipment and possibly to supplement the prospective IBRD loan for rehabilitation. The need is so great for the surplus tobacco and cotton which would be delivered under the PL 4805 agreement, that is being negotiated that there can be little question but that this negotiation would receive the unqualified approval of the new Administration.6 In any event, the sales transaction should be completed long before the new Administration comes in on March 1, 1959. 5 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of

Uruguay 1169 constructive and interesting development of the unique Uruguayan system of elections and Government. This Embassy, like most other political prognosticators and pundits in Uruguay, was resigned to a continuation of a List 15 Government by a small and unworkable margin, and the Embassy was as surprised as were the Herreristas themselves at their victory. After a few days or reorientation, however, the Embassy is inclined to be optimistic and to believe, for all the reasons outlined in the preceding paragraph, that the elections offer much more promising possibilities for Uruguay and for Uruguayan-United States relations than we had expected. Robert F Woodward UR–10. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1 Washington, February 3, 1959. SUBJECT Removal of Countervailing Duty on Uruguayan Wool Tops According to the latest Treasury calculation, recently imposed surcharges on certain categories of Uruguayan imports have raised the weighted average Uruguayan exchange rate to 4.25 pesos per dollar, as compared with a wool tops rate of 4.11 pesos per dollar. Applying the formula used in imposing the countervailing duty on Uruguayan wool tops in 1953, Treasury concluded that no subsidy of Uruguayan wool tops now exists and that the countervailing duty should be removed. Last week it informed interested members of Congress and key persons in the U.S. wool trade that an order to this effect would be issued in ten days, that is, on February 5.2

Uruguay 1171 UR–11. Telegram From the Embassy in Uruguay to the Department of State1 Montevideo, October 6, 1959. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 5 pages not declassified. UR–12. Editorial Note

Uruguay The President

Senator Luis BATLLE Berres Ambassador Robert F. Woodward Deputy Jorge BATLLE Ibañez Major John Eisenhower

Sr. Luis BATLLE Ibañez Colonel Vernon Walters SUBJECT Conversation During Courtesy Call of Senator (former President) Luis BATLLE Berres Senator Luis BATLLE Berres, accompanied by his two sons, Jorge Batlle Ibañez (who is now a Deputy in the Uruguayan Chamber of Deputies and the principal administrative manager of the Colorado List 15 newspaper ACCION) and Luis Batlle Ibañez (who is a concert pianist just beginning his career) called on President Eisenhower on March

Uruguay 1173 President Eisenhower commented that those minor criticisms were nothing as compared with the ones that he has been receiving from Cuba, and he said that this situation poses a serious problem for the United States. Senator Batlle said that while Fidel CASTRO had great prestige throughout Latin America as a revolutionist, he had lost that prestige as a governor. He repeated this observation three times, wishing to emphasize it. In the course of emphasizing this point, he said that the countries of South America could not permit communism to gain control in Cuba. The President commented that this is really a problem for the Organization of American States, and the countries of the Western Hemisphere as a whole. After restarting his views in various ways, which appeared to be entirely critical of the Cuban Government, Senator Batlle departed. UR–14. Memorandum of a Conversation1 Montevideo, March 2, 1960. US/MC/33 SUBJECT Various PARTICIPANTS United States Uruguayan The President President of the National Mr. Hagerty Council of Government, Secretary Herter Sr. Benito Nardone Major Eisenhower Councillor Victor Haedo Ambassador Woodward Councillor Faustino Harrison Lt. Col. Walters (Interpreter) Councillor Martin R. Echegoyen

Councillor Justo M. Alonso

Councillor Pedro Zabalza

Councillor Ledo Arroyo Torres

Councillor Hector A. Grauert

Councillor Cesar Batlle Pacheco

Secretary Manuel Sanchez Morales

Minister of Foreign Relations,

Homero Martinez Montero

Aide to President Eisenhower,

General Enrique Magnani

Uruguay 1175 the opportunity to improve their living conditions through the type of assistance which will enable them to attain this objective. At present the U.S. is spending 45 billion dollars a year, 60 per cent of its budget, for military purposes to assure our protection and maintain the shield behind which our people may work. This year, he said, we are requesting our Congress to provide $4.2 billion for programs of technical assistance, economic aid, and defense support. The capacity to carry out this program depends upon the maintenance of fiscal stability and the value of our money, without resorting to inflation. The U.S. has many internal problems but the most important is to maintain a healthy economy and prove to the world that we are assuring financial responsibility. The U.S. will never refuse to aid, nor will abandon, a friend who is sincerely working, making an effort to secure his livelihood and to improve the living conditions of the people. In such cases, within the framework of its world responsibilities and within the limitations of its resources, the U.S. will do everything possible to assist that friend. President Eisenhower reiterated his conviction that the free world will have the necessary strength to assure its own security, and concluded by saying he would be pleased to try to answer any specific questions which the Councillors might wish to ask. After President Nardone thanked President Eisenhower for his remarks, the latter said it would be useful to him, on the eve of the new conferences in Europe2, if he could know if the Councillors had any objection concerning what the United States was trying to do, if the U.S. is mistaken in its policies or should modify them. He said that one of his purposes in visiting Latin America before going to Paris was to obtain the opinions of these countries. He requested that such views be expressed to the U.S. Government through official channels. President Nardone’s statement that the Council shared and wished to strengthen the policies that are being carried out by the U.S. to defend democratic principles was seconded by Councillors Arroyo Torres and Batlle Pacheco of the Opposition. Councillor Haedo commented that, in this case, he agreed with the Opposition. He went on to say that the reception given to President Eisenhower would have been duplicated if he had come as a private citizen. Councillor Batlle Pacheco joined in this sentiment, saying that the President interprets exactly the North American nation and its glorious past. President Nardone then expressed Uruguayan thanks for the collaboration of the United States which had restored optimism to their 2 Reference is to the forthcoming meeting of Chiefs of State and Heads of Government, scheduled to be held in Paris during the week of May 16, 1960. Documentation on the sub-

Diego de Arteaga,

Uruguay Rascher–civilian

aide to Secretary Herter SUBJECT Official Call on Minister of Foreign Affairs; Cuban Problems - (Separate Memorandum of Conversation have been prepared on “Law of the Sea Hatiters”; “General World Situation”; and “Exchange of Gifts,”)

Uruguay 1177 There was an exchange of amenities during which the Foreign Minister expressed the hope that the personal relationship which had been developed with the Secretary beginning with the Santiago FM Conference would be considered as evidence of the friendly and cooperative relationship which the Uruguayan Government wished to have with the United States. The Secretary then brought up the question of Cuba which he had touched upon briefly with the Foreign Minister in the motorcade earlier in the day. The Secretary pointed out that the Cuban situation poses a very serious problem for the United States, but that it is not just a problem for the United States but one for all of the American Republics. The Secretary said he would appreciate having the Foreign Minister’s views of the situation. The Secretary said that since the withdrawal of our Ambassador from Cuba there had been a lessening of attacks on the United States; on the Secretary; on Assistant Secretary Rubottom and on Ambassador Bonsal. Nevertheless, the Cuban Government had continued to place in important positions within the Government persons who were known to be of the extreme left, if not Communists. This is of concern to the United States because it may indicate that the Cuban Government is likely to follow on extremist course and take extremist actions which will further complicate our relations, despite a reduction in criticism of the United States. The Secretary said that it would be hard to predict just where such a course might end. The Secretary made it very plain that we are not concerned with Cuba’s Agrarion Reform Law. He said that this is a domestic matter for the Cubans to determine. All that we ask is that there be just, adequate and prompt payment to any Americans whose property is taken. In this convection, the Secretary pointed out that the Cubans have just announced that all further foreign capital investment will be prohibited. This might be a further indication of a trend which is developing within the Cuban Government. Such a law would, of course, be of concern not only to the United States but to all other foreign countries. The Secretary also explained that the Cubans are desirous of negotiating with us on certain matters, and had recently proposed such negotiations but with conditions which were one-­sided and completely unacceptable to the United States. We have replied to the Cubans that we would not be able to negotiate on this basis. The Secretary pointed out that the unrealistic and unilateral approach of the Cubans on the question of negotiations might be a further indication of the trend of events in Cuba, and certainly will have a hearing on our relations with that country. The Foreign Minister at this point, after indicating surprise at the news of this new Cuban action of foreign investments, said he understood completely that the Cuban situation presented a very difficult

Uruguay 1179 SUMMARY: Although the conversation offered a very good opportunity for the Secretary to explain fully our positions vis-à-­vis Cuba, the Uruguayan Foreign Minister did not respond with any assurances that Uruguay understood it was a hemisphere problem nor did he give any indication of any official Uruguayan position on the Cuban case. He did make the point that, in the minds of the Uruguayans, the Cuban and Dominican problems are linked, and should be considered together. This, of course, was a reflection of the very strong anti-Dominican attitude in Uruguay. The Minister soon wondered off the Cuban question and started talking in generalities about the world of situation. Whether this was deliberate or merely represented his lack of coordinated thinking on the problem is conjectural. UR–16. Despatch from the Ambassador in Uruguay (Woodward) to the Department of State1 Montevideo, August 26, 1960. No. 155. SUBJECT Current Political and Economic Situation in Uruguay Summary Relations between the Uruguayan Government and the United States Government are at present very cooperative. This is important to the United States because Uruguay still possesses special international prestige. And Uruguayan governmental cooperation is well supported by Uruguayan public opinion. There is increasing awareness in Uruguay of the danger of international communism; Uruguayans consider Uruguay impregnable to communism; but communist and Cuban propaganda is persistent, and communist influence in Uruguay is strong among a minority of the labor movement and a minority of the teachers. The present Uruguayan Administration is definitely more conservative than the preceding one. It is slowly stabilizing the economic and

Uruguay 1181 The smaller of the two main segments of the Colorado party (List 14) is more moderate in its economic and social views and has been consistently friendly toward the United States for years, as exemplified by the utterances of its newspaper EL DIA. Even the List 15 segment of the Colorado party has been at least as cooperative in its attitude toward the United States since it left office on March 1, 1959 as it was during its own Administration. Evidently, the main body of List 15—­except for the extremist fringe—­appears as convinced as are the Blanco groups that cooperation with the United States and the Western World is the only natural and consistent line for Uruguay. And even the extremist fringe of List 15 is inclined to admire many aspects of the United States and its policies while likewise taking an interest in other methods of bettering the lot of the masses. Therefore, the majority of Uruguayan citizens clearly support the attitude of the Uruguayan Administration toward the United States. (Perhaps the most important effect of the visit to Uruguay of President Eisenhower was to precipitate a display of attitudes which showed all Uruguayans vividly that the great majority of themselves approve of the United States and its policies. This, and the converse discovery that militant critics were a small minority, has tended to give many Uruguayans more courage and more conviction and more inclination to align themselves openly with the democratic ideology as symbolized by the United States.) Successful United States efforts to clear away points of irritation in Uruguayan-U.S. relations, and to develop cooperative programs between the two countries have undoubtedly been a substantial factor in the improvement of relations, although the advent of the Blanco Administration on March 1, 1959 was undoubtedly the most important factor. Importance to the United States of Good Relations with Uruguay Although Uruguay does not stand out among other nations as conspicuously as three or four decades ago, it is still especially useful to have Uruguayan support for United States policies and actions. Uruguay’s international reputation as a country of democratic, educated, and liberty-­loving people has given Uruguayan attitudes and views more weight at international meetings or in international public discussions than the attitudes and views of any other small country of the Western Hemisphere. Uruguay continues to be the most outstanding small country in the Western Hemisphere in many respects: It has the most firmly-­entrenched democratic traditions and institutions, including a permanent Electoral Court to supervise all national elections. It has the most democratic form of Government in the American Republics in that there is the least opportunity for any one man to attain conspicuous authority. It has a practically completely graft-­free

Uruguay 1183 Uruguayan Economic Improvement The present Uruguayan Administration has moved slowly to improve the country’s economic situation. It has succeeded so far in stabilizing the international value of the Uruguayan peso, in taking a major step to eliminate the system of multiple exchange rates with many beneficial results, in coming closer to balancing the budget, in significantly restricting credit, in stopping the drain on the gold balances of the central bank, and in slowing down the increase in the cost of living. A major benefit from the elimination of the system of multiple exchange rates was to place international trade at the beginning of 1960 on a completely multilateral basis and eliminate bilateralism and discrimination. Another benefit was to increase the effective returns from important export products, creating new incentives for additional production. Another benefit to the economy was the elimination of costly subsidies of certain imports, both for consumption and for aid to industry. The Blanco Administration has shown an admirable steadfastness of purpose in proceeding with steps toward economic stabilization, over the obstacle of much clamor from the Opposition and particularly the Communists and their Socialist allies. Moreover, slow governmental procedures had been made slower by many differences of opinion within the Blanco ranks and by the exceedingly slim Blanco majority in the Legislature—50 out of 99 members in the Chamber of Deputies. Much of the credit for the progress which has been made is due to the Minister of Finance, Contador Juan AZZINI, who has a clear conception of his course, and to the comparative political imperturbability of the two main characters in the nine-­man Presidential Council (the National Council of Government), Chairman Benito NARDONE and next year’s Chairman, Victor HAEDO. The steady inflation that had come about from years of overspending and subsidizing favored urban and industrial elements in the population has had the natural effect of raising living costs in comparison with individual income. After having spent and subsidized for years to perpetuate itself in office, the List 15 Colorado Administration became discredited because the voters began to discover that they had to pay the bill through reduced individual real income. And then, ironically, the one period in which this trend was felt the most keenly was the part of 1959 after the Blanco Administration took over on March 1. In recent months, wage increases in many industries have been greater than cost-­of-­living increases, tending partly to restore real income. The Government’s four-­year budget is about to be passed by the Legislature with substantial wage increases for Government employees, which anticipate to some extent the fact that increases cannot be

Uruguay 1185 Uruguay’s Unusual Economic and Social Situation; Future Prospects Despite a degree of inflation which has increased prices more than it has wages, Uruguay probably still possesses a larger percentage of population who are fed, clothed and sheltered reasonably well than any other Latin American country. An ECLA study showed that, in 1958, about 78% of the Uruguayan population had a productivity of over 400 US$ per capita, which was the highest recorded in Latin America. Uruguay has long had the international reputation of having the largest proportion of pensioners, the largest variety of other social security services, the largest proportion of Government employees, the most public ownership of utilities and industries, and the most “welfare state” institutions in general of any Latin American country. On a comparative basis, this is probably true. For example, there are about 200,000 pensioners and about 100,000 others who are eligible but who have not been able to obtain pensions as yet because of delays that are fundamentally due to depleted pension funds that have made loans to the Government. There is a system of small “family allowances” which are funded like pensions and supplement wages, and there are unemployment funds. For medical and hospital services, the population is about equally divided between those whose income is low enough to make them eligible for public health services and those who are members of one of the many “mutual” health insurance societies; it is estimated that only about 5% of Uruguayans now depend entirely upon the private direct purchase of medical and hospital services. All of the utilities in the country except the (British-­owned) Montevideo gas company are now owned by the Government. And the Government monopolizes petroleum refining, most liquor distilling, a large part of gasoline distribution, a large part of cement manufacturing, fertilizer and chemical manufacturing, fishing and fish distribution, and insurance. There is very little foreign ownership of industry in Uruguay and the funded foreign debt is well under $100 million USCy. Despite the reputation of Uruguay, however, the backbone of its economy is private capitalism, ownership is concentrated in a surprisingly small proportion of the population, and the economic and social attitudes of these capitalists are, on the whole, not conspicuously enlightened. About 35% of all the arable land in the country is concentrated in the hands of about 600 families, and the concentration of the ownership of industry is probably about the same. Farm workers average less than $20 USCy, a month plus room and board, and ordinary industrial workers average from $60 to $80 USCy, a month, plus about 20% more from the employer for pension funds and other social security payments. Also, some of the wealth that has built Montevideo into an impressive city for such a small country has come from persons who have

Uruguay 1187 exchange to purchase Uruguayan petroleum needs from Argentina. This exchange of tourist services for petroleum would be greatly facilitated by the existence of a bridge or viaduct between Buenos Aires and Colonia in Uruguay (or a bridge somewhat farther upstream), and the financing of this construction project—­a viaduct with a petroleum pipeline attached to it—­might therefore be one of the most interesting objects of international financial cooperation to consider with a view to the encouraging and hastening of an inevitable long-­term trend in Uruguay an economic development. This Embassy has hoped that it might be possible for Uruguay to develop highly skilled industries, because there are many very capable Uruguayan craftsmen and mechanics. However, the Embassy is inclined now to estimate that the prospects of the development of truly outstanding industries are rather poor, and the principal hope in this respect is that there may be greater development of the local industries which process Uruguayan raw materials, such as the woolen textile industry. Attempting to project Uruguayan economic development in line with a realistic estimate of the situation which will probably exist ten years from now, it can be predicted that Uruguayans will be, on the average, only moderately better off than they are at present, and that any difference in their average situation will correlate quite closely with a possibly improved wool market (which, in turn, may be dependent upon new marketing opportunities that may develop in the United States from the Australian-United States conversations which have been recently initiated.) Here follows a discussion of domestic political trends. Regardless of domestic political trends in Uruguay, the prospects of continuing cooperative attitudes in relations with the United States and the Western World are good. These prospects could be reduced (1) by our not giving reasonable economic cooperation to Uruguay (2) by our falling behind, as a nation, in the worldwide economic, sociological, ideological and defense contest, or (3) by our departing from the inter- American machinery to take unilateral action in some situation such as in the Cuban case. However, assuming that we will devise increasingly effective means of economic cooperation, that we will continue to make every effort to make inter-American machinery more effective, and that our country will steadily gain in the worldwide contest, I believe we can count on Uruguayan political and ideological support. Robert F. Woodward

Uruguay President Dwight D. Eisenhower

National Councilor Haedo Ambassador Robert F. Woodward Ambassador Carlos A. Clulow Mr. C. A. Boonstra, ARA Mr. F. vanReigersburg, LS The President at 11 a.m. welcomed Councilor Haedo and mentioned the painting, on a chair in the office, by Manuel Rosé entitled, “Sunset in the Sierra de Minas” which the Councilor had sent as a gift to the President. After being seated, Councilor Haedo opened the conversation by remarking jocularly about Uruguay’s reputation as a country in which all sorts of radical movements flourished such as Castroism, Peronism, and Communism. In fact, he said, this is not the case. Uruguay is a small and stable country, but in common with other countries it has a need for improved internal security. To enhance this, he suggested that it may be a good idea to hold a meeting of police experts from all of the Latin American countries in Montevideo, “something like an Interpol meeting”. This could provide an opportunity for a discussion of police measures needed to improve internal security. To the extent possible such a meeting should be without publicity. At the same time it is becoming necessary to consider in Uruguay the provision of small arms for the police. In this connection he referred to the program of military assistance and suggested that present regulations both for military assistance and for the Uruguayan military forces should be interpreted more broadly so that the necessary small arms could be provided to the police. Even above these conditions, however, the Councilor said that he wished to emphasize the basic importance of financial security.

Uruguay 1189 Means must be found to provide the type of financial and economic arrangements on which there could be established an internally secure situation. The President asked about the existing Uruguayan situation in other respects. The Councilor replied that everything is fine and that “with Bogotá, the arrangements with the International Monetary Fund—that have been very helpful—­and financial assistance from the United States” there will be no problems. He said that his reports from the Uruguayan delegation to the Bogotá Conference were that the conference was very successful. The President remarked that the success of the Bogotá Conference was most pleasing to him. The President the said that he would like to mention a situation which is giving him a great deal of worry. He recognizes the need for economic growth in Latin America and he is convinced that private investment for this purpose is more useful than public investment. During his trip earlier this year to South America, leaders in the various countries agreed that private investment is urgently needed. The excesses of Castro in Cuba, however, are now establishing a situation which deters investors from making investments in other countries of Latin America. This has been brought to the President’s personal attention of late in conversations with individuals who would normally be making such investments. The President said that there may be a lack of realization in Latin America of the extent to which Cuba now is an obstacle to private investment. He said that he would like to see the American governments undertake the kind of programs needed to support a greater flow of capital in spite of Castro. The ridiculous demand of Castro for $30 billion dollars is illustrative of the wrong way to go about this. He then invited the Councilor to make known his views on the problem. The Councilor responded with lengthy remarks respecting Castro and what he termed the United States problem with Castro. He said that obviously much violence and misunderstanding has taken place and that in his opinion it has become necessary to seek means for clarifying the situation. He does not think that this can be done by the United States or within the framework of the United Nations. Instead it is a problem which must be taken up by countries in Latin America which are less directly involved, particularly Uruguay which is a country above suspicion of domination by any foreign power. Direct or unilateral action by the United States would be misunderstood and would cause hostility among the American Republics. The President responded by stating that violence would appear to be unilateral on the part of the Castro Government, and that the United States has been very patient. It is difficult to understand why Castro behaves the way he does. Cuba’s prosperity depends on its

Uruguay 1191 to invite the Chiefs of Delegations of the other American Republics to a luncheon, taking advantage of this opportunity to express his high regard for the OAS countries. The Councilor applauded enthusiastically these remarks. At this point, while photographers came in to take pictures, the conversation turned to the 9-man National Council of Government in Uruguay and Mr. Haedo jokingly suggested a similar system for the United States so that all of the candidates could become President for a year, as he himself would be doing next March 1. Upon leaving at 11:30 a.m., the Councilor mentioned again his hopes that the President would enjoy the painting which he presented and he added that he would be most gratified if the President might find it possible to send him an autographed photograph and one of his own paintings. He reiterated his admiration for the President and his satisfaction at having been received by him. The President thanked him for making his friendly visit. UR–18. Editorial Note On October 10, 1960, the International Monetary Fund announced that an initial par value for the Uruguayan peso had been established at 7.40 pesos per United States dollar, by agreement between the Fund and the Government of Uruguay. The fund also announced that it had entered into a stand-­by agreement enabling the Uruguayan Government to draw the equivalent of United States $30,000,000 over a 12-­month period. Documentation concerning IMF activities in Uruguay

1192 Venezuela: U.S. Relations with Venezuela VE–1. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter– American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting Secretary of State1 Washington, January 28, 1958 SUBJECT Recognition of the new Venezuelan Government.2 Discussion: Venezuela has undergone a revolutionary change of government. The former President, General Marcos Pérez Jiménez, was forced by the Armed Forces to resign on January 23. His downfall was preceded by an unsuccessful uprising on January 1 and 2, in which the Air Force and units of the Army sought to overthrow his government. After several days of civilian riots and student demonstrations, followed by a widely supported general strike on January 21 and 22, he was ousted by

Venezuela 1193 the Armed Forces. General Pérez Jiménez was a member of the original three-­man Junta of Government that assumed power in 1948, following a military coup d’etat that overthrew the legally constituted government of President Gallegos, who had gained a majority of the popular vote in the free elections conducted in Venezuela the preceding year. Installed by the Armed Forces as Provisional President in 1952, following the dissolution of the Junta, General Pérez Jiménez was named Constitutional President the following year by the Constituent Assembly. He was “reelected” for another five-­year term of office as a result of a plebiscite held on December 15, 1957, in which he was the only presidential candidate. Resentment among the younger military officers and the civilian population over the plebiscite is believed to have contributed to a great extent to his downfall. In a note dated January 25, 1958,3 the new Venezuelan Government informed our Embassy at Caracas that, in accordance with the universal desires of the nation, in defense of the supreme interests of the Republic, and in order to move toward a legally constituted democratic form of government, the National Armed Forces had assumed power and had formed a five-man Junta of Government headed by Admiral Wolfgang Larrazábal, as President of the Junta, and comprised of two other military officers and two civilians. The note stated that the new government would comply strictly with its international obligations and expressed its desire to resume cordial relations with the U.S. The Junta is in control of the machinery of government. It appears to enjoy wide popular as well as united military support and there is no substantial resistance to it. It has pledged by public announcement to conduct free elections as soon as possible in order to constitute a demo­cratic form of government. A member of the Junta has assured our Embassy of the new government’s receptivity to foreign investment and of its willingness and ability to protect it. He has also given assurances that the new government will be anti-­communist. In the belief that early recognition on our part would contribute materially to the stability of the new regime, we propose that the U.S. recognize, at 6.00 p.m. today, the Junta as the Provisional Government of Venezuela. Recommendation: That you sign the attached memorandum to the President4 recommending recognition of the Junta as the Provisional Government of the Republic of Venezuela. 3 Reference is to Venezuelan Foreign Office note 69, transmitted to the Department

Venezuela 1195 private United States and British enterprise. His policies of complete support for private enterprise were frequently cited as an example in countries addicted to Socialistic practices. To lessen the possibility that General Pérez Jiménez may wish to engage in subversive activity against the Venezuelan Government while in the United States, the consular officer handling his visa application will be instructed to require of General Pérez Jiménez verbal assurances that he will not undertake such activities during his stay in our country. A similar course of action was followed with ex-President Betancourt of Venezuela and is being followed in connection with the issuance of visas to other prominent Venezuela exiles who seek to enter the United States at this time. Recommendation: That you approve the attached telegram authorizing the issuance of visas General Pérez Jiménez and his family. (Tab A)4

Venezuela 1197 the problems we have encountered in a similar case where a visa was granted to a foreign political leader prompt me to express the reservations I mentioned to you in our telephone conversation. In the event Perez Jimenez, as in the Prio case,2 should seek to use this country for future power plotting and the Department of State should protest to this Department, as was done in the Prio case, I want to make it clear that it may be difficult to effect his deportation or even to prevent him from engaging in activities detrimental to our foreign relations while here. Furthermore, since we talked about this matter, I noticed a United Press dispatch in this morning’s newspapers reporting that the Assistant Attorney General of Venezuela has filed a formal petition for the extradition to Venezuela of Pedro Estrada, former chief of the Security Police under the Perez Jimenez regime. I am advised that Estrada is currently in the United States on a diplomatic visitor’s visa. Sincerely yours, William P. Rogers

Venezuela 1199 Recommendation:3 That you approve my holding as soon as possible discussions with the Venezuelan Government and key political leaders in Caracas to obtain their views with respect to the problem caused by the over production of oil.4

Venezuela 1201 VE–7. Editorial Note On March 24, 1958, in a Supplementary Report to the Report of the President’s Special Committee to Investigate Crude Oil Imports, dated July 29, 1957, the Special Committee recommended additional restrictions on crude oil imports quotas for Districts I–IV, the area east of the Rocky Mountains. The President approved the Special Committee’s report in a memorandum dated March 25, 1958, and in similar memo-

Venezuela 1203 VE–10. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State,

Venezuela 1205 sound policies, he said, and as long as there is the will on both sides to understand the other’s problems and to work together toward their solution, there is no reason for pessimism. Having expressed the opinion that nothing basically was wrong with relations between Venezuela and the United States, Ambassador Santaella turned to several outstanding problems that had arisen. He repeated his statement that Venezuela was in a difficult period of transition, and would need the firm moral and political support of the United States. He mentioned the problem that had resulted from the admission into the United States of Perez Jimenez and Estrada. Stating that he did not want to get involved in a discussion of the legal aspects of the case, which he understood, he reiterated the depth of feeling in Venezuela against the two men. He said that not even Beria nor the Gestapo had committed greater atrocities than those perpetrated on the people of Venezuela by Perez Jimenez and Estrada. Although the Ambassador had been arrested three times during the Perez Jimenez regime, he did not consider himself a particular victim of it. He recalled that his law partner had been arrested and forced to witness the slow torture and finally the murder of another prisoner by “Bachiller” Castro and other notorious SN inquisitors. In view of these and other equally serious crimes and atrocities, Dr. Santaella said, the Venezuelan people find it hard to understand why the United States, with its democratic traditions, permits Perez Jimenez to live in luxury in Miami and openly flaunt his wealth. He said it would not have been so bad if the two men had gone quietly to live on ranches in North Dakota, but being in Florida, so close to Central and South America, not only made their residence in the United States more conspicuous but had caused many rumors to circulate about their plotting to regain power, with the acquiescence or even the assistance of the United States. He said stories continued to circulate of their connections in high places in the United States Government, and it was known in Venezuela that Perez Jimenez and Estrada had met with their supporters in New York during the Vice President’s visit to Venezuela, ostensibly to engineer a revolt against the Provisional Government. Mr. Rubottom briefly outlined the reasons why visas were issued to the two men, reiterating that they had both been required to execute statements that while in the United States they would not engage in activities directed against the Venezuelan Government. He emphasized they had no entrée here at all; he said he had no personal sympathy whatsoever for either man; as a matter of fact, he had not even met them. He told the Ambassador that he and others who understood the situation could perform a real service by explaining the facts of the case to those who did not understand. Just as we are attempting to play down in the United States the incidents that occurred during the Vice

Venezuela 1207 In departing, Ambassador Santaella thanked Mr. Rubottom and his associates for their courtesy and assistance during the brief time he was in Washington. Mr. Rubottom told him he would look forward to seeing him again, either in Washington or Caracas; in the meantime, he said, he would be pleased to do anything he could for the Ambassador. Dr. Santaella said he was departing from Washington early Thursday morning, May 22, since President Larrazábal was anxious for him to arrive as soon as possible. VE–11. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 5, 19581 Washington, June 5, 1958. SUBJECT VENEZUELA—Petroleum Matters. PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Dr. Carlos Perez de la Cova, Minister of Mines and Hydrocarbons of Venezuela Dr. Eduardo Acosta, Venezuelan Chargé d’Affaires Dr. Morales Crespo, Director of Political Economy, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Venezuela Sr. Alirio Parra, Petroleum Counselor, Embassy of Venezuela ARA - Assistant Secretary Rubottom The Minister conveyed to the Secretary greetings and best wishes on behalf of himself and the provisional governing Junta of Venezuela. He expressed appreciation for the consultations undertaken by the United States with his Government in respect of the voluntary oil import restriction program resulting from the current slack in demand for petroleum and petroleum products, referring first to a visit of Mr. Rubottom to Caracas last February and then to the technical talks carried out by Messrs. Mann, Carson and Thompson ten days later. He said that his Government was aware of the world-­wide problem faced by the oil industry and had felt that the consultations had been mutually beneficial. He recalled that the Government of Venezuela was confronted by many serious problems of both an economic and

Venezuela 1209 for the well being and the interests of its trading partners as has the United States; (6) the United States, in its dealings with Venezuela, has shown just as much consideration for the Venezuelan oil industry as it has shown for its own; (7) he hoped that the Government of Venezuela would recognize the extent to which the United States has defended the Venezuelan oil industry, in the face of very strong efforts to restrict imports to a far greater degree than they are presently being restricted under the voluntary plan, and that it would interpret and explain this action on our part to the Venezuelan people; (8) only 25 years ago the world saw the United States enact the Smoot-Hawley Tariff, and later withdraw from the London Economic Conference, to its own detriment and that of the rest of the world; (9) this government is now scrupulously avoiding that kind of action and is, in fact, doing everything possible to consider the economic interests of its allies, although obviously, in a time of economic recession, all nations must share a part of the burden. The Secretary told the Minister that the actions taken by this Government on March 25 were designed simply to equalize the burden between the foreign producers of oil and that imposed on United States producers. The Secretary declared that he simply could not approve any statement that would suggest that the United States would take no further steps to restrict petroleum imports. He underlined his hope that this would be the case, and stressed that all of the American people were working hard to bring an end to the economic recession and that we now hoped that the upturn was about here. Nevertheless, he was in no position to make the kind of commitment for the future requested by Dr. Perez de la Cova. The Secretary said that he was not acquainted with the technical question raised by the Minister in regard to the U.S.-Venezuelan Trade Agreement, but was sure that there were officials in the Department who could take up this matter with him. Dr. Perez de la Cova recalled that Mr. Rubottom had been head of the U.S. negotiating team in 1952 when the Treaty had been consummated. It was agreed that the Minister would discuss this question with Mr. Rubottom and those officers in the Department responsible for economic affairs.3 3 The points made here by Dr. Perez de la Cova regarding the petroleum issue were reported in a conversation he had with Douglas Dillon, the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, on June 6. That conversation was recorded in a memorandum

Venezuela 1211 more desirable for the Department of Defense to administer all military credits, including the type represented by the Venezuelan transaction. Douglas Dillon VE–13. National Intelligence Estimate1 Washington, September 9, 1958.

Venezuela 1213 10. In Venezuela strong popular feeling holds the United States accountable for undue intimacy with the detested Pérez Jiménez dictatorship and for a supposed general preference for dictatorships in the Caribbean area. Any foreseeable government, however, will desire to maintain friendly relations with the United States, though remaining highly sensitive to any apparent U.S. lack of regard for Venezuelan democracy and sovereignty. (Para. 54) 11. A democratic Venezuela will continue to side generally with the West against the Soviet Bloc, in the UN and elsewhere, but this support will not be dependable in situations in which Western imperialism in underdeveloped countries is alleged. (Para. 53) DISCUSSION ESSENTIAL BACKGROUND 12. Venezuela’s present political situation reflects the strains inherent in a transition, in one generation, from a tradition of dictatorship and an oligarchic social order toward a democratic welfare state. Until as recently as 1935 the country was ruled by a succession of long-­term dictators. When the 27-­year dictatorship of Juan Vicente Gómez ended with his natural death in 1935, the Army was the only organized body available to assume the direction of public affairs. Gómez’ immediate successors, Generals Lopez Contreras (1935–1941) and Medina Angarita (1941–1945), were not radical reformers, but they did desire to liberalize political and social institutions. This liberalization released forces demanding more radical political and social change. 13. In 1945 the Medina government was overthrown by a group of younger officers impatient to succeed their elders, acting in combination with Acción Democrática (AD), a civilian group advocating more rapid and extensive social and political reforms. Under the leadership of Rómulo Betancourt (AD), the ensuing provisional government initiated sweeping constitutional and electoral changes. In the subsequent presidential election (in 1947), the AD candidate, Rómulo Gallegos, was credited with 75 percent of the apparently free popular vote. 14. The social democratic program of Acción Democrática was generally comparable to that of the British Labor Party—­but, against the Venezuelan background, that seemed radical indeed to conservative business and landholding interests which denounced AD as communistic. On the other hand, the Communists, tolerated by AD as a matter of democratic principle and as allies against conservative reaction, regarded AD as their principal rival for popular support and for the control of mass organizations. Acción Democrática withstood these antagonisms, but was undone when, emboldened by its popular mandate, it undertook to subordinate the military to the civil power. Foreseeing the loss of its special privileges, concerned by the radical tendencies of AD,

Venezuela 1215 organized by the Junta Patriótica. On the night of 22 January, the second day of the strike, the military told the dictator that he must go. MAJOR ELEMENTS IN THE EXISTING POLITICAL SITUATION 18. The Junta del Gobierno. Venezuela is now ruled by a Junta composed of three military and two civilian members and dominated by its president, Rear Admiral Wolfgang Larrazábal.3 The Junta exercises the functions of the presidency; there is, in addition, a cabinet composed of men selected primarily for their technical competence, rather than as party representatives. The stated mission of the Junta is to bring about the re-­establishment of democratic constitutional government through elections now scheduled for November.4 The chief threat to the accomplishment of its mission is that of a military coup to prevent the return of Acción Democrática to power. In military and some civilian circles, Larrazábal is strongly suspected of unduly favoring that party, as well as of unwise leniency toward the Communists. 19. The Political Parties: General. All Venezuelan parties are of recent origin: the Communist party was organized clandestinely in 1931; the oldest non-Communist parties date only from the election of 1941. The programs of the three major parties (AD, COPEI, and URD)5 are strikingly similar, being distinguishable only by minor differences of emphasis. They are socialistic and nationalistic, favoring social welfare measures, varying degrees of government direction of the economy, and greater Venezuelan control of basic industries. The minor parties of the right-center show strong traits of mid-19th century liberalism. All parties are supporting the Junta, opposing military intervention in political affairs, and demanding effective democratic government with full civil rights. 20. Inasmuch as there has been no free election in Venezuela since 1948, the relative strength of the various parties is difficult to estimate. Some 40 percent of the electorate has come of age since that date. Chiefly on the basis of the consensus among their political rivals, we estimate that AD represents at least half of the electorate and COPEI about a

Venezuela 1217 predominant influence in the party was that of rural conservatives in western Venezuela, but since 1949 the reformist segment in the Caracas area has gained control. The Church’s increasing emphasis on social action to improve the status of the workers may enable Caldera to hold COPEI’s rural Catholic support while increasing the party’s attraction for urban elements. COPEI’s program is much the same as Acción Democrática’s, the essential difference being that between COPEI’s Catholic approach and AD’s secularism. 24. Unión Republicana Democrática (URD), led by Jovito Villalba, represents primarily urban middle class elements: intellectuals, professional men, and industrialists. Its main area of popular support is in eastern Venezuela. The party program is similar to that of Acción Democrática, but, like COPEI, it favors less government ownership of basic industries. In the abortive election of 1952, from which Acción Democrática was excluded, URD apparently attracted a heavy proportion of the AD vote, but it probably could not hold that support in competition with Acción Democrática itself. 25. Partido Comunista Venezolano (PCV). The Venezuelan Communist Party was organized clandestinely in 1931, emerged as a legitimate political party in 1945, was driven underground by Pérez Jiménez, and has now reemerged under the leadership of Gustavo Machado Morales. The party is numerically weak in comparison with the three major parties of the left (AD, COPEI, and URD), but it exerts considerable influence through its infiltration of key positions in organized labor, the press, the teaching profession, and student organizations. It has also achieved some success in its efforts to infiltrate the government and the major leftist parties. Its most immediate and pressing objectives are to preserve its present freedom of action and to prepare a firm base from which to influence future governments. The PCV’s public efforts are directed primarily toward achieving respectability and acceptance as the most patriotic and democratic of Venezuelan parties. Its stated program is a composite of those of Acción Democrática, COPEI, and URD, but more stridently nationalistic and anti-­imperialist. It is most vociferous in its support of the concept of “national unity”—­which is, in effect, the concept of a popular front against military reaction. However, the party remains fundamentally hostile toward Acción Democrática, which it recognizes as its most effective rival for popular and labor leadership. 26. Integración Republicana (IR), formed in 1958, appeals to those independent liberals who are repelled by the radicalism of AD and URD and the supposed clericalism of COPEI. Its own program is a slightly moderated version of the programs of those parties, but its leaders are of a more conservative type. It has attracted some men of national stature, chiefly businessmen, lawyers, and intellectuals.

Venezuela 1219 movement. At the recent national convention of the reorganized Federation of Petroleum Workers relative party strength is estimated to

Venezuela 1221 a civil population united in its resistance. In any case, an all­out battle between the armed forces and the Junta Patriótica would be a sanguinary affair, not to be lightly undertaken. It is notable that the armed forces declined to fight to save Pérez Jiménez in January or to support Castro León in July, though the Army and Air Force officers were probably preponderantly sympathetic with the latter, and that nothing happened when Pérez Morales was relieved. 39. On 7 September there was an abortive coup attempt led by officers exiled in July and supported by elements of the Military Police. The attempt was broken up by the Army; the armed forces in general remained loyal to the government. Subsequently, however, there was a mob attack on the Military Police barracks which resulted in civilian casualties. The ominous aspect of this affair is that Betancourt and Villalba were proved unable to control the mob, once it had been aroused. The general strike provoked by this coup attempt was maintained until the government undertook to take drastic action (such as it did not take in July) to prevent the recurrence of such attempts. Implementation of this undertaking in the existing tense situation could lead to an allout conflict between military and civilian elements, although the Junta will certainly seek to avoid that result. POLITICAL PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS 40. The Communist Problem. Since the July crisis, Admiral Larrazábal and the leaders of the major parties have all taken occasion to declare their lack of sympathy with Communism, but they have also supported the right of the Communists to participate in Venezuelan politics as a legitimate political party. It is unlikely that they regard Communist activities as a serious danger in comparison with the possible restoration of a military dictatorship. Admiral Larrazábal, in particular, has expressed a remarkable confidence in the patriotism of Venezuelan Communists, though perhaps only for domestic political effect. It is unlikely that the leaders of the major parties have any such illusions, but they regard the threat of a military coup as the real and immediate danger and, so long as that threat remains, they will be unwilling to forego the potential contribution of the effective Communist organization to a united civilian resistance. Consequently, there is no early prospect of effective action to limit Communist activity in Venezuela, at least not until a democratic constitutional government has been securely installed in office. On the other hand, the major parties will continue to compete with the Communists for influence in labor and student organizations and for popular political support. 41. The Possibility of an Early Military Coup. Since the Castro León crisis, the likelihood of a concerted effort on the part of the military to seize power has apparently receded, although the situation between military and civilian elements is now especially tense as a result of the abortive coup attempt

Venezuela 1223 community, the presidency to rotate among them annually. If the other parties will not accept any of these alternatives, AD threatens to nominate its own party candidate. The other parties have rejected AD’s alternatives and called on it to reconsider Vegas as a unity candidate. It is likely that AD will continue to maneuver to secure the eventual joint nomination of Larrazábal as the only available “compromise” candidate. The outcome cannot be predicted. “National unity” could well break down. 45. Even if a coalition presidential candidate can be agreed upon, the conduct of a competitive congressional campaign and the subsequent selection of a coalition cabinet will subject “national unity” to great strain. 46. The Longer Term. Assuming that the electoral problem is resolved and that a civil government composed of a generally accepted president and a coalition cabinet is duly installed in early 1959, that government will continue to be under the constant threat of a military coup. That danger will exist as long as the military establishment remains independent of the civil government. It will be most acute in the event of a breakdown of “national unity” or of a government attempt to gain firm control of the military establishment. 47. A securely established constitutional government might take action to control Communist activities, although it would be unlikely to outlaw the party without serious provocation. As long as the threat of a coup remains, however, no effective anti-Communist action by the government is likely. The Communists will make the most of the opportunity afforded them to increase their political influence through the penetration of organized labor, youth groups, political parties, and the government. The eventual development of a situation like that in Guatemala in 1954 is possible. However, we believe it unlikely in Venezuela on account of the greater political experience of the leftist party leaders and their view of the Communists as rivals. THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AND PROSPECTS 48. Venezuelan national production, the highest per capita in Latin America, has increased steadily and rapidly in the postwar period. This growth reflects a continuous high rate of investment: over 20 percent of GNP in 1957. Over the years, the petroleum industry has contributed about one-­third of this investment and government resources (derived largely from the petroleum industry) another third. The world demand for Venezuelan petroleum has ensured the country against the foreign exchange shortages, unmanageable budget deficits, and problems of inflation which have beset other Latin American countries. 49. Despite these favorable circumstances, the Venezuelan government faces serious financial problems inherited from the improvident Pérez Jiménez regime. Although that regime expanded over half its budget on spectacular public works, notably highways, it also squandered

Venezuela 1225 dictatorships in the Caribbean area. There is also a general resentment of U.S. restrictions on the importation of Venezuelan oil, which have a direct effect upon Venezuela’s oil-­based economy. The government, however, and any likely successor government, will desire to maintain friendly relations with the United States, because of the close economic ties between the two countries and in order to facilitate readjustment of the division of petroleum profits. Even so, Venezuelans will remain highly sensitive to any apparent U.S. lack of regard for Venezuelan democracy and sovereignty. 55. If the present regime in Venezuela or an elected successor should be overthrown by a military coup, the event would be widely interpreted, in Venezuela and throughout Latin America, as the result of U.S. connivance and as confirmation of the supposed U.S. preference for dictatorships in the area.12 12 An accompanying map of Venezuela is not printed. VE–14. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, September 24, 19581 Washington, September 4, 1958. SUBJECT Venezuelan Foreign Minister’s Call on Secretary PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Dr. Rene de Sola, Foreign Minister of Venezuela Mr. Rubottom The Secretary met with the Venezuelan Foreign Minister in an office outside the Conference Room prior to this morning’s meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the American Republics.2 The Foreign Minister said that he wished simply to call to the Secretary’s attention the following: 1. The Venezuelan Government is under great pressure to revise the list of items in which the United States obtained concessions of the 1952 revised trade agreement, such as milk and cigarettes. He feels that the volume of trade in these items is relatively small and that they would

Venezuela 1227 ment was arranged through President-­elect Betancourt’s Secretary to meet with Betancourt Sunday evening at the mountain retreat of a friend of the President-elect. Mr. Betancourt had been relaxing at this country home over the weekend. Ambassador Sparks and Mr. Burrows arrived at 9:20 p.m. and the conversation with Mr. Betancourt continued from then until 12:45 a.m. over a wide range of subjects. Betancourt, who was relaxed and easy, spoke with obvious frankness on everything that occurred to him. Ambassador Sparks opened the conversation by speaking of the possibility of a visit to Caracas by Assistant Secretary Thomas C. Mann for the purpose of discussing the petroleum situation and the problem created by the present excess of supply over demand. The Ambassador spoke of Mr. Mann’s close knowledge of this situation and of the value of conversations between him and President-­elect Betancourt as well as appropriate officials of the present Venezuelan Government. Betancourt acknowledged with agreement the Ambassador’s references to Mr. Mann, as well as to Mr. Mann’s long-­standing friendship with Mr. Betancourt, but he did not openly express an opinion on the proposed visit. Ambassador Sparks finally asked President-­elect Betancourt directly if he thought it was a good idea,4 at which point Betancourt assented but without particular enthusiasm.5 It was obvious that Mr. Betancourt did not know exactly what the conversations would encompass but it was also obvious that he agreed that conversations would be of value. Ambassador Sparks then offered his own personal congratulations as well as the congratulations of the Department on Betancourt’s election and also expressed on behalf of the Department its satisfaction over the important contribution of the election to Latin America’s democratic institutions in general. Betancourt was obviously pleased at these statements and in response spoke of his own recognition of the great responsibilities he now has and his serious intentions to carry out those responsibilities to the best of his ability. The Ambassador asked him when the inauguration would be scheduled. Betancourt replied that the inauguration probably would be either late in January or early in February. Ambassador Sparks explained that sometimes the period between the election of a President and his inauguration offers an opportunity for an informal visit to be made to the United States but in view of the shortness of the Venezuelan pre-­inaugural period 4 A typewritten marginal notation reads: “On Monday and again on Tuesday, however, Betancourt himself and then his Secretary called to inquire as to the exact date of Mr. Mann’s arrival. Betancourt on the occasion of the first call said that he wanted to call his ’petroleum expert’ back from Mexico to participate in the conversations (Perez Alfonso?).” Jan Pablo Perez Alfonso had been Minister of Production, 1945–1948. 5 A handwritten marginal notation reads: “Probably knew impending tax ’coup’!”

Venezuela 1229 Betancourt expressed respect for Caldera7 and said that he would expect him to take an important part in the future political affairs of Venezuela. He said he is honest, sincere and intelligent. He attributed Caldera’s small vote to the facts that the Venezuelan people are non-­ clerical and that the vote in the recent election was polarized between Betancourt and Larrazábal. In other words, many people who might otherwise have voted for Caldera voted for Betancourt or for Larrazábal simply because they felt Caldera had no chance of winning. With reference to Villalba8 it was obvious that Betancourt has little respect for him and his party. He said that if URD had not had Larrazábal as a candidate the party would have received very few votes. With the elections over, Betancourt obviously expects URD to sink into an insignificant position. Betancourt spoke of his heavy responsibilities in assuming the Presidency of Venezuela and made clear that he intends to give everything he can of himself to those responsibilities. As far as his own political situation and that of his party is concerned, he demonstrated complete confidence. He said with reference to the Armed Forces that some of the younger officers represent a problem in that for 10 years now they have been indoctrinated with the idea that Accion Democratic did everything possible before to disrupt the Army and that if AD should return to power it would follow the same course again. He said that after his inauguration he will give immediate attention to this situation and that he feels he can correct it without difficulty. Speaking to the situation in Caracas, the large vote against him here, and the demonstrations which had already occurred, Betancourt said that he did not feel at all hopeless about it, he said that the great majority Larrazábal had received in Caracas represented a pro-Larrazábal vote but not necessarily an anti-AD vote. He is very cognizant of the problems in Caracas, particularly of unemployment and poverty, as well as the popular devotion to Larrazábal as a democratic symbol, but he said that within the first four or five months of his administration he felt that he could correct many of the unemployment problems and swing much of the popular sentiment toward him and his party. Ambassador Sparks asked Dr. Betancourt if the young and more leftist wing of his party were a cause of concern to him. Betancourt replied that with the demonstration of AD organization and support for him throughout the country outside the capital, there was no question in his mind as to who controlled the party and commanded its respect. 7 Raphael Caldera, presidential candidate of Venezuela’s Christian Socialist party, Comité de Organización Política Electoral Independiente (COPEI). 8 Jóvito Villalba, presidential candidate of Unión Republicana Democrática (URO).

Venezuela 1231 United States to support Caracas as the site for the 1954 Inter-American Conference. By insisting so strongly that this Conference be held in Caracas, he said that the United States had estranged several of its best democratic friends in Latin America. With reference to Trujillo and the Dominican Republic, he said that if Trujillo does not throw his weight around too much as a dictator and against democratic elements outside his own country, Betancourt will continue normal but cool relations. If Trujillo continues his exaggerated actions however, Betancourt will not hesitate to break relations and to impose economic sanctions. When asked about his attitude toward the situation in Cuba, it was evident that Betancourt had not given the matter any particular thought. However, he did say that he felt the OAS should go into this Cuban situation or if not the OAS as a body, at least a number of the more important countries of the Hemisphere, such as United States, Argentina, Mexico, should demonstrate multi-­lateral interest. With reference to the Presidential inauguration Betancourt indicated that there would be no attempt to build the ceremony into a tremendous occasion, but he did mention names of various Latin American personalities who would be coming to his inauguration as members of the delegations of their respective countries. In answer to a question about his Cabinet, Betancourt said that he had mentally pretty well formed his Cabinet but he had not discussed it with anyone as yet. He said that probably two or three of the more technical present Cabinet members would be kept on in the new Cabinet. At one point in the conversation Betancourt made a disparaging reference to Robert Brinsmade as the kind of American who gets involved in political matters in Venezuela which are no concern of his. This was only a passing remark and there was no indication what Betancourt might have in mind doing, if anything, but it was obvious that he has very little respect for Brinsmade. Betancourt said that the Petroquimica, the steel mill and the Caroni project would be continued under his administration. He also said there will be no more 40-­year concessions nor as a matter of fact will there be any concessions immediately since the companies already have 6,000,000 hectares and are actually utilizing only 600,000 for exploration and exploitation; he spoke of the nation taking a more direct part in the development of the industry as well as in a tanker fleet. He said that nationalism is a very strong motivating force in any country of the world today and that due regard must be taken of it in Venezuela.

Venezuela 1233 such a revision imperative. An American professor was in Venezuela for several months earlier this year to study the tax structure and report on it to the Government. What was surprising was the fact that, in contrast to previous actions affecting the petroleum industry, the income tax reform was kept secret until promulgated, and neither the oil industry nor other affected interests were given an opportunity to present their views to the Government. Moreover, despite our overriding interest in matters affecting Venezuela’s oil industry, we were neither consulted nor given any advance notification. This was all the more surprising in view of the fact that Assistant Secretary Mann was in Caracas when the decree was promulgated, having gone there for the second time this year to consult on U.S. oil imports policy.2 Moreover, Mines Minister Julio Diez left a three-­hour meeting with Mann to go directly to the television studio to participate in the announcement that the income tax decree had been formulated, without mentioning to Mr. Mann the reason for his departure from the Meeting. Mr. Mann stated that when he had expressed surprise that the Venezuelan Government had acted as it did, the Ministers of Finance and Mines had adopted an aggressive position, maintaining that the action taken by their Government was an act of national sovereignty. However, they became almost apologetic and defensive after Mr. Mann had expressed himself strongly, stating that Venezuela’s unexpected and unilateral action on an issue as sensitive as this, which not only affected directly U.S. investments but which could set off a chain reaction in other parts of the world and which is not unrelated to Western Hemisphere security, is inconsistent with Venezuela’s insistence on consultation before U.S. unilateral action affecting Venezuelan interests. Consultation, Mr. Mann informed the Venezuelans, is a two-­ way street. The Foreign Minister took the position that this was a general tax measure affecting all Venezuelans and therefore within the sovereign power of the Venezuelan Government. Mr. Mann and Ambassador Sparks replied that we did not question the sovereign right of the Government to take action; they emphasized the long established practice of American States and particularly Venezuela and the U.S. to consult in matters affecting important interests of the other. They pointed out that while the U.S. has the sovereign right to impose import restrictions on Venezuelan oil we nevertheless seek

Venezuela 1235 characterized Haight’s statement as a crude and unjustified reaction against an act of full sovereignty. Venezuelan students and government economists generally praised the Government’s action although some of the latter were dubious of the way it was carried out. Many local businessmen were angry or dismayed over the lack of public discussion, Venezuelan businessmen avoided commenting on the effect of the decree on the oil companies but instead concentrated on the repeal of the 5 per thousand tax and other features of interest to local business. Dr. Angel Carvini, generally regarded as business spokesman, deplored the lack of consultation with commerce and industry. El Nacional mentioned the “sense of justice which inspired reform and which the whole nation shares.” In reply to Mr. Haight, Mines Minister Diez issued a statement on December 23 saying that the tax reform “does not impair any acquired rights of petroleum companies nor modify any existing agreement with them”. He emphasized that it only altered internal tax rates which apply to all Venezuelans and is the sovereign right of the Government. Since the tax applies only to net income it does not increase the cost of the companies and does not alter their competitive position, he said. Most Venezuelan opinion thought Haight’s statement was too strong and inadvisable, and the press supported the government as having only exercised its sovereign right. However, many Venezuelan business and professional men reportedly were not in accord with the secrecy involved and were cynical about the purposes of the act. COPEI reserved its position until it had further time to study the decree; AD did the same. However, Villalba of URD issued a strong statement supporting the decree and attacking Creole. He called Haight’s statement absurd and referred to the billion dollars4 Eugene Holman of the Standard Oil Company (New Jersey) on December 23 was as strong, if not stronger, than Haight’s, warning that the Venezuelan Government action would “call for re-­examination of international investments”. On the following day, Venezuelan Ambassador Falcon Briceno released a statement emphasizing that the decree was an act of national sovereignty, and that the Government had no obligation to obtain Creole’s permission to act. The net result of the position taken by Creole and Jersey Standard is that the issue has now become one involving national sovereignty, with the Venezuelans standing on their national pride. Just as the threatened U.S. troop movement overshadowed the anti-U.S. incidents that occurred during Vice President Nixon’s visit to Venezuela last May, the national sovereignty issue overshadows the issue over lack of advance consultation with the companies and the U.S. Government. 4 A handwritten marginal notation reads: “something missing here.”

Venezuela 1237 VE–17. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, December 24, 19581 Washington, December 24, 1958. SUBJECT Venezuelan Income Tax Revision PARTICIPANTS Dr. Marcos Falcón-Briceño, Ambassador of Venezuela Mr. R. R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs Mr. Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director, East Coast Affairs, ARA Mr. C. E. Bartch, Officer-­in-Charge, Venezuelan Affairs Ambassador Falcón-Briceño called at the Department this afternoon at Mr. Rubottom’s request. Mr. Rubottom expressed the serious concern of the highest levels of the U. S. Government over the action taken by the Venezuelan Government on December 19 to increase the general income tax rates, particularly since Venezuela failed to consult with the United States. Mr. Rubottom pointed out that in view of the substantial U. S. interests in Venezuela, especially in the petroleum industry, we would have expected that the Venezuelan Government would have consulted with us in advance of taking action which so clearly affects those interests. Mr. Rubottom said that there was no question whatsoever of the Venezuelan Government’s right to adjust its income tax rates, as a matter of national sovereignty. He reminded the Ambassador, however, that the United States has scrupulously followed a policy of consulting with other governments before taking any action which might affect their interests. He pointed out that special efforts along these lines had been made to consult regularly with Venezuela, as the Ambassador well knew. Mr. Rubottom alluded to the importance we attach to friendly consultation and cooperation on matters of common interest among the nations of the hemisphere. He said the United States considers this friendly consultation a cornerstone of our Latin American relations. He pointed out that Venezuela’s failure to consult in advance with the United States had been even more astonishing in view of the fact that Assistant Secretary Mann was in Venezuela on the very day the decree was promulgated and made public, having gone there for the second time this year to consult with Venezuelan officials concerning the oil import situation. As a matter of fact, Minister of Mines Julio Diez had

Venezuela 1239 VE–18. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State,

Mr. Craig Stark—E Mr. Maurice Bernbaum—OSA

Members of the Petroleum Industry Mr. Carl Bartch—OSA Mr. Hollis Kannenberg—FSD At the request of the Department of State, 38 leaders of the petroleum industry met to discuss the probable effects of the Venezuelan tax decree announced December 19. Mr. Mann opened the meeting with a review of the events leading up to the Venezuelan move and outlined steps taken since then by the Department of State. He described at some length the attitude of the Venezuelan people and government toward the tax decree and cautioned against any overt retaliation on the part of industry. Mr. Mann pointed out that one of the major problems in Venezuela is in attempting to get the Government to speak frankly to its people. Mr. B. C. Schmidt (San Jacinto Petroleum) said that the Junta was under no pressure and that the move was evidently motivated by fiscal goals. It will not be possible to arrive at an exact figure, he said, because the effect will vary with the size of the company. Mr. Mann asked that the companies determine, within a range, what the effect of the cut will be. The newcomers should calculate what the effects in 1958 will be, how long it will take them to recover their initial investment and how the flow of oil in 1959 will be effected. These facts would be complementary to those provided by the established firms. Both groups should understand their case and present it to the Venezuelans in relation to their own company interest. He cautioned against making public and written protests. Private conversations with prominent Venezuelans, as well as with the Government, would be more advantageous and would provide the Department of State with support. Mr. T.S. Petersen (Standard of California) indicated that the tax decree must increase the Venezuelan tax revenue since his company’s tax bill was due within a few weeks. Any company working for

Venezuela 1241 VE–19. Instruction from the Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions1 Washington, January 19, 1959. CA–6027. SUBJECT Recent Change in Venezuelan Income Tax Law

Venezuela 1243 additional tax applied to only ½ of the excess income over the aggregate of the taxes. Companies whose net income after the normal and surtax did not exceed 10 percent of the capital invested were exempt from the additional tax. In practice the 50–50 principle has resulted in a somewhat greater share of revenues for the government than profits for the companies. It has been characteristic of the Venezuelan petroleum industry that a high volume of operations has been required before a profit could be realized. Therefore, until a level of production and profits has been reached allowing the 50–50 profit sharing tax to become effective, the division has resulted in favor of the government by reason of a relatively high royalty and heavy exploration and development costs. An unofficial, although reliable comparison of the direct income of the Venezuelan Government from petroleum companies (other than from bonuses for new concessions) with the net profits of those companies

Venezuela 1245 companies, and of the Department, should be to reduce the possibility of further harmful action by the new government, and to modify or to ameliorate the effect of the decree itself. It was recognized that Venezuela’s government would be sensitive to any action which could be interpreted as retaliation by the companies against the tax decree. It was agreed that the companies should attempt to inform influential Venezuelans of the probable economic consequences of the tax decree and should avoid public statements that might further exacerbate the issue. It was agreed that the Department would undertake to induce the Venezuelan Government to educate the Venezuelan public on the economic issues involved so as to remove the matter as far as possible from a political and emotional plane. The Department suggested that each company evaluate the effect of the decree on its own operation and on Venezuela’s competitive position in the world oil market both in the short term and as far in the future years as can be projected. Although industry is still assessing the financial impact of the new tax regime, there is little doubt of the detrimental effects of this action on investment climate, on Venezuelan oil in world markets, on Industry operations in Venezuela, and, in general, the impairment of confidence which, up to now, has caused foreign capital to invest vast sums of money in Venezuela. In summary, although the petroleum industry realized from the beginning that by converting their concessions to the Petroleum Law of 1943 the legal possibility existed that unlimited income taxes could be imposed, industry had the assurance from the outset that the Venezuelan Government’s intent was to share equally with the concessionaires the profits arising from their operations. While the Venezuelan Government has had the legal right since

Venezuela 1247 VE–20. Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela, February 14, 19591

Caracas, February 14, 1959. SUBJECT President Betancourt of Venezuela PARTICIPANTS President Betancourt; Mrs. Betancourt Governor Dewey, Head of United States Delegation to Inauguration of President Betancourt Ambassador Sparks ARA—Mr. Rubottom Ambassador Falcón Briceño Governor Dewey, Ambassador Sparks, and called on President

Venezuela 1249 who, whether or not a “good” President, had been freely elected by the Haitian people after a year of chaos. Here was Cuba, in the first flush of victory over a tyrant, permitting attacks on a nearby government. Did he approve? The President didn’t know about this situation but would look into it. Then I said that he could count on the OAS for absolute protection of Venezuela against any outside attack. He was reminded of the Río Treaty which had proved its effectiveness. With reliance on the OAS, Venezuela need have no concern about aggression; it could concentrate on its internal affairs without fear. The United States would join with others to defend Venezuela before any serious ill could fall on his country. The President seemed to listen carefully, but he did not respond in any detail to my statement. Our host mentioned the reference to revision of the trade agreement in his inaugural speech. He described it as an “escape valve” to ease pressure on him from affected Venezuelan interests. I said we would discuss the subject through regular channels if he wished, but added that the agreement was carefully balanced and would have to continue to offer advantages to both parties. With the slack in demand for petroleum, and with the new crisis in the coal industry in the United States as result of reduced market in Germany, the time was not the most propitious. He did not press his point. Finally, he turned to the subject of military equipment. The country had been left deeply in debt by Perez Jimenez. The military would be loyal to him. They need new equipment, especially for the armored forces. They hope to buy it from the United States at “token” prices. This would be one tangible way of helping and supporting his government. I asked whether he was talking about additional equipment, or that included in the purchase agreement of 1957.7 His reply was not clear, but he seemed to mean a revision of the terms of the 1957 purchase agreement, and he again referred to the need to buy it for token prices. As we left the table, I told the President of the United States’ effort to meet the Junta Government’s request for an early date to inaugurate the Boliver Statue in Washington.8 We wanted President Eisenhower to participate because of the event’s importance, and we were cognizant of the plan of Venezuela to send Admiral Larrazábal for the

Venezuela 1251 VE–22. Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela, March 10, 19591 Caracas, March 10, 1959. PARTICIPANTS President Rómulo Betancourt Ambassador Edward J. Sparks Minister-Counselor Charles R. Burrows Economic Counselor Harlan P. Bramble The conversation with the President began with the usual kind of light chit-­chat. The President remarked, in response to the Ambassador’s comments concerning redecoration in his office, that he wanted to change some of the portraits on the walls. He said he would prefer to have portraits of some civilians, in addition to the military portraits which are there now, but he can’t forget that the only civilian President Venezuela has had was overthrown.2 The President proceeded from here to a brief mention of how, since his days of exile, he always sits in a public place with his back to the wall and facing the door. He mentioned in this connection an assassination attempt against him in Havana in 1952. Ambassador Sparks introduced the subject of the Bolívar statue dedication and commented that he thought the ceremony had gone off very well indeed. He then handed President Betancourt a letter from President Eisenhower expressing the President’s appreciation for the medal which Betancourt had sent to him by Dr. Uslar Pietri. President Betancourt referred to President Eisenhower’s speech and expressed great satisfaction with its content.3 He asked if we had received the text of this speech here and said that he would like to have a copy of it. He asked that it be sent to him through the Foreign Office. Ambassador Sparks said that this would be done and said that as a matter of fact the full text of the speech had been given to all of the Caracas newspapers but that it was carried only in excerpt t by those papers. President Betancourt suggested that the Embassy develop closer relations with

Venezuela 1253 just a few years ago. As Betancourt said, others like himself “discover” anti-­imperialism at an early age and then grow away from it. In reply to Ambassador Sparks’ observation that Arévalo had a great deal to do with Arbenz’ accession to the Presidency of Guatemala, Betancourt expressed his doubt that this was true. He referred to a conversation he had with Arévalo in 1953 in Chile at which time Arévalo made clear his lack of admiration for Arbenz. As a further development of the early conversation on United States Embassy relations with the Venezuelan press, President Betancourt devoted considerable attention to the importance of United States and Venezuela pursuing vigorously a closer cultural and exchange program. He spoke specifically of the contribution which could be made to United States-Venezuelan relations by increased travel on the part of students, professors, labor leaders, etc. He suggested that groups of U.S. students and labor leaders visit Venezuela, with their Venezuelan counterparts visiting the United States. He said that if the United States would sponsor the visits of such groups to the extent of paying their transportation, Venezuela would cooperate by declaring them guests of the nation and handling their maintenance expenses while they are in Venezuela. He suggested that perhaps the same thing could be done with reference to Venezuelan students and labor leaders who might visit the United States. Turning to his suggestion that American professors come to Venezuela to visit the University, Betancourt said he has many professor-­friends in California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas and Columbia University who speak Spanish and who know Latin America and who could perform a fine service during brief visits to Venezuela, In this connection he mentioned specifically Ronald Hilton in Stanford University.5 He said “don’t be afraid” with reference to both students’ visits and workers’ visits to Venezuela—­making clear that he had in mind the experience of Vice President Nixon last year. He said that U.S. students could visit the University here with no trouble and could have a very good effect on the situation here. He said he would see that any workers who came were taken to the Casa Sindical and that here again any contact they had with Venezuelans could be very productive. President Betancourt suggested that the Embassy explore the possibility of organizing some kind of a cultural exchange committee of younger pro-American professional people, with the emphasis on middle class rather than wealthy good families, to be composed in large part of doctors, lawyers and businessmen who may have studied in the United States and who are friendly to the United States. He said there are many of these people, and he mentioned Dr. Marcel Roche6 5 Professor of Romance Languages and Director of Hispanic-American Studies. 6 An atomic scientist.

Venezuela 1255 in Caracas outside the city and so on. He estimates that the things he has in mind might cost 10 million dollars. In order to accomplish these expenditures without increasing the budget he hopes that it may be possible to acquire some of the normal materiel by means other than by direct purchase at full price, as under the Credit Arrangement with the United States for example, If he can arrange this normal acquisition at a lesser price he perhaps will be able to use the money thus saved for these other improvements which he has in mind. The President said that his military officers have told him that other Latin American countries, specifically Colombia and Brazil, are able to make purchases of materiel in the United States on the basis of more or less token payments. He is not familiar with the arrangements these countries may have with the United States but he made clear that he is interested in learning more about those arrangements. He explained that he is not complaining at all and that he realizes the Perez Jimenez Government made much of its alleged ability to pay cash for all of its extravagant purchases. The situation is quite different now and his Government is prepared to admit its problems; he hopes that the United States may be able to help him in some of the solutions. With reference to other governmental programs, he spoke of his plans for public beaches on the Litoral, of a public park in the east of the city and another on the site of the old hipodromo (with baseball fields, basketball courts and other facilities), of moving people from the ranchitos in Caracas back to the countryside and helping them to set up in small scale agricultural endeavors. With specific reference to this last point, President Betancourt said that 3,000 families have already indicated their willingness to move from Caracas back to the country. The Foreign Minister had spoken to President Betancourt about the Jerusalem vs. Tel Aviv conflict for the location if diplomatic missions in Israel. The President showed knowledge of this situation and of the United Nations resolutions on the subject and indicated that Venezuela’s decision will probably be in favor of Tel Aviv. He suggested that the previous decision to locate the Venezuelan Legation in Jerusalem had been made by the former Foreign Minister who had perhaps been influenced in that decision by the fact that he is Jewish. President Betancourt made a strong statement in support of locating the new Inter-American Bank in Caracas. He said that this would be an opportunity to lessen the North Americanization of inter-American institutions and said that he thought it would be an excellent idea from the point of view of the United States as well as Latin America for this bank not to be located in Washington or New York. He said he felt that

Washington, March 27, 1958. SUBJECT Expulsion from U.S. of Pérez Jiménez and Family The action of the Immigration and Naturalization Service in ordering Venezuelan ex-President Pérez Jiménez and family to leave the United States by April 15 already having been taken and publicly announced, this Department should acquiesce in that decision. In my opinion, however, it is unfortunate that we were not consulted in advance in order to bring into the purview of discussion certain political and other considerations which I will briefly allude to below. We should recognize that much pressure has been exerted on the Department of Justice to expel Pérez Jiménez by (1) liberal organizations and the press, (2) members of Congress, and (3) in all likelihood Vice President Nixon.

Venezuela 1257 From the standpoint of our relations with Latin America, including Venezuela itself, the Pérez Jiménez problem was no longer serious. We had stood on our long time principle, plus the added factor of his having entered the U.S. on a Venezuelan passport issued by the Junta Government and with a visa requested by that Government, and this seemed to have been widely recognized. In Venezuela itself, everybody knew that President Betancourt had resided in the United States and Puerto Rico for many years in spite of repeated demands by Pérez Jiménez that he be expelled. It is particularly unfortunate to have the Pérez Jiménez issue headlined again on the eve of Castro’s probable visit to the U.S., and while we are considering cases of many former Cuban officials in the Batista administration, some of which are real hardship cases. Decision regarding these cases will now be more difficult. There remains the basic problem of the failure of the Department of Justice (Immigration and Naturalization Service) to consult with us on a highly charged case which directly involves our relations with all of Latin America and especially Venezuela where U.S. Investment is the highest in the world except for Canada. I recommend that you call Attorney General Rogers at once to advise him of our concern over the way this case was handled and that Messrs. Murphy, Hanes and I be authorized to take immediate steps in concert with the Justice Department to prevent a recurrence.2

Venezuela 1259 was an integral part of his plans. President Betancourt, expanding on this idea of small industry, gave particular attention to the resuscitation in Venezuela of handicraft industries and spoke of the desirability of decentralizing industries of this or any other and throughout the country and away from Caracas, The President spoke also of his plans for agrarian reform, irrigation, and low-­cost housing. He referred again as he had in an earlier conversation (on March 10) to the Government’s program directed toward facilitating and encouraging the return of many of the ranchito dwellers in the various centers of population to agricultural areas. The President spoke of the necessity for local financing, particularly in the field of housing, and of his desire to broaden the base of this financing by instituting a system of popular investment in government housing bonds. In terms of a basic source for such investments, the President spoke particularly of the higher paid workers of the country, specifically in the oil industry but also in certain other fields, and of the necessity of encouraging these workers to save their money and to make it available through investments of this kind for the development of the country. He said he is thinking seriously of a plan under which up to 50% of year-­end utilidades in the petroleum and other industries would be invested by the workers in Government bond issues for low-­cost housing. The President throughout the conversation demonstrated full confidence and conviction that he would be able to carry through his program with complete success. He recognized the activities of the Communists but expressed his opinion that by 1964, the next election, the Communists will be able to account for no more than 60,000 votes. The President, and Minister Pérez Alfonso (who arrived some five minutes late) spoke with obvious preoccupation of the various labor disputes and strikes with which they have had to deal in the last two or three weeks. The President said that it has taken a great deal of his time since he has had to deal personally with all of them. He spoke particularly of the illegal LAV pilots’ strike and the hunger strike of the imprisoned military officers. Pérez Alfonso mentioned and then the President discussed a bit further the Orinoco Mining Comp any strike. The reaction of the President and Pérez Alfonso seemed to be that the company has been inclined to be overly legalistic in its dealings with the workers. There was no protracted discussion of this subject however, except that the President’s preoccupation was obvious, as was his apparent determination to endeavor to contribute to a solution of the strike. The President made a very quick reference to the news from the United States concerning the decision of the Immigration and Naturalization Service respecting the continued stay in the United States of Pérez Jiménez; in this connection he referred smilingly to LA ESFERA’s editorial of this morning (this editorial suggested that now

Venezuela 1261 it is very difficult for his Ministry to find qualified people to fill necessary positions. Ambassador Sparks opened the subject of recent developments in the Caribbean and the President’s reaction to them. Mr. Mann described how the initial favorable and enthusiastic public reaction in the United States toward the successful outcome of the Cuban revolution is now being tempered by second thoughts as developments in Cuba and continuing unfriendly and extreme statements by Castro are being observed. Pérez Alfonso expressed his understanding of the immediate reaction in Cuba to the sudden release from the Batista dictatorship but he showed concern at the continuing lack of discipline there and the failure to return to normalcy. President Betancourt made clear that he retains his basic sympathy for the new Government in Cuba, although being disturbed by present developments, and that he intends to do everything he can to advise Castro and to help in bringing some reason back into the situation. Betancourt said that Castro is a very young man, that he has a great deal to learn, and that he is very naive. The President spoke of Castro’s attempt to obtain from Venezuela, when he spoke to Betancourt here in January, a loan of $300,000,000. He said also that Castro had suggested that Venezuela might sell petroleum to Cuba at a reduced price, in answer to which Betancourt said that he had suggested to Castro that presumably. Cuba would likewise be prepared to sell its sugar to Venezuela at a discount. The President said that a Cuban commercial mission is expected to arrive soon in Caracas and he indicated his intention to receive it sympathetically although he expects the mission will have far too much optimism in regard to Venezuela’s capabilities in this field. Betancourt’s attitude was more one of sadness and sympathy than anything else. In answer to Ambassador Sparks’ reference to the experience of Figueres in Habana, President Betancourt said he believed that any monetary misunderstanding with Castro had been cleared up before Figueres left. In connection with Betancourt’s references to Figueres, he took the opportunity to recall (as he has done previously) the fact that Figueres did not receive an invitation for a State Visit to the United States while he was President of Costa Rica. With regard to the Dominican situation, President Betancourt described Venezuela’s attitude as one of forbearance and resistance to a break in relations. This has been true despite continued needling by Trujillo, such as declaring the Venezuelan Charge “persona non grata,” unbridled newspaper and radio attacks on Venezuela and on Betancourt, the departure from Caracas and return to Ciudad Trujillo of the Dominican Ambassador and so on. Betancourt does not plan to break relations nor to take any other direct action but he definitely expects to

Venezuela 1263 explained that a total of some 12 or 13 landings (one a week southbound) is probably all that would be necessary since the strip at Maiquetia should be finished within the next three or four months, Betancourt was fully briefed on this matter and as we were leaving his office he read an order to the effect that the work on the runway at Maiquetia be undertaken and completed as quickly as possible. In reply to Ambassador Sparks’ question concerning the recently expressed position of the AD youth concerning Figueres, Mufioz- Marin, Romauldi, and so on, the President said this small wing of the party is completely a dissident one, of very small consequence, and that its members will be expelled from the party. He said that his invitation to Mufioz-Marin to visit Venezuela still stands, and he expects there will be no trouble when he comes, but the President also made clear that there is at the moment no definite date for the visit. The inference was that the President would await developments before issuing a definite invitation. The President in an aside to Ambassador Sparks at the luncheon table referred to the previous conversation on March 10 and recalled to the Ambassador how he had said Venezuela would establish its Legation in Tel Aviv rather than Jerusalem which had been done. VE–26. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Venezuela1

Venezuela 1265 There follows a translation from the original French of the article which appeared in the afternoon daily “Le Soir” of March 17, 1959, announcing that an Arabic text was now available. LAW AN INCOME TAX IN VENEZUELA JUST PUBLISHED IN ARABIC LANGUAGE In its Arabic publication series of economic laws in Venezuela, the Legation of this country in Beirut, headed by H.E. Mr. Bernardo Flores, Minister Plenipotentiary, has just published the new “Income Tax Law” promulgated lately by the President of the Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Romulo Betancourt, who was the first precursor of the economic rule of “fifty-­fifty” (50%–50%) on the Venezuela oil revenues. In his preface, written especially for the Arabic edition, Mr. Flores writes: “Venezuela, which considers the Arab Nation as a sister country to which many bonds attach it socially and humanely, hopes that the present translation will be of use to the Arab states, and that it will lead to an understanding of the juridical-­economic measures adopted in Venezuela, as well as to their excellent results.” VE–28. Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela, April 27, 19591 Caracas, April 27, 1959. PARTICIPANTS President Rómulo Betancourt Ambassador Edward J. Sparks Minister-Counselor Charles R. Burrows Ambassador Sparks told the President that he had brought Mr. Burrows along as he was going to be absent next week in Chile to attend the Chiefs of Mission Conference and he felt Mr. Burrows should be completely informed on the subjects of today’s conversation. President Betancourt expressed his understanding. The President was 15 minutes late for the appointment, which had been arranged at Ambassador Sparks’ request, and it became obvious immediately that the reason for his delay had been a telephone call

Venezuela 1267 understanding position. At the same time Canada made public its protestations and now Canada is being granted an exemption from the controls. This, says the President, will make him look to his people as being entirely too weak or even cowardly to protect his country’s best interests. Ambassador Sparks expressed understanding of the President’s problem and asked him if he had any suggestions as to how the matter might best be presented to the Venezuelan public. The President said that he has a radio-­television address scheduled for the night of April 30 and he hopes he may be able at that time to tell the Venezuelan people of the Canadian exemption and that he has received assurances from the United States Government that there will be no untoward effect on importations into the United States of Venezuelan petroleum. The Ambassador said he would report immediately to the Department the President’s thoughts on this matter. The President was not bitter in his conversation but he was obviously very concerned. The President then discussed somewhat the Venezuelan economic situation and said that he feels confident about it. He said that a group of Venezuelan banks have assured the Government that they can handle an internal credit of 500,000,000 Bolivares. He recognized also that there will have to be some foreign loans but the President said that he is thinking of this in terms of an Export-Import Bank loan for electrification development, and also an overall IBRD loan based on fundamental economic studies of what the country needs in the way of really basic development. He said that the Government’s employment program is going along quite well and that the excitement over unemployment is very much reduced. He pointed out, for example, that the threatened unemployment demonstration a few days ago was never held. President Betancourt said that in the Government’s budget planning he is thinking in terms of an operating Budget and a Public Works Budget. He is anxious also to do a few things for the Armed Forces and he repeated what he had said on a previous occasion about the deplorable conditions in many of the barracks. He wants to take corrective action but this work will not fit into his budget unless he can somehow economize on other expenditures. The President said that expenditures for military materiel will total Bs. 45,000, 000 next year unless arrangements can be made to make token payments” to the United States as he understands Uruguay and Brazil do. The Ambassador recalled that the President had spoken of this before but had not set forth his ideas in any detail. The President said he would send the Ambassador a memorandum on this subject and he hoped something could be done about it.

Venezuela 1269 as described by the Foreign Minister,4 and Deptel 698 outlining the Department’s reaction to the conversation with the Foreign Minister.5 President Betancourt made clear in no uncertain terms that the Foreign Minister had stated accurately the Venezuelan position with reference to Trujillo. The President also confirmed that if he did not react immediately to an attack on Venezuela by attacking Trujillo he would be overthrown by the Armed Forces. In reply to a question the President confirmed that Gonzalo Barrios is going to Washington within the very near future and that his mission will be not that of Permanent Representative to the OAS but the very special one of introducing into the OAS a suggestion for action against Trujillo. He also made it clear that what Venezuela has in mind is not just a general anti-­dictatorship resolution but a very definitely pin-­pointed anti-Trujillo position. The President said that Trujillo is the one threat to hemispheric peace and every country in the Hemisphere should realize this. The President said that he is being subjected to great pressure to break relations with the Dominican Republic but he has opposed this action. He hopes to handle Trujillo through the OAS. He also said he is not concerned over Somoza or Stroessner; Trujillo is the enemy. With Batista, Peron and many Perezjiministas in the Dominican Republic certainly Cuba, Venezuela and Colombia can never feel secure and he feels that even Argentina should be concerned. He confirmed that one of the missions of the Foreign Minister on his trip to Buenos Aires for the Meeting of the 21 will be to discuss this anti-Trujillo move in the OAS with the Argentine, Uruguayan and Brazilian Governments. The President said that Castro will certainly not restrain himself long from an all-­out attack on Trujillo. Betancourt is convinced that unless Trujillo is made to leave by what he called “diplomatic means”, there will be an international war in the Caribbean - between Cuba, and the Dominican Republic - within two months. The President said that he would prepare and give Ambassador Sparks a copy of a memorandum outlining the basis for his accusations against Trujillo and for the Venezuelan position toward the

Venezuela 1271 behind him. Ambassador Sparks agreed that our military mission people should not engage in conversations of this kind and said that he would look into it. The President, in speaking of his position with regard to the Communists and the Armed Forces, also said that reports concerning division among the three major parties are very much exaggerated. He said that, as a matter of fact, he was having lunch that day with leaders of the three parties in order to discuss important current problems. At the end of the conversation Ambassador Sparks asked President Betancourt if the matter of PAA jet landings at Palo Negro pending the completion of the Maiquetia airstrip is a closed issue. The President said that the one experimental landing presents no problem, but the Armed Forces are very much opposed to continuing landings on a commercial basis until the airstrip at Maiquetia is finished and the President did not see how he could properly override this objection. The President said that in any case the work on the Maiquetia airstrip will be completed in October. VE–29. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Great Britain1

Venezuela 1273 treatment for Canadian oil imported into District II. It is not expected that increase in Canadian oil imported into District V as result proposed exemption will substantially exceed present level. Nevertheless if contrary to our expectations any substantial displacement of Venezuelan oil should occur as result exemption U.S. is prepared consult with Venezuela and Canada to adjust situation. 6. We regard amended program as consistent with our joint interest in common with Canada and the other American Republics in defense and security of hemisphere. We therefore hope that Venezuela will not/repeat not consider our action as discriminatory but as necessary initial step toward possible broader hemisphere approach to problem. 7. We have Venezuela’s interests very much in mind and will in future give full and sympathetic consideration to views of GOV. We are mindful of understanding and cooperation displayed by present GOV on oil imports problem in the past and hope that bilateral talks seeking broader solution may be resumed near future. FYI Perez Alfonso is close adviser to Venezuelan President on petroleum matters and is understood have President’s complete confidence and support. In past he has shown sympathetic and cooperative attitude toward restrictions U.S. has imposed on oil imports. Present Venezuelan Government took the initiative in preparing Venezuelan public opinion for imposition March 10 of mandatory oil import program and President Betancourt apparently hopes do so in regard Canadian exemption from program. President and Minister of Mines have particularly emphasized interest in maintaining Venezuela’s share of U.S. market and stabilizing oil prices at high level. They recognize that U.S. restrictions have contributed to market stability. Since action we are about to take applies only to Canadian oil it introduces new feature in U.S. oil import program to which GOV objects in principle on grounds it discriminates against Venezuela in favor Canada. END FYI Cable Department and repeat Caracas report conversation with Perez Alfonso.2 Dillon

Venezuela The Secretary

Foreign Minister ARGAYA Bivero Mr. Rubottom

Ambassador FAIGON Bricano, Amb. To the U.S.

and the OAS The Venezuela Foreign Minister, Dr. Arcaya, called on the Secretary by appointment today accompanied by the Ambassador to the United States Marcos Palcon-Briceno. The Foreign Minister expressed great appreciation for the Secretary’s role at the Conference then said that he had an important message to deliver at the request of President Betancourt. The President had either yesterday or today ordered the Venezuelan chargé in Washington to deliver a note to the Department of State requesting the extradition of former President Perez Jimenez and especially calling for his detention under the terms of Article 11 of the Extradition Treaty.2 He said that Venezuela had been working towards this end for more than a year and that it was now empowered under its laws to make the request as a result of a decision by the Supreme Court. He stressed the “spectacular” effect which the detention of Perez Jimenez would have, although recognizing that he would be able to get a habeas corpus action releasing him on bond within a day or two. (The Foreign Minister explained that he had lived in the United States for five years and was a qualified attorney there.) The Secretary said that the documents furnished by Venezuela in support of its request would have to be taken up through judicial channels in the United States, assuming that Perez Jimenez would invoke legal defense. The Foreign Minister recalled that the Vice President,

Venezuela 1275 while in Caracas last year, had, in response to a press question, indicated that the United States would grant a request for extradition if made by the Venezuelan Government. Mr. Rubottom recalled that the Vice President had actually said that the United States would give full consideration to any such request in accordance with the terms of the Extradition Treaty. The people of Venezuela would be unable to draw that fine a distinction, retorted the Foreign Minister. The Secretary said that he wanted to direct the discussion toward Cuba, which probably looked on Venezuela as its closest friend among her Latin American neighbors. Castro seemed to be slipping rather badly and leading Cuba into difficulties, and be hoped that the Venezuelans would be able to have some influence on Castro whom he hoped to see sometime next month, possibly stopping off in Cuba en route to the meeting of the General Assembly. Mr. Rubottom described the deterioration of United States-Cuban relations and the futile efforts in which Castro seemed to be engaged in trying to separate the U.S. people from U.S. Government, an impossible task in the name of a democracy like the United States. Repeated attacks on the U.S. Government, with nothing substantial to back them up, had gradually alienated most United States public opinion and would redound to Cuba’s great detainment in the long run. Castro had gained widespread public support in the United States, especially after his trip last spring, but this had been frittered away. VE–31. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, August 23, 19591 Washington, August 23, 1959. SUBJECT Extradition of Pérez Jiménez PARTICIPANTS Minister Counselor Armando Rojas, Chargé d’ Affaires of the Venezuelan Embassy Mr. José Gil-Borges, Counselor, Venezuelan Embassy Assistant Secretary R. R. Rubottom, Jr. Mr. William T. Briggs, EST Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges called on Sunday, August 23, at 3:30 p.m. at Mr. Rubottom’s office to present a note requesting the

Venezuela 1277 4. Although the Embassy had not received the pertinent documents, Messrs. Rojas and Gil-Borges understood that the charge of murder contemplated in the extradition request may well have referred to the assassination of Colonel Delgado Chalbaud, who at the time of his assassination was head of the Venezuelan junta of government and therefore the Chief of the Venezuelan State. The two Venezuelan representatives gave an account of the circumstances surrounding this assassination. They commented that as far as they knew the “Intellectual authorship” of the crime had not been proved up to now. They said, however, that should this be the murder charge which is being lodged against Pérez Jiménez, he would not be able to avoid extradition proceedings on political grounds, inasmuch as the treaty exempts the assassination of heads of state from the list of political crimes. They added that at the time of his assassination Colonel Delgado Chalbaud was head of the military junta which governed Venezuela and was therefore the Chief of the Venezuelan State. After some further desultory conversation Mr. Neidle came in and presented the Department’s note to Minister Rojas,3 whereupon he and Mr. Gil-Borges took their leave. 3 The note, which was attached to the source text, is not printed. VE–32. Telegram from the Ambassador in the Dominican Republic (Farland) to the Department of State1

Venezuela 1279 Presidential press secretary Stredel “it is great to see the old dictator on opposite side of fence for a change but we still see his extradition a little far off. Let us hope justice is done.” Presidential private secretary Yabrudy “too great to be true, time will tell if they are really going to send him to U.S.” All local papers featured headline news of arrest and released on bail. Press, favorably impressed by arrest, increasingly insistent Perez Jimenez be returned LA. ESFERA frontpage editorial typifies attitude: first favorable impression caused by reported arrest was set back by news that Perez Jimenez had been released on bond which, while adequate for others, is insignificant in case of Perez Jimenez who has robbed millions from public treasury; Venezuelan and continental democratic opinion expects State Department to honor extradition request based on Venezuela’s faith in U.S. fulfillment of international commitments “we look on preventive arrest of Perez Jimenez as best evidence for confidence in rectitude of U.S. justice and we expect extradition to make just amends for blood, sweat and tears shed by Venezuelans for ten years in cause of liberty.” Burrows VE–34. Memorandum of a Conversation, Caracas, Venezuela, August 27, 19591 Caracas, August 27, 1959. I called on the President at his home, where he is working while he is on a 2-­week “vacation”. The interview was arranged at my request for the purpose of conveying a message from Assistant Secretary Mann and Ambassador Sparks as instructed by Department telegram 153.2 I first read to the President the message from Mr. Mann and Ambassador Sparks, translating it as I read. The President nodded

Venezuela 1281 issued the orders for close inspection of such ships, the refusal of the longshoremen to unload the vessels was a spontaneous one. He said that of course the Government could do nothing about this but also inferred quite clearly that even if the Government were in a position to order the longshoremen to work the ships, he would not be inclined to do so. The President referred to the years of persecution and attack he has suffered at the hands of Trujillo and said that as far as freedom of international trade is concerned, one has to be “realistic” about these matters. I mentioned Haiti in this same part of the conversation and the President said that after talking to Mr. James of the Saturday Evening Post yesterday, he was satisfied that DUVALIER is a “zombie”. The President added further that he knows that Duvalier’s Chief of Police is in the pay of Trujillo. The President then mentioned the arrest of PEREZ Jiménez and I explained to him somewhat the procedure for handling extradition requests in the United States. The President demonstrated understanding of all of this including the probability that the extradition hearings will be a protracted affair. He referred to PJ’s description of Betancourt as being a Communist in derisive terms. The President then brought up the subject of delays in arms shipments which Venezuela has ordered under the Defense Assistance Agreement. I said General LOPEZ HENRIQUEZ had spoken to the Ambassador about this the evening of August 20 and that I knew the Ambassador was following the matter up in Washington. Although speaking in pleasant terms, the President made it very clear that the Venezuelan Government is a serious one, that it has funds to purchase the arms which it needs and which it would not buy if it did not need, and that if it cannot get those arms under the contract with the United States, it will have to look elsewhere, specifically France or Italy. I explained the basis and the reason for our giving careful consideration to arms shipments at the present time in the Caribbean and said that although some shipments of arms to Venezuela have been delayed I was not aware that any had been definitively rejected. The President was obviously unimpressed and said that as long as Trujillo is in the area threatening Venezuela militarily, Venezuela has to be prepared to defend itself. He made it clear that General Lopez Henriquez had been speaking for him on August 20 and although the President did not say so, I gathered from the conversation that he supposed that Lopez Henriquez had made just as strong a representation for the prompt shipment of arms ordered by Venezuela as he, the President, had just done. I did not remark to the President that the Minister’s approach had been much less positive.

Venezuela 1283 The implementation of nationalistic policies outlined above would not be limited to the possible unsettling effect on American investment and interests in Venezuela and Latin America. The position of our oil companies throughout the world would be weakened, as would the assured access of consuming nations to adequate supplies of oil at reasonable prices. The importance to Western Europe of an assured access to oil was demonstrated in the recent Suez crisis. Moreover, these nationalistic policies will not serve Venezuela’s own economic self-­interest. Venezuela is already in a weak competitive posture, attributable in part to its action, taken without consultation, to upset the “50-50” division of profits through large income tax increases. Given the present situation of world oversupply of all and the threat that cheaper Near and Far Eastern oil will displace Venezuelan exports in its traditional markets, our task is to get Venezuela to understand that it can best maintain a satisfactory level of oil income by improving its competitive posture rather than by seeking an international commodity agreement for government control of production, prices and marketing. Against this background, the Department of State considered the possibility of offering Venezuela a country import quota in exchange for abandonment by Venezuela of it nationalistic oil policies. This course of action is believed to be impracticable because it would discriminate against Far and Near Eastern producing countries; because Venezuela is in any case unwilling to change its policy at this time; and because such action would, by appearing to reward nationalism, encourage nationalistic oil policies in Venezuela and in the Near and Far East. Those companies which have the largest investments in Venezuela concur in this estimate. The Department of State has also considered the possibility of completely rejecting Venezuela’s desire for special treatment and has concluded that this would create a situation of maximum risk of nationalistic reaction. In an effort to find a middle ground – ­one which, on the one hand, could be regarded as a gesture of equal importance to the one which we have made toward Canada, and, on the other, which would not facilitate the carrying out of nationalistic oil program—­the Department of State has recommended that the importation of residual fuel oil to be used for burning be freely licensed to historic importers who have used storage capacity. This course of action would be tantamount to an effective decontrol of residual imports but it would not remove residual from the import control program. It would favor Venezuela because more than 40 percent of its oil exports to the United States are in the form of residual. This action would not satisfy Venezuela’s aspirations. The serious risk that Venezuela will implement nationalistic oil policies will

Venezuela 1285 Without commenting specifically on the projects which comprise the ICA program in that country at this time, the Bureau of Inter- American Affairs considers that to terminate the program in Venezuela would be contrary to the best interest of the United States. Although, as your memorandum pointed out, the per capita income of Venezuela is in excess of that of most other countries in Latin America, this figure is misleading when viewed either as a measure of the economic and social development of the country or as a measure of its ability to carry forward in economic development without outside technical assistance. In spite of the country’s high per capita income, the majorities of Venezuelan people, and especially those in rural areas, have a standard of living which is roughly equivalent to that prevailing in the rest of Latin America. The economic development of the country as a whole, excluding two or perhaps three urban centers, is in a rudimentary stage. Moreover, standards in health, education, agriculture, public administration and other technical fields vital to economic progress are still low. Venezuela, like most of Latin America, has a one-­product economy, and is dependent on this commodity, petroleum, far from 60 to 70 percent of the Government’s annual revenue. Although marketing conditions for petroleum have been reasonably favorable in recent years, so that the country has been outwardly prosperous, relatively little progress has been made either in diversifying the basic economic pattern or in moving ahead in the technical fields enumerated above. We believe that this situation is due in large part to the developmental emphasis which the dictatorial regime, which until recently governed Venezuela, placed on the largest urban areas, with little attention to basic nationwide problems. The present government, which was installed subsequent to the overthrow of the dictatorship by revolution, is a constitutional regime brought into power through free elections. It has wide popular support and is pledged to a broad program of general economic improvement and diversification. The foregoing indicates that Venezuela’s need for outside technical assistance is likely to be greater in the immediate future then has been the case in the past. The opportunity for the United States to participate in a sound and meaningful program is correspondingly greater. Although the Venezuela Government has not progressed to the stage of consulting this Government with respect to possible technical cooperation in its economic development effort, the fact that there have been several approaches in the field of health and sanitation indicate that other and more significant approaches in broader fields may well be forthcoming. Consequently, this does not seem to be the appropriate time to adopt a policy which would make it more difficult to take advantage of the opportunity when it is offered.

Venezuela 1287 VE–37. Despatch from the Chargé in Venezuela (Burrows) to the Department of State1 Caracas, October 16, 1959. No. 317. REF: CIRCULAR 1492 SUBJECT MUTUAL SECURITY AND RELATED PROGRAMS 1. Objectives As seen from the Embassy point of view, the principal U.S. objectives in Venezuela would seem to be: 1. To strengthen and support the present freely-­elected democratic government as an ally of the Free World. 2. To cooperate in the maintenance of a well trained military force capable of, and devoted to, defending the interests of the Free World in this Hemisphere. 3. To strengthen Venezuelan economic stability and assist in the development of economically feasible industrialization so as to achieve independence from the almost sole reliance on its petroleum and mineral industries. 4. To assure strong Venezuelan petroleum and iron ore industries whose resources would be available to the United States in times of national emergency. 5. To maintain in Venezuela a political and economic climate favorable to the investment of foreign capital, to foreign commerce, and to the use of foreign technical know-­how in order to foster free enterprise, free trade, and the development of the country and its resources. 6. To promote recognition by Venezuela of the dangers of Communism. II. Role of MSP The MSP offers an opportunity to demonstrate to Venezuela our interest in her well-­being and her development. It supplements the work of the technical missions of the UN and such of its specialized agencies as the FAO, the World Bank, etc. Most important, the MSP is concrete evidence of our continued interest in and support for, Venezuela in these critical years of her democratic development

Venezuela 1289 There have been and are private technical groups here on government contract to study various phases of the economy including transportation, public administration, etc., to assist in the more orderly development of governmental processes and policies. IV. Loans The Government of Venezuela continues to reiterate its reluctance to borrow from foreign sources. The proposed extraordinary budget will require about Bs. 1.1 billion if passed in full by the Congress. The Government hopes to raise this amount from local sources. Some capital requirements for specific projects might lead to borrowing from such organizations as the IBRD, the International Finance Corporation, the Export Import Bank, and the Development Loan Fund. V. Coordination of Programs The coordination of technical and economic assistance programs is by government order the responsibility of the Oficina Central de Coordinación y Planificacion in the President’s office. In the past there has been no particular problem for Embassy in field of coordination because of very special nature of USOM and IAGS activities here. There has been no duplication of U.S.-UN aid efforts in the past. VI. Future AID and Loan Programs Although it is easy to comment on future policy when there are existing programs or studied projects in being, we are troubled here with the fact that the needs, probable utilization of aid and loan programs, and the possible desires of the Venezuelan Government cannot be based upon either any historical concept or known present planning. As noted, the demands in the past have been small, with the exception of the UN technical and program; there has been no history of foreign loans from international organizations and only a minor amount of loans from private banking. Thus we must comment upon possibilities which are still in the minds of the Venezuelan Government officials and we will not know how the program can develop until it is revealed to us through requests. We do know that on the technical aid front, in addition to the expected request for more UN technicians, the President himself in an exchange of letters with Assistant Secretary Rubottom expressed deep interest in the present health program and in its expansion. It is expected that further technical assistance in other fields will very probably be the subject of future requests. Also, apart from strict technical aid, we know the Government is interested in acquiring arms at token cost. Another field in which some interest has been shown is that which is covered in other countries by the ICA Labor program. With respect to loans it is felt that it may not be possible to meet the financial needs from private local sources and therefore the facilities of

Venezuela 1291 Perez Guerrero said that, as is widely known, Venezuela is faced with serious balance of payments difficulties, with her reserves being eroded at a rate of about $100 million per month. Foreign exchange reserves had dropped from over one billion dollars to about $600 million. The Venezuelan Government feels it must act quickly to stem this flow while it can still do so coolly and deliberately, and not wait until reserves are exhausted and be forced into measures of haste and desperation. Mr. Mann said that he had been aware of this situation and was pleased to hear that the Venezuelan Government intended to face-­up to the problem. Perez Guerrero said that his Government intended to cut imports of items which are considered to be draining off Venezuela’s foreign exchange. As a temporary step it is proposed to immediately (within a few days) require licensing of all imports of a list of items which are considered to be of a non-­essential or luxury nature. He exhibited a typewritten list which included, among other things: caviar wines liquors perfumes cigars, cigarettes leaf tobacco automobiles cameras film (except motion picture film) radio receivers television receivers marble building ornaments He said that with the introduction of the licensing system, imports of these items will be severely restricted, possibly being limited to only those items already en route or on contract order. This is to be, however, only temporary until action can be taken by the Congress to impose a new, heavy excise tax on all goods in this list, whether they be imported or of domestic manufacture. When the tax becomes effective, which he estimated to be in “a matter of weeks”, the licensing requirements would be abolished. The tax would curtail effectively the importation and domestic production of these items and, at the same time, provide a new source of revenue to help balance the national budget.

Venezuela 1293 VE–39. Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affair (Mallory) to the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1 Undated. SUBJECT Briefing Memo: Venezuela’s Current Financial Situation Venezuela has recently developed serious financial difficulties and is, for the first time in recent history, actively seeking assistance from the U.S. and international financial agencies. An IMF Mission is now in Caracas to consult with the Government of Venezuela on a possible standby credit agreement. At the same time, the Government of Venezuela is negotiating with a group of U.S. private banks for a possible $200 million credit and may seek an interim, gold-­backed loan of $150 million from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. In the event that any discussion of these matters should be initiated by the Venezuelan representatives at San Salvador, you may find the following information helpful. Background Between 1951 and 1955 Venezuela’s official gold and dollar reserves increased by about $150 million. In 1956 they jumped by over

Venezuela 1295 talks, a group of U.S. private banks have informally agreed to extend $200 million in credits to the Government of Venezuela, although the terms are not yet known to the Department. To cover the interim before these credits can be formally arranged, it is expected that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York will respond favorably to a Venezuelan request for a $150 million, 90-­day, gold collateral loan. A factor which bears on the future stability of Venezuela, both political and economic, is the still unsettled petroleum industry-­labor contract negotiations. Recommended Position Bearing in mind Venezuela’s hitherto aloof attitude toward the International Monetary Fund, you might wish to express satisfaction with the manner in which Venezuela is now seeking the advice and guidance of the Fund and the serious efforts the Government is making to remedy its financial problems before they attain crisis proportions and while there is still room for maneuver. VE–40. Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in Venezuela1

Venezuela 1297 In this connection, would be particularly interesting to know Betancourt’s evaluation of potential and orientation of various anti-Trujillo groups within Dominican Republic and abroad, including those in Venezuela.3 3 When queried on the substance of telegram 926, Betancourt responded that the United States should speak to José Figueres and “trust in his judgment,” since Figueres had been very active in working with non-Communist Dominican exiles. He stated that there were very few Communists in the Dominican Republic or among the exile groups and that the United States should not worry about another Fidel Castro in the Dominican Republic. He reasserted that the United States must face up to the Trujillo problem before the United States faced the Cuban problem, and warned, “do not attack Cuban problem and expect handle it way Guatemala under Arbenz was handled.” He advised that the program which should be followed vis-á-­vis Cuba was

Venezuela 1299 VE–44. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State, for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting Secretary of State1 Washington, July 7, 1960. SUBJECT Venezuelan Request for American Foreign Ministers Meeting regarding Dominican Republic. Discussion: The Venezuelan Government has requested the Council of the Organization of American States to convoke urgently the Organ of Consultation (Meeting of Consultation of American Foreign Ministers) under Article 6 of the Rio Treaty to consider acts of intervention and aggression of the Dominican Government against the Venezuelan Government, culminating in the assassination attempt against President Betancourt on June 24,2 and to take measures in defense of Venezuela’s sovereignty and for the maintenance of hemispheric peace and security. The OAS Council received the Venezuelan request at a meeting on July 6, and decided to meet on July 8 in order to vote on it. While the Dominican representative rejected Venezuela’s charges and opposed the convocation of the Organ of Consultation, the sentiment expressed in the Council was favorable to Venezuela. Also, the Venezuelan representative presented what seemed to be impressive evidence linking the plotters in the assassination attempt with Generalissimo Trujillo and Dominican officials. It is therefore recommended that the United States at the July 8 meeting of the OAS Council support the Venezuelan request for the convocation of the Organ of Consultation in this case. It is anticipated that the Council will decide on July 8 to act provisionally as Organ of Consultation and will appoint an investigating committee to examine the available evidence, fixing at a later meeting the place

Venezuela 1301 his ear and eye injuries had completely cleared up. Doctors have subjected him to rigorous diet and rest and he happily reported his blood pressure was down to 130 (I had been reliably informed it had been as high as 220). President told me details of his horrifying experience following explosion and then related details of Dominican involvement in attempt against his life. Since it was impossible for President to read three Chafardet documents due to condition of his hands, he requested me to do so. However, I first read him carefully prepared statements in Spanish giving substance Department’s A–2 stating in effect we considered it undesirable release actual documents at this time. President made no comment on this and asked me read documents. I read about ten pages of Chafardet’s letter July 24 to Perez Jimenez when President became utterly bored and requested me to read Trujillo’s letter of September 20. I did so and showed him document with signature. He made no direct comment on this document. He immediately launched into virtual harangue on Trujillo’s nefarious operations over years. He asserted Trujillo is completely ruthless and capable of anything. He said his immediate concern and apprehension is Trujillo may attempt drop bombs on Caracas and oil fields or mount new attempt against his life. He told me precautions had been taken to defend against air raid and showed me anti-­aircraft battery set up just outside Palacio Miraflores. He said were Trujillo to be so foolhardy Venezuela must retaliate immediately. He admitted Venezuelan air capabilities are very limited and he actually inquired if U.S. would permit Venezuelan planes refuel in Puerto Rico. I then referred to Allan Stewart’s conversation with Oropeza Castillo.3 After assuring President we welcome his constructive efforts, I gave him substance DEPTEL 1114.4 President expressed deep and serious concern over recent developments in U.S.-Cuban relations and was acutely apprehensive U.S. might deem it necessary engage in some military operation against Cuba. He virtually pleaded that under no circumstances should U.S. be drawn into such move. He made it clear U.S. position vis-­a-­vis Cuba is good, that it has been provoked to an extreme, that Castro is menace to Western Hemisphere, that his actions are those bordering on a mad man, but that U.S. must restrain itself. He said were U.S. to engage in military action, directly or indirectly, it would 3 Reference is to Presidential adviser, Alejandro Oropeza Castillo, who had been asked to propose a plan, which Betancourt was interested in sponsoring, that would allow Latin American countries to offer guaranteed payment of property expropriated

Venezuela 1303 President reviewed Venezuelans unsatisfactory relations with Trujillo government beginning 1939 with various interruptions and culminating with full break 1959. President outlined briefly Venezuela’s investigations of attempt against his life and asserted GODR and Trujillo himself were involved. President referred to recent political developments in Dominican Republic and affirmed this was simply mockery to confuse MFM. At close of meeting memorandum of GOV position was made available (see EMBTEL 144).2 President expressed strong hope MFM would condemn GODR and apply sanctions provided Article 8 Rio Treaty. He stated if effective action is not taken by MFM against GODR then GOV will have to study and evaluate situation and consider what action might be incumbent upon it to take unilaterally. (President offered to provide transcript his remarks but I now learn tape recorder did not function). President then summarized his views on communism, explaining while Venezuelan Communist Party has status of legally recognized political party it has no participation in Venezuelan coalition government. Re international communist intervention in Cuba, he ratified his statements to NEW YORK TIMES correspondent Juan de Onis published July 23 and declared GOV stands firmly “hands off America”. Sparks 2 Telegram 144 transmitted the verbatim text of the referenced memorandum given

Venezuela 1305 bolivars, and to reduce expenditures further not only is difficult but could be politically and socially explosive. President Betancourt is our best bet to achieve kind of government in Venezuela that would best promote and protect U.S. national interests. He stands for what we stand for. He recognizes the dangers of Castroism and can be counted upon to assist in blocking its spread. He has come long way in being able be openly critical in his November 1 speech what is happening in Cuba. This would not have been possible six months ago. Venezuela is thus beset with serious political, social and economic difficulties. President Betancourt needs help and Embassy considers it vital that U.S. give him all possible assistance along following lines: 1) Expanded technical assistance for remainder this fiscal year. Request for technicians are still pending, even those for which GOV willing cover costs. If necessary, contingency funds should be provided. President commented bitterly to me about inability obtain technicians. 2) Urgent reconsideration of policy limiting Venezuela to very restricted ICA program. President Betancourt informed me his government is definitely interested in expanded ICA program coming fiscal year and would welcome discussions about such program. However, Embassy is reluctant approach GOV unless USG policy is such that we can follow through on any reasonable program. 3) Prompt action on loans. President made strong plea for urgent action on GOV money needs. He said he did not want grant aid; that his country would be able to repay loans. What is needed, he said, is financial assistance at this time since government is in trouble. 4) Embassy has been pushing GOV for some indication what PL-4802 assistance will be wanted from U.S. President said country still interested and experts working on program. Embassy is aware U.S. agencies concerned are interested in a PL–480 program for Venezuela and only asks that when request are made they be given sympathetic prompt action. In conclusion, Embassy again emphasizes that special conditions exist in Venezuela at this time; that our stake in Venezuela amounts to some four billion dollars and that our best bet is President Betancourt. If Venezuela’s inexperience in applying for assistance makes it impossible to meet normal economic criteria of our government then assistance must be provided on political grounds. With the imminent breakup of 2 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of

United Kingdom Under Secretary Douglas Dillon

Lord Home, Foreign Secretary John N. Irwin II, Assistant Secretary Edward Heath, Lord Privy Seal of Defense for International

Sir Evelyn Shuckburgh, Deputy Security Affairs

Under-Secretary of State, W.T M. Beale, Minister for

Foreign Office Economic Affairs,

Peter Ramsbotham, Foreign Office Embassy London William C. Trueheart, First Secretary, Embassy London Charles A. Sullivan, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary SUBJECT Oil, the OEPC and Venezuela Lord Home raised the subject of oil, the OEPC, and Venezuela. Mr. Dillon said that several U.S. oil companies had got the same idea at the same time, and it was apparent that thinking among the oil companies was much the same, except for the French oil companies. He said that in his opinion the situation is bad from the viewpoint of over-­all security. He pointed out that the OEPC put control of prices in the hands of Middle East companies and Venezuela. He said that the basic concept of controlling prices had been accepted in agreements

Venezuela 1307 relating to coffee and tin, but that he did not like the people who are exercising the control in the case of oil. He expressed the view that the trouble stems from the Soviets, and asked whether the British side had any ideas about what could be done substantively to slow things up. Lord Home, in response, inquired whether Mr. Dillon felt that the Soviets are likely to upset the situation. Mr. Dillon replied that he thought they could cause trouble, but nothing insuperable. Lord Home asked whether there was any influence that could be brought to bear on Venezuela. Mr. Dillon replied that he did not know what could be done since power rested with one man. He expressed the opinion that the oil companies had done as much as they can to influence the Venezuelan situation. VE–49. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Caracas1

Venezuela 1309 In conveying above you should of course emphasize deep preoccupation with which we observe that Venezuelan Government chosen by popular vote in orderly constitutional elections is victim of disorder inspired from abroad. Dillon VE–50. Telegram from the Ambassador in Venezuela (Sparks) to the Department of State1

Venezuela 1311 VE–52. Letter from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Coerr) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Knight)1 Washington, December 7, 1960. Dear Mr. Knight: As you aware the United States Government agreed by an exchange

Venezuela 1313 due and that will come due on past purchases, and to extend the credit terms to a ten-year period in lieu of three. Sincerely yours, Wymberley D.R. Coerr VE–53. Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Merchant) to the Secretary of State and the Under Secretary of State (Dillon)1 Washington, December 9, 1960. SUBJECT Meeting on Proposed Oil Proclamation In accordance with instructions I attended a meeting at 8:30 this morning in the White House under Gerry Morgan’s2 chairmanship on the proclamation proposed by Secretary Seaton of Interior relative to oil imports. Essentially the draft would modify the President’s procla-

1315 Index Editor’s Note: The references in this index are to document numbers. Each document is numbered within each compilation with particular prefixes. These prefixes are as follows: ETA: U.S. regional economic and technical assistance policy; BL: Bolivia; CI: Chile; CO: Colombia; CR: Costa Rica; DR: Dominican Republic; EC: Ecuador; ES: El Salvador; GT: Guatemala; HA: Haiti; HO: Honduras; NI: Nicaragua; PM: Panama; PA: Paraguay; PE: Peru; UR: Uruguay; and VE: Venezuela. Abbes Garcia, John, DR–1

1316 Index

Index 1317 Barnes, Donald F., PE–48 Barnes, Robert G., EC–1 Baron, Sydney, DR–1 Barrau Pelaez, Manuel, BL–5 Barrios, Gonzalo, VE–28

1318 Index Bogley, Samuel, GT–10 Bogran, Luis, HO–3 Bolivia (see also Latin America), BL–32; CH–29

Index 1319 Budinger, John M., VE–20

1320 Index Carrillo Smith, Carlos, PE–43 Carson, HO–10; VE–11 Carson, Charles C., PA–7, 12 Carter, Albert E., PA–6 Carter, Maj. Gen William A., PM–50, 59

Index 1321

1322 Index

Index 1323 Council on Foreign Economic Policy, ETA–5 Crespo, Morales, VE–11 Croizat, Col. Victor, HA–9

1324 Index Denmark, ETA–27 Dennison, Adm., GT–36 Dennison, W. Ellery, HA–8, 27 Desinor, Clovis, HA–26

Index 1325 Political situation and, GT–34, 40 Regional economic integration proposals, ETA–51

1326 Index Duran, EC–7 Duran, Luis M., BL–6 Duruz, Willis F., BL–10

Index 1327

1328 Index

Index 1329 Garcia Bauer, Carlos, GT–3–4 Garcia Granados, Jorge, GT–6, 18 Garcia Salas, Julio Prado, GT–20

1330 Index

Index 1331 Havlik, Herbert, PE–7, 12 Hazelett, John C., ES–23 Hazera, Jorge, CR–5 Hearst, William Randolph, Jr., PE–43 Heath, Edward, VE–48 Heinl, Col., HA–17 Hemba, Alton, ETA–41 Henderson, Horace, CO–25 Henderson, Loy, PM–43; VE–41 Herbert, Raford, CH–15 Herman, Stewart, CO–17 Hernandez, Alfredo, ETA–53 Hernández Volio, Alfredo, CR–2, 5 Herndon, Richard M., NI–23

1332 Index Hilbek, Federico, PE–7

Index 1333 Inter-American Geodetic Survey, CR–10, 29

1334 Index

Index 1335 Katsainos, Charles, CH–27 Kearns, Henry, ETA–12 Kebreau, Gen., DR–1; HA–4 Keefe, Roger, HO–21 Kefauver, Capt. R., HA–16 Kendall, David W., PM–17, 43 Kennedy, John F., ETA–40 Kenworthy, E.W., ETA–29 Kerr, Peyton A., ETA–52 Kevorkian, Arthur G., ETA–8 Keyes, Cmdr. Thomas E., DR–1 Khrushchev, Nikita S., GT–24 Kimball, HA–8 Kimmel, Roy I., CR–21, 28 Kincaid, Grover, GT–10

1336 Index

Index 1337

1338 Index Inter-American Program for Social Development, ETA–34,

Index 1339

1340 Index

Index 1341

1342 Index Inter-American Juridical Council, VE–25

Index 1343

1344 Index Philippeaux, Gerard, HA–23, 26

Index 1345 Ramsbotham, Peter, VE–48

1346 Index

Index 1347

1348 Index Sicilianu, Rocco, PM–17, 20

Index 1349

1350 Index

Index 1351 Velenzuela, Onessimo, DR–1

1352 Index Stabilization programs and, HA–8; UR–5 State-­owned enterprises, BL–6
