793.00/129a: Telegram
[Document 674]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, August 7, 1925—2 p.m.
193. Department’s 165, July 23, 3 p.m. The following comments, other than those
reported to you as coming from British and Japanese Governments, on the American
draft of note have been received: On July 28 the American Embassy at Brussels
reported19 the receipt of note from Foreign Office stating that the views of the Belgian
Government were in accord with those of the United States. The note stated that the
Belgian Government considered it extremely opportune to call together, as soon as
possible, a conference for the revision of the customs tariff and the abolition of likin
and to convoke at the same time a commission of inquiry on the subject of
extraterritoriality. The Belgian Government also stated that it believed that, if the
Governments should inform the Chinese Government, without delay, of their decisions
in principle and of the intentions of the Western Powers to treat the problems which
would be raised at these conferences in the widest and most generous spirit, such action
could not fail to produce in China a relaxation of tension.
The American Legation at The Hague reported on July 2819 that the Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs had informed it that the Dutch Government was in complete accord
with the American draft, that it desired an identic note to be sent to the Chinese
Government.
On July 31 the American Embassy at Rome reported19 that it had received a note from
the Italian Foreign Office to the effect that the Italian Government agreed in principle
with the essential points of the American draft. The note of the Italian Government
stated that:
“The Royal Government is disposed to lend its willing collaboration with a
view to calling the conference for the augmentation of the Chinese tariff as
well as the Commission on Extraterritoriality.”
The Italian Government indicated that in the course of the Conference account must be
taken of the financial and economic obligations previously assumed by China toward
one or the other of the Powers.
On July 18 the American Embassy at Paris reported20 that the French Minister at
Peking had been instructed to promote the following ideas:
