1422  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
828.	 Letter 59 from Johnson to Clough1
Letter No. 59
Geneva, September 12, 1957
Dear Ralph:
Finally, after these long months we again had a little excitement. 
Thanks very much for your prompt action on my phone call. I am glad 
everyone agreed it was best quickly to put out something here. I am 
also glad everyone agreed that I had done right by immediately turning 
down his proposal rather than temporizing on it in any way until next 
meeting. It seemed to me clearly within my instructions to do so, and 
I felt any temporizing could only lead to confounding the confusion.
I sent you the full record by telegraph as there is no courier until 
Saturday, the meeting was fairly short and I thought it best to let you 
know exactly what was said in case anything further arises. You will 
note that I became very sharp in tone toward the end on implementa­
tion, and that I did not bring up “renunciation”. As the meeting had 
developed I felt it better to end on this sharp note, and that to have 
gone any further into implementation or into renunciation would have 
been anti-climactic. I made no move to suggest the next meeting and 
he came up with that.
As far as the correspondents are concerned I do not believe they 
have entirely closed the door but have left themselves some freedom 
of action. If they were really intelligent, from their standpoint, instead 
of just attempting to act clever, they would now give visas to a few 
Americans, have a few Chinese apply to us, and then indicate they 
were waiting to see what we did before acting on the other American 
applications. At the same time they feel they have a very good theme 
in “reciprocity and equality”, particularly in Asian States and can be 
expected to play this hard.
They have just brought me in a Reuters ticker from Washington 
which I am enclosing. You can see this goes far beyond the line I was 
instructed to take today and is certainly no help to me here. I care­
fully avoided committing ourselves to admitting any correspondents, 
and indicated no interest in any agreed announcement on the ­subject 
whether the word “reciprocal” was used or not. I understood my 
instructions to refer to any “exchange arrangement”. If, as is likely, this 
issue is still alive by the time of the next meeting, I hope you will be 
sure that my instructions are as full and clear as possible.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
