616  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
by my subsequent statement along lines Deptel 1410, particularly para 5 
which, however, I stated in somewhat less categorical fashion.
4. In reply he reiterated points his opening statement and in noting 
my statement re discussion his draft proposed January 12 meeting said: 
“I should say that that would be the last opportunity for us to reach an 
agreement on basis our new draft. We can permit no further delay. Oth­
erwise we will be compelled to make public the proceedings of our dis­
cussions on the second item of our agenda and leave it to public opinion 
for judgment. We cannot afford to endure definite delay in this respect.”
5. Although foregoing statement carries some implication of break-
off, I interpret it only to be threat to go to public. Believe, however, intro­
duction our amendments next meeting would probably forestall this.
6. I challenged ultimatum aspect this statement characterizing as 
threat. In reply he did not withdraw statement but denied it was threat. 
He proposed and during subsequent give and take strongly insisted 
on next meeting January 6. I indicated I could not give any assurances 
would be in position discuss his December 1 draft before January 12. 
He finally accepted my suggestion. We announced next meeting for 
January 12 and if in meanwhile any developments either considered to 
make meeting desirable would get in touch with other. Agreed press 
announcement would state simply that in view of Christmas and New 
Year holidays next meeting January 12. Word recess was not used.
Departing for Prague this evening.
Gowen
427.	 Telegram 1311 from Geneva1
Geneva, December 22, 1955, 10 p.m.
1311. From Johnson.
1. Wang opened 31st meeting today with prepared statement: It 
three months since September 14, when our side put forward question 
of embargo and question of making preparations for Sino-American 
negotiations on higher level, as second item for agenda.
2. Wang said if both sides share sincere desire for peaceful set­
tlement Sino-American disputes there should not be any difficulty in 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/12–2255. Confidential; Limited 
Distribution.
