900
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
350.
Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of
State1
Paris, August 9, 1977, 1720Z
22983. For the Acting Secretary from the Ambassador. Subject:
French Reprocessing Plant for Pakistan.
1. On August 8 de Guiringaud told me in strict confidence how the
French government intends to proceed on the Pakistani reprocessing
issue in hopes of (A) buying a substantial amount of additional time
and (B) putting the Pakistanis in a position in which they will have to
accept a plant not capable of producing plutonium. De Guiringaud ex-
plained that he was giving US this highly sensitive information in ad-
vance because we would have a crucial role to play after rpt after the
French make their move. Meanwhile, he would like to know our reac-
tion. Obviously, any leak of the French intention would almost cer-
tainly blow up the whole operation, causing a crisis in French-Pakistani
relations and putting us in considerable difficulty with the French. I
therefore request that this be held on the strictest need to know basis.
2. After summarizing the history of this subject, going back to 1972,
and implying that neither he nor Giscard would have moved in this di-
rection, de Guiringaud explained that France has thus far turned aside
repeated overtures by Agha Shahi to come to Paris to seek reconfirma-
tion of French willingness to proceed with the contract. De Guiringaud,
however, decided to delay seeing Agha Shahi until after the Seven
Power meeting in Paris and French acceptance of INFCE had generated
the necessary momentum and created a new situation. This, according
to de Guiringaud, has given the new basis for international efforts on
non-proliferation and, indeed, changed the atmosphere for interna-
tional discussions.
3. Accordingly, de Guiringaud is sending word to the Pakistani
government that he is prepared to see Agha Shahi sometime between
about Sept 5 and Sept 15.
4. De Guiringaud’s plan is to make a presentation along the fol-
lowing lines:
—France has signed a contract and it intends to honor its
commitment.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840083–0297. Se-
cret; Immediate; Cherokee; Nodis. The message was forwarded to Brzezinski in telegram
186754 to the White House, August 8. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, N770004–0680)
