class can be most vociferous and its members are found mostly at the open
ports, where their activities attract disproportionate attention.
Mr. Gauss throughout the recent troubles at Tientsin followed the wise
policy of insisting that the Chinese authorities themselves decide upon and
execute measures for handling the situation. He not only refused to invoke
the use of American military and naval force, but he even declined to
request the authorities to eject the workmen from the factories. I
commended him for adopting this policy and to it I attribute the avoidance
of a possible repetition of incidents similar to those of May, last, in
Shanghai.22 It must be admitted that Mr. Gauss did not succeed in keeping
the American-owned factories in operation, but I cannot see that it would
have been possible to do so. I fear that American industrialists and
merchants in China must face the probability, however discouraging it may
be, that in addition to wars, extortionate taxation, and brigandage, their
various enterprises will for some time to come be hampered by fomented
ill-will and labor agitations. This is the end to which the Third International
and its paid emissaries are directing their sinister activities, and although
the Chinese, with their common sense, will ultimately see that they are
being made the dupes of the Communists and will awake to the advantages
of a co-operative, rather than an obstructive, attitude toward the world-tide
of economic progress, the moment of their awakening may be postponed
for an indefinite period. Unfortunately there are no organized efforts to
show the Chinese where their economic advantage lies in these matters, as
there are energetic efforts to mislead them.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Consul General at Tientsin (Gauss)
PEKING, February 4, 1926.
SIR: I have received your despatch of January 26, 1926, and preceding
correspondence relating to strikes of Chinese laborers in American-owned
