1955  569
Embassy but with persons in PRC with known facts in Bradshaw letters 
and failure receive communications from other 12 Americans.
6. Next meeting Thursday, December 15.
Gowen
403.	 Telegram 1269 from Geneva1
Geneva, December 8, 1955, 11 p.m.
1269. From Johnson. 
1. I opened 29th meeting today with prepared statement on imple­
mentation as follows:
A. I have been greatly encouraged in progress I feel we have been 
making in our discussions. It has seemed to me that we have been 
successful in gradually enlarging area of agreement in our search for 
basis upon which announcement would be issued which would assure 
world of our determination that our clash of views and policies, includ­
ing those in Taiwan area, would not lead to war.
B. In this connection I have often spoken of vital necessity in dis­
cussing this fundamental subject, of making certain that there is not 
only full and complete understanding between us of exact meaning 
and implications of any form of words upon which we may agree, but 
also confidence that agreements reached will be fully carried out. In this 
regard I have most earnestly and frankly spoken of my government’s 
dissatisfaction with way in which your government is carrying out obli­
gations it assumed under our agreed announcement of ­September 10. 
That was first agreement reached between us and, in spite of very 
explicit words of that statement, it now appears there was either not 
an understanding of its terms, or its terms are being violated. My gov­
ernment considers latter is case. This does not create atmosphere con­
ducive to discussion and agreement on second public announcement. 
My government and world public had every reason to expect that clear 
words of our statement of September 10 would be fully and effectively 
carried out. Words of first substantive paragraph of your portion of that 
statement are as clear as words can be: “PRC recognizes that Americans 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/12–855. Confidential; Limited 
Distribution.
