Arms Control and Disarmament 1629 I trust that one of these paths to agreement will commend itself to you and permit the resuming negotiations to make at least an initial response to the hopes of mankind. End message to Mr. K. Enclosure Draft Letter From Eisenhower to Macmillan Dear Harold: One of the most heartening aspects of our talks here was the accord we found in our strong convictions as to the importance of the negotia­ tions in Geneva for the controlled suspension of nuclear weapons tests. These talks offer the one early possibility for a first step toward enforce­ able disarmament and toward control over the future development and spread of modern means of destruction. I have been giving further thought to what we might do to revi­ talize these negotiations. I believe it is important to give a note of hope to the talks. We cannot achieve this merely by resuming interminable wranglings over the veto and the composition of inspection teams. If that is what faces our negotiators, then I think there will be increasing discouragement in our own countries and throughout the world. What we might do is make clear immediately that these important differences in approach need not be a bar to putting into effect promptly the elements of a control system which are not in dispute—control posts and agreed aircraft flights, together with the banning of the atmospheric tests which these elements can adequately monitor. As fast as the politi­ cal and technical problems of monitoring underground and outer space tests are worked out, an initial agreement would, of course, be broad­ ened to include these also. What I propose is the very opposite of an ultimatum. We would make clear by our statements and actions that we are prepared and determined to continue negotiating a comprehensive test suspension agreement. We would simply be offering a way to get started promptly in a limited area of agreement, if the Soviets remain adamant on the veto. Indeed, between us, I think that advancing such a reasonable alternative course of action may be the only effective way to test the real Soviet position on the veto. The Soviets are no doubt considering their own moves. We should act when talks resume on April 13th if we are to retain leadership and to take action to restore a sense of purpose and hope in the negotiations.
