Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX above all, the cohesion and adaptability of Tito’s successors. While these variables are potentially too volatile to permit any confident judgment about Yugoslavia’s future in the 1980s, the odds are at least marginally in favor of Yugoslavia’s continuing as an integral independent state. Internal instability and vulnerability to external pressures during a prolonged transition period, however, could make even an integral Yugoslavia a recurring source of international tension. II. SUCCESSION CONTEXTS A. Tito’s Historical Achievements 5. At the age of 87, President Tito remains the unchallenged leader of a regime that he founded over 30 years ago. Under his leadership, Yugoslavia has not only survived severe domestic and foreign challenges but has undergone remarkable transformations. 6. Economically, Yugoslavia has changed from a command to a market-socialist system, while rapidly industrializing and steadily upgrading the standard of living of its people. Since 1948, industry’s share in the gross national product has risen from 16 to 42 percent, while real per capita annual income has climbed from $650 to slightly over $2,500, and automobiles, refrigerators, washing machines, and other consumer durables are no longer scarce luxury items. 7. Politically, Yugoslavia has moved from a highly centralized and repressive Soviet-style dictatorship to a relatively open system with a considerable amount of authentic individual participation in local affairs. Although the League of Communists is still the country’s only political party, other public organizations are no longer subject to strict party control, and there have been experimental multicandidate elections for local public offices. Similarly, while public political dissent is still severely punished, literary publications are no longer subjected to precensorship, and rank-and-file citizens are free to travel and live abroad. 8. Militarily, the guerrilla partisans of wartime Yugoslavia have been transformed into conventional armed forces, backed by a territorial reserve defense force, designed to conduct prolonged unconventional warfare. The regime has simultaneously fostered development of the Army as a guarantor of national unity and as an integrative institution in the country’s domestic political life. 9. On the international plane, Yugoslavia has moved from near isolation to intense multilateral involvement and far-reaching ideological influence, and has achieved political prestige disproportionate to its size. Its status has changed from heretical outcast to that of a recognized variant within the Communist world. In the West, it has gradually won acceptance not only as a courageous breakaway Soviet satellite
