1210  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
VE–12.	
Memorandum from the Under Secretary of State for 
Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for International Security Affairs (Sprague)1
 
Washington, August 4, 1958.
SUBJECT
Defense Request for Eximbank to Administer Venezuelan Military Credit
Mr. Waugh has called my attention to Mr. Shuff’s letter to him of 
May 29, 1958, (I–3910/8),2 in which the Department of Defense requested 
the Eximbank to service a military credit being extended to Venezuela 
under section 103(c) of the Mutual Security Act.
For your information, I am enclosing a copy of a memorandum 
to Mr. Waugh, dated today, in which I state the view that it appears to 
be desirable for the Department of Defense to administer this type of 
transaction.3 You will recall that on a previous occasion the Eximbank 
handled a similar case, that of servicing an MAP loan to Peru in 1955 to 
cover the construction of two submarines in the U.S. under the terms of 
Section 505 of the Act. Section 505 at that time specifically required the 
involvement of the Eximbank, but its use to cover the Peruvian trans-
action actually led to the request for the authority the Executive branch 
now has by the terms of Section 103(c), under which MAP credits are 
almost exclusively extended and which does not require Eximbank 
participation.
The very nature of military credits is such that they immediately 
conflict with the Bank’s central purpose of encouraging and assisting in 
the development of national economies. For the Bank to engage, even 
to the limited extent of acting as agent for the Department of Defense, 
in the administration of military credits would tend to compromise its 
essential character and serve to make more difficult the Bank’s pol-
icy of not rendering loans for other than purely economic purposes. 
Moreover, to a greater or lesser degree, military transactions inherently 
carry political overtones and may even be caught up in international 
crises and incidents. It would be unwise to involve the Eximbank 
unnecessarily in a field of considerable political sensitivity.
In view of these considerations, as I have also set forth in the 
attached memorandum, I am inclined to conclude that it would be 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 103-XMB/6–1658. Confidential. Drafted 
by Athol H. Ellis of the Office of the Special Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination 
on July 7, and rewritten by Malcolm R. Barnebey on July 29 and 31.
2 Not found in Department of State files.
3 The referenced memorandum was not found with the source text.
