798  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
of the McCarran-­Walter Act), the President’s representative has on 
occasion drawn the line with respect to the scope of Committee ques­
tioning, and the Committee has acceded.
(2) Of course, nobody is going to get into the substance of national 
security matters; that is out of bounds. That would open up the way for 
Senators to talk to their constituencies and to the press.
(3) The Jackson Committee at first went far afield, but has now 
decided to limit the inquiry. NSC discussion is advice given to the Pres­
ident and as such it is privileged.
Mr. Gray indicated that it seemed to him that problems with 
the Jackson Committee could arise in two ways: First would be the 
question of release of testimony taken in executive session. This mat­
ter could be dealt with by use of the Committee transcript, and Mr. 
Haskins would not be forced to take a position until after consultation 
with Mr. McCabe and others. The second and more difficult problem 
involves the issue of whether a question put to a witness involved 
substantive matter. At this point the President’s representative would 
find it necessary at least to raise a question with the Committee 
Chairman.
Mr. Haskins then raised with the President the need for a clear 
understanding of the exact scope of his responsibilities as the President’s 
representative, pointing out that questions might arise as to the inter­
pretation of the agreed guidelines and particularly as to where the line 
between substance and procedure was to be drawn.
In response the President made the following points:
(1) That of course Mr. Haskins was not going to the Committee 
just to sit there as an observer; that it was up to Mr. Haskins to raise 
a warning light and, should the occasion arise, to say, “Now just a 
minute.”
(2) That Mr. Haskins was not to challenge the Chairman of the 
Committee, but that he was to point out where in his opinion he thought 
they were getting close to the dividing line.
(3) That it is far better to stop something in advance rather than to 
let it get into the record and then have to try to take it out of the record 
later.
Gordon Gray
Special Assistant to the President
