Covert and Overt Operations to wanting the hostage matter resolved. The Imam reportedly wants no trials. —Ghotbzadeh says the March scenario is a dead letter. With regard to the mandate of the Commission, he continues, as we know, to maintain firmly that the Red Cross visit with the hostages took the place of a visit by the UN Commission. —Beheshti was pleased by the Secretary General’s attention in asking Daoudi to see him. His view is that the hostage issue will be solved by the parliament. He did not want to talk about how the parliament would solve the problem but he spoke of determination to resolve the problem. He said it must be left to the Iranians with no threats, sanctions, or military action. —Bani-Sadr remains committed to finding a solution. He believes that whether the parliament decides or not, the issue will go back to the Imam—either for confirmation or for decision. —Ghotbzadeh very much wants the UN Commission’s report available when the parliament begins to consider the hostage issue. Bani-Sadr did not want the report now. He felt that his enemies would see the Commission’s report simply as a cover-up for the release of the hostages. He felt that premature submission of the report would close out the Commission from a future role as an organ for conducting a dialogue between the U.S. and Iran to resolve the crisis. —The Iranian authorities have not reached agreement on a plan or on timing for presenting the hostage issue to the parliament. The timing is very much related to resolution of the formation of a cabinet. Against the background of his assessment, Daoudi said he felt strongly that “something must be done” as a result of his mission. The mission cannot be left as a failure because that would tend to close the door on a future role for the UN. He said he had considered as one option an interim report by the entire Commission, but he had ruled that out as too complicated since it would involve all members of the Commission. He had, therefore, come to a second option, namely submitting his own report on his mission to the Secretary General to serve some of the functions of an interim report. The remainder of our discussion with Daoudi and the bulk of my discussion with Waldheim centered on what might be accomplished by Waldheim’s sending a report from Daoudi to the Security Council. In outline, a report by Daoudi on his mission would cover the following ground: —He would describe whom he had seen on his current mission and the instructions he had from Waldheim. —He would then describe the background of his mission by stating where the previous work of the Commission had left off. He would
