46 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I I disagree strongly. Ours is a great and powerful nation, committed to certain enduring ideals and those ideals must be reflected in our foreign policy. There are practical, effective ways in which our power can be used to alleviate human suffering around the world. We should begin by having it understood that if any nation, whatever its political system, deprives its people of basic human rights, that fact will help shape our people’s attitude toward that nation’s government. Respect for Human Rights If other nations want our friendship and support, they must understand that we want to see basic human rights respected. Our power is not unlimited, but neither is it insignificant, and I believe that if we are sensitive and if we are concerned, there can be many instances when our power can make a crucial difference to thousands of men and women who are the victims of oppression around the world. We must be realistic. Although we believe deeply in our own system of government and our own ideals, we do not and should not insist on identical standards or an identical system in all other nations. We can live with diversity in governmental systems, but we cannot look away when a government tortures people, or jails them for their beliefs, or denies minorities fair treatment or the right to emigrate. Let me suggest some actions our government should take in the area of human rights. First, we can support the principle of self-determination by refraining from intervention in the domestic politics of other countries but, obviously, we are going to protect our interests and advance our beliefs in other nations. We should not behave abroad in ways that violate our own laws or moral standards. You and I would not plot murder, but in recent years officials of our government have plotted murder, and that is wrong and unacceptable. In giving trade advantages or economic assistance to other governments, we should make sure that such aid is used to benefit the people of that country. There will be times when we will want to help those who must live under a repressive government. We may refrain from giving general economic aid or military assistance to a government, yet wish to provide food, health care, or other humanitarian assistance directly to the people. The United States should lend more vigorous support to the United Nations and other public and private international bodies in
