1978  369
battlefield mobility (new armored personnel carrier) and air defense 
weapons, all of which match or exceed the sophistication of similar US 
weapons. The Soviet Navy has grown from essentially a coastal protec-
tion fleet to a highly effective blue water surface and subsurface force, 
supported by a growing force of modern, land- and sea-­based naval 
aircraft and an increasing amphibious capability. Similarly, the charac-
ter of Soviet air forces has changed from primarily an air defense force 
with limited offensive capability into a long range, high performance, 
high payload, offensively oriented air arm.
These Soviet advances are particularly worrisome in a NATO con-
text, in that the steadily growing Soviet edge in conventional and chem-
ical warfare capability has for years been concentrated against Western 
European defenses. NATO deployments are thin and uneven, our allies 
are short of munitions, interoperability problems persist, sea lines of 
communication are critical, and, even with increased POMCUS, US 
augmentation is slowed by the limitations in our strategic airlift and 
sealift capability.
The picture is not altogether negative. The Long Term Defense Pro-
gram is a step in the right direction and we believe it is critical to main-
tain this encouraging momentum through continued Alliance-­wide 
modernization of conventional forces.4 However, we also believe that 
these measures must be recognized as but a beginning in redressing a 
regional imbalance which has been shifting for more than a decade and 
that the likely global nature of a NATO conflict must be borne in mind 
when assessing our progress.
Power Projection: This is one key military area in which the United 
States retains a substantial lead. We believe it essential to maintain this 
lead in view of the many political, economic, and military interests 
abroad which, if threatened, would have to be defended or reinforced 
with CONUS-­based forces.
Much of our lead is based on global interests and an alliance sys-
tem which motivated our developing both the technology and exper-
tise required for power projection. We have long maintained a balanced 
mix of mobile ground forces, naval and airlift forces, and flexible 
amphibious and tactical air capability for rapid reaction to any level of 
threat worldwide.
At present, our superior ability to bring such forces to bear in a 
distant crisis area provides significant deterrent leverage, and we see 
compelling evidence that the implications of this imbalance have not 
4 Reference is to the conclusions reached at the May 1978 Washington meeting of 
NATO heads of state to preserve NATO as an effective deterrent to the Warsaw Pact. A 
key outcome of the meeting was the agreement that NATO members annually increase 
their defense budgets by at least 3 percent in real terms.
