Costa Rica  419
agriculture was emphasized as being of special importance and it is 
being given a high priority by the Echandi Administration. This prob-
lem had already been appreciated by the USOM/CR and, in fact, two 
days after the Eisenhower visit the head of the Rural Credit Board of 
Costa Rica departed for the U. S. on a special rural credit study tour that 
had been programmed long before the Eisenhower visit.
d. Minimum to Meet U.S. Objectives. While it is possible that some 
rearrangement of projects, and especially of priorities, might result 
from such an overall economic plan as that proposed elsewhere in this 
report, the current program on the basis of current evaluations does not 
exceed the minimum required to achieve U. S. objectives in Costa Rica. 
In fact, such an economic plan might well result in recommendations 
in an expanded or accelerated program. Certainly in view of the need 
to add such a project for an economic survey justifies the observation 
that the current program is less than the minimum required to achieve 
U. S. objectives.
e. Coordination Between Various Assistance Programs. There is 
undoubtedly a need for more coordination of the various assistance 
programs in Costa Rica, especially by the Costa Rican Government 
itself. It is precisely the solution to this lack of planning and coordina-
tion which has been presented here as a special objective. The various 
Ministries and autonomous institutes are all busily engaged in formu-
lating plans and competing among themselves for the limited facilities 
available for their execution.
There is no problem of coordination between the various U.S. pro-
grams, since the Ambassador has established procedures which assure 
a constant review of U.S. projects both in the planning and execution 
stage. The USOM is often effective in advising the various Government 
agencies against entering into projects which would cause duplication 
of effort or be misdirected in an unproductive direction. The need for 
more coordination is being constantly brought to the attention of Costa 
Rican officials by U.S. officials, but the machinery for such coordina-
tion, especially in the planning stage, simply does not exist.
A review has been made of all current projects being conducted by 
United Nations agencies and other international organizations. While 
some of them, such as the FAO, are working on projects that are closely 
related to some U.S. projects, there is no current duplication of specific 
projects. While reservations may be made as to their relative effective-
ness, most of these non-U.S. projects may actually be considered as 
complementing our own objectives. Embassy and USOM officials are 
developing a close association with the UN technical assistance director 
for this area in an effort to implement further coordination.
There is a small but increasing amount of technical assistance being 
given by other countries, especially France and Germany. Coordination,
