804
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
intention of the United States to agree on such a memorandum. More-
over, we learned of it by way of information and not consultation. Am-
bassador Eilts gave it to me at 2:00 p.m., March 25, only 24 hours before
the scheduled ceremonies for signature of the Treaty.
4. The United States is supposed to be a partner in a tri-partite ef-
fort to achieve peace and not to support the allegations of one side
against the other.
5. The proposed Memorandum assumes that Egypt is the side li-
able to violate its obligations.
6. The proposed Memorandum could be construed as an eventual
alliance between the United States and Israel against Egypt.
7. It gives the United States certain rights that were never men-
tioned or negotiated with us.
8. It gives the United States the power to impose measures, or to
put it bluntly, punitive measures, a matter which raises doubts about
the future relations and could affect the situation in the whole region.
9. The proposed Memorandum even uses dangerously vague
terms as “threats of violations” against which certain measures would
be taken. We consider this to be a matter of grave consequences.
10. It implies that the economic and arms supply are subject to the
sole judgment of the United States Government in connection with the
alledged threats of violations being attributed to one side.
11. It makes certain aspects of Egyptian-American relations to be
subject to elements extraneous to those relations and its commitments
made to a third party.
12. It implies the United States acquiescence to Israel’s embarking
on measures, including military measures, against Egypt on the as-
sumption that there are violations or threats of violation of the Treaty.
13. It gives the United States the right to impose a military pres-
ence in the region for reasons agreed between Israel and the United
States. A matter which we cannot accept.
14. The proposed Memorandum will cast grave doubts about the
real intention of the United States, especially in connection with the
peace process. It could be accused of collaboration with Israel to create
such circumstances that would lead to American military presence in
the area, a matter which would certainly have serious implications es-
pecially on the stability in the whole region.
15. It will have adverse effects in Egypt towards the United States
and would certainly drive other Arab countries to take a harder posi-
tion against the peace process, and would give added reasons for them
not to participate in that process.
16. It would also pave the way for other alliances to be formed in
the area to counter the one whose seeds could be found in the proposed
Memorandum.
