1024 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 6. Brooks, noting a weekend conversation in which Soviet Adviser Kardashev had said that the Soviet delegation was planning to return to Moscow on June first, asked if Nazarkin could shed any light on this somewhat surprising assertion. Nazarkin said flatly that Kardashev was mistaken and that there were no instructions calling for such a return. 7. Nazarkin confirmed previous reports that Colonel Shemyakin would be spending substantial time on the inspection protocol. Nazarkin said that there were two reasons for this new assignment. First, the Soviet delegation had been reduced in size for fiscal reasons. Second, there had been an unusually high turnover in Soviet military advisers. Thus, Shemyakin’s experience would be particularly useful on inspection protocol issues. Brooks noted that the U.S. negotiating group generally had a very high regard for Shemyakin as a negotiator. 8. Brooks and Nazarkin agreed to direct their subordinates to produce an unbracketed definitions annex within a week and to concentrate on resolving differences in the notification protocol. In response to Brooks’ questions, Nazarkin said that the Soviet side would provide language on the notification of new kinds of strategic offensive arms during the first meeting of the notifications protocol working group. Nazarkin said he believed the U.S. side would be pleased with the Soviet language, but did not elaborate. (Comment. In a subsequent telephone call, Nazarkin asserted that the Soviet side had been told that the new kinds notification found in the notifications protocol had been modified by discussion between Brooks and Masterkov. Brooks said he recalled no such conversation and reaffirmed U.S. support for the formulation included in the March 4, 1991 notifications protocol page exchange. End comment.) 9. Nazarkin said that the Soviet side viewed mandatory SSI as an integral part of the PPCM/size criteria complex of issues and suggested that the sides deal with this subject in the context of PPCM. Brooks agreed. Brooks repeated his impression that the Soviet side would accept the U.S. proposal for facilities to be subject to inspection, but that it was attempting to determine what facilities it wished to ask for in return. Nazarkin said he thought this was, indeed, the case. 10. Brooks reminded Nazarkin of the history of right of refusal suspect site inspections (SSI). In February, 1991, the sides had produced virtually identical texts on right of refusal. Subsequently the Soviet side had indicated it had objected to any provisions requiring special sessions of the joint compliance and inspection commission (JCIC). Some Soviets had even suggested that the whole concept of right of refusal SSI be dropped. Brooks said his view was that this subject should be dealt with in the inspection protocol working group; Brooks wondered, however, if Nazarkin could shed any light on the Soviet position.
