declaration could also accompany the shipment. (As indicated below, there would, however, be no objection to providing for a system of licensing with respect to the “prohibited zone.”) The suggestion has been made that special export declarations for arms shipment be required rather than licenses granted by the Government. In this connection certain objections have been raised to the license system and the views of the War Department on this subject might briefly be summarized as follows: (a) Licensing might involve the Government in a responsibility as to the ultimate destination of the shipment, a responsibility which it is in no position to carry out since it has no control of the arms once the shipment leaves its territory. (b) Licensing might result in undue interference with private trade. (c) Non-producing States object to a requirement that they turn to other governments to secure licenses for the export from a foreign country of the arms necessary for their national defense. (d) A licensing system if it placed impediment in the way of acquirement abroad by non-producing States of the arms necessary to their defense would tend to force such States to become producers of arms. This result would not help toward world peace. The Department therefore desires you to ascertain whether effectual agreement could be reached on the basis that the term “export declarations” or its equivalent should be inserted for “licenses” in various articles of the convention as hereafter indicated. This is not, however, a point of such vital importance as to justify a course of action which would seriously imperil the success of the Conference. In the event, therefore, that the Powers represented at the international conference are generally agreed that the license system is the only satisfactory method of securing the control and the statistical data desired, the Department would not wish to jeopardize the success of the Conference by advocating the abandonment of the license system. SALES RESTRICTED TO RECOGNIZED GOVERNMENTS AND BELLIGERENTS This provision of the Convention should be amplified so as clearly to reserve the right of this Government or of its nationals to make direct sale of arms and war material to the authorities of any self-governing dominion, colony, dependency, mandated territory, and to the federal or administrative subdivision thereof with the consent of the central authority. It is obvious that this Government could not acquiesce in the view that sales to self-governing dominions should be made exclusively by one State or that the Mandatory or Sovereign Powers should be permitted to monopolize the trade in arms
