402 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 60. Memorandum of Conversation1 Malta, December 2, 1989, 10–11:55 a.m. SUBJECT First Expanded Bilateral Session with Chairman Gorbachev of the Soviet Union (U) PARTICIPANTS 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security Council, Condoleezza Rice Files, Soviet Union/USSR Subject Files, OA/ID CF00178–008, Summit at Malta December 1989: Malta Memcons [1]. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. Brackets are in the original. The meeting took place on the Maxim Gorky cruise liner. The full memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989– 1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. Bush flew to Valleta, Malta, on November 30 in advance of his December 2–3 meeting with Gorbachev. U.S. The President James A. Baker, Secretary of State John H. Sununu, Chief of Staff Brent Scowcroft, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Paul Wolfowitz, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Robert Zoellick, Counsellor to the Department, Department of State Robert D. Blackwill, Special Assistant to the President for European and Soviet Affairs Interpreter USSR Mikhail Gorbachev, Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet Eduard Shevardnadze, Minister of Foreign Affairs Aleksandr Yakovlev, Chairman, International Policy Aleksandr Bessmertnykh, First Deputy Minister of Foreign affairs Anatoliy Chernyaev, Aide to the General Secretary, CPSU Anatoliy Dobrynin, Adviser to the Chairman Sergey Akhromeyev, Adviser to the Chairman Interpreter The President: General Scowcroft said that his conversation with General Akhromeyev was the best that he had ever had with a Soviet official. (U) Chairman Gorbachev: Our meeting was at your initiative. It is for me to begin and welcome you and your close associates. The first thing to do is to note and appreciate your initiative to hold this meeting. Initially, I wondered why you wanted this meeting, but now I know that a lot is happening. That is the most important thing. We have to find a dialogue commensurate with the pace of change. We need more working contacts. Since the changes underway affect fundamental things, even Ministerial contacts are not enough now. You and I have to be more active in developing personal contacts. This must be regarded
