condemnation, the fact that three Magistrates, out of seven which formed
the Court, may have given a vote of absolution.
As to the inclusion in the amnesty of such cases in which the offender
alleged the complete circumstances of legitimate defence, but it is declared
that the manner in which the facts were initiated or occurred, was not
known or not proved, that is to say, the circumstances result incomplete, I
must remind you that in Article 59 of the Electoral Code so much
consideration was given to this circumstance, that, when they concur in the
crimes of homicide, greater and lesser injuries, these are exempted from
constituting penal antecedents, for the effects of said Code.
Within the opinion which peoples of saxon origin have of oath, and the
respect which they have for it, Your Excellency is right in criticising
Section (a) of Article II of the Law pending. I wish oath deserved the same
respect among us, but unfortunately this is not so, in general, and it is for
this reason that Congress includes such crime in the Amnesty, together with
that of duel, to which importance is not given also, and to simple infractions
and disciplinary corrections. It is precisely because I am convinced of the
little efficacy of oath, that I have been trying to induce Congressmen that
when Article 102 of the Electoral Code is modified, they may demand some
proof in writing to effect any inscription of electors.
Section (b) of Article II concedes amnesty to public officials and
employees. It is the second time, during the existence of the Republic that
this has been done. The first time I was the promotor in the Senate, in the
year 19)2 [sic], of an amnesty which included all American citizens and
their co-offenders who had committed crimes during the Intervention, and
the principal object pursued was to grant amnesty to the high officials of the
Post-Office Department, General Rathbone, Mr. Neely and Mr. Reeve.
I wish to state that the Project of Law which I saw before approving the
present, conceded the benefits of amnesty to the public officials and
employees without limiting it to the crimes or misdemeanors committed in
the exercise of their duties, or because of them; and, at my suggestion, that
limitation was introduced, for the Constitution does not permit pardon in
such circumstances.
