944
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
nomic problems are of a sort which can be solved only over a relatively
long period of time and which, in the process, generate new tensions
and stresses. With oil revenues in process of being restored and a bene-
ficial relationship with the West established, Iran is in a better position
to attack these problems than it was before. However, they will be suc-
cessfully solved only through a continuous and sustained effort.
The Succession to the Throne
31. In view of the key role of the Shah in the Iranian political
system, the death of the present monarch could be a serious blow to Ira-
nian stability, particularly since he has no male heirs of his own and has
refrained from openly designating a successor.3 His death would at
least create an opportunity for extensive political bickering over the
succession, in which Tudeh and the ultranationalists might revive their
demands for a republic. Should the Shah’s death take place in the
present political environment, the conservative elements now in the as-
cendancy, with the military high command taking a prominent part,
would probably succeed in stabilizing the situation. If the Shah were
assassinated, the present leadership’s ability to maintain control would
probably be enhanced by popular revulsion against the assassins. Even
if the succession were quickly established, however, the new Shah
would have to establish his authority, and initially, at least, his ability
to exercise the positive leadership which Iran needs would be less than
that of the present monarch.
The Future of the Oil Issue
32. The recent oil settlement, though not a complete victory in Ira-
nian eyes, involved sufficiently substantial concessions to Iran’s aspira-
tions to generate a significant momentum of good will and sense of
achievement. Moreover, the oil settlement removes a political irritant,
which for three years has stultified or diverted efforts to solve other ur-
gent social and economic problems, and enables Iranians to hope for
improvements both personally and nationally. The settlement will
probably also improve relations between Iran and the West. The mo-
rale of most Iranian leaders will be improved not only by the revenues
in prospect, but also by somewhat greater Iranian participation in the
control and operation of the industry and by the apparent elimination
3 With the recent death of the Shah’s only full-brother Ali Reza, the next in line is
the Shah’s oldest half-brother, Gholam Reza, 31 years old. After Gholam Reza, the next in
line is 30-year old Abdor Reza, former head of the Seven Year Plan Organization. Both
brothers are Western-educated. Although both of these brothers technically can be de-
barred under the present constitution because their respective mothers are members of
the deposed Qajar dynasty, it is probable that the Majlis would interpret the constitution
in favor of one of them if he were chosen by the Shah to succeed to the throne. [Footnote is
in the original.]
