798 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Finance Minister Cemovic wrote to Secretary Bluementhal2 asking that U.S. Federal annuitants in Yugoslavia be paid in dollars (at current rates 12 million dollars annually) thus freeing dinars to support scientific and cultural cooperation. A president of the Academy of Sciences and Arts is included on the official delegation. Indeed, the subject has rarely passed unmentioned in high-level visits and, given the rate at which the scientific cooperative program is winding down, and our stock of dinars is dwindling, this is probably the last chance for saving the joint program. We recommend replying as follows: —The Cemovic request is being given serious consideration. —The existence of U.S.-owned excess dinars was a special circumstance that has come to an end. —The USG is exploring possibilities for continuing cooperation. Military Cooperation: 15. An important U.S. objective in Yugoslavia is to develop closer contacts with the Yugoslav armed forces (JNA) than we have now. The JNA and the LCY are Yugoslavia’s two strongest and most durable politically-related institutions, and the political influence of both has increased in the last six years. JNA’s ties to the political center have been increased by a strong LCY organization within the JNA. In his Dec. 22, 1977 Army Day toast, Tito called on the military to continue its role of helping to preserve the unity of the nation, an unnecessary reminder that the military is certain to be a determining factor in the post-Tito era. In fact, under less than stable post-Tito conditions, the military could become the strongest element in determining the succession and charting the country’s future. Tito, as Supreme Commander of the JNA since its creation during World War II, has long been involved intimately with this formidable all-Yugoslav institution. 16. In pursuit of our objective and complementary to the other facets of our bilateral relationship, we have been attempting to enhance military-to-military cooperation. This cooperative effort comprises several components: (1) maintaining a regular series of ship visits to Yugoslav ports, and seeking to have an NPW visit at a favorable time; (2) beginning a program of ship repairs in the Yugoslav shipyard at Tivat; (3) seeking a mutually acceptable solution to overcome the barriers, mostly financial, which now prevent JNA officers (the future military leaders of Yugoslavia) from receiving professional U.S. military training; (4) establishing a military cooperation working group to examine periodically all our activities; (5) high-level visits; and (6) military equipment sales. Of all these, the last two are of most immediate 2 Not found.
