Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX These developments, together with the obvious irrelevance of the ruling ideology—both morally and in terms of pragmatic governing—are likely to be an important source of continuing tension in the Soviet Union and in East European states. This ferment so far has been limited largely to intellectuals and generally presents no genuine security problem. However, Soviet worry about how such ideas could infect East European ruling parties has contributed to Moscow’s rigid attitude toward CSCE implementation. 9. These factors of economic decline and frustrated political “possibilities” have increased the sense of popular dissatisfaction with East European regimes. As a result, the next decade may see a rise in social and political tensions there. These occasionally may take the form of civil disturbances. The most likely pattern will be one of increased pressure on the party leadership by elite groups, both within and outside of the party, to permit some devolution of power to more “modern” elements in society. Such long-term political dynamics will be viewed with great concern in Moscow. 10. With Eastern Europe, and at home, Soviet leaders are faced with a conflict between the CPSU imperative of hegemony and the rising demands of equality. Brezhnev’s response has been a pragmatic combination of holding to a firm line where possible (e.g., East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and Bulgaria) and grudging acceptance of gradual reform or autonomy where necessary (e.g., Poland/Hungary; Romania/Albania). The CPSU has taken a similar tough approach domestically. Toward East European regimes—as with Soviet society— the Soviet leadership has preferred, where necessary and possible, to shift the terms of debate and conflict from political to economic matters. In the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, consumerism and economic aid constitute major expressions of this strategy. Soviet aid to Poland, following the June 1976 price riots, is a case in point. 11. From a Soviet standpoint, this policy suffers from two basic defects. First, it has no natural terminal point. Gradual appeasement of East European demands—on economic issues, liberalization, or foreign policy autonomy—inevitably feeds rather than satiates East European appetites. Secondly, with its own major economic—and potential energy—problems, the USSR has neither the capacity nor the desire to divert scarce economic resources from internal Soviet requirements to the needs of more developed East European economies. Moreover, it is Western technology that is most relevant to East European and Soviet economic needs. 12. These two factors have important ramifications for Soviet/ East European relations and consequent Western policy. The dynamic feature of this relationship offers long-term hope to East Europeans and poses a long-term threat to tight Soviet control. It also suggests
