878 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement of interim LPH’s available. One of these ships is assigned to Atlantic Fleet and 2 to Pacific Fleet. Two of the LPH’s are capable of carrying a fully combat-­ready BLT and one helicopter squadron, while one LPH is capable of carrying one-­half BLT and one helicopter squadron. c. Air Force. There was a substantial reduction in the number of USAF tactical air wings world-­wide during FY 1959. These forces were reduced from a total of 45 wings at end FY 1958 to 35 wings at end FY 1959, and are being reduced further to 34 wings at end FY I960. Nevertheless, tactical as well as strategic air units retain a capability to respond effectively to general war or local aggression, resulting from improved nuclear delivery means, decreased reaction time and increased mobility. However, our present programs do not compensate entirely for future improvements and increase in Soviet capability. The most pressing problems in the tactical area concern the slow rate of aircraft modernization and the need for improved ground environment systems which can control effectively both air defense and tactical air weapon systems in overseas areas. d. In the succeeding paragraphs the ready forces capable of responding selectively and flexibly to local aggression and general war are treated by geographical areas. [Omitted here is the remainder of Section II of the report.] III. EVALUATION OF OUR ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL CAPABILITIES TO PROVIDE AN ADEQUATE CONTINENTAL DEFENSE SYSTEM. A. OBJECTIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CONTINENTAL U.S. DEFENSE PROGRAMS (Based on NSC 5802/1). To be prepared at all times to counter an attack on the North American Continent in such a way as to deter Soviet attack, or, if an attack occurs, to insure our survival as a free nation. Such preparation requires that the United States achieve and maintain, in collaboration with Canada and other Free World nations, a continental defense readiness and capability which will protect and permit the launching of our nuclear retaliatory forces, even in the event of surprise attack. Such preparation should: (1) Provide warn­ ing to alert the nation to impending attack; (2) counter enemy subversive and clandestine efforts; (3) prevent the threat of nuclear destruction from unduly restricting U.S. freedom of action or weakening national morale; (4) maintain adaptability to make timely changes as technology permits and as the nature of the threat changes; (5) provide appropriate measures of protection for the civil population; and (6) include appropriately orga­ nizing, protecting, and placing in a condition of readiness the resources of the country essential to national survival. B. ESTIMATED SOVIET THREAT AND CAPABILITIES. 1. Current Soviet capabilities for full-­scale air attack on the con­ tinental United States depend mainly on their long range aviation. Although still consisting primarily of medium bombers capable of
