Comprehensive Test Ban 547 over, establishing the right to have [number not declassified] stations [less than 1 line not declassified] is important in itself. If, for instance, the treaty were extended for a second three years, we would be without grounds for establishing any [number not declassified] over the six year period. [2 lines not declassified] I believe that it would impair the prospects for ratification if we had abandoned what might turn out to be a very useful element of verification. Stansfield Turner 223. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, October 13, 1978, 1858Z 15493. Exdis USCTB. Pass to DOE. Subject: CTB Negotiations: Status of Verification Issues. CTB message no. 332 1. Summary. During the initial weeks of the current negotiating round, the US Delegation has devoted most of its efforts to pressing the Soviets to make early and favorable responses to US proposals on the remaining verification issues. In our three plenary statements and in many informal exchanges at various levels, we have emphasized the top priority we assign to verification, urged the Soviets to join us in concrete negotiations particularly on arrangements for national seismic stations (NSS), and stressed our view that verification measures must be effective regardless of the length of the treaty. While we have not yet gotten into detailed negotiations, there have been some promising signs that the Soviets may be preparing to get down to serious business in the near future. End summary. 2. Beginning with our opening statement on September 28,2 we have tried to use every available opportunity, either in formal plenary sessions or in informal conversations, to emphasize the importance of getting down to detailed work on outstanding verification issues, especially NSS and OSI, and to call on the Soviets to respond favorably to 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780419–0887. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to London and Moscow. 2 The U.S. statement is available in telegram 14623 from Geneva, September 28. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780397–0007)
