22
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
of the seas. The purpose of such development is not to level the eco-
nomic lot of every person on earth. It is to inject the wealth-creating
process into countries that are now stagnant; it is to help developing
countries to act in what is their own best interest as well as ours—pro-
duce more food, limit population growth, and expand markets, sup-
plies, and materials. It is simply to give every country a sufficient stake
in the international order so that it feels no need to act as an outlaw. It is
to advance the cause of human dignity.
We must also work with the countries of the communist world.
The policy of East-West de´tente is under attack today because of the
way it has been exploited by the Soviet Union. The American people
were told it would mean a “generation of peace,” at no risk to the na-
tion’s vital interests. And yet, in places like Syria or Angola, in activities
like offensive missile development, the Soviets seem to be taking ad-
vantage of the new relationship to expand their power and influence,
and increase the risk of conflict.
I support the objectives of de´tente, but I cannot go along with the
way it has been handled by Presidents Nixon and Ford. The Secretary
of State has tied its success too closely to his personal reputation.
As a result, he is giving up too much and asking for too little. He is
trumpeting achievements on paper while failing to insist on them in
practice.
The relationship of de´tente is one of both cooperation and compe-
tition, of new kinds of contacts in some areas along with continued hos-
tility in others. In the troubled history of our relationships with the So-
viet Union, this is where we have arrived. The benefits of de´tente must
accrue to both sides, or they are worthless. Their mutual advantage
must be apparent, or the American people will not support the policy.
To the Soviets, de´tente is an opportunity to continue the process of
world revolution without running the threat of nuclear war. They have
said so quite openly, as recently as 1 month ago at their 25th Party
Congress.6 To the Soviet Union, with our acquiescence, de´tente is sur-
face tranquility in Europe within boundaries redefined to their benefit
together with support for wars of national liberation elsewhere. It is
having the benefits of the Helsinki Accords7 without the requirement of
6 The 25th Party Congress convened on February 24; see Foreign Relations, 1969–
1976, vol. XVI, Soviet Union, August 1974–December 1976, Document 266.
7 Reference is to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE)
Final Act, or Helsinki Accords, comprised of four “baskets” or categories. For the text of
the Final Act, signed on August 1, 1975, by 33 European nations, the United States, and
Canada, see Department of State Bulletin, September 1, 1975, pp. 323–350. July 30 marked
the opening day of the CSCE in Helsinki. Ford addressed conference delegates on August
1. For the text of Ford’s remarks, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVIII, Part 1,
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1973–1976, Document 62.
