1054 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Data denial The US plans this week to introduce a major new proposal on telemetry transmission practices for existing and new missiles. The Soviet position is to defer most of this subject to subsequent negotiations in the JCIC. The new US proposal may precipitate serious negotiations on this issue. Also unresolved is the extent to which each side will provide assistance in interpreting its telemetry for the other side. In particular, the Soviets are resisting the national security exception. Satisfactory resolution on data denial is important to ratification, as this is one of the big plusses for the agreement. PPCM PPCM will be established at the facilities where the SS–24 and SS–25 missiles and Peacekeeper first stages are produced. If the Small ICBM is produced as a mobile ICBM, PPCM will be established where its first stage is produced. There are a number of other PPCM issues (e.g. the size criterion for inspecting objects coming out the portal), that are hung up in part because the Soviets are not prepared to provide information on precisely what comes out of these facilities in addition to complete missiles. Suspect-site inspection To supplement PPCM, we have proposed the right to inspect a list of 4 facilities in the USSR where mobile ICBMs might be illegally assembled. The Soviets have accepted 3, denied the 4th, and proposed a list of 4 sites in the US, at least 1 of which is a problem. It is important to get SSI rights at the 4 facilities in the USSR in order for the intelligence community to testify that the combination of PPCM and SSI gives us a good handle on mobile ICBM production. New types definition The Soviets recently moved from their position that differences in throw weight alone constitute a basis for considering a missile to be a new type. They now propose a difference of 10% in throw weight combined with 5% in length. The remaining issue is to find a mutually acceptable percentage on throw weight combined with another dimension (length or volume). The current gap between our positions is large. Stage dimensions The Soviets recently moved toward us by offering to provide in the MOU the weights and dimensions of first stages and entire missiles.
