Non-Proliferation The Prime Minister then emphasized the special position of Japan concerning nonproliferation. Japan, he said, is the only nation which suffered a nuclear attack; the Government of Japan firmly maintains the three non-nuclear principles, i.e. no manufacture, no use, no introduction of nuclear weapons into Japan. His concerns about nonproliferation, Prime Minister Fukuda said, may even exceed those of President Carter. At the same time, Japan’s energy situation compels it to explore all possible alternatives to fossil fuels. When Japan ratified the Nonproliferation Treaty, the GOJ promised the Diet and the Japanese public that this would remove impediments to Japan’s acquisition of a complete nuclear cycle, including reprocessing capabilities.4 Japan now has a pilot reprocessing plant which is ready to begin “hot” tests this summer. Inability to initiate these tests, Fukuda said, as a result of U.S. decisions would constitute his “biggest political headache”.5 The Prime Minister then posed the question: “Are other countries possessing reprocessing capabilities going to stop their activities in this field? What about the communist countries?” If the others continue, and Japan is prevented from doing so, he said this would constitute an example of “unforgivable inequality”. Prime Minister Fukuda promised to pass the report which the President had given him on to his experts, but he added that urgent consultations at a governmental level between the U.S. and Japan would be required. He asked, “Who is the highest and most authoritative U.S. representative on this subject with whom we should consult?” The President indicated that the U.S. would try to obtain the agreement of the UK, France, West Germany, and the USSR—as well as Japan—to join us in stopping reprocessing. We think reprocessing is wasteful and unnecessary. We have no authority over other nations, he said, but we are thinking in terms of voluntarily complying with constraints on the use of reprocessing capabilities ourselves even in the ab- 4 In an undated memorandum, Vance told Carter that since Japan was “90 percent dependent on outside energy sources,” it saw nuclear power “as its only realistic means of reducing this dependence” in spite of its “historic sensitivity to the dangers of proliferation.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box
