Non-Proliferation
829
The Prime Minister then emphasized the special position of Japan
concerning nonproliferation. Japan, he said, is the only nation which
suffered a nuclear attack; the Government of Japan firmly maintains
the three non-nuclear principles, i.e. no manufacture, no use, no intro-
duction of nuclear weapons into Japan. His concerns about nonprolifer-
ation, Prime Minister Fukuda said, may even exceed those of President
Carter. At the same time, Japan’s energy situation compels it to explore
all possible alternatives to fossil fuels. When Japan ratified the Non-
proliferation Treaty, the GOJ promised the Diet and the Japanese
public that this would remove impediments to Japan’s acquisition of a
complete nuclear cycle, including reprocessing capabilities.4 Japan now
has a pilot reprocessing plant which is ready to begin “hot” tests this
summer. Inability to initiate these tests, Fukuda said, as a result of U.S.
decisions would constitute his “biggest political headache”.5 The Prime
Minister then posed the question: “Are other countries possessing re-
processing capabilities going to stop their activities in this field? What
about the communist countries?” If the others continue, and Japan is
prevented from doing so, he said this would constitute an example of
“unforgivable inequality”. Prime Minister Fukuda promised to pass
the report which the President had given him on to his experts, but he
added that urgent consultations at a governmental level between the
U.S. and Japan would be required. He asked, “Who is the highest and
most authoritative U.S. representative on this subject with whom we
should consult?”
The President indicated that the U.S. would try to obtain the agree-
ment of the UK, France, West Germany, and the USSR—as well as
Japan—to join us in stopping reprocessing. We think reprocessing is
wasteful and unnecessary. We have no authority over other nations, he
said, but we are thinking in terms of voluntarily complying with con-
straints on the use of reprocessing capabilities ourselves even in the ab-
4 In an undated memorandum, Vance told Carter that since Japan was “90 percent
dependent on outside energy sources,” it saw nuclear power “as its only realistic means
of reducing this dependence” in spite of its “historic sensitivity to the dangers of prolifer-
ation.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box
8, Japan: Prime Minister Fukuda, 3/18–24/77, Briefing Book [II]) Carter initialed Vance’s
memorandum. In his memoirs, Brzezinski recalled that he had alerted Carter “to the ex-
treme sensitivity of the Japanese to any changes in our nuclear policy and the impact
these changes would have on U.S.-Japan relations.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp.
130–131)
5 On February 25, the Embassy in Japan warned the Department of State that “the
Japanese believe that controls on fuel reprocessing which the U.S. may adopt could set
back their effort to make themselves less dependent on OPEC oil. It would be difficult to
overstate the strategic importance of this issue. In all probability, few developments
could contribute more to confirming Japan’s long-term orientation toward the U.S. than
our assured cooperation in its nuclear energy program.” (Telegram 2626 from Tokyo,
February 25; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770065–0493)
