Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks 673 trast to Glenn, they clearly support it—Clark, McGovern, Pell and Sarbanes particularly. Javits suggested that we subsume paragraph 6 under paragraph 2 and limit its application to “sophisticated weaponry”. There was then a good deal of back and forth with Glenn, Javits and others as to what is covered and what is not. It seemed from the discussion that a brief insert after the language, “defense articles and services” to explain that we mean items of major defense equipment on the ITAR list would answer these questions. Arms Control and Iran McGovern then asked the Secretary about how this new policy would impact upon our arms sales to Iran and the Committee’s deep concern about arms transfers to the Persian Gulf area. The Secretary said, in his judgment, this policy would have a profound effect on arms sales to Iran, particularly in terms of the more sophisticated weaponry which the Iranians have sought. He pointed out that in Iran, for example, a number of cases had developed where arms salesmen had dealt directly with the Iranians and had created interest in advanced weapons systems, some still on the drawing board, which then posed a diplomatic challenge for us if we chose to limit such sales. Earlier Notification to Congress Clark said he hailed the President’s draft and wondered if we might not wish to crank in a specific means of providing earlier notification to the Congress. He said whereas Congress now has 20 days informal notice and 30 days formal notice, this was still after an arms sale project was fairly well developed and Congressional disapproval became difficult and diplomatically expensive. He referred to the possibility of Congressional involvement at the price-and-availability stage. Clark said perhaps the new board for arms sales controls would be the best vehicle for early Congressional input. Mrs. Benson and the Secretary concurred. Hussein’s Visit Javits then raised the question of Hussein’s visit.6 He said the situation, in his judgment, is now ripe for a review of Rabat.7 He wondered whether this had come up during Hussein’s visit. 6 King Hussein of Jordan visited the United States on April 25–26. For more on these meetings, see Foreign Relations, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, Documents 30 and 31. 7 King Hussein and Yasser Arafat, the head of the Palestine Liberation Organization, met in Rabat, Morocco in March to discuss a proposed Palestinian state on the West Bank and whether the PLO should be an independent representative or part of the Jordanian delegation to an upcoming peace conference on the Middle East.
