First Responses
5
Mr. Precht telephoned Ayatollah Beheshti to request his assistance
in securing the release of Embassy personnel and evacuation of the
Embassy compound by Iranian students. The request was couched in
humanitarian terms and included statements of understanding for the
views of the Iranian people and the aims of their revolution.
The Ayatollah replied that the Iranian people should be expected
to become angry when a nation speaks of good relations but shelters
Iran’s principal enemy. The Shah could have gone elsewhere for treat-
ment. The presence of Bakhtiar and others in England has also angered
the Iranian people and has resulted in the occupation of the UK
Embassy as well. Iran will go its own way and although it wants equal
relations with all countries, will remain independent.
The students have emphasized that they will take care of the secu-
rity and safety of the hostages. We cannot oppose the zeal of the nation;
there can be no separation of the Iranian leadership from the desires
of the Iranian people. Meanwhile, Beheshti advised the U.S. to consider
carefully “the true causes of happenings which nobody likes.” The
Iranian authorities will do their best to control the situation but much
will depend upon the U.S. and UK reactions.
According to Beheshti, the USG must offer the Iranian people an
acceptable answer to the question of the Shah’s presence in the United
States. Statements on good relations can help to improve the situation
and the Iranian authorities will expect such a statement.
Finally, Beheshti agreed to speak to other members of the Revolu-
tionary Council and other decision-makers to see what might be done.
4.
Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Iran
Iranian internal politics are seriously complicating the hostage
negotiations. The division in the government between the religious
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 30, Subject File, Iran 11/1/79–11/10/79. Secret. A stamped notation in the upper
right-hand corner of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
