March 1952–February 1953
347
United States Government dole of monthly budgetary aid. Such a dole
would obviously make political blackmail and commercial stubborn-
ness pay well and would not salve the constant irritation of the oil dis-
pute nor would such a dole be likely to win friends for the United States
in Iran since generosity of this nature is regarded with great suspicion
in the Middle East, particularly if any attempt is made to control dis-
bursements of these funds. National income must be increased in Iran
but it should be based upon exploitation of Iran’s own natural
resources.
4. United States policy toward Iran has been influenced by an un-
derstanding that the United Kingdom is responsible for the initiative in
military support of Iran in the event of communist subversion or ag-
gression. This understanding is very questionable in the present situa-
tion. The extensive British organization10 in Iran which was based pri-
marily upon British commercial installations and interests has been
totally destroyed. Public antagonism to the British has been so in-
flamed over the past two years by nationalist propaganda that it is very
doubtful whether any legitimate Iranian Government could request
British assistance in the event of a communist seizure of power. Even
such previously independent pro-western figures as the Shah have
been so reduced in power and prestige that they should not be ex-
pected to act independently of nationalist sentiments even in the face of
a communist coup. Anti-British feeling has, in fact, reached such a
point that many Iranian leaders believe themselves to be sincere in
saying, as Nasser Khan Qashqai said in Washington on September 4,
“We would prefer the Russians to the British”. Other developments in
the Middle East have also strongly affected the British military position
in that area so that it is doubtful that British military intervention in
Iran could be effective even if an Iranian Government were to request
British support.
5. The so-called “blockade” of Iranian oil sales has been based
upon the legal claim of the AIOC to ownership of the oil products pres-
ently stored in Abadan. Legal opinion in the Department of State infor-
mally holds that the decision of the ICJ that it had no jurisdiction over
the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute was based upon a decision that the dis-
pute was not between two nations but between the Iranian sovereign
and a private company on Iranian territory. It is held that a court, de-
ciding upon the AIOC’s claim to ownership of oil lifted by any tanker
from Iran, would be required to discuss the validity of the 1933 oil con-
cession and Iran’s sovereign right to abrogate a contract with a private
company. It is entirely possible, therefore, that many courts would re-
10 This word is struck through in the original.
