First Responses
121
Since the Treasury action permitting setoffs in blocked accounts,
up to $1 billion in setoffs have been made by U.S. banks—mostly in
London. Some banks that have made sizeable loans to Iran did not
have Iranian deposits, and they have, therefore, not been able to setoff.
Those banks are presently considering attachments, that is action by
which they can seize Iranian assets wherever they can find them by a
court order known as an attachment, to satisfy their loans to Iran.
Again, attachments (like setoffs) are governed by local law and it is
by no means clear that they can be utilized in the present state of
affairs. The only attachment Treasury knows of is the Morgan Guaranty
attachment in Germany of the Iranian’s shares in Krupp.
Generally speaking, neither a setoff nor an attachment is available
to satisfy a debt unless the debt is due and unpaid. Debts become due
and payable when there is a failure to pay interest or principal when
due or when there is an anticipatory breach or a violation of a term
in the loan agreement. For instance, some of the Iranian loan agreements
contain a provision, known as a cross-default clause, that states that
the loan becomes due and payable if Iran defaults under any other loan.
As a consequence of the blocking, Iran did not pay the interest
due on a $500 million loan on which Chase Manhattan is the agent
bank. Chase notified all the members of the syndicate of the default
and asked instructions as to whether the loan should be accelerated
and thus become immediately due and payable. A majority of the
banks in the syndicate (including all U.S., but none of the foreign banks)
voted to accelerate the loan. Chase accelerated the loan on Tuesday
(November 20). Several other loans have since gone into default; others
are soon expected to. Thus, cross default provisions are being triggered
and other loans will also soon become due. That will widen the scope
of setoffs and attachments that are possible. It could lead foreign banks
to try to protect their positions by setoffs and attachments, thus wiping
out most of Iran’s presently free assets. (It also may be relevant to this
discussion that last week Treasury modified its regulations to permit
the Iranians to pay interest and principal due on a loan, with new
(unblocked) dollars. Thus Iran cannot argue that the blocking made
compliance with the terms of the loan impossible. Iran has made no
attempt to pay interest or principal on any loan with new money.)
Eximbank has about $400 million in loans outstanding to Iran.
Several of these are now in default, either because interest has not
been paid or because of cross-default provisions. Eximbank has never
declared a loan to a foreign government to be in default and initiated
attachment proceedings, although there have been a number of defaults
in the past.
Options Available
The balance of this memorandum discusses the options available
in the context of the situation described above and in the context of
