Afghanistan
657
troops—the first time in 30 years that Soviet troops have transgressed
the boundaries you achieved as a result of World War II. This is not
something which you could expect the United States or its allies to
ignore. It sets a remarkably dangerous precedent and is an event to
which we have to respond unambiguously, so that your government
does not mistake the depth and gravity of our reaction or what our
reaction will be if this type of behavior continues. (S)
The fact of the matter is, Bessmertnykh replied, that your allies see
the situation entirely differently than you do. Not only do they not
regard Afghanistan as endangering them in any way, they rather see
it as an opportunity to derive commercial advantage in their dealing
with us. Many people in Moscow are aware of this and are trying to
take advantage of it. Dobrynin and I have worked very hard to build
up US-Soviet trade, and now it will all go to the West Europeans and
the Japanese. (S)
More important than trade, I said, is whether the Soviet Union
thinks it has the right to introduce armed combat troops anywhere in
the world to support “revolutionary movements” wherever they exist.
We have the right to do whatever you do, Bessmertnykh replied. There
has been a great change in the world. This is no longer the ’50s or ’60s,
he repeated. And what has changed is that we have achieved military
parity with you not only in the strategic field, but in conventional arms
as well. You have your troops all over the world, half a million of
them. You do not ask our permission to go into places like Korea. Your
troops are there not only to defend that territory, but to prop up the
local government. There is no reason for you to have any rights which
we do not have. We must insist on equality. It is hard for you to adjust
to this, but you must come to realize that it is a new fact of life. You
have lived many years in my country and you understand very well
that we are quite cautious. We do not undertake actions such as those
in Afghanistan without fully realizing their implications. We moved
only to protect our vital interests. We do not consider that Afghanistan
is a precedent for future action. (S)
Although you say this, and might even believe it, I replied, there
is no way that you can know for certain that what you are saying is the
truth. Events have a way of becoming precedents which can ultimately
surprise the people who triggered those same events. It is therefore
essential that Afghanistan indeed not be a precedent for future Soviet
actions. US-Soviet relations cannot stand future Afghanistans. We
therefore must find a viable way to resolve this problem. The President
suggested one such way when he indicated that the US is ready to
support efforts by the international community to restore a neutral,
non-aligned Afghan government that would be responsive to the
wishes of the Afghan people. The essence of a settlement must therefore
