Afghanistan
43
comments now being offered by Pakistanis of all walks of life, and
indeed, the nation—or at least its opinion molders—appears to be in
a state of shock.3
2. To fully understand the meaning for Pakistanis of the change
in Afghanistan it is important to recall that for most of the history of
this part of the world—at least until the Europeans came by sea some
400 years ago—Afghanistan has been both the military and cultural
route into South Asia. As the British Empire in India took shape, British
policy sought to seal off that route by fostering a classic buffer role for
what was to become Afghanistan. The replacement of the czars by
Bolsheviks and the British Raj by swaraj (self-rule) did not fundamen-
tally change this situation, and Afghanistan remained a buffer in a cold
war context.
3. This is not simply an historical digression. Rather these are
fundamental facts which underly the thinking and the relationships of
the peoples and the states of this region, predating the Dulles and
Ayub Khan eras but incorporated, essentially intact, into our earliest
security relationship with Pakistan. When opinion leaders in this coun-
try now turn to us to express their concerns and anxieties about Paki-
stan’s future in view of the apparent loss of that buffer against Soviet
Central Asia, they have in mind these widely perceived historical reali-
ties and are reacting with gut concern for national survival. Turning
to the U.S. for reassurance at this moment is also something of a
reversion to earlier principles, since it was as an anti-Soviet alliance,
focused on the USSR (and Afghanistan), that the post-war U.S.-Pakistan
relationship was strongest.
4. If it were the uncertainties in the Afghan situation alone in their
minds it would be disturbing enough for many Pakistanis. But the
change in the role of Afghanistan may also have destroyed—for now
at least—whatever slender prospect there was for continued warming
Indo-Pakistan relations, described now by Foreign Advisor Agha Shahi
as “back to square one.” The quick Indian recognition of the new
regime in Kabul—however warranted in Delhi’s eyes and welcome in
Kabul’s—has rather quickly resurrected all the old shibboleths about
the Indo-Soviet relationship (based on their 1971 agreement).4 At the
official level, and even more widely in the country, there is renewed
suspicion about what the wily Hindus are up to this time combined
3 In telegram 4727 from Islamabad, May 12, the Embassy reported that Foreign
Affairs Adviser Agha Shahi told Hummel that recent events in Afghanistan threatened
Pakistan and CENTO existentially: “While you wait to see how things develop in Afghani-
stan, we will be gone.” (See footnote 2, above)
4 India recognized the new Afghan Government on May 2. For the 1971 agreement,
see footnote 3, Document 16.
