486
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
elections will definitely be held in five months would be difficult at
best. If the elections can be completed in nine or ten or eleven or twelve
months, this will be a notable step. The Israelis think that it can be done.
Foreign Minister Dayan is getting to the end of his career, but he per-
sonally wants to carry out the elections and oversee the withdrawal of
the military government. This is one of his great ambitions, to end the
occupation. But to tie this together with a specific date could cast doubt
on the treaty. If Israel agrees, that would suit me fine. Anything you
agree to is all right. But I am afraid of what will happen if you set a co-
terminous date. The Israelis fear that even if they do their best, but if
things fail, this could jeopardize the Egypt-Israel treaty. The entire
process if very difficult. We have asked the Israelis for unilateral com-
mitments to show good faith by allowing political meetings and the re-
lease of some political prisoners. They have said that they will do this
as a unilateral gesture. I believe that we can be successful, and I hope
that you will understand the special problems in Israel.
I see the peace treaty as being signed, and then within one month,
there would be negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza. There would
be a registration of voters, elections would be held and the self-
government would be established. The first thing on the agenda would
be to define the duties and responsibilities of the self-governing body.
If the negotiations go well, which I anticipate, then there will be an in-
crease in trust, despite some difficulties. I assume that you saw our an-
swers to King Hussein. I assume that these satisfied you, although
the Israelis do not like them. We will take these views into those
negotiations.
My preference is that Egypt and Israel will accept the treaty as it
now is. If Israel is willing to link the elections in the West Bank and
Gaza to the interim withdrawal date, I have no objections. I see Sadat’s
offer to wait on withdrawal until there is proof of progress in the West
Bank and Gaza as a generous step. But it could make the whole peace
treaty tentative instead of final. The Israelis say they are prepared to ne-
gotiate in good faith. President Sadat doubts that. There are some
doubts in Israel that President Sadat can prevail over the PLO. I have
no assurance that the Israeli Cabinet will accept the present document.
Secretary Vance: On linkage, there is now language in the preamble
that is basically derived from an Egyptian draft.
Vice President Mubarak: That’s okay.
The President: I met with Weizman recently,3 and I have met with
Dayan.4 They see that linkage is there. They are prepared to begin ne-
3 See footnote 5, Document 138.
4 See Document 96.
