3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
602
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
confirmation, and that created a serious problem for us. He asked
Brezhnev if that was his understanding.
Foreign Minister Gromyko interrupted and said there was no
problem at all. What had been agreed before Vienna and what had been
done in accordance with that understanding was that President Carter
would make a statement to the effect that it was his understanding the
Soviet Union would not produce more than thirty airplanes of this type
per year. The Soviet side, for its part, would not rebut that statement.
That is precisely what had been done, or rather not done, yesterday; the
Soviet side had not refuted President Carter’s statement. This was
strictly in accord with the previous arrangement, and therefore there
was no difference between the sides. The Secretary of State knew very
well that there had been one word in the statement that had stood in the
way of complete agreement, but that word had since been removed,
and therefore he could see nothing that would indicate any difference
in views.
Secretary Vance wanted to state his understanding of what had
been agreed. It was that the word “approximately” would be removed
from the Soviet statement, and that the Soviet side would confirm here
in Vienna that our statement was correct.
President Carter noted that now Brezhnev had said that the Soviet
Union would not be bound by any unilateral interpretation of its state-
ment. Gromyko said that they would not be bound by any unilateral in-
terpretations of the Soviet statement but that would not apply to the
U.S. statement on the rate of production.
Secretary Vance said his understanding was that the Soviet Union
would not produce more than thirty Backfires per year. President
Carter had stated that, but had received no confirmation from the So-
viet side.
Brezhnev interrupted to state that the two sides had an identical un-
derstanding on this score. He said that the Soviet Union will not pro-
duce more than thirty per year.
President Carter said that was perfect.
Foreign Minister Gromyko said this should end the discussion of the
Backfire. He added jokingly that President Carter loves concessions.
President Carter said that resolved the Backfire problem and it need
not be addressed again.
The President wanted to make one more comment. He had outlined
to Brezhnev several very specific and important thoughts and sugges-
tions regarding future arms negotiations leading to SALT III.4
4 See Document 202.
