rights as soon as China shall demonstrate that her laws and the administration of the laws and judicial system are adequate for the protection of foreign lives and property within China. China has invited commerce and development and, of course, it is her duty as a sovereign nation to fulfill her obligations under the laws of nations and to protect foreigners in their lives and property. I am sure that the United States has always been most desirous to respect and uphold Chinese sovereign rights and the development of a stable government. I know that I have since I became Secretary of State worked earnestly to carry out the provisions of the treaties and resolutions adopted at the Washington Conference with respect to the holding of the Tariff Conference and the appointment of the Commission on Extraterritoriality. Unfortunately the conditions in China have not been such as to further her aspirations in these respects. I shall not attempt, of course, to review the various changes in government, the fall of the empire and the establishment of the republic, but simply to call attention to the fact that within the last few months, there have been riots and antiforeign demonstrations which have caused loss of life, not only of foreigners but of Chinese. There has been a recurrence of anti-foreign demonstrations such as has [have] not existed since the Boxer Rebellion. The Powers have been compelled to protect their nationals by armed force. I believe the Chinese Provisional Government has made an effort to restrain this anti-foreign hostility and disorders but its efforts have not been completely successful. Nevertheless, I do not believe that these unfortunate conditions should constitute a reason why the United States and the other Powers should not scrupulously adhere to the pledges they made to China in the Washington Conference to meet her in the spirit of helpfulness with the hope that she may realize her ambitions. These are some of the problems which will have to be settled in the near future, and, for one, I am willing to face them now, to meet the representatives of the Chinese Government frankly and discuss the whole subject. But these conventional tariffs, extraterritorial rights and foreign settlements have come about through treaty arrangements with China under which thousands of Americans and foreigners have taken up their residence and carried on their business within that country. The United States owes to them the duty of adequate protection and; the Chinese Government must have a realization of its sovereign obligations according to the law of all civilized nations. In the discussion and settlement of these problems, one of the most difficult questions is whether China now has a stable Government capable of carrying out these treaty obligations. I am very sure that the people of the United States do not wish to control, by treaty or otherwise, the internal policies of China, to fix its tariffs, or establish and administer courts but that they look forward to the day when this will not be necessary. 26 For release after delivery of the Secretary’s address.
