Human Rights
35
10.
Memorandum From the Coordinator for Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs (Wilson) to the Deputy Secretary of
State-Designate (Christopher)1
Washington, February 4, 1977
SUBJECT
S/P Human Rights Memorandum to the Secretary
The S/P memo to the Secretary of today’s date2 was read but not
commented on by this office in view of S/P’s insistence on sending it
forward immediately. No other interested bureaus have seen it. Our
preliminary views are as follows.
General: We agree that action needs to be taken soon on a number
of important pending issues and most particularly, as I indicated to you
earlier, that an in depth study be undertaken at once by S/P, either in-
ternally within the Department or as part of a broader interagency
PRM. If the latter, it should be kept under the Department’s lead.
Short-term Actions
—Ms. Derian should be consulted on the need to go beyond recent
press reports to push for an official announcement on her appointment
before her clearance.
—The proposal for an internal Coordinating Committee at the
Deputy Assistant Secretary level appears premature and probably un-
necessary. Ms. Derian must be given a chance to see how she wishes to
proceed in the future and to decide what mechanisms will be most
helpful to her.
—We have already recommended favorable action on the human
rights conventions and covenants. The President may want to an-
nounce his intentions at Monday’s press conference.3 Alternatively it
may be better to wait until further checks can be made with Congres-
sional leaders.
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
1976–1977 Human Rights Subject Files and Country Files, Lot 80D177, SHUM—Policies.
Confidential. Drafted by Wilson. A copy was sent to Derian.
2 See Document 9.
3 Carter held his first news conference as President on February 8. For his remarks,
see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 92–100. Later, the President noted, “I had my
first press conference. I felt completely at ease and leveled with the press the best I could,
describing frankly some of the crucial issues that face our country. The major emphasis
was on SALT talks and human rights. I spelled out in general terms our positions on
these issues and intend to keep the press conferences on schedule and not evade issues
any more than necessary for national security.” (Carter, White House Diary, pp. 17–18)
