1068
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Our agreement with the Brazilians4 envisaged shipment of the fuel
by December 1977 in order to meet the planned start-up date of the re-
actor in July 1978. [less than 1 line not declassified] the date is likely to slip
by as much as one year because of construction problems and bad site
selection. Nevertheless, there is no question that the Brazilians feel that
we are legally and morally bound to approve shipment by December.
As you will recall, this issue arose when you sent the letter to
Geisel last week.5 Our initial strategy was to have made our new pro-
posal to the Brazilians and Germans simultaneously, in order to avoid a
recurrence of last February’s incident when the Brazilians accused us to
trying to go behind their backs in talks with the Germans. We now fear
that there is a high probability that the Germans will tell the Brazilians
of our proposal (possibly in a highly distorted form) and that, out of
pique, the Brazilians will refuse to invite Gerry Smith or to give the pro-
posal serious consideration. State and Smith feel extremely strongly
that the only chance for a fair hearing is for you to remove the Sword of
Damocles—the Angra fuel—by confidentially notifying them that you
have recommended approval to the NRC.
You should be aware of the risks of this decision. In three areas
Brazil does not precisely meet the criteria of the new non-proliferation
bill,6 and it is therefore quite possible that the NRC will refuse the li-
cense, and/or that the license would be the subject of legal proceedings
by anti-nuclear groups. The three areas are: Brazil’s refusal to give us
an explicit no-PNE assurance; Brazil’s refusal to accept full scope safe-
guards; and, the lack of explicit and airtight provisions in the US-Brazil
Agreement for Cooperation giving the US a right of veto over the re-
processing of both US-origin and foreign fuel from Brazilian reactors.
These are all legal questions that can be interpreted one way or the
other. What is clear is that there is a basis here for controversy in Congress, in
the courts, and at the NRC over whether approval of this license is consistent
with your non-proliferation policy.7
4 On July 17, 1972, the United States and Brazil signed an agreement whereby the
United States would provide low-enriched nuclear fuel to Brazil for its Angra I reactor.
5 Carter wrote Giesel on October 25 that he was prepared to send Smith to Brazil “to
discuss with you our new ideas, or to adopt any other mode you prefer,” on the nuclear
question in advance of Carter’s expected visit to Brazil later in November. (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country
Chron, Box 5, Brazil, 9–12/77) Geisel replied on October 31 and said he welcomed
Smith’s visit. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 6, Brazil, 1–12/77)
6 Reference is to Carter’s proposal for a Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act which he
submitted to Congress on April 27.
7 To the left of this paragraph, Carter wrote “I presume they meet present crite-
ria. J.”
