1022
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
disarmament. It is only by close consultation that peace and order can
be achieved.
The Secretary said he would look forward to mutual cooperation
to this end. Pinheiro said he would transmit to his government the
views expressed by the Secretary and he would only respectfully re-
quest the United States to try to look at the nuclear problem from
Brazil’s point of view as well. Brazil needs the energy but is equally in-
terested in the nonproliferation question.
Pinheiro then remarked that the press was already aware that he
was seeing the Secretary today. The Secretary said that he had in-
structed the Department’s press people to respond to questions by
saying he had asked the Ambassador to come in to talk about the broad
range of common interests between the two countries and how we
might approach these mutual interests in a constructive way. If the
press inquired whether nuclear matters were discussed the answer
would be affirmative—that it was one of the subjects raised.5
5 In a second meeting with Vance on February 2, Pinheiro said that Silveira wished
to emphasize that his government wanted to hold meetings with the United States to
discuss the nuclear issue and that Brazil and the Federal Republic of Germany remained
committed to nuclear non-proliferation. However, he stressed that the “Brazilian Gov-
ernment believes that an effort to prevent the transfer of technology would be unjust and
even impossible to achieve” and he called the agreement between the Federal Republic of
Germany and Brazil “a valid, legally binding instrument entered into by two states and
supplemented by an agreement on safeguards.” Vance thanked Pinheiro for passing on
Silveira’s message and said that a Delegation led by Deputy Secretary of State Warren
Christopher would visit Brazil on February 10 to discuss the issue. While he “understood
that Brazil considers the agreement as legally binding,” Vance asked that it delay “imple-
mentation of the agreement until after” Christopher’s visit. Pinheiro replied that he
would “convey this point immediately.” (Memorandum of Conversation, February 2;
Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—
1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, EXDIS Memcons, 1977) On February 3, the Department of
State instructed Walter Stoessel, the Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany, to
inform Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher about Christopher’s trip and that the
United States considered the issue “of the highest importance to USG and we intend to
approach these discussions from standpoint of reaching overall solution, involving ac-
ceptable alternatives to transfer of enrichment and processing plants to Brazil.” (Tele-
gram 24890 to Bonn, February 3; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
North/South, Pastor Country File, Box 2, Brazil, 1–2/77)
