1956  1087
that. It is not too early to consider how we will handle the various con­
tingencies that might be expected at about that time, but I leave that in 
your good hands.
There is no question but that we really have them on the ropes 
with regard to the prisoners. I am still hoping it will accomplish some­
thing other than giving me some fun in the meetings. However, as 
I said previously, I think the greatest pressure on them will come if 
and when some prisoners actually leave. Until then they will try to 
dismiss it as a stunt on our part. I do hope that some prisoners can be 
gotten on their way shortly and then I can really turn on the heat here. 
Tell Ralph that I have much confidence in him. It does not affect my 
conscience in the slightest to have a few dope peddlers and murder­
ers go back, and I am surprised the GRC is still making such a point 
over competing with Peiping for the affections of such persons. If the 
Indians continue to turn us down I would not be inclined to try to 
bring in the ICRC but believe the ARC has considerable merit. As you 
can sense my main interest is in getting some under way as quickly as 
that is possible. Incidentally, I thought your reply to the Indian letter 
was excellent. It said exactly the right things in the right way. You will 
note that in this morning’s meeting I avoided saying that the Indians 
had refused to act so as to leave the door open for them to change 
their minds but sought to leave an impression that the PRC attitude 
was holding up everything. I thought it better not to press him today 
beyond the point that I did.
With respect to para 5 of Deptel 2217, I could not think of any way 
to obtain a reaction to the postponement of Nehru’s visit. However, if 
I happen to run into him again on the plane I may be able to turn the 
conversation in that direction and see what reaction I get. I regret that 
such conversations are so very limited in their possible scope by the 
language problem.
Incidentally his failure in any way to mention the matter this morn­
ing leads me to believe that, as I hoped, the Indians have not passed on 
to them the text of our letter to the prisoners.
With respect to the last para of Deptel 2217 I had, of course, intended 
that Wang would share the responsibility for any postponement, and 
that was the reason for our suggestion that the UN call Wang and sim­
ply say the same thing to him that they had said to us. This would then 
have provided a basis for my raising the matter with him. However, 
it subsequently developed that the UN did not do so but scrambled 
around and decided they could with some difficulty accommodate us 
even during the week of July 9. However, they thereafter called Wang 
saying that there would be some difficulties in accommodating us 
through the ECOSOC session and did he have in mind any vacation 
in the talks during July or August. His reply was that he did not. I pass
