678
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Soviets. Mining is less dangerous, though the Soviets could be invited
to sweep. Neither, however, resolves the hostage issue.
We should therefore consider the rescue. Latest plans reduce the
possibility of disaster, but some deaths are unavoidable. A decision
needs to be made very soon—no later than within the next three weeks:
Stansfield Turner: The negotiating option is not really open. The
only non-belligerent option is to get Khomeini’s advisors to convince
him that it is immoral to retain the hostages. Mining would have impact
on internal stability if undertaken before the harvest comes in.
As to a rescue, it is probable that all of the hostages are now in
the compound.
David Jones: (Describes in detail the mining option.) The rescue
option has been well rehearsed. It may be too late to undertake it in
May–June. The current scheme calls for two nights and one day—and
we are losing nighttime (describes the operation in detail).
The Vice President: Rescue is the best option. We are in an intolerable
situation which is humiliating to the United States. A blockade will
enhance the humiliation while increasing Soviet influence in Iran. I
come down for the rescue. We need a careful deception program, and
we should explore the Iraqi aspects.
Jody Powell: We need a formula for explaining the timing of the
rescue.
Zbigniew Brzezinski: Rescue is the best of the available action alterna-
tives. If undertaken, it should be undertaken as early as possible; there
should be a post-rescue punitive option, if the rescue fails; and we
should consider taking prisoners to Egypt (as protection against new
hostages being taken by the Iranians).
David Jones: The 24th would be the earliest date.
The President: I have talked this over with Rosalynn, also with Ham,
Fritz, Jody, and Cy, and I have talked extensively with Zbig. We may
have damaged our country by not acting sooner. (Impressed by Sadat’s
views.)3 We have to go now on a stronger course of action. Our national
honor is at stake. We have to go with the rescue. To do so we will
3 Sadat met with Carter in Washington April 8 and 9. (Carter Library, President’s
Daily Diary) In a March 28 meeting in Giza, Sadat had told Sol Linowitz, Special U.S.
Negotiator for the Middle East, that, because of Iran, the Soviet Union would not with-
draw from Afghanistan and that, after Khomeini died, Iran would move to the left and
the Soviets would exploit such a development. “In Iran,” he said, “anything can happen.”
Sadat also reaffirmed that he would allow the Shah to remain in Egypt. He told Linowitz
that the Shah was “very bitter” toward the United States. (Memorandum from Linowitz
to Carter, April 1; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP
Visit File, Box 4, Egypt President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin 4/80 Cables and
Memos 3/25/80–4/9/80)
