Human Rights 619 serve to isolate communist and radical (left and right) countries which seek to undermine UN human rights efforts. “Human Rights and the IFIs “Under the International Financial Institutions Act of 1977, the U.S. Executive Directors to the Multilateral Development Banks are required to oppose any loan to any country whose government engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights. Thus, all MDB loans to all countries are screened by the Working Group of the Inter-Agency (Christopher) Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance (IAGHR). To date the U.S. has opposed 87 loans to 16 countries. Concern of human rights advocates in the Congress that the review process be institutionalized has led to proposals to legislate the continued functioning of the IAGHR. HA favors the proposals. Human rights groups are watching to see if an assiduous human rights review of MDB loans continues to produce a vigorous policy and a firm U.S. stand in the banks. “Human Rights and Security Assistance “We need to ensure that human rights concerns are more systematically factored into our decision-making on security assistance. HA believes military aid and sales should be screened for human rights by an interagency working group, perhaps reporting to the Inter-Agency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance.” The remainder of the briefing paper detailed a variety of countryspecific issues. (Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1980 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D180, SHUM Policies 1980) According to a May 21 memorandum from the Executive Secretariat to all Bureau principals, at Muskie’s May 21 morning staff meeting, the Secretary had requested that each Bureau prepare a list and description of high priority items. (Ibid.) Responding to this request, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Patricia Derian sent forward a 1-page briefing memorandum later that day. Derian’s lead item focused on overall policy implementation: “Institutionalization of the human rights policy—Despite extensive legislation and the President’s commitment, human rights issues are not yet adequately incorporated into decision-making. We need more systematically to apply human rights criteria to security assistance issues. HA has not been included at relevant PRCs when issues significant to human rights are raised, e.g., last week’s PRC on Argentina. The regional bureaus continue to evince excessive ‘clientitis.’ Many posts overseas fail to do their part in implementing the policy.” The remainder of Derian’s briefing memorandum discussed human rights situations in Argentina, Israel, Korea, and Liberia. (Ibid.)
