3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 29. Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev1 Washington, June 9, 1977 Dear Mr. General Secretary: I am taking advantage of Ambassador Toon’s return to Moscow for him to convey to you my personal greetings and to deliver this letter. I would like to share with you my feeling of encouragement at the more constructive spirit that prevailed during the recent meeting between Secretary Vance and Foreign Minister Gromyko.2 The understanding reached by them regarding the format of the next SALT agreement was a small but useful and welcome step forward. I was also gratified by the preliminary decision regarding the non-testing and non-deployment of new missiles. I realize, of course, that we are a long way from a comprehensive agreement. The differences between our respective positions are substantive and wide. I am aware that you and your colleagues have special concerns regarding some of our strategic weapons, and I am eager to find a solution that provides equal security to both sides. At the same time, I would like you to understand that our concern with respect to the new Soviet ICBMs, and especially the MLBMs, is motivated by our belief that the full deployment of these missiles, with their potential for numerous large reentry vehicles, could prove excessively threatening to our land-based ICBMs tending to destabilize the balance of nuclear deterrent capability. I hope that our negotiators can make progress toward resolving these issues—as well as our differing positions on cruise missiles. My own preference—which I have stated before—is to move more rapidly toward truly significant reductions in the nuclear arsenals that we both control, for I strongly believe that such a step would open up many new opportunities for constructive American-Soviet cooperation. This is why I am eager to cut through existing obstacles, and I have the impression that you share the same desire. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 5, USSR (SALT), 2–12/77. No classification marking. 2 See Documents 17–23. 139
