United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 77 operation since December 1956 and an International Monetary Fund representative is resident in La Paz. The stabilization program has been carried out with a considerable degree of success considering the magnitude of the problems and recent political history since 1952. The single rate of exchange has been fairly stable at about 12,000 Bolivianos to the dollar; the cost of living which rose by 178% during the year before the stabilization program began, has increased by only about 20% in the past two years; the government has followed an austerity plan in its expenditures and has made some progress in its credit restrictions. However, the financial situation began to deteriorate again in the middle of 1958 when pressures for wage increases resulted in numerous strikes and higher public expenditures; at the same time public sector financial deficits increased. Early in 1959 a revised standby agreement was negotiated with the International Monetary Fund but the Bolivian government has had some difficulty in complying with some of its provisions. The basic difficulty was the government’s unwillingness to discontinue price subsidies in commissaries operated by the nationalized mines, which were creating a heavy financial burden. After considerable negotiation in which the United States Government supported the International Monetary Fund’s position, the commissary price issue was finally resolved and a new standby agreement concluded in May 1959. This standby is still in force. Under the stabilization agreement of May 1959, Bolivia was given a further drawing of $1.5 million by the International Monetary Fund and to date has drawn $0.2 million of this amount. ICA grant assistance has continued in the amounts indicated above and it is believed that it may be possible to taper off grant aid over the next years. The fundamental problem in Bolivia has been that production of the basic export product, tin, has declined as a result of nationalization of the mines, antiquated equipment, and worker indiscipline, so that foreign exchange earnings have fallen off drastically from a total of $150 mil-
