First Responses 71 the administration on CIA to find political action solutions in Iran; congressional/public concerns for Iran will provide an atmosphere permitting such operations.” That the above scenario is unfolding as predicted is no tribute to my prescience; it is the result of an entirely inevitable, predictable dynamic. That the administration made an honest try to get along with Bazargan, provide military supplies, etc., was good insofar as the onus of the deterioration of relations now rests firmly on the Iranians. But, if this short-lived policy of accommodation with Khomeini was based on a genuine conviction that Bazargan or some other reasonable government under Khomeini could work and cooperate with the U.S., then this policy was demonstrably unworkable. At any rate, the situation as it stands today is: —The left on one major occasion on 12 August 1979 tested its street strength with impressive showing. That it has not made a serious bid for street control and power is probably based on the conviction that the time is not ripe. Khomeini, particularly now that he benefits from a new anti-American wave, is not yet dislodgeable [less than 1 line not declassified] and economic disintegration has not reached an advanced enough stage. The left is still biding its time. —The moderates in Iran’s political spectrum are becoming rapidly disenchanted, and with Khomeini having obviously jettisoned responsible government in favor of medieval Islamic bigotry, totally devoid of statecraft, this process will accelerate rapidly. —The various “conservative, middle-class land-owners” referred to above seem, indeed, to be finding a rallying point in Bakhtiar. Bakhtiar has, in all likelihood, or will seek, Iranian expatriate private backing and will probably seek backing from the U.S. if he has not already done so (feelers through the Qashqai, etc.). Bakhtiar’s move, if it ever comes, (or some other move by moderates, possibly military) will precede a leftist bid for urban power and the leftists will be the urban beneficiaries of civil war in the streets. They will have the advantage thus of not having to take on Khomeini, a semi-deified saint in the eyes of Iran’s common man; they will instead pose as the champions of order in the face of a bourgeois effort to depose Khomeini. The groundwork for the other feature of my scenario, tribal, provincial autonomy, is already taking place. The Kurds clearly are beyond reach of the center and intend to stay that way even though it means withdrawing into the mountains. Khuzistan Arabs, possibly incited by Iraq, have had to be brutally suppressed by Admiral Madani (who has now resigned and may not be replaced by such a resolute man). And, [1½ lines not declassified], the Qashqai strategy is to build a tribal coalition to maintain southern tranquility ostensibly as a favor to Khomeini, but actually to get into position to bid for power under a nationalist banner in the event of civil war in which Khomeini is martyred. In many ways, the Qashqais, using a provincial base of power, are
