National Security Policy  15
Admiral Burke thought that the operational deputy suggestion 
would probably be desirable and would relieve a good deal of the load 
now being carried by the JCS. He thought that these would take the 
place of the present operational deputies in the Joint Staff and might be 
called Deputies for Planning—­the alter egos of the service chiefs.
General Lemnitzer thought that this operational deputy idea would 
be superior to separating the Chiefs from their service responsibilities, 
but he did think that this process would not remove the need for the com­
mittees in the Joint Staff. Admiral Burke agreed with this observation.
Secretary Douglas expressed the view that special deputies would 
help the JCS a great deal. He said however that the process might 
remove the chiefs of services from full responsibility for JCS activity, and 
he mentioned the tendency even now to rely more and more on the Vice 
Chiefs of Staff for the day-­to-­day administration of the military services. 
General Bradley pointed out that in World War II General Marshall left 
his administrative duties almost entirely to Generals Somervell and 
McNair while Marshall worked almost full time on JCS war planning. 
Admiral Radford pointed out that in time of war the Chiefs do not have 
to go to Capitol Hill nearly as often as in peacetime.
Secretary McElroy asked about the feasibility of short-­circuiting the 
line between the JCS and the chiefs of services designated as agents to the 
Joint Chiefs. Secretary Gates commented that the peacetime problems 
of the forces are charged with political, economic, and public relations 
considerations and therefore that the intervention of the service secretar­
ies is essential. He said the present process works satisfactorily because 
the service chief goes right ahead with his responsibilities but keeps the 
Secretary informed. He felt that this relationship would continue because 
many JCS undertakings have significant civilian as well as military impli­
cations. For the same reasons, Secretary Brucker also felt that the service 
Secretaries should not be by-­passed. He said the present system does 
not delay action in any way, and he emphasized that this viewpoint was 
not prompted by any feeling on the part of any service Secretary that by-­
passing the Secretaries would tend to downgrade them.
General Twining said he thought the command channels should 
be straightened out. Secretary Douglas, however, took the same view 
of Secretary Gates.
Secretary McElroy observed that going around the service Secretaries 
would not be a substantial change, that it would simply make sure that 
the command line would go straight to the service chief who in turn 
would inform his Secretary. Admiral Burke commented that the chief 
certainly should contact his Secretary swiftly because of the many non­
military considerations involved in such matters.
Deputy Secretary Quarles expressed the view that the greatest 
need is to clear up command channels. He thought the channels would
