International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
479
lative vehicles, provided the votes are there to control the matter and
push the bill past the shoals.
If we should fail to gain an extension of the waiver, there is one
other option for avoiding collection of the duties: Treasury could reach
deep into its bag of administrative tricks and come up with a way of
merely “suspending liquidation” of the duties, although technically the
authority does not really exist. This would be an act of desperation
which could compound the problem, i.e., damage our credibility
abroad (we’ve been saying we have no option but to collect the duties
January 3, 1979) and possibly enrage elements of Congress.
Finally, you should be reminded that Murray Finley has thirteen
countervailing duty complaints pending at Treasury involving approx-
imately $1 billion worth of textile products from less developed
countries.
Wolff. (National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Subject Files,
1977–1979, Box 2, Congressional Correspondence 1977)
151.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, July 25, 1978
SUBJECT
National Export Policy
Juanita Kreps is sending you the recommendations of the inter-
agency task force on means to increase US exports.2
Increased exports are essential if we are to reduce the current ac-
count deficit. Other measures (energy, anti-inflation, etc.) will help, but
they cannot do the job alone.
Juanita Kreps’ recommendations would put us on the road to im-
proved export performance, which the US pledged to seek in the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 91, Export Controls: (National Export Policy): 8/77–
7/78. Confidential. Sent for information.
2 See footnote 14, Document 119. No memorandum from Kreps to Carter with the
recommendations of the task force, which was headed by Frank Weil, was found, but see
Document 15.
