March 27–December 31, 1979 885 I addressed myself first to the open borders. I cited the disparity between the number of visa applications submitted and approved; more than 200 Israeli citizens have applied for visas to visit Egypt but 20 only were granted. President Sadat said he was not aware of this and he told me he would instruct the appropriate authorities to enable all applicants to travel to Egypt. The same will apply on our part to Egyptian citizens wishing to visit Israel. I spoke, in this connection, of an immediate humanitarian problem regarding members of the Jewish community. During synagogue services on the day of my arrival individuals approached me and expressed the wish, sometimes with great emotion, to visit relatives in Israel whom they had not seen in almost two generations. President Sadat assured me that all would be allowed to pay such visits. Indeed, the first family flew into Israel from Alexandria on our press plane. A second matter that came up for discussion was the oil question. This has been positively agreed upon. On November 26 we shall transfer the oil wells along the Suez Gulf to Egypt. On the following day Israeli tankers will take their oil cargo from those wells to Eilat. We shall pay the market price as determined in the annex4 to the letter you addressed to me, Mr. President, following the signing of the peace treaty. I raised with President Sadat the proposition of renewing the direct railway link between Egypt and Israel as it had existed until 1948. The President received the idea positively, both for the transport of passengers and goods. We will, in due course, invite a delegation of experts representing a railway construction consortium to do a survey in our two countries. President Sadat and I spent time reviewing the situation in the region and we were in full agreement as to the nature of the Soviet designs in the Middle East and elsewhere. During the second meeting on the following day it was President Sadat who opened the conversation addressing himself to the main issues concerning our mutual relations and other highly important matters. Our exchange, as before, was conducted in warm amity. The President spoke about the future of Judea and Samaria (in his language, the West Bank) and the Gaza Strip. He said that the idea of full autonomy was seen by him as a positive one. He wished to make a suggestion about what will occur after the transitional period of five years. He proposed that following the five year transitional period a the Arab rejectionists.” (Telegram 611 from Alexandria, July 14; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840166–2413) 4 See Document 241.
