670 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Evron: Or we could use the words suggestions. Secretary Vance: I like the word suggestions. 193. Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Egyptian President Sadat1 Washington, March 5, 1979, 9:36–9:43 a.m. PARTICIPANTS President Carter President Sadat Exchange of pleasantries. President Carter: Have you seen Eilts? Sadat: I saw him2 and agreed to your theory. President Carter: We put forward to the Israelis after 2–3 days of negotiations some suggestions on article 6 and the target date. They were not exactly what you want but should be acceptable to you. Begin just called me3 to say the Cabinet accepted them by a close vote. We have not addressed the time of withdrawal issue nor the question of ambassadors. I would like to come to Egypt as soon as possible to discuss these items with you as well as the regional security issue and the U.S. interrelationship with Egypt. Sadat: I told Eilts it would be a great event but let us agree on the treaty first . . . it will be something marvelous. President Carter: I don’t quite understand your answer. It would be best if I first came to Ismailia. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 66, Middle East: President Carter’s Trip to Jerusalem and Cairo: 2–4/79. Confidential. 2 Eilts met with Sadat, Mubarak, and Khalil on March 5 to discuss Carter’s conversations with Begin, the proposed U.S. reformulations of Article VI, and the proposed exchange of ambassadors. Sadat informed Eilts that he did not take Begin’s decision to take the U.S. reformulations to the Israeli Cabinet “seriously,” arguing “[a]ll authority rests in Begin’s hands and Cabinet ploy is no more than a cover.” (Telegram 4491 from Cairo, March 5; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840163–2101) 3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter spoke with Begin from 8:55 a.m. to 8:57 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No memorandum of conversation has been found.
