60  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
A. Unilateral Postures
A1. General No-First-Use
The importance of declaratory policies and the consequences of 
changing them are often overemphasized. This could be true in this 
case. It is conceivable that a general US renunciation of first-­use of 
nuclear weapons would not have much affect, for good or evil, on the 
actions of men and governments. Yet such a renunciation would clearly 
be the extreme instance of underlining the unimportance of declaratory 
policy. It is much more likely that US adoption of a general no-­first-­use 
posture would have significant political-­strategic consequences. Pre-
sumably there would be some benefit in terms of a somewhat nebu-
lous world public opinion concern with nuclear dangers. The principal 
consequences of such a posture, however, would be overwhelmingly 
undesirable.
(1) It would erode the credibility of the US deterrent posture in 
Europe and East Asia, which now benefits from benign ambiguity as to 
whether the US would or would not use nuclear weapons in response 
to major attacks on its allies.
(2) As a result, it could encourage and it certainly would do noth-
ing to dissuade the Soviets and the North Koreans from pushing out.
(3) It could well lead to an increase in U.S. general purpose forces 
and a skyrocketing military budget as a result.
(4) It would produce a most unsettling “Carter-­shock” for our 
European allies and Japan, confronting them directly with the hard 
choice which they have been so desperate to avoid of:
(a) engaging in a major strengthening of their conventional forces;
(b) modernizing (UK, France) or developing (FRG, Japan, ROK, 
ROC) their own nuclear weapons capabilities; or
(c) accommodating to the Soviet Union; or
(d) engaging in some combination of the above.
(5) It would raise doubts in the minds of PRC leaders as to U.S. 
willingness to oppose the Soviets in the crunch.
(6) It would generally encourage countries throughout the world 
to consider more seriously the development of their own nuclear 
capabilities.
(7) It would, presumably, remove any option for limited nuclear 
strikes against military targets in the context of a European conflict or 
otherwise.
(8) It would encourage the political forces in the US and among our 
allies who wish the US to take the unilateral initiative in reducing our 
nuclear capabilities to a minimum deterrence level. (If we’re not going 
to use them—­except in retaliation, why do we need so much?)
