428 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement without comment. NCNA October 20 quoting Special Correspondent Ch’en Shih-­wu, accused US of “consistently obstructing and delaying discussion” of substantive issues under Item 2 by unilateral disclosure of “controversial issues” to press, and by press fabrications. NCNA cited as example of latter, NY Times article October 15 quoting NCNA representative in Geneva to effect that Wang instructed not to discuss renunciation of force prior to discussion trade embargo and Seventh Fleet removal. Accused Times correspondent of adopting “hostile attitude” toward talks, and hinted he has close connections with US Consulate. On Taiwan issue, NCNA October 17 stated US still creating ten­ sion Taiwan area, hence continued need for “vigilance”; stressed need to “prepare for liberation of Taiwan,” while Geneva talks continue. People’s Daily editorial October 19 stated “Chinese people willing to strive to liberate Taiwan by peaceful means.” Cited Tibet as example of “peaceful liberation.” Contrasted US “use of force” in Taiwan area, with Chinese peaceful intentions. Concluded that “If Dulles principle of renouncing force is to have practical significance, US should discard use of force . . . and materially contribute to easing of tension in Taiwan area.” Considerable attention in Peiping press during past week to need for early “normalization” relations with Japan. Address by Liu Shao-­ch’i to group Diet members October 16 followed general line established by Chou-­Mao interviews October 3—i.e., achieve “normal­ ization” first, then settle specific issues. Liu called for early holding of “diplomatic negotiations” with Japanese government and continued expansion of informal contacts, through trade, cultural, and parlia­ mentary missions. Liu address followed by joint communique Octo­ ber 17 calling for “positive efforts” normalize relations; relaxation of COCOM controls; increased cultural contacts. Mao Tse-­tung quoted by Reuters as having told Japanese Diet members he was willing to visit Japan or US if invitation offered and would extend return invitation to Hatoyama. Mao reported as having said that international situation “might change” hence he sought to promote friendship with all coun­ tries. Meanwhile Peiping continued take harsh line toward Hatoyama government strongly protesting Japanese decision send 150 Chinese residents of Japan to Taiwan and hinting this was due to “American influence.” Dulles
