278 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 the Arab world and could be seen in Iran as a step by the Shah to get close enough to reassert himself into Iranian affairs. (S) The Prime Minister asked for our view of the process of a general trial. What were the Iranians trying to accomplish? How long would it last? Was it designed by them as a way out of the crisis? If the answer to the last question was yes, the Prime Minister thought the U.S. attitude should be to assist the Iranians in finding a face-saving device which did not at the same time humiliate America. (S) The President responded that we knew very little about what the Iranians had in mind concerning the Tribunal. He hoped Khomeini was looking for a way to save face, but he guessed there was very little rationality in Iran about the idea. The President said he thought that the Iranians knew we would punish their country if their action so warranted. But it was our hope that Iranians would not call the hostages before the Tribunal, even as witnesses. Our position would be to continue to do nothing which would endanger the safety of the hostages, but at the same time not lend any dignity or authenticity to the proceedings. (S) Indicating that he would like to make two points, Dr. Brzezinski said there were a number of specific financial steps our friends could take before a Chapter Seven finding was adopted at the United Nations. Now was the time to take those steps. With respect to the Tribunal, Dr. Brzezinski noted we were witnessing a struggle for the future of Iran. A major actor in this struggle was a group dedicated to using the crisis to permanently sever links between Iran and the U.S. and between Iran and the West. This highly destabilized situation raised an important longer-range strategic question. How could we influence the course of events in Iran so as to minimize the danger that it would gradually assume the role of a satellite of the Soviet Union, an evolution which events in Afghanistan did not make any less likely.2 (S) In response to Dr. Brzezinski’s first point, Lord Carrington said that experts from France, Germany and the UK had agreed last week in Brussels after the Quad meeting that it would be much easier to take specific financial steps after a Chapter Seven finding at the UN rather than before. Lord Carrington then asked how long the U.S. would wait before taking further positive action against Iran. A matter of days, the President responded. Secretary Vance said that he guessed that the Iranians did not know what they wanted to do with the Tribunal. Mrs. Thatcher observed that this Iranian uncertainty and confusion made a quick trial highly unlikely and could also produce humilia- 2 In the left margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “(ZB said he interjected this when it became clear the talks were going to stay general only.)”
