723.2515/1642: Telegram
[Document 234]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 17, 1925—3 p.m.
For Pershing: Your October 14, 6 p.m. I have considered the whole matter very
carefully. I do not desire to condone any acts of oppression and violence which tend to
destroy fair plebiscite, and any suggestions made in course of conversation with
Chilean Ambassador were not made with that intention. I had not heard from Mathieu
in reply to my note to Government of Chile, so I sent for him this morning and
discussed entire question with him. I read him Collier’s message to me which was
repeated to you in my October 15, 11 a.m.,67 and said that I did not think that Mr.
Edwards had made proposed suggestions to you. I did not read him your telegram of
October 14, 6 p.m., but told him that we had wholly reliable information of acts of
oppression and coercion, as you had reported, and that my information was not
received from Peruvian sources. I put it very strongly to him that Government of Chile
must give protection necessary to fair plebiscite and should comply substantially with
demands you set forth in your resolution, of which Mathieu had a copy; that both Chile
and Peru had urged the President of the United States to accept the arbitration; the
President had given his decision; the legal position in my note to Government of Chile
was undeniably correct; it was inadmissible for Chilean Government now to obstruct
election by means I had narrated. I did this in the hope that he would urge his
Government to comply with your request.
Not being on the ground I am unable of course to judge of necessary measures which
must be taken to insure fair election. My only desire is to call your attention to very
great importance of carrying out plebiscite. The Tacna-Arica question had been a long-
standing dispute and a menace not only to the peace of Chile and Peru, but also to the
peace of South America, and failure now will be not only of vital concern to both
countries but may involve them in serious conflict. Not only are future interests of
those two countries involved, but those of South America generally. I feel very strongly
that while interest of this Government is primarily to aid in settlement of this most
difficult question, it is most important that you should not withdraw from plebiscite and
should take every reasonable means to prevent either Chile or Peru from withdrawing,
but if anyone is to withdraw it should be one of the other two nations. Your withdrawal
would place this Government in most embarrassing position and would give Chile
opportunity to assert that we are responsible for the failure. Without condoning any
