Yugoslavia
857
issues, discusses the options available to you, and makes a recommen-
dation for further action. Attached are some biographic sketches of the
key Yugoslav players.
b. There is some precedent for an intelligence exchange with the
Yugoslavs:
—Following Yugoslavia’s expulsion from the Cominform in 1948,
a program of exchange of military intelligence was developed between
the United States and the Yugoslav Defense Ministry. This arrangement
was cancelled by the Yugoslavs in August 1955 as a result of Belgrade’s
normalized relations with Moscow.
—[1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]
—On 29 August 1968, following upon the Soviet invasion of
Czechoslovakia, Secretary Rusk told the Yugoslav Ambassador that
the US was closely watching the situation and offered to check out any
information that the Yugoslavs developed regarding a Soviet build-up
of forces. A few days later, a senior Yugoslav official in Belgrade did
request confirmation of reported Soviet moves. When the US Embassy
responded with a summary of information on Soviet deployments in
Hungary and Bulgaria, an offer was made to provide more detail. The
Yugoslavs demurred, saying that they would prefer to continue to
exchange information as they had in this instance. The State Depart-
ment does not equate this arrangement [1 line not declassified]. From
1968 until the 1973–74 period, however, the Yugoslav military attaches
were responsive to queries from their US counterparts, which may be
attributed to individual rapport at certain posts. US-Yugoslav differ-
ences over arms sales and the Toth affair (American convicted by the
Yugoslavs for alleged espionage) may have contributed to the cessation
of this limited cooperation, but there was no specific word on the
subject from the Yugoslavs.
—On 4 October 1978, coincident to the Yugoslav approach regard-
ing an intelligence exchange, the Department of State provided the
Yugoslav Foreign Ministry with an assessment of the Soviet leader-
ship.2 This stemmed from a proposal by Ambassador Eagleburger to
Rajko Knezevic, Director of the Office for Eastern Europe in the Foreign
Ministry, that the US and Yugoslavia exchange information on the
Soviet leadership and was made in response to Knezevic’s expression of
2 In telegram 6654 from Belgrade, September 12, Eagleburger reported his conversa-
tion with Knezevic at a reception in Belgrade. After hearing from Knezevic of the “GOY’s
‘serious’ concern about what is going on in Moscow,” Eagleburger reported his offer to
the Yugoslav official for an “exchange of views about what is going on in Moscow among
the leadership.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780371–0143)
