3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
919
view, were getting out of control. We saw signs of such planning in
September and October.2
—Soviet concerns were somewhat alleviated by Kania’s first trip to
Moscow October 30.
—However, the Soviets were undoubtedly dismayed by subse-
quent developments, which they may well have regarded as proving
the unreliability of the Kania leadership.
—The last straw was the release from prison of Narozniak and Sa-
piello3 on November 27, an act which was simply not acceptable to the
Soviets.
—On that date (probably at the usual Thursday afternoon Polit-
buro meeting) the Soviets probably made a firm decision to intervene
in Poland, unless they could get credible assurances from the Poles that
this sort of “capitulationist” behavior would not happen again.
—Beginning November 28, Soviet, Czech and East German forces
proceeded with a military buildup aimed at being ready to invade Po-
land by December 8.
—The Moscow Summit meeting was Kania’s last chance. At
the summit he gave the Soviets assurances that his government
would crack down on any future unauthorized strikes or counter-
revolutionary activities. According to the Romanians, the only Warsaw
Pact leader to argue forcefully for immediate intervention in Poland
was Honecker.4 That sounds credible to me. Subsequent events would
indicate that the Poles (and the Romanians) left Moscow thinking that
the Soviets were willing to give them more time to solve their
problems.
—Although far from sanguine that the Polish problem had been
resolved by the meeting, the Soviet leadership probably opted to take a
wait-and-see attitude. The Moscow Summit was over on December 5,5
i.e., three days before D-Day.
—Only three days away from achieving full readiness, the Soviets
decided to go ahead with their pre-planned scenario for the following
reasons:
2 Industrial unrest and changes in the Polish United Workers’ Party leadership con-
tributed to instability in Poland beginning in mid-1980. For more on the changing polit-
ical situation, see Kessing’s Contemporary Archive, 1981, pp. 30717–30724.
3 Reference is to Jan Narozniak, a union volunteer, and Piotr Sapiello, a government
employee, who were arrested on allegations of stealing a government plan on regulating
dissidents.
4 Erich Honecker, Chairman of the German Democratic Republic’s State Council.
5 Reference is to the Warsaw Pact summit meeting, held in Moscow, December 4–5.
