436
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
hostages are held by the Iranian government; he does not think the
militants will agree to release them to us. It will also be important for
Iran to make a clear distinction and disassociate the militants from the
government.
The commission’s report on Iran’s grievances will be communi-
cated to the world at large and presumably to the UN. This portion
was not clear to B and V. It was not certain whether Iran would require
a resolution by the General Assembly or some other formal action.
Ghotbzadeh said no resolution was necessary but that is in doubt.
Sean McBride would have an additional role as the negotiator of
the precise stages for ending the crisis. He would help settle the bilateral
problems such as the freeze of assets, form of relations, recovery of
the Shah’s assets, etc. The Iranians shared our view that a high-level
contact between us was necessary, but could not have direct links
during the very sensitive period of the next 30 days before the new
government is in place.
The hostages would be released on the eve of a religious ceremony
which the Iranians will organize in Tehran to mark the 1500th anniver-
sary of Islam. V and B could not specify the exact holiday that would
be used for this commemoration, but they thought it was in the latter
part of February. They thought they could give us the date Saturday.4
Khomeini’s act of releasing the hostages would thus be a religious
gesture witnessed by the many religious figures who would be invited
to the ceremony.
V said it was agreed in Iran that the hostage issue should be settled
within the next thirty days before a new government took office. It
was anticipated that Ghotbzadeh would remain as Foreign Minister and
would be charged with handling the hostage crisis during this period.
Meanwhile, the Panama track would be proceeding along pre-
determined lines. B and V intended to go to Panama in the next day
or so to appoint a Panamanian lawyer to represent Iran in pressing
the extradition case. The Panamanian government will be asked to
issue a formal order to the Shah to place himself “at the disposal” of
the government during a 60-day period in which the extradition evi-
dence from Iran might be presented. V thought that this would be an
easy matter to arrange with the Panamanians.
In general B and V described themselves as “almost very optimis-
tic” in dealing with an extremely difficult situation.
4 January 26.
