498  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
360.	 Telegram 1115 from Geneva1
Geneva, November 10, 1955, 9 a.m.
1115. From Johnson.
This morning I received the following letter from Wang:
I wish to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of November 8. 
Our side does not bear any responsibility in connection with the news 
report mentioned in your letter. The groundless charges in your letter 
are unacceptable at all. However, since reference has been made in your 
letter of leakage of the contents of our talks I am inclined to point out 
that it is precisely American official quarters and Western news agen­
cies which have on many occasions made disclosures of the contents 
of our talks. During the course of our discussions on the first item of 
the agenda as well as after agreement on that item was reached the 
spokesman of the U.S. Department of State and Western news agencies 
had been making side disclosures on certain substance of our discus­
sions on the first agenda item as well as on the United States attitude in 
refusing to undertake discussion of other matters under the pretext of 
implementation of agreement.
You will certainly recall when on September 14 you violated the 
agreement between both sides on the publication of information by 
openly making a statement disclosing the points at issue in the talks. 
Since we entered into the discussion of agenda item two the disclosing 
of the contents of our talks by American official quarters and Western 
news agencies has assumed an even more serious nature. Following 
your proposal at our meeting of October 8 for both sides to make a 
statement on the renunciation of force to achieve national objectives, 
the U.S. Secretary of State Mr. Dulles in a speech delivered before the 
annual convention of the American Legion asked that China accept the 
principle that “military force should not be used aggressively to achieve 
national goals”. The United States Government was thus implicitly and 
intentionally leaking the substance of our talks through its Secretary of 
State. At a press conference on October 18 Mr. Dulles made yet another 
disclosure of the substance of our talks. He not only stated the intention 
of the United States with regard to the first item of the agenda but also 
disclosed that our talks were already discussing the question of renun­
ciation of force. In view of the repeated disclosure of the substance of 
our talks by American official quarters and Western news agencies 
which has already created an extremely confused impression in public 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–1055. Confidential.
