Chile  269
unique in its flagrant disregard of the principles of the United Nations, 
as most recently demonstrated by its actions in Tibet and other places.
A particularly sensitive aspect of the proposed transaction, 
Mr. Rubottom continued, was that our Export-Import Bank now had 
under consideration loan applications submitted by two of the three 
copper fabricating firms in Chile, and we understood that these 
firms would expect to participate in this sale. We hoped the Chilean 
Government would understand that it could be extremely embar-
rassing to all concerned if it became known that an agency of the U.S. 
Government was considering lending money to a foreign firm which 
would use U.S. funds to develop facilities for trading with Communist 
China while U.S firms are forbidden by law to engage in such trade.3
Mr. Phillips asked the Ambassador whether he had seen a study on 
copper prepared by W.R. Grace & Co. which was fairly optimistic con-
cerning copper’s prospects over the next few years. The Ambassador 
said he knew of this study and hoped its optimism would prove to be 
justified, but the Chilean Government was worried primarily by the 
probability of a weak copper market in the particular year 1960.
(Mr. Burr called Mr. Phillips at home the morning of October 24, 
saying that he wished to verify one point in yesterday’s conversation 
before reporting by cable to the Chilean Foreign Ministry. The Embassy 
was particularly interested in knowing just how much copper the 
U.S. Government thought Chile might reasonably sell to Communist 
China if it did not sell the proposed 30,000 tons. Mr. Phillips said he 
thought that no official of the U.S. Government could or should attempt 
to set a quota for Chile’s possible copper sales to Communist China. 
The Department had no intention of reopening the question of inter-
national strategic controls on copper. The issue posed by the Chinese 
Communist offer we considered to be a political one, and, in this con-
text, we hoped the Chilean Government realized that the less business 
it did with Communist China the better.)
(At a luncheon on October 26, Ambassador Muller told 
Mr. Rubottom that the Chilean Embassy had been instructed to inform 
us that we had nothing to worry about regarding the proposed sale. 
The Chilean Government intended to find the means of frustrating the 
proposed sale and was only concerned with doing this in a way which 
would not involve it in internal political difficulties or make it appear 
that the Government had acted under U.S. pressure. Mr. Burr also con-
firmed this in a later conversation with Mr. Phillips.)
3 The Department subsequently informed the Export Import Bank that it saw no 
objections to approval of the loans to the copper fabricators. (Memorandum from Phillips 
to Rubottom, October 28, 1959, ARA/WST Files, Lot 62 D 31, “Credits-Eximbank”)
