3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 296 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI other possible steps which, in the opinion of the US government, could bar the access of South Africa to nuclear weapons. It is obvious that this question is a matter of immediate concern to our countries as permanent members of the Security Council which bear special responsibility for maintaining peace and international security. It is necessary to take all possible measures in order to prevent the development of nuclear weapons by South Africa, to induce it to accede to the Treaty on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and to place all its nuclear activities under the control of the International Atomic Energy Agency. I hope, Mr. President, that you will consider my communication with understanding and, on your part, will share with me your thoughts on this question which, as you understand, becomes a matter of urgency. 88. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1 Washington, March 9, 1978, 0811Z 60448. Subject: Horn of Africa: Somali Withdrawal. 1. Secretary sent oral message to Siad Barre March 8 strongly urging Somali announcement of withdrawal from all of Ogaden. Siad informed our Ambassador Loughran2 late that same day he accepted President’s appeal and would be making announcement of all Somali troop withdrawal shortly. Announcement has not been made at this point. 2. Deputy Secretary informed Dobrynin at midnight tonight of Siad’s decision and appealed to Soviets to take steps to urge prompt ceasefire on Ethiopians in order to facilitate peaceful withdrawal and avoid further bloodshed. Dobrynin made no substantive comment but indicated he would inform Moscow immediately. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840176–1381. Secret; Niact; Exdis; Distribute as Nodis. Sent Niact Immediate to U.S. Interest Section, Havana. Drafted by Paul Kreisberg (S/P); cleared by Shulman, Anthony Lake (S/P), and Sydney Goldsmith (S/S–O); approved by William C. Harrop (AF). 2 John Lewis Loughran, U.S. Ambassador to Somalia.
