Hungary 475 158. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, December 1, 1977 SUBJECT The Crown of St. Stephen You have asked us for an update of the written assurances we are seeking from the Hungarians in connection with the return of the Crown.2 I can report that they have agreed to our proposal for a joint communique in the name of the two Presidents.3 It will specify what the Hungarians have agreed to do with respect to the public ceremony, permanent public display of the Crown, and concerning foreigners who wish to return to Hungary to see the Crown. The Hungarian Government’s acceptance of the communique will serve as a written guarantee of these essential elements. Concerning the nature and scope of religious participation in the return ceremony, the Hungarian Government has assured us that leading Hungarian religious figures will be included in the ceremony. The Hungarian Cardinal told us this week that he will be an active participant. Senior Foreign Ministry officials have expressed agreement to our request that Hungarian Protestant church leaders and leaders of the Jewish community also participate in the ceremony. I believe it is both appropriate and important that we now set a firm date for the return of the Hungarian Crown. Further delay could allow the political climate to become worse: —Clem Zablocki and Lee Hamilton have been urging us to return the Crown at the earliest possible date. They were helpful at the hearings on the Crown, and Hamilton is trying to avoid a formal vote in his European sub-committee on Congresswoman Oakar’s bill against the return. Even though her bill would be defeated, a vote could be embarrassing for the Administration and politically difficult 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen: 12/77. Secret; Nodis. Vest sent the memorandum to Vance under a covering memorandum dated December 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of European Affairs, Office of Eastern Europe and Yugoslavia, Hungarian Holy Crown—Crown Follow Up 1979 and Prior Years 1945–1980, Lot 85D389, Box 1, The Crown 1977) 2 See footnote 2, Document 157. 3 In telegram 3976 from Budapest, November 15, Kaiser reported that Puja had informed him of the Hungarian Government’s agreement to issue a joint communiqué as part of the ceremony for the return of the Crown. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770422–0676)
