National Security Policy 1119 the Committees. These are the Port Security Program (for which Treasury has primary responsibility,) and the Government Employee Security Program (for which the Civil Service Commission has a coordinating responsibility). Highlights of Report 3. These are the highlights of the report which were considered by the Planning Board: a. The over-all objective of the Internal Security Program is to main­ tain the highest practicable state of internal security consistent with our form of government. b. The primary threat to the internal security of the United States is Communist activity, espionage and sabotage, including the clandestine introduction of nuclear weapons for use against selected U.S. targets in wartime. c. A summary appraisal of our internal security program leads the Committees to these conclusions: (1) While total internal security defenses are unobtainable, improve­ ments are considered possible in the areas of Entry and Exit, Physical and Industrial Security, the Security of Vital Data, and in defenses against Clandestine Introduction of Nuclear Weapons. (2) The Committees find no basis for [illegible in the original] that the completion of over-all program objectives will be achieved in the next year, in the absence of improved measures to meet the internal security provisions of [illegible in the original] National Security Policy. d. The Investigative Program of the FBI and the other IIC agencies is highlighted by the following: (1) The identification, penetration and coverage, of the ranks of Communist Party members and supporters requires a full-time, major investigative effort. The FBI continues to develop evidence for use in legal action against subversive individuals and organizations, and the outcome of cases now pending in the Supreme Court will materially affect the prosecutive program. (2) The FBI is also expending full-time investigative effort to main­ tain an up-to-date listing of individuals that will be considered for detention as potentially dangerous in a war emergency. (12,000 persons are currently listed, of whom all are aliens). (3) Intensified coverage of Soviet bloc diplomats and official repre­ sentatives and the penetration of foreign intelligence operations in the United States also requires a major investigative effort. The number of Soviet bloc official nationals stationed here has steadily increased over the past five years. Of the 557 bloc officials assigned in this country 160 are known or suspected to engage in intelligence operations. The Soviet intelligence potential is doubled by the availability of the other Bloc officials in the United States whose intelligence operations are super­ vised by the Soviets. [text not declassified]. (4) Comparison studies by the IIC disclose that United States attache personnel stationed in Soviet bloc countries are subjected to
