National Security Policy 945 1. U.S. POLICY WITH RESPECT TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF CARGO AIR LIFT (NSC Action No. 2151–­f–(2); NSC 5919; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated January 7, 1960) Mr. Gray began his presentation of NSC 5919 by referring to a study which the Department of Defense had recently submitted to the President on “The Role of MATS in Peace and War”. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s Briefing Note is filed in the Minutes of the meeting and another is attached to this Memorandum). Mr. Gray said the Defense Department report was not up for con­ sideration by the Council or decision by the President at this meeting, but he felt it would be useful for the Council to hear the report’s rec­ ommendations before considering NSC 5919. Accordingly, he asked the Secretary of Defense to summarize the recommendations which he had submitted to the President in the Department of Defense study. Secretary Gates said Mr. Douglas would present a summary of the Department of Defense recommendations. Mr. Douglas said the Defense report on “The Role of MATS in Peace and War” had been a long time in preparation. He then read the first conclusion from the report and all the recommendations as follows: CONCLUSIONS “Military Airlift Requirements. The size of MATS and the extent and nature of its operations are keyed to approved military wartime air­ lift requirements. These requirements break down into (1) critical or hard-­core2 requirements which because of their nature or the nature of the mission to be supported must move in military operated aircraft, and (2) other essential or civil eligible3 requirements which can move in either military or civil operated aircraft. “Hard-­core requirements are applicable in general war situations as well as situations short of general war. Satisfaction of hard-­core requirements (general or limited war) is vital to the successful imple­ mentation of military strategy. Therefore, MATS must possess adequate capability at all times to meet these requirements on an effective and timely basis. “Commercial carriers do not now have adequate air cargo capabil­ ity to accommodate those approved military requirements which could move during emergencies in commercially operated transport aircraft.” 2 “Airlift requirements which must move in military aircraft, manned and operated by military crews because of special military considerations, security, or because of lim­ iting physical characteristics such as size or dangerous properties. Included in this cate­ gory are special military deployments involving nuclear retaliatory forces, the SAC post strike recovery mission, tactical deployments, movement of missiles, special munitions, etc. [Footnote is in the original.] 3 “These are the so-­called ‘civil eligible’ requirements. [Footnote is in the original.]
