92  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
have to deal with a massive adverse political reaction, both in America 
and throughout the world. They would be put on the political defen-
sive. This range of uncertainty about what would occur, including the 
consequences of a stalemate, is likely to deter the Soviets.
General Brown: I don’t understand how you feel that a stalemate 
strategy will deter the Soviets. If we can’t get back territory, then they 
would simply be able to grab it.
Dr. Brzezinski: But they would have to deal with the long-­term polit-
ical consequences of such an act. I’m not saying that I like this strategy, 
but it’s the best we can do: the Allies are a problem—­they won’t do 
more—­and I’m not sure we can afford a buildup, either.
General Brown: That’s saying that we can’t match the Soviets 
militarily.
Secretary Brown: We cannot match them in building up a massive 
military establishment.
Dr. Brzezinski: Okay. Look at AIMS H and I and see what they 
cost. Congress won’t fund that. We simply have to hope that the long-­
term consequences of a potential stalemate will act as a restraint on the 
Soviets.
General Brown: The restraint will act on us, not them.
Secretary Brown: If we hope for a stalemate, then what do we do 
about sustaining capability? Zbig seems to be talking about a situation 
where we would rely on a massive mobilization base. We need advance 
planning for that and don’t have it.
Dr. Brzezinski: How about 60 days? I don’t like 90 days because that 
means a long destructive war in Europe. But 30 days is just simply too 
short; it’s risky. Sixty days is obviously an arbitrary intermediate num-
ber. But we need some time to put pressure on the Soviets.
General Brown: The JCS starting point is NATO strategy—­the mili-
tary strategy that has been developed in MC 14/3. We commit forces on 
that basis to NATO every year. The US and the FRG are the two strong 
partners of the Alliance. I fear that if we begin now to take a dramatic 
step in new directions, we are going to have problems, especially with 
the Germans and especially if we appear to back off NATO strategy. 
The JCS think: we have to be able to stop a Warsaw Pact attack; we have 
to throw the Soviets back to the pre-­war boundaries.
Dr. Brzezinski: But how many forces do we need for that?
General Brown: Options I, J, and M are about what we think NATO 
needs. Zbig’s options are F, H, and I.
Secretary Brown: Zbig is talking about F Variant with 60 days.
Mr. Aaron: General Brown, what could we do today?
General Brown: The JCS judgment is shown in the study itself.
