568 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX able time (once we have presented the cases to Patan), we should warn the Romanians that we may have to raise this during the visit. 6. World Bank/Human rights. Following a discussion of how we have so far used this linkage with Romania, it was agreed that any negative US action before the visit on a World Bank loan for Romania would antagonize the GOR to such an extent that it would completely undermine the chances of using Ceausescu’s visit itself to advance our human rights goals. Nevertheless, we will explore this linkage further in the context of the human rights action plan currently being revised. 7. Exchanges. It was pointed out that even the exchange program had a human rights aspect. For example, some American scientific organizations have complained that travel restrictions prevent Romanian scientists from carrying out their exchange activities. OES recommended that the difficulties with the NSF exchange agreement be raised with Pungan during his visit to the US in February. 8. Consular. A Circular 175 request is still pending for a dualnational agreement with Romania. Efforts will be made to complete this process quickly so that negotiations can begin. 9. Nuclear. It was agreed that it is important to complete action on the Romanian request to purchase highly-enriched uranium fuel for their research reactor and the related question of additional assurances before the April visit. Also pending is the Romanian request to purchase US heavy water manufacturing technology. In this connection, the example of Argentina raises some important questions. It was agreed that an update was needed on the status of Romanian-Canadian negotiations for heavy-water power reactors. Commenting on the possibility that the Romanians might ask to sign a nuclear cooperation agreement, OES said that the benefits to the US of such an agreement were not readily apparent. However, if there were to be a joint declaration or communique issued during the time of the visit, a reference to the need for nuclear safeguards and to nonproliferation might be useful. 10. Documents to be signed. Commerce suggested that we exchange economic information during the Ceausescu visit. The updating the December 1973 Joint Statement of Presidents Nixon and Ceausescu was also suggested4 and it was noted that the Romanians can be expected to want to sign a number of documents during the visit. Andrews commented that from the US point of view perhaps it would be best to limit ourselves to simply issuing an unsigned joint communique, in the event we cannot get the language we want in a statement of principles or a signed communique. 4 On December 5, 1973, Nixon and Ceausescu signed a Joint Statement of Principles following their meeting at the White House. (Public Papers: Nixon, 1973, pp. 997–999)
