known as the Gondra Treaty) was signed at Santiago, Chile, on May 3,
1923, by sixteen republics parties to the Pan American Union;69 viz., the
United States, Cuba, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua, Panama, Colombia, Venezuela, Brazil, Ecuador, Chile,
Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina. It was subsequently signed by Mexico.
To date it has been ratified by the following states and the ratifications duly
deposited at Santiago, Chile,—the United States, Mexico, Cuba, Chile,
Haiti, Venezuela, Brazil and Paraguay. The information available to the
Department indicates that the following nations have ratified the treaty but
have not yet officially deposited their ratifications—Guatemala, Panama
and Uruguay.
On March 29, 1928, at the invitation of the Acting Secretary of State, the
diplomatic representatives of Uruguay, Panama and Colombia, as the three
diplomatic agents longest accredited before this Government, met in the
Department of State and organized the Permanent Commission to be
established at Washington in accordance with Article III of this Treaty.70
The Minister of Uruguay was chosen as Chairman of this Commission.
The Gondra Treaty, similar to the Bryan Treaty which the United States has
concluded with about eighteen countries,71 would seem to cover questions
of conciliation; and, as you are probably aware, the last Pan American
Conference adopted a resolution, a copy of which is enclosed, requesting all
states parties to the Pan American Union to ratify this Treaty as quickly as
possible.
I desire you confidentially and discreetly to obtain such information as may
be possible with regard to the attitude of the Brazilian Government on the
question of arbitration and conciliation. Brazil has ratified the Gondra
Treaty and it would therefore seem as though that subject has been properly
taken care of; but the Department desires to know the attitude of the
Government of Brazil with regard to the arbitration of juridical questions.
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
