International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
419
U.S. tariffs. Even though the current economic situation will make
reaching agreement on a substantial tariff cut difficult, economic ad-
justments required will not be great since existing tariffs are already
low, any cuts will be spread over 8 years, and part of the cut could be
delayed if warranted by economic circumstances.
The U.S. tariff offer, as tabled in January would result in 42.2 percent
average reduction in our tariff rates.
The EC has offered a 37.8 percent reduction in items of interest to the
United States. If the EC were to implement a list of withdrawals that it
has tentatively distributed, the depth of cut offered would drop to 31.1
percent. Since that time, the EC Council of Ministers has approved an
additional list of withdrawals that would lower their depth of cut
further.
The Japanese offer amounts to a 20 percent reduction of applied
rates and a 47.4 percent reduction of legal rates. We have received indi-
cations that they are willing to increase that offer to a 28 percent reduc-
tion from applied rates.
The Canadian offer amounts to a 40.9 percent cut on GATT rates,
and a 26.7 percent cut on applied rates.
2. Composition of Tariff Reductions.—In order to achieve a satis-
factory tariff package, we must achieve adequate tariff reductions in
key U.S. export industries. The offers now on the table from our major
trading partners fall short in key U.S. industries such as paper, elec-
tronic products, chemicals, construction equipment and photographic
film.
Government Procurement.—There is currently a strong presumption
against foreign procurement by publicly-owned entities, much of it
high technology items in which the U.S. is strongly competitive. Given
this fact, plus the current trend of greater public ownership in many
foreign countries, we feel that negotiation of a government procure-
ment code is particularly important.
The two main issues in the government procurement area are:
(1) The degree to which governments will provide the information
necessary to judge whether new rules for greater access by foreign sup-
pliers are being followed.
(2) The public entities, commodities, and type of contracts which
are to be subject to the rules (coverage) of a new code.
Standards.—The standards code which is under negotiation will
contain international guidelines for the development of product stand-
ards to assure that they do not unnecessarily distort trade. Major issues
in the standards area which remain are:
(1) The extent to which a standards code would apply to state,
local, and private standards setting bodies;
