306  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
to fill in the remaining gaps in our positions on some reasonable sched-
ule. In the first six months of the Bush Administration, we have failed 
to fill in a single gap in our START position. Indeed, we are in the pro-
cess now of reopening many of the decisions that were taken last year.
10. In conclusion, we may be approaching a turning point in START. 
It is far from clear that the opportunity that now exists for START will 
be available indefinitely. If START drifts, Gorbachev may not be in 
the posiion a few years from now to deliver the tough decisions that a 
START treaty requires. As a result, putting the talks on the back-­burner 
could mean letting an important chance for moving “beyond contain-
ment” slip from our grasp. At the same time, a crash effort to wrap up 
a treaty would clearly send the wrong signal to Moscow and would be 
bad politics at home. We can best exploit Gorbachev’s current desire 
for an agreement by pursuing a measured, step-­by-­step approach to 
START that puts the President and you in the position to close a deal 
two years from now while avoiding a last-­minute rush to judgment. 
I look forward to discussing these issues with you soon in Washington. 
Cheers, Rick.
Burt
42.	
Draft Paper Prepared in the Arms Control and Disarmament 
Agency1
Washington, August 15, 1989
NON-PAPER ON THE NEXT BIG MOVES IN START:  
MOBILE ICBMS & THE BOMBER/ALCM ISSUES
The mobile ICBM issue in START is politically and technically 
complex. Failure to handle it effectively could deal a major blow to the 
Administration by undermining its strategic modernization program 
and its success in START. Permitting mobile ICBMs will weaken the 
verifiability of the START agreement and create certain stability prob-
lems such as enhanced rapid reload. Failure to permit mobile ICBMs 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, Richard A. Davis Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF1590–007, START Initiatives. 
Secret. Kantor sent the draft to Gordon and Davis and wrote in the upper right-­hand 
corner: “This is a non-­paper that Ron Lehman left with Brent yesterday. Please treat as 
close hold.—Arnie.”
