Non-Proliferation
821
will probably have strong incentives to cooperate with the US. But even
then, the resources and attention necessary to minimize the dangers
presented by the spread of nuclear weapons are likely to be substantial
and continuing.
328.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Summary of PRC Meeting on Nuclear Proliferation (PRM–15)
The meeting2 began with a summary by Nye, of the two principal
conclusions of the review:3 that the U.S. should seek a pause in interna-
tional nuclear developments which make weapons useable material
more available; and that the pause would be used for an international
nuclear fuel cycle evaluation program (hereinafter FCEP) in which suppliers
and recipients jointly participate.
FCEP and Reprocessing: The Key Question
Discussion opened on the principal issue: What should the FCEP
evaluate? Should the evaluation concern itself with improvements
(safety and safeguards) in reprocessing? Or, should it concern alterna-
tives to reprocessing and to other sensitive technologies which make
plutonium or HEU directly available? Views were presented on what
should be done about domestic reprocessing, but without reaching any
conclusion. The discussion quickly turned to the question of what the
FCEP should evaluate and how it should be presented to the interna-
tional community. ERDA felt that in order to be “credible” the evalu-
ation would have to include reprocessing, (Option a, Recommendation
3, p. 16). State felt that while FCEP should concentrate on alternatives,
that we could not present the international program as one in which re-
processing is a closed question to which we already know the answer.
Therefore, the evaluation would have to include reprocessing abroad,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 60, PRC
007, 3/16/77, Nuclear Proliferation. Secret; Sensitive. Brzezinski did not initial the
memorandum.
2 No minutes or summary of conclusions of the March 16 meeting were found.
3 See Document 325.
