Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII If they did not improve soon, they would get much worse. And “many people here in town” he said, are beginning to have doubts about the prospects. [Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.] 5. On Afghanistan, I made very strongly the argument that the Soviet press was blaming the whole problem upon the U.S. upsetting the internal situation in Afghanistan and that we had specifically stated that we had not been interfering and had done so many times, most recently in President Carter’s letter to Tito, from which I quoted.2 Arbatov’s answer to this was, “I am not disputing your word, but perhaps the Agency has been misinforming the State Department.” He said his government was convinced that the U.S. is in fact training and sending in Afghans from Pakistan to disrupt the internal situation. He said that about three million Afghanis moved back and forth between Pakistan and Afghanistan seasonally with their flocks and that the infiltration of 200,000 armed Afghans would be relatively simple to be hidden in this migration—though he added that he had no information that this was actually happening. 6. While he stressed the role of outside interference, by the U.S. and also by China and Pakistan, Arbatov discussed the internal situation in Afghanistan as well as a reason for the Soviet action. He said the Soviets had gotten along very well with the King and with Daoud and then talked about the excesses of Amin, whom he compared with his namesake Idi Amin. He said that the elimination of the Amin regime, while in the Soviet interest, was also somewhat in the American interest because they were attempting to remove a bloody tyrant, installing a more generally popular regime, and bringing stability to the region. 7. As for how long it might take to bring about the stability they were seeking, Arbatov thought maybe only a few months—provided outside interference stopped. He did not dispute my point that the Brezhnev formula seemed like a non-starter, since it was impossible for us to pledge to stop doing something we are not doing. He did not seem much interested in talking about other formulas for getting the Soviets out of Afghanistan, although he thought the idea of having Mrs. Gandhi and a group of nonaligned nations or others work together to find some way to guarantee the Pak/Afghan border was an idea worth exploring. 2 Carter’s February 26 letter to Tito addressed how the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan had changed the dynamic of de´tente and offered support to Yugoslavia as an independent and nonaligned country. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 22, Yugo-
