10
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
5. Contingencies. Before the meeting tomorrow, a very small group
will examine each of the following cases:
(1) Rescue. The SCC saw no way for us to intervene militarily to
rescue the hostages without seriously risking their lives. We would
expect the Iranian military to oppose any such intervention. The most
likely means would be to secure an airfield and conduct a helicopter
raid into the embassy compound.3
(2) Retaliation, if some or all of the hostages were killed. A number
of economic responses are available, including seizure of Iranian assets,
cutoff of trade (including food), and cessation of supply of spare parts
for the military. Militarily, we could: blockade Iran’s oil shipments;
strike or seize a site such as the Bandar Abbas military base in the
south, Kharg Island oil loading terminal, or the three islands which
Iran occupies at the mouth of the Persian Gulf; we could attempt to
destroy the F–14s and/or other military assets by air strike; we would
consider renewing direct support to the Kurds; and we could poten-
tially kidnap a leading Iranian figure as a counter-hostage.
(3) Disintegration. Our previous plan to defend the oil fields was
predicated on the assistance of the Iranian military. This must now be
reconsidered. (TS)
6. Iranian Students. For tomorrow’s meeting, the Department of
Justice will provide a report on the numbers of Iranians in various
categories (including illegal aliens) in the United States, investigations
which may currently be under way, and the steps which might be
available to us. (TS)
3 As Carter and Sick later recalled, Brzezinski called Brown to inform him that
Carter wanted the Joint Chiefs to move ahead on a rescue mission contingency plan.
(Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 459, and Sick, All Fall Down, pp. 213–216) By November 4, Jones
activated a small ad hoc planning cell under Major General Vaught housed within the
Joint Staff Special Operations Division, J–3. Vaught reported directly to Jones. (Holloway
Report, July 23, 1980, pp. 9, 26)
