Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX ence in East European countries and to limit policy options developed by the West. Western orientation, rather than consumerism, could turn out to be the most important long-term factor in US-Soviet relations where the East Europeans are concerned. Events in Eastern Europe have some impact on Soviet foreign and domestic policy. For example, experiments in Poland and Hungary will influence the Soviets. Criticisms of the Soviets by the West European Communist parties have had resonance in Eastern Europe. We should be conscious of this indirect effect and should take it into account in our policy. The comment was made that if one reviews the trends from Eastern Europe for the last five to ten years from a Soviet perspective, they all seem bad. And the Soviets are not facing up to the problem, by one interpretation. By another, the squeaky wheel is getting the grease. It was suggested that it might be useful to try to identify those things that are likely to get immediate Soviet attention; i.e., to identify the ceiling above which Soviets won’t tolerate interference. There was general agreement that the action or reaction (i.e. use of force) line was getting fuzzier, but none doubted that the Soviets would act when they deemed it necessary. The fuzziness, or blurring of Soviet perceptions of what actions would be tolerated, was viewed as good. The Soviets are still going to be vigilant in areas where they feel the US is pushing greater autonomy for Eastern Europe. All agreed that US policies had to include initiatives that would fall within the fuzzy area and succeed by not ruffling Soviet feathers. There was disagreement about the types of initiatives that would meet this criterion. Some felt that the Soviets would not allow any move by the Eastern European countries that would slacken the Soviet control of their economies or planning processes, and that any help given to Eastern European economies would eventually filter back to the Soviet Union and work to the US’s detriment. Another body of opinion held that the Soviets would welcome the movement of some of their East European problem children (in the economic sense) into an international framework that would impose some economic discipline without excessively increasing the autonomy of Eastern Europe. IMF membership for Poland was given as an example, but doubt was expressed that either Warsaw or Moscow could permit genuine IMF discipline to interfere with Polish central planning and CMEA regional trade schemes. A similar disagreement concerned the linkage between technology transfer, economic growth, and military capability. Some argued that there was a direct linkage, i.e., that more technology transfer led to more economic growth and inevitably to greater military capabilities;
