826  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
– Closing out existing ministerial issues will require further 
ministerial-­level discussion and additional ministerial issues are being 
uncovered.
– Washington is taking too long to establish positions and respond 
to the Negotiator’s ad ref agreements.
– As we approach the end of negotiations, Geneva will have 
increasing difficulty in translating agreed positions into detailed, sound 
treaty text.
– The working level in Washington does not believe the U.S. is 
committed to finish the Treaty this year and is not energized to devote 
the hours needed to work toward that goal.
What do we need to do?
Rick’s proposals range from the unexceptional to the draconian. 
He believes almost all of his suggestions need to be implemented to 
get a Treaty by the end of the year. We have been developing a START 
work program for the next several months and will consider Rick’s sug-
gestions in our recommendations to you. His specific proposals include 
the following:
1. Make more effective use of the ministerial process. We should:
— Schedule a Ministerial every month until START is signed with 
prearranged agendas;
— Organize internally so that we can make real-­time decisions at 
Ministerials;
— Where possible, record Ministerial decisions in treaty text form 
at the Ministerial itself to speed up the implementation process;
— Give Shevardnadze lists of technical issues being worked 
in Moscow so he can lean on his technical experts and the Moscow 
bureaucracy;
2. Make more effective use of our assets in Washington. We should:
— Expedite reaching U.S. positions on all outstanding issues so 
that no U.S. position remains untabled by September 15;
— Establish a policy now that, on September 20, the Negotiating 
Group should accept Soviet positions in all areas in which there is no 
U.S. position. Allow exceptions only with the personal approval of a 
Cabinet Officer.
3. Make more effective use of our assets in Geneva. We should:
— Assign two additional State advisors to the Negotiating Group 
as soon as possible;
— Reorganize the Negotiating Group to address the problem that 
the Inspection Protocol and Memorandum of Inspection Procedures 
are as large, and contain as many issues, as all other treaty documents 
combined.
