568 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ­violation of the Treaty and sought to correct the situation by eliminating Article 6 from the Treaty. The Government of El Salvador would have been willing to accept the revision of the Treaty had it been possible to assure them that no Salvadoran would be drafted until one year after the date of notice. We were unable to do so, and as a consequence the Salvadoran Government felt obliged to interpret the notice, correctly so according to the Legal Division of the Department, as a termination of the entire Treaty.10 (5) Three-­cent tax on soluble coffee. The 1936 Trade Agreement between the United States and EI Salvador,11 provides for the free entry into the United States of coffee. United States tariff schedules, however, provide for a $.03 per pound tax for coffee substitutes, essences and adulterants. El Salvador interprets the word “coffee” in the 1936 Treaty in its generic sense to include all kinds of coffee. United States customs officials, however, ruled Salvadoran soluble coffee dutiable under the Tariff Act. (6) The $250,000 check to Cruz Salazar. In the conversation with the United States Military Attaché referred to above, the official of the Salvadoran General Staff said that President Lemus had received a photostatic copy of a check for $250,000 made out to Colonel Cruz Salazar and signed by the chief of the Point IV Mission in Guatemala. He said that President Lemus’ interpretation of the check was that it had been given to Cruz Salazar by the United States Government as part of a deal to insure the election by the Guatemalan Congress of Ydígoras Fuentes. He said that this check provoked President Lemus’ further disillusionment with the behavior of the United States Government. While this can undoubtedly be explained, the possibility remains that Lemus may also consider this in terms of the large amount of assistance being provided to Guatemala by the United States as compared with the absence of grant aid to El Salvador. Many Salvadorans have made no secret of what they claim to be the premium the United States Government places on aid to unstable governments while ignoring the no-­less-­needy but more stable and democratic Latin governments. (7) Lemus’ request for an MDAP Treaty. Although the Lemus Government is aware that former President Osorio turned down the United States offer of an MDAP agreement, it does not feel bound by the earlier decision of the Osorio administration. President Lemus has expressed interest in an MDAP agreement. This was discouraged by the 10 The Treaty terminated February 7, 1958; pertinent documents are in decimal file 611.1696. 11 Reference is to the Reciprocal Trade Agreement, signed at San Salvador, February 19, 1937; for text, see 50 Stat. (pt. 2) 1564.
