3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
394
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
The Secretary said he accepted what Gromyko had said, but would
point out that when one gets what appears to be realistic information,
because it comes from a good source, one had a tendency to accept it as
valid.
Gromyko thought that the general mentioned was perhaps simply
trying to save his own skin. He would also ask what motivated him in
his actions and for whom he was working. Many questions immedi-
ately arose in that connection.
The Secretary said he did not want to argue further regarding this
matter. The problem involved in evaluating information from different
sources was not an easy one. Therefore it was important that we have
an opportunity to exchange views with the Soviet side and get a better
understanding of how it perceives the facts in any given situation.
Gromyko said the Secretary was quite correct in saying this. How-
ever, when a broad campaign was unleashed throughout the United
States, based on such information, and the U.S. Government took part
in such a campaign, that was quite another matter. He would ask the
Secretary to try and understand what situation the Soviet side now
found itself in. What conclusions could the Soviets come to? After all,
these statements were not made within four walls.
Senior Military Exchanges
The Secretary said that President Carter had asked him to check
with Gromyko to find out if he thought it might be a good idea to ex-
change visits between senior military officers.
Gromyko asked at what level such exchanges would take place
and what problems were to be dealt with.
The Secretary said that, for example, the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff might invite his counterpart, Marshall Ogarkov, to visit
the United States.
Gromyko said: “Or vice versa?”
The Secretary replied in the affirmative, and said that they might
agree ahead of time what questions were to be discussed.
Gromyko said he would take this under advisement and consult
with the military leadership. He would let the Secretary know in due
course.
The Secretary thought it would be a good idea to exchange views
on all levels of our respective governments, thus lessening the impres-
sion that our relations were of a confrontational nature.
Non-Circumvention, Non-Transfer
The Secretary recalled that the other day Gromyko had mentioned
that Article XII of the Draft Treaty, dealing with non-circumvention,
had been discussed and settled in Moscow. The Secretary wanted to re-
