1178
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
nonproliferation, and if it, instead, weakens these efforts, thoughts
about general disarmament become academic. Whatever opinion one
has of the NPT, he said, one central objective of the treaty was to buy
time to get on with other arms control activities. For, whenever there is
proliferation, it makes it more difficult to move forward on arms con-
trol and disarmament. This is in addition to the dangers to international
security produced by proliferation. Thus, the documents must reflect
that there cannot be increased prospects for arms control if there is fur-
ther nuclear proliferation.
—The documents should make another point about the impor-
tance of merely halting or freezing arms competition, for this is the pre-
requisite to reversing arms build-ups and to disarming, which may in
many cases be easier than reaching agreement on where to stop. He
said there is a certain tendency to depreciate any step that does not in-
volve reductions, which is not reflective of realities.
—It is also necessary that the documents avoid code words such as
“dissolution of military blocs.”
—We should also seek precision of language in these papers if they
are to gain widespread support, noting that the nonaligned paper, if
taken literally, called for immediate nuclear disarmament.
—Halting “nuclear weapons testing,” was a phrasing that, of
course, was not acceptable to the US.
—It is hard to tie savings from disarmament automatically and
mechanically to development assistance. The documents should point
out that the savers too will benefit from the redirected resources which
would emerge from disarmament programs since this is a major incen-
tive for disarmament efforts.
—The SSOD, and therefore also the documents, should stimulate
public involvement—more openness, more information. There is much
concern world wide about the unknown in national security postures,
and we are concerned that this is a stimulus to arms racing.
—It is important that new ideas be reflected in the SSOD and, if
possible, also in the documents. While it is too early to promise any
specific new ideas out of the US, we believe the menu must be enriched
by all participants.
—Decisions on machinery for disarmament should follow deci-
sions on the Program of Action. We believe it is essential not to turn a
negotiating body into a voting body (such as the UNGA). This would
change the nature of the forum and it would no longer be a real negoti-
ating body.
Weiler reiterated that he was only speaking personally, and that he
was not trying to give an exhaustive summary of comments on the
Nonaligned paper, but only trying to highlight for the Yugoslav dele-
