International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1101
will have a two-fold purpose: to utilize the scientific and technological
resources of the developed world to help developing countries solve
urgent problems, and to help these countries develop the indigenous
scientific and technological capability to solve their own problems over
the long run. The Fund will coordinate its activities with those of other
bilateral and multilateral programs to avoid duplication. The United
States should be prepared to contribute to the Fund.
At the UN Conference on Science and Technology for Develop-
ment, developing countries’ representatives hailed your initiative in
proposing ISTC. They saw it as a signal of recognition by the United
States of the importance attached by developing countries to building
the capability to solve their own problems, and of the mutual benefits
to be gained from a cooperative approach to the solution of global
problems.
ISTC was authorized by Congress last year. As this report is sub-
mitted, however, Congress has not yet approved funding for the Insti-
tute in 1980. Assuming that funding is available, 1980 will obviously be
a year of crucial importance for the Institute. ISTC’s purpose will be to
promote close relations with individuals and institutions in developing
countries concerned with science and technology. Up to one-third of
the members of the ISTC Council, which will advise the Director on
broad policy and program matters, will be drawn from developing
countries.
Scientific and technological talent is one of this country’s greatest
strengths. ISTC should take the lead in mobilizing this talent for the
benefit of developing countries. ISTC should be the focal point in the
U.S. Government for assessing scientific research of relevance to devel-
opment, and identifying for high priority topics of mutual interest that
are most urgent to developing countries. In this regard, one of the first
undertakings envisioned for it is a study of ongoing research activities
in the U.S. Government, and an information system to keep this inven-
tory accurate. ISTC should stimulate and assist U.S. nongovernmental
scientific and technological institutions to give more emphasis to
building up the scientific competence of developing countries, through
joint research activities, improved training of their students, and assist-
ance to their research institutions.
More and more countries in the developing world are reaching the
“middle-income” level at which AID assistance is no longer appro-
priate. ISTC, with its problem-focus, could supplement the work of the
multilateral development banks, and undertake cooperative work with
these developing countries to deal with the development problems that
remain.
