3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
822
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
indicated clearly that even in the absence of any inimical intentions by
the Soviet Union, its move into Afghanistan was regarded as a risk,
whatever the reasons for it. He would add that in the Senate Budget
Committee hearings a number of witnesses had appeared who were
not at all in agreement regarding Soviet motives. Thus US concern in
this regard was not a frivolous matter. If it were, we would not have
acted that way.
As for the justification Gromyko had provided for the Soviet move
into Afghanistan—if by massive arms intervention from the outside he
had meant the involvement of U.S. forces, that was not a fact. He had to
say that we were not yet persuaded that there was justification for the
Soviet action. However, he had listened to what Gromyko had told him
today. In fact, he had come here to listen.
Gromyko had also asserted that the Soviet Union had moved its
troops into Afghanistan at the request of that country’s government.
And yet, Amin, who had been President of Afghanistan at the time of
the Soviet move had not survived. That appeared to us to be very
strange indeed.
As for the precondition Gromyko had mentioned, the Secretary
had simply stated the fact at the outset of the present talk that the
problem of Afghanistan was a roadblock to the development of rela-
tions between us. It would not be hard to make a distinction between
that statement and a statement concerning preconditions. He would
only repeat that if this problem was not resolved, it would be very diffi-
cult to make progress elsewhere. Therefore, the failure to withdraw So-
viet troops had to be regarded as the largest obstacle to resumption of
detente. He would repeat that he had not spoken about a precondition,
but had simply stated a fact. What formula could express this ade-
quately remains a problem.
As for the proposal Gromyko had outlined today, it was the same
proposal that had been offered by Afghanistan during the last two
days. We had studied it and saw the biggest problem in legitimization
of the government of Karmal. Such legitimization would give the So-
viet Union full control as to the judgment when the reasons for Soviet
intervention cease to exist. Therefore we had trouble with this pro-
posal. He naturally intended to indicate to President Carter that he and
Gromyko had discussed this proposal today.
China
Normalization of U.S. relations with China in the first instance was
not directed against the Soviet Union. Before normalization the Secre-
tary had led a Congressional delegation into China in the belief that it
made sense for us to normalize our relations with that country. We
were not contemplating any military alliance with China. Indeed, we
