September 18–December 16, 1978 435 further disillusioning shock when he proceeds to an actual signing. The Arabs will see the withdrawal of the most powerful Arab state from the arena as destroying their leverage to get decent terms on the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian aspect. They will not be inclined to see U.S. assurances that we intend to deliver the goods in West Bank/Gaza negotiations as an adequate substitute for Egypt’s retirement. While it is possible that Egypt’s action might galvanize Jordan and West Bank/ Gaza Palestinians into coming into the negotiations so as to get at least some kind of deal, we think it more likely that the Arabs in their present mood will retreat into a condition of sullen negativism and begin to turn their attention toward actions they can take against Sadat, even though King Hussein and the Saudis will not feel comfortable about being drawn into such a posture. The problem is that we cannot be sure that the opposite course— that of engaging in a struggle with Israel in the context of the present negotiations to get better terms on the West Bank/Gaza aspect—will be the decisive factor in bringing in Jordan or representative Palestinians. And if we cannot be certain of this it can be argued that we may be better off playing it in a way that minimizes our problems with Israel. If we choose this option we would accept the fact that in the immediate post-Treaty situation we might not be in a good position to push Israel farther and for more than it chose to give on the West Bank/Gaza, but that in the long term we will get more out of Israel by managing the process in a way that is more acceptable to Israel. On the Israeli side of the equation we need to assess whether we will be in a better position to move Israel now or in a post-Treaty situation. One thesis is that by trying to drive a bargain now we make it particularly difficult for Israel because it comes in a context of conditionality on the Egypt-Israel Treaty, something the Israelis were assured would not happen at Camp David. The opposing thesis is that once Israel achieves its strategic objective of removing Egypt from the conflict, it will see even less reason to give ground on its eastern front. Both theses have an element of truth in them. Finally, it needs to be noted that the option to delay if necessary the present negotiations to achieve something more precise on the West Bank and Gaza obviously presents us with public relations and Congressional problems. The Israelis will argue that it is the U.S. rather than Sadat that is holding up the Treaty. They will also mount a campaign which will find receptivity in some quarters that it is unwarranted for the U.S. to be using the additional assistance Israel has requested to try to gain political concessions. Conducting West Bank/Gaza Negotiations In designing our strategy for extending the Camp David negotiations to the West Bank/Gaza, we need to keep in mind that it may
