Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1195 launchers of ICBMs at parking sites, and of heavy bombers and former heavy bombers located within a specified air base. Each Party may request such cooperative measures seven times per year. VERIFICATION BY INSPECTION The Treaty contains the most extensive and intrusive inspection regime ever included in an arms control agreement. The Parties will have the right to conduct 12 types of on-site inspections and exhibitions. In addition, the Treaty gives the Parties the right to conduct continuous monitoring activities at mobile missile final assembly facilities. There are the following basic types of inspections and exhibitions: baseline data inspections at facilities to help confirm the accuracy of the data on numbers and types of items specified in the initial data exchanges; data update inspections to help confirm subsequent changes in data; new facility inspections to help confirm the accuracy of data provided on such facilities; suspect-site inspections to help ensure that covert production of mobile missiles is not occurring at specific facilities that have such a capability; reentry vehicle inspections of deployed ICBMs and SLBMs to “spot check” the data related to the number of warheads deployed on a specific type of missile; post-exercise dispersal inspections of deployed mobile ICBM launchers and their associated missiles; conversion or elimination inspections to observe those processes and witness removal from accountability; close-out inspections to help confirm that facilities have been eliminated; technical characteristics exhibitions to confirm the data on technical characteristics of ICBMs, SLBMs, and mobile launchers; distinguishability exhibitions of heavy bombers, former heavy bombers, and long-range nuclear ALCMs; and baseline exhibitions of various bombers. In addition, the Treaty provides for continuous monitoring activities at specified mobile ICBM final assembly facilities throughout the life of the Treaty. These provisions call for a continuous presence at the exits of these facilities so that monitors can count all the mobile ICBMs that exit such facilities. The general obligation of the Parties to facilitate inspections and continuous monitoring is set forth in the Protocol on Inspection. It establishes: how inspectors, monitors and aircrew members are to be chosen and reviewed and sets forth the privileges and immunities to which they are entitled; a general framework for transportation to the place to be inspected or monitored; the detailed provisions on the notice that is to be given prior to inspections; and the requirements for identifying what is to be inspected. IMPLEMENTATION AND COMPLIANCE To promote the objectives and implementation of the provisions of the Treaty, the Parties have established the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission (JCIC). Through the JCIC, the Parties can
