188  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
shift. When he made mention at beginning conversation, gap until next 
meeting I said he should realize their position was facing us with “very 
serious situation”.
During preceding dinner table conversation again much talk by 
Wang on economic backwardness China (steel production now three 
million tons only three and one-half million by 1957 etc.) economy 
would long be primarily agricultural and therefore complementary to 
advanced industrial economy US thus providing good basis economic 
relations, US industry very advanced—by implication better than 
USSR (Soviet autos not good, low powered and old fashioned wanted 
US cars etc.), wanted send students to US, China and US long been 
good friends should be friends again etc.
Gowen
Note: Advance copy to Mr. Waddell (FE) 10:30 am 8/29/55 (FMH)
147.	 Telegram 654 to Geneva1
Washington, August 29, 1955, 8:20 p.m.
654. For Johnson.
Your 630. Instructions for August 31 meeting.
1. Propose solve problem reference “nationals” by returning to 
phraseology of July 25 identic announcement: “repatriation of civilians 
who desire to return to their respective countries”. Object is to avoid 
any language which might be construed as implying that US acknowl­
edges that any Chinese in this country have PRC nationality.
2. It should be specified in announcement that we are authorizing 
GOI to act. It would not seem essential for announcement to take note 
of fact that PRC has requested GOI to act. If necessary obtain agree­
ment, we would be prepared consider insertion of modifying phrase 
such as “which has been requested by the PRC to serve in this capacity” 
following “will authorize the Government of India.”
3. You should stand firm on: (a) refusal to use term “US agrees”, 
(b) avoidance “on behalf of the PRC”, and (c) restitution of phrase “in 
any such case”.
1 Source: Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2655. Secret; Priority. 
Drafted by McConaughy; cleared by Dulles.
