March 1952–February 1953
403
6. Under Condition I—Communist (Tudeh) Party completely controls
Iran. U.S. national objective requires military action to prevent further spread
of Communism in Middle East. The feasible military courses of action are:
a. Furnish additional arms aid to appropriate Middle East coun-
tries so as to eventually enable them to possess the strength to secure
their frontiers against effective Communist infiltration.
b. Encourage the U.K. and/or other Commonwealth nations to un-
dertake a commitment to deploy additional forces to Iraq on the order
of 1 Division reinforced and appropriate air forces, subject to Iraqi
agreement, with a mission of assisting Middle East governments in pre-
venting the spread of Communist power to their countries.
c. Deploy appropriate Air Force units on the order of 1½ wings
plus support units, to southern Turkey with a mission of assisting
Middle East governments in preventing the spread of communist
power to their countries. This mission is to be accomplished in conjunc-
tion with friendly forces that may be deployed to the area. Since
Turkey, the key to Middle East defense, is the strongest anti-
communist nation in the Middle East and since its North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) mission supports the U.S. war plans, sta-
tioning of U.S. Air Forces in Turkey would materially demonstrate evi-
dence of U.S. support. Additionally, the combination of the U.K. forces
in Iraq mentioned above and the U.S. forces in southern Turkey would
further deployments in support of NATO war plans.
d. Deploy U.S. forces on the order of 1 Division reinforced and nec-
essary supporting air and naval forces to the vicinity of Basra with a
mission of assisting Middle East governments in preventing the spread
of communist power to their countries. This mission is to be accom-
plished in conjunction with friendly forces that may be deployed to the
area. It should be recognized that such a deployment would be tanta-
mount to associating the United States militarily with the United
Kingdom in a ground defense of the Middle East. Current war plans do
not contemplate the deployment of U.S. ground forces in this area, and
no provisions in this regard are included in current operational or mo-
bilization plans.
7. Under Condition II—Communist (Tudeh) Party completely controls
Iran. U.S. national objective requires military action to re-establish a Western
oriented government. The feasible military courses of action are:
a. Same as Condition I.
b. These limited U.S., U.K., and/or other Commonwealth forces
probably could not insure the re-establishment of a Western oriented
government in Iran, but could cooperate with and covertly support the
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) as required in the overthrow of a
Tudeh regime and re-establishment of a friendly government.
