1955  479
wound up, as I often do, in long involved sentences which are by no 
means easy to put into Chinese. I also value his judgment, and particu­
larly his assessment of reactions of the other side. I have had to change 
every member of my little group here except Ekvall. I would be very 
reluctant to have any more changes at this time.
I am having to go up to Prague this week-­end because of a per­
sonnel emergency arising in the staff up there. As I mentioned in my 
telegram, I plan, as usual, to come back on Tuesday. I talked it over with 
Rod and Herman, as I could, if essential, have come back on Sunday, 
but I think that that will give us plenty of time. The Secretary is going 
to be away in Vienna and Yugoslavia over the week-­end.
I sent off to you today my thoughts with regard to the next meeting 
and will presume that by Tuesday evening we will have your instruc­
tions, which I can, if necessary, Rod assured me, discuss with the Sec­
retary Tuesday evening in time to get something back to you before 
Thursday’s meeting.
My travel to Prague has now been complicated by the fact that 
they have taken off the early morning plane from Geneva to Zurich, 
which means there is no way for me to get there except to go up to 
Zurich Friday evening by train and stay overnight and take the plane 
to Prague the next morning. However, I can still come back directly, 
arriving here at 3:45 p.m. Tuesday afternoons.
I was very interested in the conversation with Mehta. It does not 
shed any light on whether or not they have actually thus far “assisted” 
anyone, but I would presume from the conversation that they have not 
done so.
Yesterday and today I have quickly and firmly knocked down sev­
eral press rumors—one to the effect that yesterday I agreed with Wang 
on a Foreign Ministers’ meeting, and another today to the effect that the 
Secretary and Chou have recently exchanged letters.
I will have to cut this short in order to make the pouch, but you can 
be sure that we will continue to try to keep things under control.
I assume the Department will do whatever it considers necessary 
to keep Hammarskjold informed of our discussion on missing military 
personnel.
Regards to all.
Sincerely,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
