30 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement from political influences, but noted that the new institution was being born in a political atmosphere. He agreed with the importance of a flexible approach, and of endeavoring to learn the views of the Latin Americans. Mr. Schaefer commented that ICA had found difficulty in negotiating in Latin America on a multilateral basis. Mr. Stans inquired as to what initiative the Latin Americans had taken on the matter. The Chairman replied that the creation of an Inter-American Bank had been high on the agenda of recent Inter-American meetings. Dr. Milton Eisenhower had indicated that the Latin Americans felt “shuffled around” from bank to bank, and had suggested that there should be one central place for contacts. The Chairman continued that many important questions would have to be considered. These included whether financing would be provided for housing; whether it should be a “soft loan” institution, in the sense of lending dollars with repayment in local currency; what would be the source of a constant stream of dollars, and who would put up funds in addition to the United States; whether the Latin American countries would make a single or a yearly contribution; what use would be made of Latin American currencies contributed to the Institution; and whether the Institution should lend for oil development in Latin America, and many other questions. The question of whether a new institution was needed was pertinent, but the demands of the Latin Americans would not be satisfied by increasing the resources of existing institutions. However, the United States could not afford to back an institution which was not soundly conceived and operated to provide a basis for healthy growth. It would be imperative not to impair the functioning of existing institutions, and there should be the closest kind of association with these institutions, including both the International Bank and the Export-Import Bank. The Chairman concluded that it would be unwise to raise any of these issues formally with the Latin American countries at too early a date, although informal bilateral discussions might be useful. With respect to the time schedule, Mr. Dillon observed that Buenos Aires Conference Resolution XVIII directed the Inter-American ECOSOC to study and report on the needs of Latin America for capital, the possible sources of such capital, and related questions. The report to the 21 governments should be ready about the first of October. Bilateral talks could follow receipt of the report, with details to be negotiated in Inter-American Economic and Social Council, followed by a formal ratification meeting. The Secretary of the Council noted that Resolution XVIII contemplated a meeting of financial representatives. Mr. Dillon said that the representatives should meet only after informal talks had been held. He mentioned that an Inter-American
