1032  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
and order in Cuzco during the recent Communist uprising there, to 
describe what had happened.
The Archbishop said that the Communists had been planning to 
cause trouble in the South. The increase in the price of gasoline was 
merely an excuse for action.2 They had 15,000 people under their con-
trol. They had worked out complete plans for seizing and dividing up 
the large farms of the area and for sacking the homes of the prosperous 
people of Cuzco. Groups had been chosen for these tasks. It was not, 
however, possible for the Communists to carry through these plans.
The Archbishop described the way in which the Communist group 
had used to their advantage the fact that a boy had been critically 
injured during the rioting by a bullet fired by the police. The boy was 
carried around by the mob on a large theater sign and permitted to die 
without medical attention.
The Communists used the common technique of putting women 
and children in the front of their group during demonstrations.
The Archbishop spoke of his personal difficulties in trying to inter-
vene in the situation. He was not permitted to speak from the cathedral 
to the 15,000 or more people massed in the central plaza. He had to go 
to the headquarters of the Labor Union, where he was able to address 
the people. He offered to serve as an intermediary with the Army, if the 
people would be willing to go to their homes and behave in an orderly 
fashion.
After this arrangement was worked out a people’s militia of about 
one thousand took over the task of keeping order during the period 
after the police and troops were withdrawn in order to avoid bloodshed.
Since the Army had only about 500 troops in Cuzco at the begin-
ning of the uprising, the Communists thought that they could be smoth-
ered by the large group of people which they could mobilize. During 
the night after the major uprising, however, more troops arrived by 
plane and overland, and they were able to get the situation under con-
trol. The Communists managed to interrupt traffic by cutting ditches 
across the highways. The troops coming overland had to go the last ten 
kilometers by foot.
After order was restored by the military the Communist newspa-
per in Cuzco said that what happened in the city was merely a skir-
mish; next time the uprising will be on a national scale.
2 In despatch 772 from Lima, April 16, the Embassy reported on a nation-­wide 
chauffers’ strike, April 7–11, over a new gasoline tax. A violent general strike developed 
in Cuzco, requiring federal troops to restore order. (823.062/4–1658) In despatch 976 from 
Lima, June 12, the Embassy transmitted an eyewitness report by Richard P. Schaedel 
(USOM) on the uprising in Cuzco. (823.062/6–1258)
