166  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
to assess the enemy’s ultimate objectives and determine whether and 
where he would likely consider his costs disproportionate to any gain. 
Also required would be a clear understanding of our own objectives 
with respect to the issue at hand, and our willingness to risk a Soviet 
counter-­limited strike in return.
(U) The NSSM 169 study group recognized that there can be no 
guarantee that the limited nuclear options will in fact control escala-
tion. They believed, however, that the capability to employ limited 
nuclear options provides the NCA with the only means to try to control 
the level of violence.
General War
(S) A second focus of concern to the NSSM–169 study group was 
how best to deter a major attack on the US. Recognizing, however, that 
there was no way deterrence of a major nuclear war could be categor-
ically assured, the group also developed targeting criteria that would 
contribute to the most favorable outcome possible for the US in the 
event deterrence failed. They concluded that the ability to deny the 
enemy his postwar objectives in terms of overall power and influence 
would be a better deterrent to a major nuclear attack than destroying 
what was defined in advance to be “unacceptable cost” in terms of 
fatalities and damage to the enemy’s war-­supporting and urban indus-
trial base.
(S) Under NSTAP, the preponderance of weapons in the SIOP 
were aimed at military targets with attacks directed at enemy nuclear 
offensive capabilities, as well as attacks against a comprehensive mil-
itary target system. A significantly smaller number of weapons were 
allocated against the war-­supporting and urban-­industrial targets to 
achieve the public strategy of “assured destruction.”
(S) In place of a general war-­targeting objective threatening to kill 
millions of people and destroy a large percentage of Soviet industry, 
the NSSM–169 study group recommended threatening to destroy the 
enemy’s military and economic power and slow down the enemy’s 
postwar recovery. [3 lines not declassified] By directly threatening the 
political, military and economic institutions through which they direct 
and control their societies, they believed the opposing political lead-
ers’ goals and values would be more directly threatened and deterrence 
enhanced. Moreover, the US goal of securing the best position possible 
for the US in terms of postwar power and influence if deterrence fails 
would be promoted.
(TS) The group rejected the targeting alternative which emphasized 
indiscriminate destruction of population for the following reasons:
—The US was limited in its ability to insure approximately equal 
Soviet deaths to those suffered by the US given the demographic
