Guatemala  701
attendant on the throwing of bombs, some of which, he said, have 
been tossed by the extreme Leftist PR, others by the extreme Rightist 
MDN, in efforts to create confusion. Some, he said, have hoped to force 
Ydígoras to set up a dictatorship but the President has refused to do so 
because he is determined to upload democracy. However, the Minister 
continued, by their tactics the PR and MDN have unwittingly become 
tools of an international plot being stage-­managed by Betancourt of 
Venezuela and Fidel Castro of Cuba, in the interest of securing the 
return of Arévalo to the head of the Guatemala Government. Their pur-
pose, the Minister stated, is to set up a network of Governments similar 
to their own, and Betancourt is the creature of Arévalo, who is serving 
as close advisor to him, as well as close friend. If elections were to be 
held next year in Guatemala, the Minister added, Arévalo would be 
elected by an overwhelming majority, with dire results for the country 
and great embarrassment for the United States.
The Minister expressed indignation at the speech given in the 
UNGA by the Cuban Foreign Minister, Roa, especially at his having 
coupled Guatemala with Hungary and Tibet.2 He said he had felt that 
the Guatemalan Foreign Office could not reply to these remarks, but 
that the task had been undertaken by the Guatemalan Consul General 
in New York, who had made a strong reply, making it clear there had 
been no foreign intervention in Guatemala’s Liberation.
Stating that he was doing so at the Secretary’s request, Mr. 
Rubottom told the Minister that in the Camp David conversations the 
“dead line” for settlement of the Berlin issue had been dropped and the 
way apparently opened for a Summit meeting.
2 The referenced speech was delivered on September 24, 1959; for text, see United 
Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourteenth Session, Plenary Meetings 
(A/PV.806), p. 145.
GT–23.	
Telegram From the Embassy in Guatemala to the 
Department of State1
Guatemala City, October 9, 1959.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. 5 pages not declassified.
