624 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Assessment of the Basing Arguments OSTP and OMB have a point in arguing that there are some uncertainties regarding the trench system, but I think they are carrying their point too far in saying the system is not choosable now. As a result of their original interest in the trench concept the Air Force has a large body of study and test information to draw on in completing a design with the desired features, and I believe that reasonable answers will drop into place if the trench idea is pursued. (C) On the other hand, with a somewhat faster shuffling of missile positions to minimize concerns about the possibility of a breakdown in security, and with horizontal shelters to ease SALT related concerns, MPS looks like a reasonable choice too. The key question would seem to be—Are we so concerned about the possibility that the Soviets can determine which shelters our missiles are in as to justify the very rapid inter-­shelter mobility provided by the trench system? (C) As far as Option 5 goes—I agree with OMB’s agreements that it is not politically feasible. In addition, some other arguments given against Option 5 seem very persuasive: 1) it does not restore the survivability of the ICBM leg of the Triad and may thus encourage the Soviets to think we will let their efforts to undermine our strategic forces succeed and, 2) it sharply increases our RV levels, which may increase Soviet interest in mobile systems, but may also cause them to resist fractionation limits in the future and simply proliferate RV’s themselves. (S) The Missile Decision OSD is now arguing that if the trench concept is chosen we should also proceed with the largest missile possible. This is because smaller missiles must be bought in larger numbers to reach any given level of surviving capability and each additional missile requires additional trench and a transporter, both of which are relatively expensive. (S) OSD argues that if Option 5/air mobile is chosen we should proceed with a common missile. The largest missile won’t fit in the airplane they would use, and the mostly common missile will not offer enough improvement over the common missile to justify the extra cost and the management problems it would create. (S) I believe these are reasonable arguments and that the mostly common missile is not a good idea for any deployment mode. In the deployment modes where it makes sense, trench and MPS, the larger missile offers perceptional, political, schedule, and management advantages that far outweigh the marginal cost saving that might be achieved with the mostly common missile. (S)
