Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX aegis of the Arab self-governing council. Would it be possible for the U.S. to finance this resettlement? The Secretary replied that he would not rule it out and asked whether Dayan could provide a rough estimate of the cost, which Dayan said he would do. (Later in the day, Rubenstein told Ambassador Lewis that a very rough estimate of the cost involved would be $200 million.) Dayan then said he was hard pressed to know how best to pursue the question of detailed negotiations over Sinai here at Camp David. Would it have to be done between Begin and Sadat, or rather between Sadat and Weizman? (At this point in the conversation Weizman and Tamir along with the other participants joined the discussion.) Secretary Vance asked Weizman if he would please review his understandings with Sadat and Gamasy with respect to security zones in the Sinai. Weizman replied that Sadat insists that the air bases must be totally out within two years along with all Israeli settlements. He would agree to limiting his troops across the Canal to one infantry division with approximately 200 tanks between the Canal and the Mitla Pass. Various “frontier force” units would be spread out East of the Mitla. (Weizman said that this was all a bit confusing, however, since Sadat at one point in Salzburg4 had talked about needing only one brigade of troops throughout the Sinai.) There would be UN forces stationed at Sharm el-Sheikh and elsewhere along the eastern borders of Sinai, although Sadat really would prefer to have all UN forces out. Any electronic early warning systems retained would have to be based on the principle of reciprocity. (Here Weizman added that the Israelis would prefer to give up electronic warning sites of their own in Sinai if having them meant that there would have to be Egyptian sites within Israel proper. But perhaps U.S. monitoring sites of the type now at the Sinai Field Mission could substitute.) Weizman said that Sadat had spoken of a general thinning out of his overall forces, cutting back substantially from the present level of 750,000 men under arms. Weizman then made clear that he saw no difficulty making firm decisions on the various security zones once Israel had made a clear decision to get totally out of Sinai. But he made clear there was no such decision at present because the Israelis cannot accept Sadat’s insistence that their settlements be dismantled. One other unresolved issue was whether or not Sadat would insist on having his own military aircraft east of the passes at bases like Bir Gifgafa. 4 Reference is to the July 13 meetings between Sadat and Weizman in Salzburg, Austria. For documentation on these meetings, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978.
