3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 76 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI had provided was required. We now believed that there was a large disparity between Eastern and Western forces, but we would need better data to arrive at correct conclusions. In sum, if we could agree on the two principles the Secretary had described, and could have reliable data, we could promptly achieve the positive results that both our countries wanted. He would point out that the data presented so far showed 150,000 fewer troops on the side of the Eastern powers than our estimates indicated. We needed a breakdown of the data in order to find out where differences existed and how they could be reconciled. Gromyko thought that if some additional data were indeed required this could be done, but it would have to be done on a bilateral basis. On their side, too, they might require additional data. He would have to further reflect on this matter. The Secretary said that if the Soviet side needed additional data, they should let us know, and we would take it up with our allies. Gromyko said the situation was such that since the West had raised this matter of data, obviously the Soviet Union and its allies would be equally entitled to additional data. Smirnov added that one would have to give some further thought to this direction. Gromyko acknowledged this, but said that it would be wrong if the question of data were to turn into an obstacle to resolving this major issue in substance. The Secretary once again stressed that if agreement could be reached on the two principles he had mentioned, there was reason to believe that progress could be made in Vienna. He added that we were prepared to consider requests for additional data, and believed the Soviet side should approach the question in this manner. He hoped that Gromyko could reflect on the matter of agreeing on the two principles. Gromyko said that we should not permit really insignificant discrepancies in the data each side had stand in the way of progress in resolving what was indeed a most important political issue. He would repeat that he was in favor of negotiating further. The Soviet Union and its allies would never be the first to break off these negotiations. The Secretary said that was good. Gromyko said that there were some problems that required not just a few years, but in some cases even decades to be resolved. This did not mean he was in favor of dragging the Vienna talks out for decades. It sometimes happened that a sudden breakthrough occurs which moves the negotiations forward. A good example of that could be seen in Soviet relations with the Federal Republic of Germany. For many years the Soviet Union and the FRG did not even have diplomatic relations. Then suddenly diplomatic relations were established and even a treaty
