1978 333 The decremented level is calculated in a converse manner—­it is 4% less than the basic in FY 1980, 6% less by FY 1984. These three program levels (covering a range of some $95 billion in total program through FY 1984) permit us to consider a reasonably wide range of defense programs, and to have a better understanding of the implications of different levels of the Defense program. The next step is one of particular importance. The three are program benchmarks to define what capabilities would be added at the higher levels, or sacrificed at the lower. Recognizing the other claims on our national resources (though no other claim can match in importance that of protecting our physical security), I need your guidance as to what the level of the Defense program for the next five years, and the budget for the next year, is to be. Your selection of a level now, followed by my staff’s preparation of the balanced program corresponding to it, will lead to the final step in the process: preparation of the FY 80 budget for submission to the Congress next January.5 I have prepared this memorandum in three parts. The first summarizes briefly the present military context in which your decision will be taken, and the trends which have led to that military posture. Part II, the main portion, summarizes the conclusions from eight months of intense effort by me and many others in the Department, including the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the JCS, and the Military Departments. It describes the implications, mainly in hardware and force structure terms, of the choice of one or another level of five-­ year defense program—­what really happens to our forces and defense capability, and in what particulars, if you decide to expand or contract the commitment to the country’s defense. Finally, in Part III I have appended my thoughts on the domestic and international considerations of a nature not entirely military which bear on the implementation and the effects of the defense decisions which you take. part of the DoD budget, the divergence from the basic level DoD budget is only, as noted, 4%–6%. [Footnote is in the original.] 5 These programs of course represent only three specific points on a continuum of possibilities. Because of the large effort involved, I have not tried to build other properly balanced programs intermediate to these. By preserving these three as points of reference, we will be able to accommodate quickly to any intermediate level you might choose now, or adopt later. [Footnote is in the original.]
