International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
731
was needed to deal with the large payments imbalances and that the
private markets would again have to undertake the bulk of the recy-
cling responsibility. Regarding the private markets, the Germans em-
phasized their concern about the safety and solvency of private finan-
cial institutions and suggested that the “safety net” which private
banks in Germany have among themselves might be a useful example
for the private sector to build on internationally. This gave rise to the
favorable mention in the communique´ of BIS efforts to strengthen pru-
dential aspects of banking operations, which could be supplemented
by private bank efforts. The Summit made clear that in addition to recy-
cling through the private market, OPEC should increase direct lending
to countries with financial problems, and the international financial in-
stitutions—the IMF and World Bank—would have to play an ex-
panded role. Several of the participants stressed the responsibility of
OPEC to provide substantially increased grant aid to ease the burden
on the developing countries that OPEC’s stunning oil price increases
had caused. With regard to the IMF, the Summit pledged to implement
the proposed quota increase,8 supported the Fund’s efforts to borrow
additional resources, and encouraged the IMF to seek ways to make it
more attractive for countries with financial problems to use its re-
sources, including measures to reduce charges to low-income devel-
oping countries. The Summit also endorsed the World Bank’s new
structural adjustment lending program and emphasized the impor-
tance of the IMF and World Bank working closely together. The French
did not unveil a monetary “initiative,” as had been long rumored.
9. Participants agreed on the importance of strengthening the open
world trading system and resisting protectionist pressures. They
agreed to strengthen the international arrangement on export credits,
and to work toward an agreement to prohibit illicit payments to foreign
government officials in international business transactions. They urged
“the more advanced of our developing partners gradually to open their
markets over the coming decade.”
10. Relations with Developing Countries. In addition to the mas-
sive balance of payments deficits of the developing countries caused di-
rectly and indirectly by the recent more than doubling of the price of
oil, the problems for LDCs to which the Summit participants called at-
tention and on which they offered their cooperation included devel-
oping indigenous LDC energy resources, enhancing food security, and
moderating population growth. The World Bank was asked to consider
the possibility of a new affiliate or facility for LDC energy exploration,
development, and production, “and to explore its findings with both
8 IMF quotas were increased by 51 percent in November 1980. (Boughton, Silent
Revolution, pp. 53, 854)
