172
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Frustrated at fighting a no-win struggle, poorly trained, dependent on
tenuous air resupply, and badly overextended, some units have refused
to fight. More important, at the recent rate of losses and desertions
major units may be unable to maintain organizational integrity and
combat effectiveness through the winter.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) As
the government’s power base has narrowed, the Army’s role as the
primary national-level stabilizing institution has become critical. Nei-
ther non-Khalqi officers nor the Soviet advisers are likely to allow the
Army to collapse or be sacrificed. Before such a development, key
military units in Kabul are likely to turn on the government. Such a
struggle could result in anarchy, and the outcome is far from clear. In
the event of a power vacuum in Kabul, a tribe or combination of
rebel tribes might seize the capital, but this would only aggravate the
bloodshed. In any case, serious violence in Kabul and political change
seem almost inevitable and could occur at any time.
[Omitted here is the body of the appraisal.]
59.
Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, August 22, 1979
SUBJECT
CIA Covert Action Activities in Afghanistan
1. Since the signing by the President on 3 July of Specific and
General Findings on Afghanistan (attached), CIA has initiated action
to implement this policy.2 The following provides a status report on
such action.
2. The Specific Finding: This Finding tasked CIA to carry out three
options approved at a meeting of the Special Coordination Committee
on 26 June. Those options and related actions follow.
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–047, Afghanistan: 15 Feb 1979–22 Aug 1979. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
The report was attached at Tab C to an August 22 memorandum from Henze to Denend,
not printed, that responded to Mondale’s request for information on Afghanistan. Henze
did not specify when Mondale made the request.
2 Attached at Tab B to Henze’s August 22 memorandum to Denend, but not printed.
For the Presidential Finding approved at the June 26 SCC meeting, see footnote 5,
Document 53.
