The Colombian Minister replied that he was authorized by his Government
to accept as persona grata anyone whose name should have been suggested
by the Government of Panama, and he added that he was authorized by his
Government, in reciprocation, to inquire whether Doctor José Maria
González Valencia would be persona grata to the Government of Panama.
The Panaman Minister replied that he was authorized by his Government to
accept as persona grata anyone whose name should have been suggested by
the Government of Colombia.
The Secretary of State then expressed his appreciation of the good-will and
friendly attitude thus shown by the Governments of Colombia and Panama
towards each other, and his gratification that the sister Republics were to
establish regular diplomatic relations and undertake formally to adjust their
relations in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents. It
was, he said, his understanding that both Governments earnestly desired the
establishment of regular diplomatic relations as soon as possible and to that
end it might be agreeable to both Governments to set a date for the
appointment of Mr. Victoria J. as Panaman Minister to Colombia and
Doctor Gonzalez Valencia as Colombian Minister to Panama. If so, he
would suggest May 15, 1924, as a suitable date, it being mutually agreed
that both representatives shall thereupon proceed forthwith to their
respective posts.
The Panaman and Colombian Ministers both replied that they were
authorized by their respective Governments to state that Messrs. Victoria J.
and Gonzalez Valencia would be appointed respectively as Panaman
Minister to Colombia and Colombian Minister to Panama on May 15, 1924,
and that they would thereupon proceed forthwith to their posts.
 
This procès verbal of the meeting, drawn up in triplicate in English and
Spanish, was signed by the Secretary of State and the Ministers of
Colombia and Panama. One copy will be retained by the Secretary of State,
who will send of the remaining two copies, one each to the Ministers of
Colombia and Panama respectively.
