782
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The second fissure is East-West versus North-South primacy, be-
tween those who view East-West relations as still the cornerstone of
U.S. foreign policy and those who believe that North-South relations
rival if not exceed East-West relations for the cornerstone role.
The third fissure concerns economics—the growing incongruities be-
tween economic power on the one hand (Europe, Japan, and Saudi Arabia)
and military security responsibilities on the other hand (the U.S. carries
them all). It is only vaguely recognized, but it has enormous potential
to evoke an “isolationist-internationalist” dichotomy in security policy
prescriptions.
These fissures prevent a foreign policy consensus on East-West re-
lations and mean that in the 1970s, and perhaps into the 1980s, no U.S.
policy toward the USSR can have broad and constant support. The do-
mestic need to accommodate both sides of each fissure, particularly in
Congress for budgets, inevitably creates the impression, if not the re-
ality, of a wavering U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union and our allies.
Thus, blaming the President is far from an adequate explanation.
The primary task for U.S. foreign and defense policy in the early
1980s, therefore, is to complete the transition to Era II peacefully and to
give that era a definition and direction appropriate to changed realities.
Success will depend in part on closing the three fissures, and a compel-
ling formula articulated by the President will help close these. Only
their closure will provide the liberal consensus necessary for a sus-
tained realistic policy.
A U.S. Policy for Era II
Era II may or may not be dominated by the U.S. A return to the
Cold War is not possible because regaining the military preponderance
of that time is not feasible. Were it feasible, a Cold War balance would
be the best choice because it was a period relatively secure from general
war. A return to detente of the early 1970s is equally infeasible. The So-
viets would demand higher terms and be no less aggressive in pro-
jecting power into the disputed regions. Even if the Soviet leaders per-
sonally desired a relaxation, the centrifugal forces within the USSR, in
the Warsaw Pact, and in client states elsewhere would make it too
risky. They are trapped in their own expansive dynamic which limits
fundamental choices.
Neither the containment policy nor the detente policy alone is ade-
quate to deal effectively with the new level of Soviet power. A more
comprehensive approach is essential. The U.S. must neither rely largely
on military power nor passively “contain” Soviet power. The U.S. must
engage the USSR competitively.
Huntington defined four elements of a policy toward the USSR on
which “competitive engagement” can be built.
