1038  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
PE–10.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Peru (Achilles) to the 
Department of State1

Lima, May 16, 1958, 6 p.m.
1034. While long-­range effects of VP’s visit there cannot yet be 
forecast, I submit following at this time.
(1) Weak government here was hoping to utilize visit to seek 
more U.S. loans and may not have been averse to prospect of mild 
Communist anti-U.S. demonstrations to impress us as to need for 
help. Seriousness of demonstrations however surprised, mortified 
and shocked government. Demonstrations were partially designed 
to embarrass ­government and after-­effect has been considerably to 
weaken government’s already shaky position.
Some coolness on part Peru Government apparent before incidents 
and even more thereafter with attempt shift blame to U.S. rather than 
face up to own responsibilities for maintenance order, social advance-
ment and avoidance discouragement of foreign investment. We should 
help them regain confidence and face but continue remind them tact-
fully of their own responsibilities.
(2) One strong impact has been on university ferment where pot 
already boiling before visit due not only traditional excessive politick-
ing by LA students but to frustration of students over poor teaching, 
facilities and prospects. Too early yet to evaluate this.
(3) Public reaction has been one of humiliation, admiration for 
VP and reiteration of traditional warm friendship for U.S. But most 
have shown more shame for violence and discourtesy than liking 
for U.S. policies. Reaction has also shown undertones of widespread 
latent non-Communist antipathy toward U.S. because of its wealth 
and power and resentment at certain aspects of its economic policies 
or actions as they adversely affect Peru, notably of course re lead and 
zinc. In this connection U.S. editorials citing latin resentment at U.S. 
policies have been widely reprinted here. It is this latent antipathy and 
periodic resentment, coupled with low living standards, which makes 
Communism dangerous out of all proportion to its numbers. Reaction 
has shown that trade far more important than aid. Latter nevertheless 
important here, particularly when it works from bottom up to help 
maximum number neediest help selves and avoids bureaucratic ten-
dency toward bigness. It has hitherto done both and same grass roots 
approach even more necessary in future to combat Communism. Some 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-NI/5–1658. Official Use Only; 
Priority. This telegram was sent in two sections.
