Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III and other groups. In several of our countries, measures have been taken since the Summit to deal with the particularly serious problem of youth unemployment. To help in further developing such measures, the proposal for a conference on youth unemployment foreshadowed at the Summit was agreed by the recent OECD Ministerial meeting,10 and plans are now being made to hold a Ministerial Conference in December. We conclude from the foregoing: 1. Viewing the Summit nations as a whole, progress in growth, reducing unemployment, and balance of payments adjustment will not be as significant in 1977 as was hoped at the May Summit. While inflation, especially in the weaker countries, is still much too high, the prospects for its reduction in most countries seem a little better than they did at the time of the Summit. 2. The principal routes to adjustment of present distribution of surpluses and deficits remain: (i) policies in the stronger surplus countries which increase domestic demand consistently with the control of inflation, and orient their economies toward expanded imports; and (ii) stabilization policies in the weaker deficit countries. Among the strong countries, only the United States has moved into deficit. Measures to increase home demand have recently been proposed in Japan and Germany; the Japanese and German current surpluses are still too high. 3. Unemployment is rising in all the countries represented except the United States. Increases in present rates of growth, along with continued restraint of inflation in prices and costs, are the best hope of reducing it. 4. Protectionist policies would increase unemployment and inflation. Unless a sustained recovery takes place, however, pressures for protection can be expected to grow. II. Balance of Payments Financing IMF Facility. Even assuming satisfactory growth and stabilization policies, there will remain a need for the provision of adequate international financing to complement commercial credits in meeting balance of payments deficits. Final agreement has been reached on establishment of the Witteveen facility, to which the Summit nations pledged their support at London, with firm commitments on financing
