National Security Policy  453
own pre-­eminence. By means of the June and October 1957 purges and 
the industrial reorganization, the Party demonstrated its supremacy 
over the economic bureaucracy and the military, while Khrushchev, 
through skillful political maneuvering, eliminated his chief rivals from 
the Party Presidium.
25. The June purge of Malenkov, Molotov, and Kaganovich ended 
four years of joint rule by a small circle of Stalin’s most prominent 
heirs. Both policy differences and personal rivalries were involved. The 
losing group not only distrusted many policy innovations sponsored 
by Khrushchev, but probably was alarmed by the way in which his 
energy and political acumen were enabling him gradually to assume a 
dominant role. From the key position of First Secretary, he had built a 
political machine within the Party apparatus, managing Party appoint­
ments so thoroughly that, although he seems to have faced defeat in 
the Presidium in June, he won an apparently hard-­fought and decisive 
victory once he managed to transfer the dispute to the larger Central 
Committee.
26. Then in October, the Party moved against Marshal Zhukov, 
who had been elevated to full membership in the Presidium at the time 
of the June purge. It is likely that the Party feared an attempt by Zhukov 
to use his new political strength to resist certain aspects of Party control 
in the armed forces. He is known to have been impatient with such con­
trols in the past. However, nothing in the Zhukov affair suggests that he 
had been preparing a coup by the armed forces against the Party or that 
he even had political ambition of this kind. But Khrushchev and other 
Party leaders were probably extraordinarily sensitive to the potential 
dangers of a military force not thoroughly under Party domination. 
Furthermore, Khrushchev himself may have regarded Zhukov as a 
potentially dangerous rival.
27. Although there remains a gap between Khrushchev’s pres­
ent powers and those accumulated by Stalin, he does not appear, for 
the present, to have any close rivals. Probably no major policy can 
be adopted without his approval. A majority of the new Presidium 
are his proteges, and the others lack resources sufficient to oppose 
him if they were inclined to do so. But while Khrushchev has gained 
a clear field for his policies, he has not used police terror against his 
colleagues in the manner of Stalin and has indicated in various ways 
that he does not propose to try. Moreover, though the Presidium is 
still the major repository of political power and is likely to remain 
so, Khrushchev by his recourse to the Central Committee in both 
June and October has re-­emphasized the formal subordination of the 
Presidium to that body.
