800.51 W 89France/64: Telegram
[Document 86]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PARIS, January 23, 1925—6 p.m.
[Received 9:15 p.m.28 ]
79. The trend of events in regard to the question of debt settlement has me greatly
worried. A speech by M. Marin in the Chamber of Deputies on January 21 is a fairly
accurate representation of the views of the man in the street, and a more difficult
situation will arise if this opinion be allowed to crystallize. I do not know whether the
United States realizes the financial crisis that France is now facing. At the present
moment it is almost impossible for the Government to make any concrete effort at debt
settlement which would meet American approval. If matter is allowed to rest I fear that
opinion here may become general that we are not prepared to make reasonable
settlement and that a frame of mind will be built up which not only would intensify
French lack of confidence in their finances but would make it impossible for any
Government to make further proposals. I have been indirectly informed that Clémentel
feels that proposal contained in his memorandum is his last word, and although from
our point of view it is unsatisfactory, he is being criticized here for having offered too
much; I am reliably informed that the Governor of the Bank of France has said that in
his opinion Clémentel had offered more than France could afford.
I feel that M. Herriot’s government has made greater efforts to bring about settlements
of pending questions than any preceding one, perhaps greater than may be made by
succeeding governments. For this reason it seems to me that an effort must be made to
persuade French Government to reopen question by making official communication of
some sort which, even if not satisfactory to us, would serve as basis for further
negotiations.
Such effort as this, it seems to me, would serve two purposes; first, it would forestall
formation of opinion here that the United States is a merciless creditor, and second, it
would prevent fixing of American opinion in the idea that France intended to repudiate
the debts.
I venture to ask you, therefore, if, in spite of your telegram No. 46, January 15, 4 p.m.,
it would not be well to endeavor to have the Clémentel proposal renewed in an official
form. I have not yet heard (and I have not pressed for a reply) whether Clémentel was
