Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
105
1. The US would prefer that all space objects be covered by the ini-
tial ASAT Treaty. However, the US can accept a formulation which
covers space objects in which either Party has an interest. Specifically,
the US can accept a limited approach which covers a) all space objects
launched by a Party, except for those in which the Party has no interest
and so designates to the other side, and b) space objects launched by a
third country but in which a Party has an interest and so designates to
the other side. (TS)
2. If the US comes to accept limited coverage in the initial ASAT
Treaty, the Delegation should attempt to get the Soviets to state for the
record that limited coverage is not a pretext for retaining ASAT capa-
bilities and is without prejudice to future negotiations aimed at limiting
or eliminating ASAT capabilities. Delegation should also ensure that
any notification procedures required as a result of limited coverage re-
quire a minimum of information to be provided when interest in a
space object launched by a third country is claimed, and place the
burden of proof on the side challenging the legitimacy of any such
claims. (TS)
3. The Delegation should oppose inclusion in the initial ASAT
Treaty of an exception for space objects that are “illegal” or perform
“hostile acts.” In addition, the Delegation should minimize the degree
to which the negotiating record suggests that the US recognizes the
possible existence of such space objects. The Delegation is authorized,
however, to state that in the US view nothing in the agreement is in-
tended to question a Party’s right of self-defense as set forth in Article
51 of the UN Charter, and that the US is prepared to consider language
to this effect in the preamble of the ASAT Treaty. (TS)
4. The Delegation should avoid formulations that would compli-
cate a future option to open the provisions of any final treaty reached
by the two sides to accession by third countries. (C)
5. With respect to accidental damage, destruction or displacement
of space objects, the Delegation should insure that the initial agreement
does not require and the negotiating record does not imply a require-
realize a satisfactory comprehensive agreement that removes the current asymmetry in
ASAT capabilities,” the Department warned that the United States would “remove this
asymmetry by means of its own ASAT programs.” (Telegram 96873 to USNATO, April
17; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790177–0720) The Mission re-
plied that the “only immediate comment” came from the British Permanent Representa-
tive, who “called the resumption of negotiations ‘good news’. He said he had been im-
pressed by the destabilizing impact” of the Soviet ASAT system and worried that the
Soviets “might be able to destroy US capability to detect Soviet launches in the period just
prior to general hostilities.” (Telegram 2971 from USNATO, April 18; National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790178–0848)
