Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX OMB will present you an upward revision in the supplemental for refugees, requested by the Department based on the latest information on refugee flows and careful analysis of the appropriate U.S. response.) Second, to provide immediate alleviation to the hardest-hit voluntary agencies, and to meet the pre-October shortfall, I am here proposing the provision of $1.13 million from the Emergency Refugee and Migration Assistance Fund, for which a Presidential Determination is required. All of this amount will be used for payments equivalent to resettlement grants at the standard 1978 contract rate ($250 per capita) to the voluntary agencies who resettled European refugees, without U.S. compensation, before October 1. The attached table shows the funding shortfalls, by voluntary agency, during 1978. Only the pre- October amounts will be met by this drawdown. The October-to- December shortfall will be met through the FY 1979 supplemental. Our efforts to use the Emergency Fund for this purpose have been delayed because of certain steps taken on December 15 by Senator Inouye for the Senate Appropriations Committee. At that time, in the course of objecting to a proposed reprogramming action, Senator Inouye asked the GAO to determine whether the Emergency Fund could be used as here proposed. Accordingly, we suspended further action on use of the fund until the GAO ruled. We received its ruling on February 9. The GAO has fully approved the proposed use of the Emergency Fund to meet the pre-October shortfall of the voluntary agencies. The current balance of the Emergency Fund is $3,290,000, sufficient to cover this proposed drawdown. Recommendation That you sign the attached determination which will make available up to $1.13 million through the Department of State to American voluntary agencies to meet their expenses incurred during 1978 prior to October 1, in resettling refugees as part of the European portion of the United States Refugee Program.3 3 No decision is noted on the document.
