International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 33 tive programs. However, they are working separately on this project, and their programs may not dovetail. The Treasury plan will likely call for the establishment of a Trade Adjustment Bank, a development bank for the domestic economy. The State proposal would entail grants and loans on the order of $50 million. Both see the need for a “footwear czar” with overall responsibility for the assistance programs. DOD and Agriculture may support such a proposal. Strauss, Labor, and Commerce will probably argue for some form of import relief. RECOMMENDATION Option I (enriched adjustment assistance) is the only option that would not require a significant cutback in imports, would not penalize the American consumer and would deal with the real problem in this case (i.e., the inefficiency of certain sectors of the footwear industry). We recommend that you support this option as articulated by Cooper and, perhaps, Blumenthal (although Blumenthal might combine it with an option to moderately restrict imports). As a fallback, but only as a desperation fallback, adjustment assistance coupled with a brief (2–3 year), liberalized, tariff quota system would be tolerable. Thus, while not giving up on Option I, you should attempt to ensure that Option III is fashioned in a liberal way—i.e. that the quota level is relatively high [a 1974–76 base period (306 million pairs) with a growth factor of more than the 5% (15.3 million pairs) in the STR option to give some latitude for the newer entrants into the market (mostly developing countries) and to avoid cutbacks for older exporters such as Italy, Spain and Brazil]. All three are politically important, have large trade deficits, and face difficult financial situations. To limit their exports below 1976 levels would be both politically and economically harmful to our interests. The STR option (III) increases Italy’s market share from 47 million pairs in 1976 to 54 million in 1977, which is excellent; but it cuts Spain from 38 to 37 million, and Brazil from 27 to 25 million. You should accordingly argue for a larger overall quota level—above STR’s proposed figures of 322 million pairs—to avoid cutbacks in these countries and raise the level for others as well. [You should not, in this argument, imply support for this option, but point out that you are simply trying to improve it to make it more acceptable if selected by the President.]5 BASIC TALKING POINTS —I take it that we are not going to make a decision here, but are merely trying to refine options for the President. 5 Brackets in the original.
