1980 873 Readiness. Defense will propose large increases in readiness-­related programs including operations and logistics. Since 1979 we have provided annual real growth of about $2.5 billion in readiness funding. The increases for 1982 could be as high as $5B. This is in response to widely known problems (e.g. out of service aircraft) and public perceptions of these problems. This is the first year in which Congress has been reluctant to make cuts from Administration requests for operations programs and may even add to the requests. We need to increase readiness. The question is by how much. Rapid Deployment Forces. The Administration has emphasized the need for a rapid deployment force to counter non-Soviet threats outside NATO and Korea. The Persian Gulf region has been the principal focus of RDF planning since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Initial plans are oriented toward a baseline RDF (31⁄3 divisions) sized to be a trip wire rather than to counter a full Soviet attack. An RDF capable of more effectively countering a Soviet threat would require 61⁄3 divisions. Under current plans support of either size force would require the drawing down of NATO support. Also, the forces required for either the baseline or expanded RDF would be drawn from the existing force structure. Priority in 1980/81 has been given to improved mobility, especially near term sealift enhancements and long term airlift improvements, needed for any RDF deployment and to improved facilities in the Indian Ocean. Enhancements now under consideration by Defense would improve both the level of support for deployed forces (without drawing down NATO) and facility access in the Persian Gulf. Specific program details still need to be defined and priced. Several questions need to be resolved including: —How much effort should go toward an earlier enhancement of the early deploying and sustaining capabilities for the 61⁄3 division force? —Should NATO designated support be protected? —Should the RDF be designed to meet Persian Gulf scenarios specifically or to address worldwide contingencies? —Should some existing ground forces be reconfigured for the RDF to make them easier to move? Forces lighter than those we now have would be more flexible and easier to deploy and sustain, although at the expense of tactical capability. Research and Development. There has been overall real growth of 12% in R&D from 1978 through 1981. This year’s emphasis on readiness and rapid deployment forces is squeezing the R&D budget. Currently, Defense is projecting a constant R&D program in real terms for 1982. Given the large growth in MX development, this implies a real decline for the rest of the R&D program. There will be strong arguments for some real growth.
