by Belgium on condition that Belgian Government undertake at once to refund its entire indebtedness to the United States on following principles:98 “(a) In accordance with the policy prescribed by the debt funding act and the position consistently maintained by the Government of the United States, this Government looks solely to Belgium for payment of its indebtedness which on May 15, 1925, with principal and accrued and unpaid interest, aggregated over $480,000,000 and which, with the exception of about $2,000,000, is all payable on demand. Germany may not be substituted directly or indirectly for Belgium in respect of the pre-armistice debt. (b) Settlement to be submitted to the approval of Congress, may be made along the lines of the British-American debt funding agreement,99 with amortization of the principal of the debt in sixtytwo years and annual payments representing interest and installments of principal. (c) Such postponement or payment of the earlier installments of interest or modification of rates of interest as may be required by the fiscal and economic condition of Belgium.” No objection will be interposed by the Government of the United States to floating of proposed loan should it receive a communication in writing from the appropriate Belgian officials that Belgium accepts principles set forth in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of above statement and will send at earliest possible moment a commission to the United States to negotiate settlement with our Debt Funding Commission. Settlements on substantially same basis have been reached with Great Britain, Finland, Hungary, Lithuania, and Poland.1 (3) You may hand to appropriate Belgian officials informal memorandum containing quoted paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) above. (4) Please cable Department on action taken. KELLOGG 98 Quoted passage not paraphrased. 99 Combined Annual Reports of the World War Foreign Debt Commission, 1922–1926 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1927), p. 106. 1 See ibid., pp. 106, 120, 132, 144, and 156.
