1234 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI cial Session, although we will be pressed to commit ourselves to specific negotiations. He hoped that the President would continue to follow up on the cutoff study.6 He and others believe that cutoff would be in our national security interest. However, he recognized that the study has not progressed to a point which would allow us to make that case and, therefore, the guidance does not extend that far. Mr. Newman noted that these decisions will help immensely the morale of the U.S. Delegation in New York and it will help significantly in achieving consensus at the Special Session. It will help, for example, in heading off the Iraqi resolution condemning the United States and Israel for armaments in the Middle East. The President asked that Secretary Vance, Ambassador Young, and Mr. Aaron work on the announcement of the negative security assurance. Ambassador Young noted that over the last five years opinion polls have shown, without much variation, 75% approval of both SALT and de´tente. The only exception was the period in 1976 when President Ford rejected the word “de´tente,” but thereafter, the proportion went back up from 50% to 75%. He hoped that we could use SSOD to rally American public opinion in support of SALT. Ms. Benton suggested to the President in this context that he do a fireside chat on SALT and de´tente, to clarify Administration policy. The President termed this an excellent idea that we would work on. We are evolving a public relations campaign to sell SALT to the American people and to the Senate. In the absence of an agreed treaty, it would be premature to work in that direction. We have agreed with the Soviets not to reveal details of the negotiations at this time. But at this point we are in good shape in terms of U.S. public opinion, with a ratio of 78 to 12 in favor of SALT, almost the reverse of the split on the Panama Canal at the outset.7 The Republicans have decided to campaign against SALT, although that will be a serious mistake on their part. Some Republicans, like Matthias, Kissinger, and Ford may support SALT, but most will campaign against it. In this case, however, we will have public opinion on our side. He repeated his thanks to the delegation for their contribution to the work of the Special Session. He noted his appreciation for Harold Willens’ article in the New York Times on the importance of press coverage of SSOD.8 6 See Documents 484 and 485. 7 Public opinion polls taken in 1977 as the Carter administration resumed the final negotiations of the Panama Canal treaty revealed that over 70% of the American public opposed the treaty, which would have given control over the canal zone to Panama. 8 Harold Willens, “Where Are the Media?,” New York Times, June 11, 1978, p. E21.
