Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I sources on programs which most directly contribute not only to growth but also to equity in those countries which receive our aid. This approach is not only this Administration’s policy. It has been expressed by the Congress in the 1973 Foreign Assistance Act8 and the International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1978.9 And it applies not only to our bilateral aid programs but also to those programs we support in the multilateral development institutions. Growth without equity can lead to a situation in which a growing economic pie is cut into ever more unequal pieces. Equity without growth can lead to a situation where a shrinking economic pie is cut into equal but ever smaller pieces. Neither situation can lead to long-term political or economic health. Both growth and equity are necessary. A practical focus also requires that we be clear about our priorities. Thus while we will continue to work with the developing countries in addressing the future of the international political and economic system, we intend increasingly to concentrate on specific development goals: energy, food, health, and increasing the capacity of the developing countries to obtain and apply the knowledge and technology they need. There is good reason for seeking international emphasis on each of these areas: • An ample supply of energy at reasonable prices is essential to economic advancement. It is also a key to our own prosperity. • Adequate food and good health are basic to human survival and productivity. • And the ability of people and institutions in the developing countries to obtain, develop, adapt, and apply technology is critical to most development problems. Let me illustrate these priorities today by describing our current efforts and future plans in two areas—energy and food. In the coming months and in other forums such as the U.N. Conference on Science and Technology for Development and the World Health Assembly, we will be addressing the others as well.10
