3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
503
ment, judging that it should not be used in the difficult atmosphere that
had developed.
6. I handed over draft statement on not deploying more than, 20
ALCMs on existing B–52 bombers. Soviets raised issue of omission of
B–1 from list. Gromyko suggested that he believed that US would agree
not to deploy more than 20 ALCMs on any aircraft. I said that was
clearly wrong, that the only aircraft at issue were existing ones, and
that the idea of a maximum of 20 on all aircraft, including those built
subsequently was inconsistent with the concept of averaging.
7. Gromyko agreed to 10 RVs being permitted on ASBMs.
Vance
168.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Oral Message from Brezhnev
The enclosed oral message from Brezhnev is designed to induce
you to influence the Western Europeans not to sell any arms to the Chi-
nese (the translation is by the Soviet Embassy;2 am asking Cy for an of-
ficial US translation of the Russian text). In addition to sending a copy
to Cy, should I send a copy to Harold?
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 4,
USSR (Brezhnev Drafts/Letters), 4/77–9/80. Secret; Eyes Only. Carter wrote in the mem-
orandum’s upper right-hand corner, “Pers[onal] File. J.” Carter, in his memoirs, quoted
his diary entry written after receiving this letter from Brezhnev: “On the 27th I got a very
discouraging letter from Brezhnev, showing that they [the Soviets] are almost paranoid
about the People’s Republic of China and demanding that I prevent our Western allies
from selling any defensive weapons to the PRC. We’ll delay for a few days before giving
him an answer. . . . Had an excellent meeting with Cy Vance. He spent the night with us
at Camp David, and I went over a broad gamut of foreign affairs questions with him. He
and I agree that the most significant responsibility we have is to balance our new friend-
ship with the PRC and our continued improvement of relations with the Soviet
Union. . . . As we moved toward a most-favored-nation relationship with the PRC, we
must face the need to do the same thing with the Soviet Union.” Ellipses in the original.
(Keeping Faith, p. 201)
2 Brzezinski placed an asterisk here and wrote “it’s poor” at the bottom of the page.
