National Security Policy 233 5. On May 22 Mr. Randall filed with the Council a memorandum report, which is before you, stating (1) the text of the existing CFEP policy on international commodity agreements, and (2) the consensus of CFEP that this policy should be continued in effect. In the light of this review, there appears no need to include any paragraph on this subject in the basic policy statement, and none has been included. 6. It may interest the Council to know that the CFEP, under the exceptions procedure in its existing policy, recently authorized the Department of State to participate in an international coffee study group and to discuss an international coffee agreement, if such an agreement is proposed by one of the members of the study group. The CFEP also urged State to take every precaution not to imply directly or indirectly, that the U.S. would participate in or police such an agreement. cc: Mr. Harr Mr. Lay Dr. Gleason Mr. Johnson 65. Memorandum of Discussion at the 369th NSC Meeting1 Washington, June 19, 1958 SUBJECT Discussion at the 369th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, June 19, 1958 Present at the 369th NSC Meeting were the President of the United States, presiding; the Vice President of the United States; the Secretary of State; the Secretary of Defense; and the Director, Office of Defense Mobilization. Also present were Mr. Fred C. Scribner, Jr., for the Secretary of the Treasury; the Attorney General; the Director, Bureau of the Budget; Mr. Walter Williams for the Secretary of Commerce (Items 2 and 5); the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission; the Federal Civil Defense Administrator; the Chairman, Council on Foreign Economic Policy (Items 1 and 5); the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Deputy Assistant to the President; the Acting Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Director, International 1 Source: Agenda item 1: Basic National Security Policy. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
