Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1045
A. Treaty of Tlatelolco
—Request Brazil to confirm publicly, consistent with the position
taken by Foreign Minister Silveira, that it will act as if bound by the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, and thus all of its nuclear facilities will be under
IAEA safeguards.
—Over the longer term, offer to work with Brazil to bring the
Treaty of Tlatelolco into full effect, with the result that all peaceful nu-
clear explosives would be precluded. (Brazil is committed not to use its
present nuclear supply from the US and Germany for explosives.)
B. Expanded Nuclear Cooperation
—Offer to cooperate with Brazil in developing technology asso-
ciated with high temperature reactors and the thorium fuel cycle, as
part of the US-proposed fuel cycle evaluation program. Point out
that we believe that these technologies could greatly aid Brazil in
achieving energy independence; without reliance on the plutonium
economy.
C. Enrichment
—Tell Brazil that we accept the contemplated initial steps toward
the establishment of a multi-national enrichment facility in Brazil. (Li-
censes for a laboratory-scale facility utilizing the unproven Becker
nozzle process are to be issued in 1979; subsequently a demonstration
plant will be licensed.)
D. Reprocessing
—Ask Brazil to acquiesce in deferral of any further transfers of re-
processing technology pending evaluation of present and alternative
nuclear fuel cycles in the fuel cycle evaluation program.3
Vance
3 On April 27, Crimmins reported in telegram 3330 from Brasilia that “the time has
come to make the move” proposed by the Department of State. “The critical factor,” he
cautioned, remained “our readiness and ability to exert persuasive influence and pres-
sure on the FRG.” He also urged the administration to make sure that the Brazilians “un-
derstand what we are driving at; ambiguity on this point can only lay up serious trouble
for the future.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840086–3330)
