1144 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement China. Peiping timed their decision to authorize visas for the newsmen pretty shrewdly. The knowledge that entry would be granted by the Chinese Communists was just enough of a catalyst to set the pot to boiling very vigorously. As long as there was some doubt whether the newsmen could actually obtain entry into Communist China, the issue was more or less academic and pressure was accordingly moderate. Now it has increased to a point where it can be contained only with great difficulty. Linc White in his first round with the newsmen after word was received that visas were obtainable, put the emphasis almost completely on non-­recognition as the reason for the non-­validation of passports. This came under considerable fire since its vulnerability was pretty obvious in the existing situation. Very influential publishing figures including ­Sulzberger of the New York Times intervened quite actively in favor of the granting of authorization for the visits. They got in touch with the White House as well as with the Department. The Secretary felt that we would have to rely on the issue of the imprisoned Americans as the reason for holding the line. This was something tangible that everybody could understand. It is difficult to refute. Of course it has the drawback that it overlooks the other cogent reasons which exist or might exist for continuing the policy after the possible release of the 10 Americans. Also it does not give us a com­ plete basis for excluding visits to North Korea and North Vietnam, which are included in the passport ban. However it is the basis which has been selected to stand on. If all the Americans are released and if there is no new element in the situation, presumably we would have to authorize visits. And it is doubtful if we could discriminate in favor of newsmen as a class and against others with strong practical reasons for visiting Mainland China. The press reaction, except for David Lawrence’s column has been quite critical of the Department’s policy. I am enclosing a large batch of clippings assembled by John Lindbeck. These need not be returned. As you were informed in the Department’s 135, the American Red Cross has agreed to undertake the visits to the Chinese con­ victs to ascertain their wishes. The Red Cross showed no hesitation in undertaking the task and is going about it in a business-­like man­ ner. We decided not to send a Departmental officer along with them. It would have meant the loss to CA of Ralph Clough for two weeks or both Ralph and Joe Nagoski for one week and a considerable slice out of FE’s travel funds. If we had thought that it would improve our position, we wouldn’t have hesitated to make the sacrifice. However, we do not think that sending a Departmental officer along would have the slightest effect on the attitude of either the Chinese Communists or the Indians, except perhaps to strengthen the Chinese Communist
