Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II gaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations, but the requirement could of course be imposed in agreements with any government. All Title I agreements already include general “self-help” provisions under which recipient countries agree to undertake agricultural development projects and programs. Legislation directs the Executive Branch to consider particularly the extent to which self-help efforts “contribute directly to development progress in poor rural areas and to enable the poor to participate actively in increasing agricultural production.” Annual reports on self-help progress are required from recipient governments, and some monitoring of self-help project expenditures occurs. We do not, however, require recipient governments to demonstrate how food or proceeds will specifically help the needy. EB View (supported by USDA) EB believes that only agreements with countries identified as consistent and gross violators should be amended. Its reasoning is as follows: —This is what Section 112 of the PL 480 Act requires. It is not necessary or desirable to go beyond the law to add reporting requirements for countries which are not gross violators. —Some have argued that additional reports are needed to meet Congressional intent, and to indicate to Congress that the Administration takes the amendment seriously. EB does not agree. There is a clear division in Congress between human rights advocates and farm bloc Congressmen interested in expanding U.S. farm exports. This split on the issue creates a different, and more controversial, human rights climate for PL 480 than for other assistance programs. On the specific amendment in question, many Congressmen had serious reservations about including it in PL 480 and would not favor Administration action to apply it liberally. This being the case, EB does not believe any clear Congressional intent exists regarding implementation. The Administration can demonstrate to Congress other, more effective, actions to use PL 480 to promote human rights. These include, for example, the review process already initiated, appropriate demarches linked to Title I programs etc. —Too many reports already are required under the PL 480 program, which take up a significant amount of staff time. In addition to “self-help” reports mentioned above, there are shipping and commodity arrival reports, new reports required regarding storage facilities and production disincentives, quarterly reports to Congress on planned programming, an annual report to Congress on global food assessments etc. Another reporting requirement will only add to the burden.
