282
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
gaged in a consistent pattern of gross violations, but the requirement
could of course be imposed in agreements with any government.
All Title I agreements already include general “self-help” provi-
sions under which recipient countries agree to undertake agricultural
development projects and programs. Legislation directs the Executive
Branch to consider particularly the extent to which self-help efforts
“contribute directly to development progress in poor rural areas and to
enable the poor to participate actively in increasing agricultural pro-
duction.” Annual reports on self-help progress are required from recip-
ient governments, and some monitoring of self-help project expendi-
tures occurs. We do not, however, require recipient governments to
demonstrate how food or proceeds will specifically help the needy.
EB View (supported by USDA)
EB believes that only agreements with countries identified as con-
sistent and gross violators should be amended. Its reasoning is as
follows:
—This is what Section 112 of the PL 480 Act requires. It is not nec-
essary or desirable to go beyond the law to add reporting requirements
for countries which are not gross violators.
—Some have argued that additional reports are needed to meet
Congressional intent, and to indicate to Congress that the Administra-
tion takes the amendment seriously. EB does not agree. There is a clear
division in Congress between human rights advocates and farm bloc
Congressmen interested in expanding U.S. farm exports. This split on
the issue creates a different, and more controversial, human rights cli-
mate for PL 480 than for other assistance programs. On the specific
amendment in question, many Congressmen had serious reservations
about including it in PL 480 and would not favor Administration action
to apply it liberally. This being the case, EB does not believe any clear
Congressional intent exists regarding implementation. The Adminis-
tration can demonstrate to Congress other, more effective, actions to use
PL 480 to promote human rights. These include, for example, the re-
view process already initiated, appropriate demarches linked to Title I
programs etc.
—Too many reports already are required under the PL 480 pro-
gram, which take up a significant amount of staff time. In addition to
“self-help” reports mentioned above, there are shipping and com-
modity arrival reports, new reports required regarding storage facil-
ities and production disincentives, quarterly reports to Congress on
planned programming, an annual report to Congress on global food as-
sessments etc. Another reporting requirement will only add to the
burden.
