202  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
of the conversation was devoted to the Cuban problem, and this portion 
of the discussion was reported in the telegram under reference.
Comibal
The Ambassador inquired concerning the Comibol situation. 
Dr. Paz said that the commission on Comibol was working “seriously” 
and that immediately upon his assumption of office he would set into 
motion measures which would in time, perhaps six to eight months, 
improve Comibol’s financial situation. He realized that reforms would 
not make their effect felt on Comibol for some time. Dr. Paz said he was 
concerned by the possibility that Bolivia’s treasury would be empty by 
the time he took office. He said he understood that the Government 
of Bolivia had requested the “ICA” August cash grant of $450,000 this 
month. The Ambassador said that it had been decided that the August 
grant would not be made in July except with the approval of Dr. Paz. 
Dr. Paz said that he believed he would be faced with a grave finan-
cial crisis soon after August 6 and hinted that he might have to look to 
the United States for some special emergency assistance at that time. 
The Ambassador said that while he did not have instructions to say 
so, he was quite sure that the United States Government would con-
sider any proposals of the Government of Bolivia which were offered if 
they were consistent with the political realities which the United States 
Government must take into account in its relations with Bolivia. Thus, 
for example, it would be politically undesirable for the United States 
Government to be associated in a financial way with the dismissal of 
supernumerary miners. On the other hand, there might be a possibility 
of some assistance to the Government of Bolivia in a program of reset-
tlement of dismissed miners. The President-Elect acknowledged the 
validity of the Ambassador’s comment. Dr. Paz said that he intended 
to institute certain reforms including, probably, the raising of gasoline 
prices, the establishment of a rationing system in the mine commissaries, 
and the re-­allocation of miners to redress the present situation in which 
65 percent of the miners in Comibol mines work above ground.
The Ambassador said, by way of illustrating one of the things 
that was wrong with Comibol, that recently an American geologist 
had talked to him, explaining that he had been hired by Comibol to 
engage in exploration work. He had said that if the needed explora-
tion was to be accomplished expeditiously, it was desirable that the 
initial work be done, not on the ground, but from the air. The Bolivian 
Army’s Geography Institute possessed numerous maps and other data 
which would be most valuable to the work of Comibol’s geologists, 
but Comibol had not been able to obtain these data without paying for 
them. Dr. Paz added, “And Comibol does not have the money.” The 
Ambassador said that this situation seemed to him to be one which
