Human Rights
75
—Other important treaties in the area of human rights include the
Genocide Convention, the Convention on Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, and the Covenants on Civil and Political Rights
and Economic and Social Rights. The USSR is party to all of these
treaties. President Carter has pledged to seek prompt Senate consent to
these treaties in order that the US also will become a party to them.
—The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by the UN
General Assembly in 1948, while not a treaty, is an authoritative state-
ment of the human rights which the Charter is meant to promote.
—The Final Act of the Conference on European Security and Co-
operation8 provides “In the field of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, the participating states will act in conformity with the pur-
poses and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and with the
Universal Declaration as set forth in the international declarations and
agreements in this field, including inter alia the International Cov-
enants of Human Rights, by which they may be bound.”
—When a state’s practice is inconsistent with its international
human rights obligations set forth in the above treaties, it may not, of
course, legitimately complain that the practice is an internal affair on
which others may not comment. (Addressees should also be aware that
it has been the long-standing USG position that statements by one gov-
ernment about the affairs of another, even in the absence of treaty obli-
gations, do not constitute unlawful intervention under international
law.)
3. You should also point out as appropriate that the USG monitors,
evaluates and criticizes when necessary our own human rights per-
formance. The US Commission on Civil Rights, an independent agency
of the USG, is charged with the responsibility to encourage construc-
tive steps toward equal opportunity for minority groups and women. It
investigates complaints, holds public hearings, and collects and studies
information on denials of equal protection of the laws because of race,
color, religion, sex, or national origin. Voting rights, administration of
justice, and equality of opportunity in education, employment and
housing are among the many topics of specific Commission interest.
Recent studies by the Commission cover the following areas of civil
rights:
—Education: desegregation in schools; equal educational opportu-
nities for minorities; problems particular to minorities including isola-
tion, performance, language barriers.
—Employment: unemployment and layoffs; equal opportunities
for employment; affirmative action programs.
8 The text of the Helsinki Final Act is printed in Department of State Bulletin, Sep-
tember 1, 1975, pp. 323–350.
