82
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Expanding the scope and effectiveness of the Human Rights Coordi-
nating Group. This group—which you set up recently,23 chaired by the
Deputy Secretary and including Deputy Assistant Secretary-level rep-
resentation from all Department bureaus concerned with human
rights—should meet at least once a month to project pending issues
and determine matters for decision by you or the Deputy Secretary. A
smaller core group—to include D, P, IO, H, L, and S/P—should be
available to meet, at Assistant Secretary level, for fast-action items.
—Assuring interagency coordination. The State Department should
take the lead in helping assure a coherent line on human rights by
all concerned parts of the Executive Branch (most notably, Defense,
Treasury, CIA, USIA, AID). In lieu of the now-cancelled PRM on
human rights,24 this effort will require action by the Deputy Secretary
through an interagency task force or ad hoc group.
Actions Requested:
—That you inform the President of the policy being implemented
by the State Department and propose the use of an interagency ad hoc
group, chaired by the Deputy Secretary to help assure Executive
Branch coordination. (See Tab 325 for proposed memorandum from you
to the President.)26
—Authorize the Deputy Secretary to expedite confirmation of Patt
Derian as the Coordinator for Human Rights.27
—Authorize the Deputy Under Secretary for Management to de-
tail five Foreign Service Officers to D/HA by April 1.28
—Request that D/HA, assisted by S/P, provide you with a brief
status report (due by the first day of each month) on items proposed in
this memorandum and subsequent initiatives on human rights.29
23 See Document 9.
24 See footnote 1, Document 22.
25 Attached but not printed is an undated memorandum from Vance to the Presi-
dent. The final version of this memorandum is printed as Document 48. Christopher
wrote in the margin next to this point: “? Do we want to get a lot of others involved; will it
dilute effort and hamper flexibility? Is coordination worth it?”
26 There is no indication as to whether Christopher approved or disapproved the
recommendation.
27 Christopher initialed his approval and added: “Bennet should be asked to check
on hearing date.” Derian’s nomination was subsequently submitted to the Senate on
April 29. Her formal swearing-in ceremony took place at the White House on June 17.
(Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 746 and 1131–1132)
28 There is no indication as to whether Christopher approved or disapproved the
recommendation. He bracketed this point and wrote in the margin: “question necessity if
PD can build permanent staff.”
29 There is no indication as to whether Christopher approved or disapproved the
recommendation.
