3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
286
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Let us take the main problem—the state of affairs with the prepa-
ration of the strategic offensive arms limitation agreement. In my pre-
vious letters I have already noted that after agreement of principle on a
number of major issues was achieved during the meetings with you of
the USSR Minister of Foreign Affairs last September, from the US side,
notwithstanding the readiness we showed to seek mutually acceptable
solutions to outstanding questions, there followed no equivalent steps
towards the Soviet position.
Moreover, judging by your letter, now an attempt is made to intro-
duce into the preparation of the agreement, as a new factor, references
to the domestic opposition in the US, for the satisfaction of which we
are called upon to make further concessions. And among unsolved
issues such questions are again mentioned (as the Backfire, for ex-
ample) which should have been closed long ago. Such approach is in no
way helpful. It is easy to imagine what would happen if the Soviet side
acted in a similar manner.
We, of course, are prepared to continue to seek mutually accept-
able solutions to outstanding problems. We are also ready to con-
tribute—to the extent it depends on us—to creating a favorable atmos-
phere in the US around the future agreement. But successful
completion of the agreement, in which objectively both our countries
are equally interested, requires that the US side also make its part of the
road. And, of course, our efforts in favor of the approval of the agree-
ment in the US can by no means be regarded as a substitute for efforts
in the said direction by the Administration itself which, naturally, is
fully responsible for that.
Frankly speaking, I also expected a more constructive reply to the
letter I had sent to you specifically on the question of neutron
weapons.3 I shall not repeat now our stated assessment of this new va-
riety of weapons of mass annihilation. I wish, however, to stress again
one aspect of principle. If we take purely military characteristics of that
weapon, to which the matter is actually reduced in your letter, even
then such an approach clearly shows its pernicious consequences for
international peace and security. In fact, the production and deploy-
ment of that weapon would inevitably lead to reducing the so called
nuclear threshold, to a temptation to use it at earlier stages of a conflict
and, consequently, to increasing the risk of a nuclear war. Is this alone
not sufficient to cause concern that prompted the proposal I put for-
ward? And it is not the matter of propaganda here at all.
We confirm our proposal to agree on a mutual refusal to produce
neutron weapons and we would like to hope that this proposal will be
3 See Document 76.
