Government of the United States considers extremely
drastic the regulations concerning the navigation of the
Yangtze from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. in the so-called war zone
and those concerning search at certain places during the
daylight hours on penalty of artillery fire if there has
been failure to stop on signal, which are contrary to
treaty provisions, but is willing, with due reservation of
the treaty rights involve[d] and as a purely temporary
measure, not to prevent commercial vessels flying the
American flag to comply [from complying?] with these
regulations, should they so desire. On the other and, the
American Government will not direct its war vessels to
comply with the above regulations, and more especially
with the circular from the commander in chief of the so-
called National Revolutionary Army requesting such
vessels promptly to sail down river to a comparatively
distant place, and not to anchor in the vicinity of the
war zone at Wuhan, in order to prevent danger and
avoid misunderstanding. The Government of the United
States desires to bring immediately and forcibly to the
attention of all the Chinese authorities concerned their
grave responsibility should any untoward incident arise
from an effort to put these regulations into effect, with
which it is obviously impossible for American men-of-
war to comply.”30
4. Pursuant to the Legation’s policy as expressed in the Legation’s 360,
August 30, 5 p.m., and 403, September 15, 11 a.m., I am instructing the
American consul general at Canton to protest vigorously with the
authorities there against the navigation regulations and request their
cancelation or [apparent omission] on the Yangtze appear to have
determined not to comply with the regulations as to their ships of war. No
definite information is available regarding British attitude.
6. [sic] I regret exceedingly that the exigencies of the situation prevented
my referring preliminarily to you for instructions. I earnestly trust you
approve the action taken.
