August 8–September 17, 1978
175
Vance, that he read the Egyptian paper or at least be aware of the Egyp-
tian Delegation’s objections before he meets with President Carter. He
could then indicate to President Carter the areas in which the Egyptians
see problems and suggest that details could be discussed later in the
day with the Egyptian Delegation. Kamel was skeptical about Eilts’
going over there and finally suggested that this not be done. (Com-
ment: Kamel was sensitive to the idea that he had not been able to get to
Sadat and that we might be able to do so on our own.)
Kamel noted with some chagrin that President Carter had said that
President Sadat is flexible, but that his aides are not. President Carter
had indicated the reverse is so with the Israelis. He thought this was not
fair. The Egyptian Delegation is seeking to find a fair and honorable
settlement. He wished to emphasize this point. It was not seeking to
block what Sadat wants to do. We are passing through a crucial phase,
Kamel noted. Sadat has placed all of his faith in the United States. He
again urged that the United States, and specifically President Carter,
take into consideration Sadat’s problems in the Arab world. This is ter-
ribly important. Secretary Vance pointed out that we do so. Kamel in-
sisted that the paper in its present form will hurt Sadat in the Arab
world. Sadat, unfortunately, does not like to go to President Carter and
appear to be “bargaining.” The Secretary pointed out that there is no
desire to bargain. What we want is Sadat’s statement as to what he feels
is wrong with the paper. Details can be discussed with the Egyptian
Delegation. Kamel did not respond directly, but noted that the present
paper will frighten off Hussein, the Saudis, and others. Sadat will be to-
tally isolated.
There were some more exchanges on the possibility of the Egyp-
tian Delegation meeting with Sadat prior to the Sadat meeting with
President Carter in order to persuade the President to point out to
Carter what is wrong with the paper. That part of the discussion ended
inconclusively with the Egyptians indicating they will try, but clearly
not being sanguine about the possibility of such an advance meeting.
As Ahmed Maher and Eilts were going from Walnut9 to Laurel10 to
get ice and glasses, Maher said to Eilts that the basic problem that the
Egyptians have with our paper is that it is viewed (rightly or wrongly)
as a U.S.-Israeli paper. He noted the Egyptian awareness of the fact that
we had given the paper first to the Israelis and thereafter spent six
hours with the Israelis hearing their suggestions. Eilts pointed out that
we had rejected many of the Israeli suggestions and, as Secretary Vance
had pointed out, the Israelis are not very happy about this. Maher said
9 Walnut Lodge, the Camp David residence of Vance and Mondale for the duration
of the summit.
10 Laurel Lodge, the location of the main dining facilities at Camp David.
