Human Rights 617 199. Editorial Note Secretary of State Cyrus Vance wrote out a formal letter of resignation on April 21, 1980, following President Jimmy Carter’s decision to launch a rescue operation on April 24 in an attempt to free the American hostages in Iran. In his letter, Vance noted, “I know how deeply you have pondered your decision on Iran. I wish I could support you in it. But for the reasons we have discussed I cannot.” The complete text of Vance’s resignation letter is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 1980, page 2. Vance delivered the letter to Carter the afternoon of April 21. In his memoirs, Vance stated that he “wanted to make it clear that I would resign whether or not the mission was sucessful.” (Vance, Hard Choices, page 411) Vance recounted: “I agreed to his request not to make my resignation public until after the rescue attempt, and to remain in my position until the mission was completed.” (Ibid.) For the text of Carter’s April 25 address to the nation, wherein he indicated that the rescue operation had been cancelled, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pages 772–773. On the morning of April 28, Vance met with Carter at the White House; Carter gave Vance a letter accepting Vance’s resignation. In his farewell remarks at the Department of State on April 28, Vance indicated that he would “support fully” the President’s policies related to other foreign policy issues and demurred from further discussion of the details informing his resignation. (Department of State Bulletin, June 1980, page 2) On April 29, the President announced from the Briefing Room at the White House that he had designated Senator Edmund S. Muskie (D–Maine) as his Secretary of State nominee, touting Muskie’s “extensive knowledge of foreign affairs.” Following Carter’s announcement, Muskie offered a brief statement, remarking: “The world is in turmoil. The issues are complex. But I believe that in this instability the United States must be perceived as stable and as a source of strength in the free world. As Secretary of State, I will devote my full energies to achieve these goals. I respond to this challenge with genuine hope. America remains a land of great opportunity. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pages 791–792) The Senate confirmed Muskie’s nomination on May 7. In a White House ceremony on May 8, Muskie was sworn in as Secretary of State. For the President’s and Muskie’s remarks, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pages 861–864. A briefing paper prepared by the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs on May 9 for inclusion in Secretary Muskie’s briefing book summarized the historical antecedents for the administration’s human rights policy and called for a “reinfusion of high level commitment and support to preserve and build upon the accomplishments of the past 3½ years.” The paper outlined six major objectives:
