Summaries of Compilations LV Chile U.S. Relations With Chile Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. Although the United States and Chile continued cordial relations during 1958–1960, there was considerable tension between them over copper policy. About one-­half of Chile’s foreign exchange was derived from this one commodity, and the United States affected Chile’s copper market in a variety of ways: as consumer, as homeland of Chile’s two principal copper operators (Anaconda and Kennicott Corporations), and as prime mover in the worldwide COCOM effort to keep vital raw materials out of East bloc countries. At the beginning of 1958, the U.S. Congress was preparing legislation to reinstitute a copper duty to protect domestic production in the face of declining world demand. The Embassy, pointing out that the Chilean perception of the importance of the U.S. market was even more important than the market was in actuality, recommended alternatives such as stockpile purchases or an outright subsidy. The Department fundamentally agreed but observed that some compromise would have to be found. (CI–1) Vigorous public support of the duties by Interior Secretary Fred Seaton led Chilean President Carlos Ibáñez del Campo to cancel a scheduled visit to the United States. (CI–2, 4) In the wake of this setback, the Embassy recommended increased U.S. courtship of Chile, especially including measures of economic aid and cultural exchange which would remind Chileans that the United States did “recognize the difference between a Dominican dictatorship and a Chilean democracy” (CI–5) In elections held in September 1958, Conservative-Liberal candidate Jorge Alessandri gained a narrow 31 percent to 29 percent plurality over Salvador Allende, the standard-­bearer of a broad left-­of-­center coalition. Increased foreign exchange problems coincided with his victory. (CI–11). The Department and Embassy wanted to help Chile work out a favorable solution with the International Monetary Fund, especially as they perceived Alessandri as “much more business-­like” than
