Summaries of Compilations  LV
Chile
U.S. Relations With Chile
Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents 
in the text.
Although the United States and Chile continued cordial relations 
during 1958–1960, there was considerable tension between them over 
copper policy. About one-­half of Chile’s foreign exchange was derived 
from this one commodity, and the United States affected Chile’s copper 
market in a variety of ways: as consumer, as homeland of Chile’s two 
principal copper operators (Anaconda and Kennicott Corporations), 
and as prime mover in the worldwide COCOM effort to keep vital raw 
materials out of East bloc countries.
At the beginning of 1958, the U.S. Congress was preparing legisla-
tion to reinstitute a copper duty to protect domestic production in the 
face of declining world demand. The Embassy, pointing out that the 
Chilean perception of the importance of the U.S. market was even more 
important than the market was in actuality, recommended alternatives 
such as stockpile purchases or an outright subsidy. The Department 
fundamentally agreed but observed that some compromise would 
have to be found. (CI–1) Vigorous public support of the duties by 
Interior Secretary Fred Seaton led Chilean President Carlos Ibáñez del 
Campo to cancel a scheduled visit to the United States. (CI–2, 4) In the 
wake of this setback, the Embassy recommended increased U.S. court-
ship of Chile, especially including measures of economic aid and cul-
tural exchange which would remind Chileans that the United States 
did “recognize the difference between a Dominican dictatorship and a 
Chilean democracy” (CI–5)
In elections held in September 1958, Conservative-Liberal candi-
date Jorge Alessandri gained a narrow 31 percent to 29 percent plural-
ity over Salvador Allende, the standard-­bearer of a broad left-­of-­center 
coalition. Increased foreign exchange problems coincided with his vic-
tory. (CI–11). The Department and Embassy wanted to help Chile work 
out a favorable solution with the International Monetary Fund, espe-
cially as they perceived Alessandri as “much more business-­like” than 
his predecessor. (CI–12, 13, 16) Along the way, however, the Department 
grew more skeptical that Alessandri had the will to introduce a thor-
oughgoing stabilization program. (CI–17) The Department also worked 
to head off the plans of other agencies to dispose surplus copper stocks. 
(CI–20, 21) Finally in May 1959, a package was worked out combining 
U.S. and IMF assistance to Chile. (CI–19)
