January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1139
tion. He said that what was needed was imaginative approaches such
as Dayan’s, as well as my ideas with reference to religious sovereignty
and Heads of Agreement as put forward, in addition to the absentee
ballot for the Palestinian Arabs.
He asked me to work with Secretary Vance in putting together a
briefing book7 for him preparatory to his meeting with Sadat and then
said that he noticed that I wore cufflinks and wanted me to have a pair
with the Presidential Seal. He gave them to me and I left.
7 The briefing book on U.S. strategy for the upcoming Sadat and Begin visits, for-
warded to Carter under an undated 19-page covering memorandum from Vance and Li-
nowitz, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit
File, Box 3, Egypt: President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin, 4/80: Briefing Book.
354.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 8, 1980, 3:04–4:18 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Second Meeting with Egyptian President Anwar
al-Sadat
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President
Ambassador Roy Atherton, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (notetaker)
His Excellency Muhammad Anwar al-Sadat, President of the Arab Republic of
Egypt
General Kamal Hasan Ali, Minister of Defense and War Production
Dr. Butros Butros Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 37, Serial
Xs—(2/1/80–4/15/80). Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room.
Carter’s handwritten notes related to this meeting are in the Carter Library, Plains File,
President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 3, Mid East, 4/79–12/80.
