World Hunger and Food Policy
911
for FY 1980, assuming relevant portions of the FY 1980 supplementals
are enacted, and the pending regular FY 1981 appropriation requests.
OMB concurs.9
If you approve, I will work out details with the agencies, the sched-
ulers, and Jody Powell, and I will provide a briefing paper for your use
in Rome and Venice.
I believe this initiative and statement would be well received by
US religious, charitable and international relations groups that are the
backbone of support for our aid bills in the Congress, and by members
of the US black community and press concerned with Africa.
Recommendation
That you agree to the initiative proposed above, subject to detailed
interagency and OMB review. (I will report back to you if there are any
problems.)10
9 An unknown hand underlined this sentence.
10 There is no indication that the President approved or disapproved the recom-
mendation. The Venice Summit took place June 22–23. At the Summit’s conclusion, the
leaders of the seven major industrialized nations released a communique´, which is
printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 1980, pp. 8–11.
274.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, June 19, 1980
SUBJECT
Rome-Venice Initiative and Statement on World Hunger
Here is a late entry agenda suggestion for your meeting with the
Pope.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects—
Hazel Denton, Box 57, Food: 4–7/80. No classification marking. Attached to the memo-
randum is a handwritten note from Owen to Brzezinski: “Zbig—You said that an earlier
version of this memo was too late. Rud [Rutherford Poats] has redrafted it, so that it ap-
plies only to the visit to the Pope. You may want to suggest to the President that he
discuss the problem of world hunger, in general & starvation in Uganda, in particular,
with the Pope—& then report on this discussion to the press & TV afterward. I think it’s a
good idea. You have to judge whether it’s still ‘too late.’ This has been cleared by all the
relevant agencies in Washington. I believe it would be helpful—but substantively & to
the President. HO.” (Ibid.)
