March–August 1953 601 220. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, June 19, 1953, 4 p.m. SUBJECT Certain Decisions on the Iranian Problem PARTICIPANTS G—Mr. Matthews S/P—Mr. Bowie E—Messrs. Waugh and Schaetzel BNA—Mr. Raynor NEA—Mr. Jernegan Ambassador Henderson GTI—Messrs. Richards and Stutesman At 4:00 p.m. June 19, the above noted persons gathered in Mr. Matthews’ office to discuss a memorandum from Mr. Jernegan to Mr. Matthews dated June 15,2 listing nine problems related to Iran which required consideration in order to clarify the Department’s position. Mr. Jernegan opened the discussion by stating that these problems should be viewed in the light of three alternative approaches: 1) an assumption that Mosadeq is going to stay in power; 2) an assumption that it is not to the advantage of the U.S. to take any measures which would assist Mosadeq to remain in power; 3) an assumption that the situation in Iran has changed drastically and a non-communist successor to Mosadeq has arisen. The problems raised in Mr. Jernegan’s memorandum of June 15 were then studied in order. A) What reply, if any, is to be given Dr. Mosadeq’s request that President Eisenhower act as an arbitrator in the oil dispute? It was agreed that no reply should be given Dr. Mosadeq on this matter, unless he raises the question again. B) What guidance should be given Walter Levy who has suggested that he send, as a private citizen, a suggestion to Dr. Mosadeq of a figure which would be a basis for a lump sum settlement of the compensation question in the oil dispute? It was agreed that the U.S. Government would avoid any unwanted interference in the oil dispute and would urge Mr. Levy, at least for the present, to postpone any trip to Iran or communication with Dr. Mosadeq on the subject of a lump sum settlement. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 888.2553/6–1953. Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Stutesman on June 20 and approved by Jernegan and Richards. 2 Document 218.
