396  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Gorbachev will have his own arms control agenda for the meet-
ing. We should be well prepared on issues such as the future of the 
European alliances, stationed forces, deeper CFE cuts, naval arms con-
trol, “next steps” in nuclear testing, binary CW production, and the 
like. Even if Gorbachev should not raise such issues, the press will and 
so will Gorbachev’s very effective and knowledgeable public relations 
machine.
Ronald F. Lehman II3
Attachment
Paper Prepared by the Director of the Arms Control and 
Disarmament Agency (Lehman)4
Washington, November 29, 1989
Arms Control, Political Change in Eastern Europe,  
and the Malta Meeting
Two years ago, while still START Negotiator, in a speech in Vienna 
I suggested that the arms control spotlight would increasingly turn 
from Geneva and its nuclear talks toward Vienna where new conven-
tional force talks and human rights discussions were taking place in the 
CSCE context. In the years ahead, we would reach the limits of what 
could be accomplished in nuclear arms control without parallel prog-
ress in the conventional arena. More significantly, progress in human 
rights would be more important for the future success of our arms 
control efforts than any of our current arms control negotiations. Arms 
control deals only with the symptoms of East–West tension, whereas 
CSCE strives to deal with the causes of insecurity in Europe. Although 
we wish to avoid rigid and arbitrary linkages, arms control and human 
rights issues were inherently connected. In the end, we could not trust 
the regimes of the Warsaw Pact any more than they trust their own peo-
ple and are trusted by them. I still believe this to be the case.
Political change is helping arms control
Last week I returned from a trip to Berlin, Warsaw and Budapest. 
Clearly, we should do nothing that would slow the pace of political, 
social and economic change in Eastern Europe. Positive political change 
in Eastern Europe will enhance the prospects for arms control, and vice 
3 Lehman signed the memorandum “Ron” above this typed signature.
4 Secret.
