El Salvador 601 Regarding his request for two security advisors to assist at the Casa Presidential, the President again expressed his urgent interest, saying he wanted to have the use of these advisors right now, rather than at some indefinite time in the future. - - - - - On leaving I asked if he intended to remain firm regarding the students sent out of the country. He said he intended to exercise a firm hand. What was more, if the disorders did not subside, he would arrest the Rector and the Deans and throw them out of the country. - - - - - All through the talk he received phone calls through [which?] he received information or issued orders. Among the former was a call from Rubio Melhado7 saying that the Rector had asked to see him. On laying down the phone Lemus said, “I think he is afraid.” Among the latter he gave orders for the distribution of government leaflets. While tired, he seemed to be confident and sure that he could control the situation. - - - - - While waiting for my audience I talked with two of the Presidential aides, both major officers in the army. They agreed that underlying the present disturbance were the social and economic inequalities in the country. However, the students had no rallying point except opposition to the MFM in San José. Both confidently expected the present disorders to subside quickly and opined that the President had no choice but to exercise a firm hand. - - - - - Following the meeting with the President I passed by the office of Rubio Melhado. Major Rubio asked why I was still in town and not on vacation as planned. I said that the nature of the current crisis indicated my continued presence here; Major Rubio agreed that the situation was serious [text not declassified]. We agreed I would not leave town until we were both certain that the situation was such as to permit my absence. 7 Maj. Alfonso Rubio Melhado was Secretary General of the Presidency and a member of the Central Committee of the Partido Revolucionario de Unificatión Democrática.
