earth recognizes, the others will realize that it is time for them to find out
what they are going to do.”
Vrioni saw to it that everybody in official life in Tirana heard the news of
President Coolidge’s telegram before the night was over and the following
morning representatives of most of the governments which had not
recognized came early to see me and verify the report. It seemed to me that
there was an atmosphere of gloom hovering over them because they
believed that it might upset the consultations which they had heard were
going on between Paris, London and Belgrade.
The Yugoslav government recognized on the same day that I delivered the
formal note, and it is my opinion that immediately after American
recognition the British and French governments suggested that Belgrade act
favorably at once and without reservations. My French and British
colleagues made no effort to veil the fact that their governments were
studying the question of Recognition jointly and that the stumbling block up
to that time had been the title voted to the new monarch, “Bang of the
Albanians.”
While Great Britain and France recognized on September 21, it is my
conviction that, if they did not make representations to the Royal Albanian
Government, they agreed upon a joint policy to be pursued in the event that
any new pacts with Italy are brought to light which threaten to cause
another ruction in the Balkans. And I also can say most assuredly that even
Italy had become just a little worried over the silence of Great Britain and
France. And no doubt was left in my mind that the Italian Legation here
was more than gratified when the United States recognized.
A demonstration was ordered to be held in front of the Legation on the
evening of September 15. I invited the multitude to come into the Legation
court. There were about 1,500 persons, headed by the Government’s
military band. The band first played the American and then the Albanian
anthem and gave vociferous applause at which juncture nothing was left for
me to do but make a speech, which I had not intended doing.
The Department will not receive a copy of the speech, which was entirely
impromptu, but let it suffice to say that I said nothing that would do any
