to favor the continuance of existing authority while oppressive administration or
measures hostile to the welfare and traditions of the people might have an opposite
effect. The character of the future administration and its effect, whatever its character,
upon the disposition of the voters could not be safely predicted. The Parties
nevertheless agreed to postpone the plebiscite long enough to make the result uncertain.
And the point of the agreement was that neither Chile nor Peru was to be assured of
definitive control but that the decision should be left to popular vote.
 
It is apparent that there are no physical obstacles to the holding of a plebiscite at the
present time. So far as the necessary arrangements for a plebiscite are concerned, it
cannot be said that it must be abandoned because it has become in the nature of things
impracticable to hold it.
Nor has there been an agreement between the Parties to terminate the provisions of
Article 3.
It is the contention of Peru, maintained with earnestness and eloquence, that Chile
wilfully prevented the timely holding of a plebiscite and that her action in the course of
her administration of the territory constituted a perversion of the conditions essential to
the plebiscite as contemplated by the treaty; in short, that Chile by preventing the
performance of Article 3 has discharged Peru from her obligations thereunder, and
hence that a plebiscite should not now be held and that Chile should be regarded as a
trespasser in the territory in question since the year 1894.
This contention raises two principal questions: First, with respect to the conduct of
Chile in relation to the efforts to reach an agreement for a plebiscite; and, second with
respect to her Administration of the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.
THE FAILURE TO AGREE—DELAYS IN NEGOTIATIONS
It has not been contended that the plebiscite should have been held before the
expiration of the ten-year period. The nature of the obligation imposed by Article 3
must be derived from its terms. Until the special agreement was made there could be no
plebiscite. As the Parties agreed to enter into a special protocol, but did not fix its
terms, their undertaking was in substance to negotiate in good faith to that end, and it
would follow that a wilful refusal of either Party so to do would have justified the other
Party in claiming discharge from the provision. But, as the Parties did not in the treaty
prescribe the conditions of the plebiscite and left these to be the subject of a future
agreement, it is manifest that with respect to the negotiations looking to such an
agreement they retained the rights of sovereign States acting in good faith. Neither
Party waived the right to propose conditions which it deemed to be reasonable and
appropriate to the holding of the plebiscite, or to oppose conditions proposed by the
