Summaries of Compilations  LXVII
his supporters by failing to consult them. Nonetheless, Kalijarvi rec-
ommended continuing support of the constitutional government by 
speeding up action on pending aid requests. (ES–19, 23)
The Recognition Issue
On October 20, 1960, a military-­civilian Junta seized power in a 
bloodless coup. It declared the Constitution still in effect and prom-
ised to hold free elections, and the new Foreign Minister assured 
Kalijarvi that the Junta wished to maintain close and cordial rela-
tions with the United States. (ES–25) Kalijarvi reported 3 days later, 
however, that the coup represented a “decided shift to the left”. 
Although the military members of the Junta were friendly to the 
United States, they were young and politically inexperienced, while 
the civilian members included many strong leftists and some “out 
and out Commies.” The leading figure behind the coup was report-
edly former President Oscar Osorio, who might think he could keep 
the leftists under control, but Kalijarvi thought the military clement 
in the Junta was “no match” for the leftists and that the coup should 
be regarded as the “first step towards Fidelismo.” Arguing that sup-
port for the Junta was already cooling and a countercoup might be 
in the making, he urged the Department of State to “go slow with 
recognition.” (ES–26)
In Washington, the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs took a more 
benign view of the new regime, considering that the Junta’s civilian 
members were largely leftist but moderate. (ES–27) In a November 1 
memorandum to President Eisenhower, Secretary of State Herter noted 
that the majority of the army and the conservative oligarchy supported 
the Junta, that Osorio had a long record of cooperation with the United 
States and opposition to Communism, and that several other countries 
had already extended recognition. He recommended prompt recog-
nition in order to enable the United States to establish good relations 
and exert a positive influence on the new regime, and Eisenhower 
approved. (ES–28)
Meanwhile, the Department’s concern about the new regime was 
increased by new reports from the Embassy, reinforced by Kalijarvi’s 
return to Washington for consultations. Chargé Donald P. Downs was 
instructed to meet with Osorio and selected army officers and ascertain 
their views. Downs reported on November 3 that Osorio had replied to 
questions vaguely and evasively and that he did not think it was neces-
sary to curb Communist activities but intended that all parties should 
participate in free elections. Downs also met with one of the military 
members of the Junta, who he thought was friendly but “a complete 
babe in the woods.” (ES–29, 30)
