522
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
1. Return to the Security Council. Secretary Vance reported that
Ambassador McHenry was doing a formal paper which would be
available in the next 48 hours concerning the pros and cons of raising
the Iranian issue in the UNSC.3 We need a report from the Commission
to the SC which would report on their reasons for breaking off their
efforts. It would not deal with the substance of the charges against the
Shah, etc. The report could be done in either closed or open session.
The Secretary General probably prefers a closed session report, at least
initially.4 Secretary Vance will go to New York, probably on Wednes-
day,5 to meet with the co-chairmen of the Commission. We will also
be in touch through intermediaries on Wednesday for an evaluation
of the situation after the departure of the Commission. In Vance’s view,
the Commission idea is not dead yet, and going to the Security Council
at this stage would only worsen the chances that it can be resuscitated.
He recommended that we wait until we have been in touch with the
co-chairmen, until we have had a report through the intermediaries,
and perhaps until the election is held in Iran on Friday before taking
any action. All agreed that we had about a week to ten days before
public opinion would begin to demand action, and we should use that
time to explore whether the Commission can be revived. (S)
The SCC recommended that we proceed with the report of the
Commission to the SC, looking to the Secretary General in the first
instance whether this should be in open or closed session. Based on
that report and other contacts during the rest of the week, a decision
would be taken whether to introduce a new initiative in the UNSC. In
the meantime, Ambassador McHenry would submit a memorandum
to the President concerning the nature, timing and advisability of such
an approach.6 (S)
Approve the above approach.7
Expedite an approach to the SC.
2. World Court. Oral arguments are scheduled to be presented to
the ICJ on March 17, leading to a formal decision by the Court condemn-
ing Iran’s seizure of the hostages and ordering their return. The SCC
agreed that the oral arguments should proceed as scheduled. This
would be seen as some pressure on Iran but would not be the kind of
3 Not found.
4 According to telegram 1000 from USUN, March 18, Waldheim’s briefing of the
Security Council members on March 17 was informal, did not go beyond public state-
ments, and did not include a Commission report. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800139–0258)
5 March 12.
6 No memorandum has been found.
7 Carter approved this option with a checkmark.
