Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III c. The French want the Summit to call on the OPEC countries to participate vigorously in these programs of energy aid to LDCs. This makes sense. (C) 2. Food. In line with Sol Linowitz’ Hunger Commission report to you:6 a. Reserves. The Summit should call on LDCs to strengthen their food storage capacity, so that they can maintain larger food reserves, and should urge increased bilateral and multilateral aid to them for this purpose. You might urge governments expeditiously to establish the basis for a successful resumption of the negotiations for an international wheat reserve. (This means European willingness to agree to larger stocks.) (C) b. Production. The Summit should call on LDCs to develop national food production strategies, and pledge increased bilateral and multilateral aid to help LDCs carry out these strategies. (C) c. Research. The Summit should call for increased bilateral and multilateral aid for agricultural research in LDCs. This is one of the main prerequisites to increased food output; it is underfunded. The most effective instrument for supporting this research is the World Bank’s Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research; its resources should be doubled. (C) d. Food Aid. The Summit should call for more food aid to LDCs. To this end, it should suggest negotiating a new Food Aid Convention, and fulfilling the aid targets in the present one.7 (C) 3. Technical Assistance. The Summit should call for increased effort in this field and for coordination between national programs—such as our proposed new Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation and the comparable Canadian institution. (C) The heads of government don’t need to spend a great deal of time on these North-South issues. If they will agree that the communique should be specific, the Summit Preparatory Group can do the rest. The Bonn communique called for a new World Bank program of lending for oil exploration in LDCs, which has proved exceedingly useful. This is 6 Sol Linowitz, Chairman of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger, sent Carter a report entitled “Recommendations Concerning Hunger for the President’s Use at the Tokyo Summit” under cover of a June 8 letter. (Letter from Linowitz to Mondale, June 15; Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National Secu-
