636
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
c. The French want the Summit to call on the OPEC countries to
participate vigorously in these programs of energy aid to LDCs. This
makes sense. (C)
2. Food. In line with Sol Linowitz’ Hunger Commission report to
you:6
a. Reserves. The Summit should call on LDCs to strengthen their
food storage capacity, so that they can maintain larger food reserves,
and should urge increased bilateral and multilateral aid to them for this
purpose. You might urge governments expeditiously to establish the
basis for a successful resumption of the negotiations for an interna-
tional wheat reserve. (This means European willingness to agree to
larger stocks.) (C)
b. Production. The Summit should call on LDCs to develop national
food production strategies, and pledge increased bilateral and multi-
lateral aid to help LDCs carry out these strategies. (C)
c. Research. The Summit should call for increased bilateral and mul-
tilateral aid for agricultural research in LDCs. This is one of the main
prerequisites to increased food output; it is underfunded. The most ef-
fective instrument for supporting this research is the World Bank’s
Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research; its re-
sources should be doubled. (C)
d. Food Aid. The Summit should call for more food aid to LDCs. To
this end, it should suggest negotiating a new Food Aid Convention,
and fulfilling the aid targets in the present one.7 (C)
3. Technical Assistance. The Summit should call for increased effort
in this field and for coordination between national programs—such as
our proposed new Institute for Scientific and Technological Coopera-
tion and the comparable Canadian institution. (C)
The heads of government don’t need to spend a great deal of time
on these North-South issues. If they will agree that the communique
should be specific, the Summit Preparatory Group can do the rest. The
Bonn communique called for a new World Bank program of lending for
oil exploration in LDCs, which has proved exceedingly useful. This is
6 Sol Linowitz, Chairman of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger, sent
Carter a report entitled “Recommendations Concerning Hunger for the President’s Use
at the Tokyo Summit” under cover of a June 8 letter. (Letter from Linowitz to Mondale,
June 15; Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National Secu-
rity Issues, Box 87, National Security Issues—World Food (6/30/1977–12/17/1979))
Documentation on the report is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs.
7 Under the Food Aid Convention, first negotiated in 1967, donor nations promised
to provide LDCs with specified amounts of food assistance.
