Bolivia 193 campaign in Bolivia “in defense of YPFB” which favors acceptance of a Soviet loan and drastic modification of the liberal petroleum code under which several U. S. oil companies are actively engaged in exploration activities. In recognition of Treasury’s opposition, on policy grounds, to a direct open loan to YPFB, we have drafted an answer to Embassy/ USOM La Paz (Tab A)7 authorizing them to reiterate the ICATO 81 proposal but also authorizing them to inform President Siles that when announcing the over-­all FY 1960 aid program and his Government’s plans for utilizing our aid, he could state that in view of the stabilization support Bolivia is to receive from the United States his Government has found it possible to channel some of Bolivia’s own resources to YPFB. We have pointed out that in connection with such an announcement he could explain the need for the necessary reforms. We believe that in this way Embassy/USOM’s main objections to the ICATO 81 proposal can be resolved. Unfortunately, although Treasury has cleared our message ICA has informed us (Tab D)8 that it cannot concur. ICA now holds that it does not agree with the indirect grant approach and favors a direct loan to YPFB. ICA further recommends that a survey team be sent to Bolivia to study YPFB’s financial situation and future prospects to provide the basis for determining the amount and conditions of a loan. In view of Treasury’s strong objection to a direct loan we cannot accept ICA’s proposal. Moreover a survey team would be inconsistent with Treasury’s desire to play down the connection between our aid and YPFB’s financing. We have no doubt YPFB badly needs at least $5 million in financial assistance at this time. The details of what our assistance would be used for and procedures for assuring ourselves that our money goes for this purpose can be worked out through our Embassy and USOM. Recommendation I recommend that you speak directly with Mr. Saccio9 to obtain his concurrence with our proposed telegram. In the present context, our 7 Not attached to the source text. 8 Not attached to the source. The reference is to a memorandum from ICA to Assistant Secretary Rubottom, dated September 9, 1959. 9 Leonard J. Saccio, Deputy Director, International Cooperation Administration.
