Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
177
41.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, May 24, 1977
These are the paragraphs which I hope you will find helpful. They
are designed to accomplish three purposes:
1. Continue the President’s Notre Dame theme of combining a vi-
sion of America’s international role with the realities of a novel interna-
tional system;2
2. Establish an agenda for U.S. and OECD activity on North-South
issues over the next year which, without hiding the difficulties of the
concept, examines and develops a set of proposals around the theme of
basic human needs; and
3. Establishes that this theme will be a major element in the contin-
uing North-South dialogue post CIEC3 for constructive and legitimate
reasons—not for tactical reasons of “splitting” the Group of 77.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Attachment
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff4
Washington, undated
As the Administration of President Carter has reviewed the major
issues currently on the North-South agenda and begun to establish its
own set of priorities, it has found one issue slighted in all the talk about
a new international economic order. The issue has various names: the
“absolute poverty” problem, the problem of “basic human needs,” the
problem of “the forgotten forty percent.” Whatever we choose to call it,
it is the problem of those one billion persons living at the razor’s edge
of existence. Again, as President Carter noted at Notre Dame, most na-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 122, Vance, Miscellaneous Communications with:
5/77. No classification marking. Printed from an unsigned copy. There is no indication
that Vance saw the memorandum.
2 See Document 40.
3 Vance attended the final CIEC ministerial meeting in Paris May 30–June 3. For ad-
ditional information, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy,
Document 265. For Vance’s May 30 address to the CIEC, see Department of State Bulletin,
June 20, 1977, pp. 645–648.
4 No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the paper.
