Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 273 I just outlined. As a result of this review, the President has concluded that the primary objective for strategic arms control is to achieve verifiable agreements that reduce the risk of nuclear war. The risk of nuclear war can be reduced by creating a more stable nuclear balance, in which deterrence is strengthened and the incentives perceived by either side, even in a crisis, to launch a nuclear strike are reduced and eliminated. Strategic force reductions can enhance stability if they are properly applied. Based on the fundamental principles that I have just outlined, the United States will pursue in START reductions that would result in a genuine diminution of the risk of nuclear war. However, both sides should as well consider options to enhance stability through force restructuring and confidence-­building measures that create greater openness. The U.S. approach in START, complementing our own force structuring decisions, will ensure a stable nuclear balance by reducing the nature and scope of the threat posed to each side, thereby decreasing the vulnerability of our respective retaliatory forces to the threat that remains, and by lowering uncertainties in the evolution of forces between the sides. Vulnerability can be reduced by focusing reductions on the most threatening systems, especially highly-MIRVed, increasingly accurate heavy intercontinental ballistic missiles, by curbing specific emerging and currently deployed threats, and by taking other steps to ensure the survivability of retaliatory forces. Conversely, a START treaty should permit each side to retain adequate retaliatory capability, particularly those systems less suitable for conducting a first strike or short-­warning attack. To ensure that improvements in force survivability remain valid over the long term, they must be balanced with the requirement that the size and nature of current and evolving strategic forces be transparent and predictable to the other side, and that agreements be effectively verifiable. Mobile ICBMs provide a case in point: the same aspect of mobile ICBMs that makes them more survivable also complicates effective verification. The U.S. position on mobile ICBMs remains unchanged for now: unless we can devise and reach agreement on a regime that would provide for effective verification of numerical limits on such systems, mobile launchers of ICBMs must be banned under a START treaty. Otherwise, they would be a source of serious compliance concern. The U.S. remains prepared to continue our previous efforts to develop an effective verification regime for mobile ICBMs. The negotiations to date have produced a joint draft treaty text that reflects the areas of agreement and disagreement between the sides. Reaffirming Secretary Baker’s commitment to Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, the U.S. side intends to proceed on the basis of the existing JDT. The United States is also pleased to reaffirm our continued
