Yugoslavia
801
250.
Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the
Department of State1
Belgrade, February 26, 1978, 1356Z
1584. Subj: The Tito Visit in Perspective.
1. Very little that affects the future of the foreign policy of the
United States can be predicted with confidence. But (as in so many
other things), Yugoslavia is an exception to the rule. We can be abso-
lutely positive of one thing, and reasonably certain of another:
—The certainty: Despite all the evidence to the contrary, Josip Broz
Tito will not live forever. Indeed, it is unlikely that he will still be
around when the Carter administration leaves office.
—The probability: There will follow in the wake of Tito’s demise
a period of internal uncertainty and international tension in the heart
of Europe, with the ever-present danger that uncertainty will degener-
ate into civil war and tension escalate to crisis.
2. These two factors—The certainty of Tito’s death and its potential
consequences—must lie at the heart of our thinking about the substance
of our bilateral relationship. And since the Tito visit will inevitably
influence the development of that relationship, these factors are rele-
vant to the trip as well.
3. The key question is not so much what we will do when or after
Tito passes (important as that is), but what we can do beforehand to
put ourselves in a position to have as much influence as possible on
the course of events in the post-Tito period.
4. Under a worst-case scenario Tito’s death could unleash immedi-
ately, or within a reasonably short period, a clash among Yugoslav
nationalities, or a vying for power among the residual leadership, or
both, that would result in massive instability. And who could predict
with confidence what the Soviets might, under such circumstances, be
tempted, “invited,” or feel compelled to do?
5. I make no claim that these events will come to pass. Indeed,
I believe it improbable that they will. Certainly there are other less
horrendous scenarios that are more within the realm of the possible.
But some degree of uncertainty and instability, even if only of a very
temporary nature, is virtually certain. And it is during that period
of uncertainty and—if the crisis passes uneventfully—the institution-
building that will follow after, that the US can have its greatest and
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780089–0117.
Secret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. According to another copy, Eagleburger drafted and
approved the telegram. (Ibid.)
