608  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
ceiling would not be exceeded. There would be a floating level on the 
number of these aircraft. At the same time there would be a ceiling, and 
the floating level would not exceed the ceiling.
Finally, this approach would apply to ALCMs with a range in 
excess of 600 km.
Bartholomew: It is important to have a full picture of what your 
thinking is. Before I respond, can you describe your thinking on SLCMs?
Akhromeyev: These are separate issues. I would like to invite a 
discussion of ALCMs, then proceed to SLCMs.
Burt: What has become of the proposal for verifying aggregate lev-
els of ALCMs? Akhromeyev: I am removing it.
Burt: Second, the elements of common ground called for 115 con-
verted bombers, and called for a continuing right. It would apply not 
just to existing bombers, but in the future we want the continuing right 
to have 115 bombers outside the START limits. Can you accept the con-
cept of continuing right?
Akhromeyev: My position is in the negative. The elements say 115, 
I can say 100. And not new types of bombers.
Burt: The idea is not to convert new types of bombers. Say 10 years 
from now bombers that are now new would be older and could be con-
verted, but the number would never exceed 115. Bartholomew: The num-
ber would never exceed 115. As bombers are converted, earlier converted 
bombers would be retired. Burt: For example we would not now declare 
B–2s for conversion.
Akhromeyev: This is an entirely new question. Let us not add new 
points to our exchange. Let us settle the questions we have before us.
Burt: This is not a new issue, we have addressed it in Geneva. 
Akhromeyev: Let us discuss Moscow questions, not Geneva questions. 
Burt: It was in the elements of common ground. Akhromeyev: I cannot 
answer on the subject of continuing right. I can answer on the number 
of aircraft outside the 1600. Other aspects can be clarified in Geneva.
Bartholomew: Do I understand that we would be agreeing on a 
number outside the START limits that would not be exceeded. The US 
is talking about transferring some aircraft into this category while tak-
ing others out, so the total never exceeds the agreed number.
Akhromeyev: I understand. In case of malfunction, aircraft could 
be replaced. Burt: We were talking about replacing aircraft that age. 
Akhromeyev: That is different, there I cannot answer.
Burt: Our view is that if these converted heavy bombers are carry-
ing non-­nuclear ALCMs that are distinguishable, they would not count 
against the 1600. Of course these converted bombers would count 
against the 115 limit, but if equipped with non-­nuclear ALCMs would 
not count against the 1600.
