920 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement defensible. I am just very doubtful that agreement can be reached thereon and made my comments in order that all possible points of view would receive consideration. I particularly appreciated your spelling out the rationalization for the draft and it is much help to me in formulating the arguments in its defense. While I entirely see the Department’s point of view with regard to the self-­defense clause, I frankly continue to have some difficulty in convincing myself of its real importance as an issue. To whatever extent any Chinese Communist statement of renuncia­ tion of force in the Taiwan area or elsewhere has value, the question of our exercising the right of self-­defense against them does not arise. If they violate the declaration and attack I do not see how even the most unfriendly critic could allege that the United States would still be bound by the declaration and forestalled from exercising its right of individual and collective self-­defense. However, I agree that in the context of nego­ tiations as they have developed it is difficult to drop the clause, and I felt that now that we were presenting a new draft it would be our only opportunity of doing so and the possibility should at least be consid­ ered. Of course the difficulties that we will face if and when agreement is reached on a renunciation declaration are such that there is much to be said for stretching things out along the present line as long as possi­ ble. I think that the new draft has merit viewed in this light. Of course I do not exclude the possibility of the Chinese ­Communists realizing this and therefore looking for a way to shift their position and getting a declaration issued, substantially accepting our new draft. However, at the moment, this does not seem likely. I have carefully studied the second paragraph of the Department’s 1892 with a view to determining whether there was any way at tomor­ row’s meeting I could usefully further sound out the situation before deciding whether to present my draft. I have just not been able to think of any way this could be done except that I plan to try to get him to speak first, which I expect he will refuse, and I then plan to make an opening statement which will present the draft. I am entirely sure that he fully understood my hint at the last meeting with respect to the possibility of new draft, and if I am coy about bringing it forward it can only be counterproductive. The only thing I might do would be to restate his positions in a form designed to pave the way for the introduction of my draft and wait for his reaction. However, this has the danger of elicit­ ing responses from him which would make it difficult then to introduce the draft. I have, therefore, decided that if he refuses to speak first (it is actually my turn to speak first tomorrow) I will try to avoid accepting any summary rejection on his part by not getting into too much detailed discussion and urging that he take it home and study it. Anyway, you will know how things have come out before you receive this letter, but I wanted you to know my present thinking.
