1956  787
Foreign Ministers’ meeting, the release of three imprisoned ­Americans 
was announced by Peiping. Since that time only one American, 
Dr. Homer Bradshaw, has been released, it being clear even to Peiping 
that in his case Mrs. Bradshaw would shortly pass away in China as a 
result of the treatment she had received in prison unless Dr. Bradshaw, 
who is a physician, could accompany her from the country.
“In the meanwhile the Chinese Communists have tried hard to 
assert that the remaining thirteen Americans imprisoned, equally cov­
ered by their September 10 commitment, are somehow not entitled to 
return because they have ‘committed offences against the law’, and, on 
the other hand, to intimate that their return depends on ‘improvement 
in relations’, that is, the granting to Communist China of political con­
cessions by the United States.
“Thus the Chinese Communist failure to honor its pledge of 
­September 10, 1955 to release all imprisoned Americans, and its pattern 
of action with regard to those prisoners who have been released, again 
conclusively establish the continued efforts of Peiping to use innocent 
Americans as political hostages and propaganda pawns.”
Enclosure
Draft Press Release3
Undated
PRESS RELEASE
I regret to announce that Ambassador Wang has rebuffed my 
efforts to continue to seek with him agreement on a declaration which 
would renounce the threat or use of force generally and particularly in 
the Taiwan area, and which would unqualifiedly provide that differ­
ences between the United States and Communist China be settled only 
by peaceful means.
Ambassador Wang made it clear that his refusal further to meet 
with me was based upon the Chinese Communists’ unwillingness to 
drop the demand that the U.S. give up its right to self-­defense against 
armed attack in the Taiwan area, and in fact concede to them the very 
goals for which they would use armed force.
4Ambassador Wang also informed me of the Chinese Communists’ 
intent to denounce our Agreed Announcement of September 10 with 
respect to the return of civilians. Such unilateral action cannot relieve 
3 No classification marking.
4 This paragraph to be used and penultimate paragraph deleted if Wang denounces 
Agreed Announcement. [Footnote in the original.]
