642 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 135. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, February 9, 1959, 10:30 a.m. OTHERS PRESENT General Twining Major Eisenhower General Twining opened by telling the President of the visit of General Norstad, who had been in Washington for the week end. The purpose of his trip had been to testify before the Mahon Subcommittee (Defense) of the House Appropriations Committee. On Saturday morn­ ing General Norstad met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The subject at that time had been the current U.S. position on contingency plans for Berlin, which General Norstad had thought was very fine. To this the President added Secretary Dulles had had a successful trip to Europe and had reported that the French are taking a much more positive view on the Berlin question. (The Secretary had pointed out, however, that despite their resolution, the French have very little capability available in Europe itself.) General Twining then mentioned the idea of a military represent­ ative to the tripartite meetings which are being held in Washington between Alphand, Caccia and Murphy. (These are being held in response to De Gaulle’s desire for tripartite discussions within NATO.) Specifically, Admiral Dennison had been present at the first meeting, held recently, to brief on the subject of the Far East. The Joint Chiefs of Staff desire to terminate this procedure of providing a military repre­ sentative at first chance, fearing that too many political problems will be pushed off on the military. General Twining promised that he would see Mr. Murphy on the subject. He added, however, that at the meeting between Secretary Dulles and General De Gaulle it had been helpful to the Secretary to be able to state that we provided a military representa­ tion to this tripartite meeting. General Twining believes that he has now arrived at an estimate of what De Gaulle wants. Primarily, he desires to have a veto over the use of our Strategic Air Command. * * * General Twining then brought up the matter of personnel changes in Europe. General Norstad had voiced the desire to remain in his pres­ ent job to the end of this Administration; specifically, he feels he should 1 Source: Senior military personnel appointments, publicizing defense efforts; Congressional hearings. Top Secret. 7 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on February 10.
