Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA 207 From Prague, the Embassy summed up frustration felt by posts with the discussion of relocation of the Radios: “The question is, since the USG has developed an efficient and influential voice in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union at a modest cost, why should we continually study ways to save relatively small amounts of money when the proposed solutions will all adversely affect the utility of that rather valuable resource?” (Telegram 4057 from Prague, November 20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790534–0053) Strongly recommending against moving the Radios, the Embassy in Bonn stressed that “implementation of any kind of relocation plan beyond transfer of a few low-level positions would stir political controversy in the FRG, with ensuing tensions in FRG–US relations.” Any move—be it complete or partial—would have the same effect, the Embassy reported in telegram 20671 from Bonn, November 19. Relocation would open Schmidt to attack from the right for abandoning the Radios, as well as from the left by Social Democratic Party elements seeking to completely remove the Radios from German soil. Without discussing the financial aspects of the move, the Embassy concluded “that the negative political implications are so substantial as to throw considerable weight into the balance.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790533–0171) In a November 27 letter to Board for International Broadcasting Executive Director Walter Roberts, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs George Vest detailed the Department’s position in the Radio relocation debate: “Our Embassies have concluded that the relocation to the U.S. of 50, 25, and 10 [percent] of RFE/RL personnel would have an adverse political and psychological impact on US interests in the Federal Republic of Germany, the USSR, and the five Eastern European countries.” Vest also stressed the assessment of the Embassy in Bonn that relocation would become “a contentious domestic political issue” in West Germany, and that both Moscow and Bonn believe any relocation would lead to “intensified Soviet pressure for the complete removal of the Radios from the Federal Republic.” The Department of State informed the Embassies in Bonn, Moscow, and the Eastern European capitals of the text of the letter in telegram 310750 to multiple posts, December 2. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790556–0447) The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979, the ongoing hostage crisis in Iran, the boycott of the Moscow Olympics, and the increasing popular unrest in Poland all gave added weight to the usefulness of the Radios. However, facing financial crisis, Washington continued the pressure to find budget cuts. On June 25, 1980, Board for International Broadcasting Chairman Gronouski informed Secretary of State Edmund Muskie of the Board’s decision to transfer
