Arms Control and Disarmament  1505
The Gore Proposal as a Fall-­Back Position. If the present negotiations 
do break down, the United States may well wish to announce a pol­
icy of moderation in future testing. Such self-­imposed moderation may 
be prudent since, even if the blame for the break lies with the Soviet 
Union, increased pressure for a cessation of tests can be expected to be 
directed against the U.S. and the Soviet Union alike and unilateral U.S. 
action would cut the ground under proposals to this effect.
Further study must be given to the proper course of action. It is 
not clear at present that underground testing will permit satisfactory 
diagnostic measurement, including yields, to meet all important future 
test requirements. Testing in outer space will present even greater and 
more complex diagnostic problems.
403.	 Letter From McCone to Gray1
Washington, December 19, 1958
Dear Mr. Gray:
Attached is a copy of a classified memorandum from the Gen­
eral Manager to me which summarizes the Atomic Energy Commis­
sion’s views on a number of issues which have arisen at Geneva. This 
includes item 5, page 2, which reflects the Commission’s views on the 
Gore Proposal.
Also, I am attaching a copy of a TELEX sent to me from Livermore 
by Commissioner Libby and Dr. Teller on July 25, 1958.
You will note that the TELEX sets forth two alternate plans for 
reducing weapons test programs by agreement with other nuclear 
powers. The second of the two plans parallels the Gore proposal. When 
these two plans were put forth by me it was concluded that since the 
Geneva Technical Conference was exploring complete suspension, the 
introduction of the ideas set forth in the TELEX would not be timely.
The Atomic Energy Commission adheres to the validity of either 
proposal contained in the Libby TELEX, but questions any arrange­
ment of a “unilateral nature”. We suggest that a suspension be put into 
effect only by bilateral or multilateral treaty which provides, among 
1 Source: Conveys AEC views on issues that have arisen in nuclear test suspension 
negotiations. Secret; Defense Information. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office 
Files, Project Clean Up, Disarmament.
