122 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 possible pressure on the dollar that may come if the Iranians no longer accept dollars in payment for oil or try to shift their unblocked assets out of dollars. They are not mutually exclusive and are not ranked in any order of preference. All but the first two require active cooperation (which has not yet been forthcoming) from our major allies: United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, France, and possibly the Swiss. It should also be recognized that none of these economic measures will have much immediate impact. Over weeks and months, they may help to destabilize conditions in Iran. Over a longer term Iran, like Rhodesia and other recent subjects of economic warfare, will be able to frustrate even our best designed measures because eventually it will be able to sell its oil. Option 1. Continue the present policy of eliminating obstacles to setoff or attachment and maintaining neutrality as to whether defaults are declared and loans accelerated. • This may result ultimately in most loans to Iran being accelerated and Iran’s assets being wiped out. But it is also possible that some foreign banks may not accelerate but will try to help Iran, in the hope of becoming its lead bank in the future. • This is the lowest profile position to take and the least likely to antagonize our allies.3 Option 2. Encourage U.S. and other banks to declare defaults by Iran and accelerate their loans. A second variation of this option is to have Eximbank publicly declare a default and accelerate. • This may happen anyway but overt government encouragement would speed up the process, but it would also identify the U.S. publicly with a quasi-economic warfare measure. • Indirectly this action would put pressure on foreign banks who would worry about the soundness of their loans which would probably be in default because of cross-default provisions. • If the Eximbank were to accelerate its loans that would unmistakably signal U.S. resolve. Option 3. Encourage U.S. and other banks to make setoffs and attachments to collect accelerated loans. A second variation of this option would be for Eximbank to proceed by way of attachment in a foreign jurisdiction. 3 At the November 21 SCC meeting, attendees decided to “nudge” the default process. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic Files, Box 13)
