Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  309
Counting the MIRVed ICBMs under the 1540 limit will appeal to 
those who want to ban MIRVed mobiles and to those who are concerned 
about the military threat and breakout capability posed by the SS-18 
heavy ICBMs. To the degree that some critics believe Soviet MIRVed 
mobiles are more threatening, then a reduction in heavies would 
appeal as compensation. Our own MIRVed rail-­mobile Peacekeeper 
(MX) would be permitted, would be limited, and thus would not be 
undermined politically as would be the case if the US proposed to ban 
MIRVed mobiles outright. (S/NF)
The United States should not propose to change any of the agreed 
numbers in the basic START framework, i.e., the 1600 SNDV limit or 
the warhead limits of 6000, 4900, and 1540. However, offering to permit 
an increase in the 1600 SNDV number to say 1700 or 1800 is a far bet-
ter and more direct way to address the warhead-­to-­target ratio issue, 
i.e., de-MIRVing, than essentially cosmetic proposals to limit MIRVed 
ICBMs. Even if, in the end, we continue to ban mobile ICBMs, a higher 
SNDV number such as 1700 or 1800 would permit us to keep a larger 
ICBM force of de-MIRVed ICBMs (Minuteman II, Minuteman III, or 
Midgetman) in existing silos at low cost and it would also give us 
greater flexibility on bombers, especially if B–52s for the conventional 
mission get captured in START. (S/NF)
The above approach is far superior to MIRVed ICBM ceilings. 
MIRVed ICBM ceilings at levels between 1800 and 2200 do not reduce 
the threat to us in the long run, will invite Soviet efforts to limit MIRVed 
SLBMs, which is unacceptable, and will cost us in bargaining chips 
and momentum. Likewise, radical proposals such as banning MIRVed 
ICBMs will have a Reykjavik-­like effect of forcing a debate about con-
flicting visions of the future, more suitable for START II or START III, 
while disrupting the real negotiations of START I. (S/NF)
Politically, it is important that we make a move like this in START, 
in part because it is not in our interest at this time to make fundamen-
tal changes in our Defense & Space position or in certain other critical 
aspects of START where more technical and political work needs to be 
done. This proposal would defuse pressures to put forth at this time 
major concessions in other areas. In particular, I am concerned that 
some may press us to agree to the Soviet approach to counting ALCMs 
(“as equipped”), rather than proposing some variant of the current US 
approach which “attributes” to a bomber a number in the same way that 
we and the Soviets agreed to deal with the counting of gravity bombs 
and short-­range attack missiles. I understand that the “as equipped” 
rule, by reducing the number of US ALCMs permitted, would highlight 
the importance of the B–2 bomber. Such a rule, however, would mean 
that the single system cut the most under START would not be the
