Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission —There is a substantial Soviet military threat to Iran, in both the near and the longer term, most likely to be triggered by (a) US military action, or (b) the need of a promising pro-Soviet regime for support. —The judgment in my memo on Soviet expectation of the need to use force and willingness to do so may or may not prove correct; but it is overstated in the light of current evidence. (Three-to-one against me here; I’ll stand pat on my judgment, however.) —We do need to do more faster in building our security posture in and for Southwest Asia. But it will take more than apocalyptic opinions to generate the requisite additional money and political Some key points in the discussion: Bill expressed some skepticism about the extent and novelty of Soviet military upgrades in the Transcaucasus.3 In a day or so, we’ll be getting a complete inventory of what they’ve done since December, and the supporting evidence. The senior DCI staffer on the problem told me today he regards the activity as extensive and novel, but not signifying imminent (days, weeks) operations. He says it looks like they are meeting a new force readiness objective some months in the future. Marshall argued that the Soviets probably regard their military improvements as a prudent response to turmoil in the region, and they need not be linked in Soviet thinking to any specific contingency or schedule. The US forces buildup in the Indian Ocean would be enough to rationalize it. (S) Marshall argued, with Bill’s support, that the Soviets have a preferred strategy for gaining dominance in Iran, in which they have justifiable confidence: A Tudeh-dominated regime, arising out of a post-Khomeini “popular front” and able to consolidate its power without direct Soviet intervention. If this regime were seriously threatened with overthrow from within, the Soviets would intervene to preserve it. But the Soviets see their main military task as deterring US military intervention. I argued that a Tudeh regime would almost inevitably be met with widespread armed resistance requiring Soviet intervention, as in Afghanistan. We were all quite unsure as to how fast the rise of a Tudeh regime could come about. (S) Marshall was of the view, on balance, that the Soviets would probably not intervene militarily to prevent the emergence of an effective Islamic regime, even if it sought to liquidate the Left. He also judged that Soviet public disaffection over the costs of the Afghan war, assuming it is not a fairly quick victory and well over by the time of a decision on Iran, would have at least some inhibiting effect on a Soviet repeat 3 Memorandum from Odom to Brzezinski, April 16. (Carter Library, National Secu-
