366  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
to his understanding, the two sides would continue negotiating in 
Geneva on START and D&S. The Soviet side was now prepared to com-
plete, sign, and implement START even if, at that time, there was no 
agreement on D&S. It seemed to follow that the Soviet side was also 
prepared to withdraw its proposal in the JDT that would terminate 
START if the D&S or ABM treaties were violated. The standard with-
drawal provision would therefore not make reference to the D&S or 
ABM treaties. Were these understandings correct?
Karpov replied that his Minister had confirmed Soviet belief in the 
interrelationship between adherence to the ABM Treaty and 50% reduc-
tions. Both of those elements depended on each other. SALT I was the 
cornerstone of SALT II and START. The relationship could not be bro-
ken. The question was how to agree to that interdependence. The Soviet 
side suggested keeping the essence of the December 1987 agreement 
but looking for a simpler formula for expressing it. If the proposal for 
a non-­withdrawal period was too difficult, we could withdraw it and 
search for other ways of guaranteeing that the ABM Treaty remained in 
force and that both sides were abiding by their obligations. That was 
why Shevardnadze said that, if there was a gross violation of the ABM 
Treaty, the other side should have the right to use START’s withdrawal 
provision. This idea might be expressed in a special article, in an agreed 
interpretation, or in some other manner. The form was less important 
than the essence.
Ambassador Burt asked Karpov to confirm that we could go ahead 
and sign START even if D&S issues were not yet agreed.
Karpov said that was correct.
Burt asked what withdrawal provision START would contain.
Karpov replied that it would contain the “classic” one.
Burt asked what would happen to the bracketed Soviet language 
providing for termination of START if either side violated the ABM or 
D&S agreements.
Karpov responded that, if the bracketed formulation was not 
acceptable, it could be dropped. But there should be an agreed inter-
pretation that use of the withdrawal provision would be justified in 
case of a gross violation of the ABM Treaty.
Ambassador Cooper asked whether there were preconditions for 
withdrawing the proposal for a non-­withdrawal period.
Karpov said the proposal was not linked.
Cooper asked what the Soviet position was toward other elements 
of the Washington Summit Joint Statement.
Karpov replied that the centerpiece of that statement was that 
both sides should carry out their obligations under the ABM Treaty as 
signed in 1972. One way to carry them out was not to withdraw from 
the Treaty for an agreed period. Now we should look for another way.
