648 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 240. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, March 19, 1980, 6 p.m. SUBJECT Discussion with Six Ambassadors on a Neutral Afghanistan and Visit of Chinese Vice Foreign Minister PARTICIPANTS Deputy Secretary Christopher Ambassador Hermes, FRG Ambassador de Laboulaye, France Ambassador Henderson, U.K. Ambassador Towe, Canada Ambassador Pansa, Italy Ambassador Togo, Japan Neutral and Non-Aligned Afghanistan Deputy Secretary Christopher gave the Ambassadors a paper on “Elements for a Neutral and Non-Aligned Afghanistan” (attached) as a basis for discussion and then retrieved the paper later in the meeting. He said the “Elements” had not been prepared for use at any specific event but as a contribution to the search for a common position among us which could (1) develop ultimately into a sound basis for a constructive Western approach and (2) help develop a structure which might be useful eventually in resolving the problem in Afghanistan. The Soviets appeared to be uninterested but not closing the door. He noted the importance of avoiding the appearance of pursuing the Soviets and the need to watch for shifts in the Soviet line.2 He commented on the range of upcoming diplomatic events—the Tito funeral, the EC Heads of Government meeting on March 31, the Islamic Foreign Ministers meeting in Islamabad in late April, the Venice Summit in June and the 1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensitive File, 1979–1983, Lot 96D262, Box 3, 1980 Super Sensitive I, Jan, Feb, Mar–1980. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Vest. Attached but not printed is a March 20 memorandum from Lake and Tarnoff to Vance forwarding the memorandum of conversation. 2 An article in the President’s Daily Brief, March 24, reported Karmal’s New Year’s address which characterized Western attempts to neutralize Afghanistan as “reactionary” and reaffirmed that Soviet troops would remain in Afghanistan until “the smallest signs of aggression” had been “completely uprooted.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—March 1980, PDBs) An intelligence memorandum prepared in the Department of Defense, March 25, reporting on a conversation between a Soviet diplomat and a Polish counterpart in Moscow, relayed the former’s assertion that the Soviet Union “rejected totally” the Western European proposal for a neutral Afghanistan. (Washington National Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330–82–0217, Box 2, Afghanistan, Jan–Feb 1980)
