66 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Shevardnadze broke in to say, jokingly, that he felt it was going to be difficult to deal with Bartholomew. The Secretary rejoined that it was, in fact, easy to deal with him. Shevardnadze said: “maybe for you, but not for us.” Bartholomew, resuming, said his point was that the U.S. stood by the Washington statement. As we had moved forward to apply that statement in the Defense and Space talks, however, we had found that we each interpreted the WSJS formula to mean different things. Thus we proposed to tackle these differences in the context of building upon the WSJS. Shevardnadze said he believed he had found a way to break the deadlock: hand the problem over to the working group. The Secretary said he had no problem with this suggestion, but the Ministers would have to face up to this problem later. Shevardnadze repeated his view that on these fundamental issues, it was very important to stick to principles of continuity. If we wanted to speak seriously about a warming of the political climate and the contribution that the U.S. and USSR were making to the historical changes in the world, one had to acknowledge that these changes have been due to progress on arms control. Without progress on INF, there would not have been any basis for serious discussion of overcoming confrontation. Therefore, in the area of arms control and disarmament, we should abide by continuity and by agreements reached in the past. SLCMs Shevardnadze added that, of course, other problems remained. While he didn’t want to concentrate on these now, he did want to mention sea-­launched cruise missiles (SLCMs). On ALCMs, the prospects were good for reaching an understanding. But on SLCMs (or, better, on naval nuclear weapons), the position that the U.S. had taken in the past represented a dead end. It did not allow a continued discussion. Nuclear weapons were nuclear weapons, whether air-, groundor sea-­ launched. With the introduction of extensive and bold verification measures, we should be able to proceed with limitations on SLCMs just as we had been able to do in the case of limiting and verifying other types of cruise missiles. There were instruments that could be used, as well as the possibility of on-­site inspection at depots, storage facilities and the like. It was important, Shevardnadze stressed, that the Administration take a fundamental position in limiting and effectively verifying SLCMs. If this problem were not resolved, it would be highly unlikely
