3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
600
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
developing this vehicle. This was not a departure from our overall
space effort, and if the Soviets took the position that the shuttle was
being developed as an anti-satellite system, we would only assure them
that it definitely was not.
Gromyko said that the Soviet Union was in favor of continuing
these negotiations, but it would be impossible to reach agreement on
the basis of the US position.
Returning to conventional arms transfers, Gromyko noted that the
negotiations had begun some time ago and seemed to move right
along, but then the representatives of the United States had proposed to
discuss conventional arms transfers on a regional basis. In brief, the re-
gions mentioned were those in which the United States was interested.
When Soviet representatives mentioned other areas and countries of
concern to both sides, US representatives had simply refused to discuss
them. Such a unilateral approach could not possibly be acceptable to
the Soviet side, so US representatives had simply walked out of the
talks and had returned home. Thus, the conventional arms transfers
talks were now in a state of suspense.
The President said with respect to conventional arms transfers that
our position has been that we should not begin with areas where each
country was deeply involved. We provide military assistance to South
Korea and Japan, for example. The Soviet Union provided military
assistance to Vietnam and Ethiopia. We would want to concentrate in
the beginning on areas where there was not that much controversy,
where our two countries were not involved by commitments of long
standing.
Gromyko said the Soviet Union would be prepared to resume the
conventional arms transfer negotiations.
Gromyko turned to the talks on the Indian Ocean and limitation of
military activities in that area. He noted that the talks on this subject
had begun at a lively pace, but then the U.S. had unilaterally suspended
them and no discussions were in progress at this time. He thought that
perhaps the United States might be prepared to resume the talks, but
pointed out that in the absence of these negotiations the United States
had continued its activities aimed at strengthening the Diego Garcia
base, and in general had intensified naval activities in that area. The So-
viet side was prepared to continue negotiations on this subject, but he
wanted to draw the President’s attention to the fact that it would be im-
possible to do so without a change in the position of the United States.
As for the Indian Ocean, the President said that we had never re-
nounced developing the Diego Garcia base. What had occurred was
massive Soviet arms supply to Ethiopia and before that to Somalia,
along with the presence of thousands of Cuban troops in the Horn.
Now the Soviet Union was building up arms in Afghanistan. Thus, the
