XLVI  Summary of Print Volume
Tensions between Rafael Trujillo’s Dominican Republic and Cuba as well 
as newly-­democratic Venezuela were near the boiling point. The U.S. 
Government, although reluctant to back the autocratic Trujillo against 
his neighbors, was nevertheless determined to uphold the principles of 
non-­intervention and non-­aggression in the hemisphere. It suggested 
that tensions in the region be reduced through a meeting of the Western 
Hemisphere’s Foreign Ministers (81). The Council of the Organization of 
American States approved the proposal on July 13 (82).
The meeting opened in Santiago, Chile, on August 12. Secretary 
Herter addressed its second plenary session the following day and 
called for a new declaration of principles of the inter-American system, 
formation of a special temporary committee to study the Caribbean sit-
uation, and authorization for a permanent committee, such as the Peace 
Committee, to make a study of the problems underlying the tensions 
in the Caribbean (94). Herter cabled the President on August 17 that 
the meeting had been a success and that the U.S. proposals had been 
“reduced to concrete, satisfactory resolutions” (98). The conference 
ended the next day.
The political situation in the Caribbean remained volatile, however, 
and continued to concern U.S. policymakers The Eisenhower admin-
istration feared that the numerous revolutionary movements in the 
region, inspired and supported by the Castro regime, were communist 
influenced and anti-American in character (112). The U.S. Government 
decided to pursue a policy of opposing foreign-­based revolutionary 
movements (118).
Of particular concern to the United States was the security of its 
military facilities in the Caribbean and the continuation of its mili-
tary assistance programs in the region. A Special National Intelligence 
Estimate of March 10, 1959 concluded that the United States would be 
able to retain access to its military facilities but would probably be met 
with local demands to alter the terms of agreements governing them 
(111). In April 1959, the U.S. Government distributed an Aide-Mémoire 
to its European Allies which stated that because of unsettled conditions 
in the region the United States had adopted a practice of examining 
carefully on a case-­by-­case basis requests for military assistance to the 
Caribbean (117).
As British power declined in the Caribbean, U.S. policymakers 
agreed on the need for the United States to play a larger role in defend-
ing its interests in the region traditionally protected by the United 
Kingdom. The emerging nations of the area, such as those within the 
nascent West Indies Federation, it was recognized, would present new 
foreign policy challenges to the United States. On March 21, 1960, the 
National Security Council adopted a “Statement of U.S. Policy Toward 
the West Indies” to help define and address these challenges (129). On
