850 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II This would require a $346 million increase in the budgeted $1,399 million program level and an equal increase in outlays (Tab A). 2) Secretary Vance seeks an additional $41 million for Egypt added to any supplemental request to offset price increases. State indicates support for a total increase of $273 million including Egypt (Tab B). 3) IDCA Director Ehrlich favors a $206 million increase, but opposes the Egyptian add-on (Tab C). Each proposal would call for an immediate supplemental. A January transmittal would be too late, because by the time Congress acted on it, probably next June, logistical constraints would not allow shipment of the full amount requested. Action now could also take into account that the House has added $59 million to the 1980 Title I appropriation request; there is no Senate PL 480 add-on. The appropriation bill will probably be in conference next week. By supporting the House position then, the Administration might avoid formally seeking a supplemental for the amount of the House increment. There are strong arguments in favor of the proposals. Many developing countries, particularly the poorest, have been hard hit by rising food and oil prices this year. (USDA has provided the analysis of developing country food needs at Tab A). It will appear particularly insensitive for the United States, with good harvests and record food export earnings this year, to accept the cut in planned PL 480 volume from 6.8 to 5.3 million tons caused by higher prices. There will be strong criticism of significant tonnage cuts from both the farm bloc and from humanitarian groups, particularly those voluntary agencies implementing Title II food donations. Finally USDA points out that reductions in PL 480 will create pressure for a supplemental to finance higher CCC short-term export loans. Nevertheless, we remain concerned about the impact of such large increases on budget restraint. Approving a PL 480 supplemental to allow for price inflation can only intensify pressures for similar add-ons to domestic programs where we have been trying to hold the line. We note that while LDC harvests overall appear down from last year, there seem to be few extraordinary shortfalls. The planned 6.8 million tons for 1980 is well above the 6.2 million tons that will be shipped in 1979 when most major needs have been met. Finally, there is a risk that a supplemental now for the popular food aid program may lead to partial offsetting reductions in regular appropriations for AID and the multilateral development banks (sharply cut by the House) during Senate committee mark-up late this month. These points lead us to conclude that some reduction in the agencies’ requests would be both feasible and desirable.
