850
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
This would require a $346 million increase in the budgeted $1,399 mil-
lion program level and an equal increase in outlays (Tab A).
2) Secretary Vance seeks an additional $41 million for Egypt added
to any supplemental request to offset price increases. State indicates
support for a total increase of $273 million including Egypt (Tab B).
3) IDCA Director Ehrlich favors a $206 million increase, but op-
poses the Egyptian add-on (Tab C).
Each proposal would call for an immediate supplemental. A Jan-
uary transmittal would be too late, because by the time Congress acted
on it, probably next June, logistical constraints would not allow ship-
ment of the full amount requested. Action now could also take into ac-
count that the House has added $59 million to the 1980 Title I appropri-
ation request; there is no Senate PL 480 add-on. The appropriation bill
will probably be in conference next week. By supporting the House po-
sition then, the Administration might avoid formally seeking a supple-
mental for the amount of the House increment.
There are strong arguments in favor of the proposals. Many devel-
oping countries, particularly the poorest, have been hard hit by rising
food and oil prices this year. (USDA has provided the analysis of devel-
oping country food needs at Tab A). It will appear particularly insensi-
tive for the United States, with good harvests and record food export
earnings this year, to accept the cut in planned PL 480 volume from 6.8
to 5.3 million tons caused by higher prices. There will be strong criti-
cism of significant tonnage cuts from both the farm bloc and from hu-
manitarian groups, particularly those voluntary agencies imple-
menting Title II food donations. Finally USDA points out that
reductions in PL 480 will create pressure for a supplemental to finance
higher CCC short-term export loans.
Nevertheless, we remain concerned about the impact of such large
increases on budget restraint. Approving a PL 480 supplemental to
allow for price inflation can only intensify pressures for similar
add-ons to domestic programs where we have been trying to hold the
line. We note that while LDC harvests overall appear down from last
year, there seem to be few extraordinary shortfalls. The planned 6.8
million tons for 1980 is well above the 6.2 million tons that will be
shipped in 1979 when most major needs have been met. Finally, there is
a risk that a supplemental now for the popular food aid program may
lead to partial offsetting reductions in regular appropriations for AID
and the multilateral development banks (sharply cut by the House)
during Senate committee mark-up late this month. These points lead us
to conclude that some reduction in the agencies’ requests would be
both feasible and desirable.
