December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
791
227.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 20, 1979
SUBJECT
Peace Treaty Signing Ceremonies
I have forwarded your comments on Begin’s cable to Vance2 for
action.
At the same time, let me suggest again that it might be easier for
Sadat to live up to the promise, which I asked him to reaffirm two days
ago in Cairo, to have a signing ceremony both in Cairo and Jerusalem if
a senior American official takes part in it. Having either Vance or Mon-
dale participate will make it less awkward for Sadat to have Begin in
Cairo.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 11, Egypt: 1–3/79. Confidential. In the upper right-hand corner of the mem-
orandum, Carter wrote: “Let me approach Sadat directly—send msg. JC.” At the bottom
of the memorandum, Carter added the following handwritten message: “To Pres. Sadat,
Believing that it was acceptable to you, I have told Begin and my own people that there
would be brief signing ceremonies in Israel and in Cairo for the Hebrew & Arabic treaty
documents. Both of these events could be completed during one afternoon, and I would
be pleased to send a top level American delegation to represent me. I hope you will ap-
prove this request. Your friend, J.C.” No evidence of the delivery of this message has
been found.
2 Attached but not printed. In a March 20 meeting with Lewis, Begin requested that
a personal message be passed to Vance, conveying Begin’s insistence that “Sadat honor
his promise” to sign the Hebrew and Arabic versions of the treaty in Jerusalem and Cairo
respectively. The details of this exchange were conveyed in telegram 930 from Jerusalem,
March 20. On a copy of the telegram, Carter added the handwritten notation: “I prefer the
extra signings, but it’s up to Sadat.” (Ibid.) The signing issue was still not solved on
March 22 when Sadat remarked to journalists that while Begin’s proposal for three
signing ceremonies was still a “possibility,” he repeated his view that all three versions of
the treaty should be signed in Washington “in order to give full credit to President
Carter.” Eilts reported that due to worries about Arab public opinion, Khalil was urging
Sadat not to go to Jerusalem. Sadat, Eilts added, “clearly expects the issue to be discussed
in Washington” when the three leaders convened later in the week. (Telegram 5968 from
Cairo, March 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790134–0838)
