666 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 211. Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts1 Washington, April 9, 1977, 0128Z 80276. Rome for FODAG. Subject: Information for FAO Global Information and Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture. 1. At the request of FAO we have undertaken to try to increase the food information flow which should prove useful to both the U.S. and the FAO’s Global Information and Early Warning System (EWS). 2. The EWS was established by the FAO Council to collect and disseminate a variety of data on food outlook, food requirements, food crops and shortages, and food situations. Much of this data is subject to restricted distribution due to the sensitivities of some aid receiving countries to release of such information. Nonetheless, increasing numbers of such countries are joining the system, and have established units or appointed officers to collect the appropriate information and provide it to FAO via its in-country representative or other channels. FAO is preparing to provide assistance to MSA countries in establishing such early warning units. 3. FAO and/or World Food Program colleagues in the field prepare monthly food situation reports which are sent to Rome headquarters. If a potential food supply or related problem is indicated Rome headquarters requests clarification from the field or takes steps to send an evaluator for an on-the-spot assessment. Apart from the EWS, prices, freight rates, supply trends, production estimates, food aid flows, etc., are monitored by FAO through a variety of sources. 4. FAO and its members are striving to improve the EWS on a priority basis due to continuing food supply uncertainties throughout the world and especially in MSA countries. Both the FAO, EWS and the USG could benefit from sharing more information on a regular basis. Congress has repeatedly expressed interest in FAO’s Global Information and Early Warning System. Efforts are being made to increase U.S. participation in the EWS. USDA works closely with the FAO and regu- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770124–1183. Unclassified. Drafted by Wolf and Rupprecht; cleared in substance by Byrnes, John Washburn (IO/ML), McNutt, David Moran, Lauralee Peters (ARA/ECP/FDA), Shurtleff, J. Phillip McLean (EUR/RPE), by Melvin Schuweiler (AID/PPC), in draft by Daniel Chaij (AID/LADR), Fletcher Riggs (AID/ASIA/TD/RD), Woodrow Leake (AID/AFR/DR/ ARD), Russell Olson (AID/NE/TECH), William Fradenburg (AID/MP/A), and by telephone in USDA/FAS; approved by Wolf. Repeated for information to the Liaison Office in Peking, the Interests Section in Baghdad, Vientiane, Taipei, Bucharest, Banjul, Beirut, USUN, the Mission to the OECD in Paris, the Mission in Geneva, the Mission to the EC in Brussels, the Mission to the IAEA in Vienna, and the Mission to NATO in Brussels.
