is involved in its prosperity himself, and, therefore, is interested
parties [party?] in assuming responsibility for seeking a
settlement which might contribute to produce conditions of order
in his bailiwick favorable to trade. The upset of this agreement is
even now being attempted by interested bureaus of the Peking
Government.
4. The lack of a sense of international responsibility in the Peking
regime is illustrated from a somewhat different angle by
representations made by it recently to the British Legation,
bearing upon the negotiations regarding the Hongkong strike and
boycott with the Canton authorities. Occasion was taken by the
Foreign Office to state that although the claims of Canton for
compensation were viewed with approval by the “Chinese
Government”, a caveat must be entered against the suggested loan
to the Canton authorities from the Hongkong government for
industrial development. Its intervention in this matter had for its
sole purpose the imposition of an additional condition of
settlement as though from above. Thus, while professing to
represent the whole of China internationally, the Peking regime
stultified that claim by recognizing complacently that, with its
approval but without its participation, negotiations relating to
questions of its own treaty obligations to Great Britain were being
carried on by a section of the country ignoring the existence here
of a so-called government.
5. I feel convinced from these and similar indications of its
attitude that neither the regime now in existence nor any likely to
succeed it will, except as moved thereto either by some quid pro
quo of support of this factional group against its rivals or by
coercion, 
make 
any 
attempt 
to 
meet 
its 
international
responsibilities. Of these means of influencing, neither is open to
us. The practical reason for a continuation of the diplomatic
fiction of a central government has come to an end. The fact must
be accepted by us. When in the future China is able again to
constitute such a government as can be recognized because of its
merits, conformably to the practice prevailing in other countries,
