Human Rights 353 pecially of how much the policy actually has affected our economic or military programs. This review is useful to have, but may be the least interesting part of the paper. You might want to begin with our assessment of accomplishments (pp 5–6) and of whether there have been setbacks (to human rights, on p 6, and to other American interests, on pp 7–10). The paper then discusses the problem of consistency: ways in which we are being less, or perhaps in some cases more, consistent than we should aim for (pp 11–15). The memorandum ends with recommendations for future directions: —A Presidential Decision would help to clarify to the bureaucracy how the President views the policy, its application, and the range of instruments being used. (A draft reportedly is with the President).2 —We badly need country strategy papers3 that will integrate our human rights interests with other American concerns in each country, and give useful guidance for coherent application of all our instruments of influence. —Our country strategies should try to emphasize what is most likely to be effective in improving human rights situations, rather than what decisions will make us look consistent.4 —We need better procedures to integrate our economic with our military assistance decisions. —We have hard choices to make on compliance with the legal requirements about our role in International Financial Institutions.5 —We should look for more ways to multilateralize our human rights efforts, both to reduce suspicions of a smug American moralism and to further enlist the weight of world opinion in conjunction with our efforts. —We should draw more attention to what we are doing to correct our human rights problems in this country. briefing memorandum, noting that he had “read and reread the memorandum S/P has prepared assessing the human rights policy, and think it is a commendable piece of work.” (Ibid.) 2 Presumable reference to the draft PD that Brzezinski forwarded to the President under cover of a December 3, 1977, memorandum; see Document 96. 3 An unknown hand circled the phrase “country strategy papers” and placed a check mark in the margin to the right of the paragraph. 4 An unknown hand placed a question mark in the margin to the right of the paragraph. 5 An unknown hand placed a check mark in the margin to the right of the paragraph.
