898
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
to the Soviets, should be considered. The attached paper2 outlines the
rationale and structure of the kind of effort we have in mind. Although
this notion was triggered by the recent Soviet exercises,3 we would
have to be careful to protect the sources involved when developing
our threat story. (S)
It is time, in any case, for intelligence to do a basic and prompt
reassessment of Soviet intentions and capabilities toward Iran. Materi-
als for use with allies and other audiences can readily be spun off. (S)
From a foreign policy point of view, this kind of effort is definitely
needed, especially in the post-Olympics period, to keep pressures for
drifting back to “business as usual” under control. Although we think
this unlikely, it could interfere with the President’s effort to give a
balanced view of his foreign policy during the campaign. On balance,
we are inclined to believe that, as in most cases, here good foreign
policy makes good domestic politics.4 (S)
2 Attached but not printed. The undated paper is titled “Campaign to Exploit Soviet
Military Preparations Against Iran.”
3 According to an August 2 CIA brief, the Soviet Union had carried out a command
post exercise in the Transcaucasus Military District in the last week of July. This exercise
was the first simulated ground and air operation against Iran since the overthrow of the
Shah. The exercise posited Iran as the primary enemy and included the rapid movement
of troops across Iran, the use of air power, and the contingency use of tactical nuclear
weapons. The objective of the scenario was the Persian Gulf area. On August 6, a CIA
brief reported that a second command post exercise simulating a Soviet invasion of Iran
had occurred. (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator, Box 8)
4 At the bottom of the page, Brzezinski wrote: “I agree. Give me implementing memo.
What about the command exercise? Can we let the Iranians know somehow via the
Turks or Paks? ZB.”
