50 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement I then continued I had been giving particular thought to Wang statement last meeting regarding necessity any solution reached being beneficial to both parties. Said I thoroughly agreed this view but failed to see how it possible to describe situation at present stage of discussions as unfair to Chinese Government or people. Added if I desired to do so could dwell at some length on unfairness pres­ ent situation to Americans in China but I did not believe it useful engage fruitless debate this subject but rather look at present practi­ cal situation. I said at second meeting Wang had asked for solution to question of restrictions on return to China of Chinese nationals in US. I said I immediately and promptly replied under full authority my govern­ ment no Chinese being prevented from leaving US. At last meeting I carefully and frankly explained nature of restrictions formerly placed on departure some Chinese students and explained these now entirely removed. I reiterated to Wang that US Government not now preventing departure any Chinese from US. Said it was difficult for me to see how I could be more explicit or more fully meet request Wang had made. I said I had tried make it clear that US Government expects all its nation­ als in China desiring to return to US will be able promptly to do so and that Wang’s government should take whatever measures necessary bring about this result. I concluded stating it would greatly facilitate and expedite our discussions if Wang could shortly give me explicit info regarding measures along this line which I understood were being considered by his government. I emphasized again that my govern­ ment had taken all necessary steps to meet Wang’s requirements and there were no exceptions not even case of Dr. Tsien to my assurance that all Chinese free to leave US. Wang said noted my statement. Said he had restated own posi­ tion concerning his original proposals 1, 2 and 3, declaring he agreed with me it was necessary for both sides to make reciprocal or corre­ sponding arrangements for return of nationals which would bring a solution to this problem. He expressed regret I had not agreed his first proposal. Said on his part he had already given me complete list all Americans in China which very convenient for our use. Therefore Wang added which very reasonable his side require similar action from US and would appreciate it if US could reconsider its position on first proposal. Regarding arrangement I had suggested on the 4th proposal he reserved comments until next meeting which Wang proposed be August 10, 10 a.m. I then proposed press release to which Wang agreed as reported my tel 347. Atmosphere continues easy and informal. Gowen
