68 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV These results assume that: (1) Soviet ICBM reliability is about 80 percent, (2) the Air Force is able to meet its goal of a [less than 1 line not declassified] hardness level for the encapsulated missile, and (3) an effective method can be found for nullifying the “shock tube” effect that will occur if the blast waves “get into” the tunnel. (If this occurs, the tunnel will act as a classic shock tube and propagate overpressure levels to substantially greater distances than would otherwise be possible.) Subject to these uncertainties, the surviving ICBM forces in the above table would still have the capability to do substantial damage to the Soviet Union, but not nearly the level of damage we would prefer in each leg of the strategic Triad. Thus we will probably need more than the 1400 nm of trenches at Luke/Yuma if a trench-­based M–X system is to guarantee a significant survivable ICBM force. 21. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter1 Washington, June 20, 1977 SUBJECT B–1 Decision I would like to add the following points to your deliberations on the B–1: 1. Attached is a memorandum from Congressman Les Aspin, prepared privately at my request.2 As you remember, he briefed you before the second debate in San Francisco on defense matters.3 He is a respected defense expert with a generally liberal reputation on defense matters. For that reason his recommendation to build 90 B–1s is interesting. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 17, B–1 Bomber, President’s File, 5–6/77. Confidential; Not for Circulation. In the upper-­right corner of the first page in the source text, Carter wrote, “Susan—­w/ B–1 file. J”. 2 Attached but not printed is a June 18 memorandum prepared by Aspin, who concluded that 90 B–1s, in addition to the existing B–52 force, would be “more than enough for any reasonable security requirements.” (Ibid.) 3 Reference is to the October 6, 1976, presidential debate between Carter and Ford.
