National Security Policy 221 primary cause of European concern was simply that they could read current articles about the tremendous casualties estimated to occur in nuclear war and logically had been led to wonder if any country would be willing to pay such a high price to come to the aid of its friends. He believes the US would pay such a price—­not because of any “love” for our friends, not because of any agreement which we would feel an obligation to honor, but out of the belief that if we did not take this action we would be faced with a worse alternative later. We would be crowded and crowded by the Soviet Union. Secretary Dulles emphasized that he never shows any sympathy for foreign anxieties in this respect. He personally truly believes that the US will, if necessary, carry out its strategic plans. Mr. Quarles said in regard to General de Gaulle that we should make clear to him that US policy is not to try to prevent the French from developing a nuclear weapons capability. He believed that our previous policy of trying to stop the French had been greatly resented. He also felt that it was not logical to think of transferring nuclear weapons to the French because they could not obtain enough to have an independent deterrent. France is a member of an alliance and as such should rely on the capabilities of the alliance and not on the few weapons which it may be able to construct. (The tenor of Mr. Quarles’ remarks was that France should be “admitted” into the nuclear weapons club.2) Secretary Dulles said that General de Gaulle might well take the position that the US’s attitude means that France will have to spend much of its treasure for obsolete weapons during a period of critical financial strain. And France will wonder if this is the type of treatment an ally should receive. Secretary McElroy thought that France merely wanted to produce weapons and not necessarily to receive US help in producing them. He feels that the French don’t care about the quality of the weapons, but are mainly interested in salving national pride. Mr. Quarles observed that our law prevents the transfer of nuclear weapons to the French. Secretary McElroy said that he now had a better understanding of Secretary Dulles’ views and would like to be of help. He reverted to the concept of volunteer forces which might be used until a truly UN force could come into being. He suggested that such force would not wear US uniforms. It would be made up of yellow, black and white people, and would not be identified with national units. The idea would be to try to avoid involvement of national pride in certain types of limited hostilities. 2 NSC policy on France is that we should seek to persuade France not to make nuclear weapons. [Footnote is in the original.]
