National Security Policy  337
1959. There is also one wing of tactical bombers on 30 June 1958, which 
remains through FY 1959; and 3 groups of MATADOR tactical missiles. 
One of the 3 MATADOR groups will be converted to the more advanced 
TM–76 A (MACE) tactical missile by end FY 1959. MATADOR missiles 
released by this conversion are expected to be transferred to a selected 
Ally. Tactical air forces in United States, capable of augmenting forces 
overseas, consist of 12–3/4 fighter day and fighter bomber wings (less 
4 squadrons on rotation) of which 7 wings are nuclear capable, to be 
reduced to 7-1/4 tactical fighter wings (less 4 squadrons on rotation) all 
of which are nuclear capable, by end FY 1959; and one tactical bomber 
wing to be inactivated during FY 1959. By end FY 1959, all tactical 
fighter wings are planned to be totally equipped with modern “century 
series” fighters.
Continuing progress is being made in providing the above deliv­
ery systems with smaller diameter and lighter weight weapons and 
warheads of various yields. The continuing dispersal of nuclear weapons 
to combat units in the field has improved greatly the operational read­
iness of our offensive forces. This action, coupled with the streamlin­
ing of our release procedures, has reduced substantially the reaction 
time of these forces to counter enemy aggression. However, due to 
political denial of storage rights in certain countries, weapons allo­
cated to some combat units are not immediately available to those 
units. Action is continuing to obtain greater latitude in the dispersal 
of nuclear weapons.
Certain major U.S. Navy forces, with the primary mission of main­
taining control of essential sea areas and air communications, possess 
a significant nuclear retaliatory strike capability. This capability exists 
primarily in attack carrier striking forces with a secondary capabil­
ity in missile delivery from surface ship and submarine. There are 15 
attack carriers and 17 associated carrier air groups. Since the previous 
report (30 June 1957), deliveries of new jet aircraft and moderniza­
tion and new construction of attack aircraft carriers have materially 
increased Navy’s nuclear weapon delivery capability. Three CVA 59 
(FORRESTAL) class carriers have replaced ESSEX class carriers for 
fleet operations. Included in Naval forces are Marine Corps forces which 
contribute to the over-­all nuclear retaliatory capability. These include 
3 Marine Aircraft Wings, 2 in continental U.S. and one deployed in the 
Pacific area, maintained in a state of readiness to operate from land 
or sea bases, and to deploy rapidly to a theater of operations from 
present locations.
Present Naval capability for guided missile delivery of large nuclear 
warheads from surface ships and submarines is represented by the 
REGULUS system, for which nuclear warheads are stockpiled. 
REGULUS I system is now installed in 3 submarines and 4 heavy cruis­
ers. There are 8 submarines equipped with REGULUS radar guidance
