840  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
NI–3.	
Despatch from the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan) to 
the Department of State1

Managua, March 18, 1958.
No. 414.
SUBJECT
The Invasion Plot and Relations with Honduras
President SOMOZA and his brother are still expecting the 
Nicaraguan exiles to make an invasion attempt from Honduras. If it 
comes, they intend to smash it bloodily, in order to prevent the devel-
opment of a situation like the one in Cuba. General SOMOZA told the 
Military Attaché last weekend that he will use a regimental combat 
team for this purpose.
While President Somoza has consistently refused to credit rumors 
that the exiles are getting help or encouragement from President 
VILLEDA Morales, he has been concerned by reports that Foreign 
Minister ALVARADO Puerto and other associates of President Villeda 
are helping the exiles behind Villeda’s back. He was somewhat reassured 
on this score during the past few days by a report from Tegucigalpa that 
President Villeda had called in certain unspecified Honduran officials 
and “laid down the law” to them.
The President said yesterday that he had been in touch with Villeda 
and they had agreed to have a meeting soon after Easter. The Embassy 
believes such a meeting would help produce harmony and tolerance in 
their future relations.
The Embassy has today seen a report from Tegucigalpa, dated 
March 15, transmitting information obtained from a usually-­reliable 
source concerning rather concrete invasion plans of GOMEZ Flores. 
We trust this report is being distributed to all recipients of our des-
patch 403.2

For the Ambassador: 
William P. Hudson
Counselor of Embassy
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 717.00/3–1858. Confidential.
2 Despatch 403 from Managua, March 11, not printed, reiterated Ambassador Whelan’s 
belief that the Nicaraguan exiles were planning an invasion of the country and expressed 
concern that the Embassy in Honduras had decided not to approach President Morales in 
order to convey its concern about the exiles’ reported invasion plans. (717.00/3–1158)
