Chapter 4, February–April 1990  585
previous night with those reached in Moscow. Bartholomew cited the 
following points:
 On SLCMs, the Moscow statement recorded agreement to pro-
ceed on a politically binding document. Now the Soviet side was work-
ing on the basis of a legally binding protocol to the agreement, which 
contradicted what had been decided in Moscow.
 The previous night’s proposal had been for detailed verification 
measures, whereas in Moscow, working with a bracketed SLCM dec-
laration, the Soviet side had set the verification issue aside, making no 
mention of it.
 Indeed, Bartholomew added, the concept of verification mea-
sures was inconsistent with the idea of a politically binding agreement.
 Lastly—­although there were other issues—­the Soviet side had 
proposed an agreed numerical limit on the number of SLCMs per ship 
type, whereas the declaration in Moscow spoke only of a confidential 
exchange of information on capabilities.
On ALCMs, Bartholomew listed five points:
 The Soviet paper of the previous night had proposed to include 
all heavy bombers in the 1600 limit; but the Moscow elements of com-
mon ground (hereafter MECG) provides for 115 conventional heavy 
bombers outside that limit.
Burt interjected that Nazarkin had told him in Geneva that the 
Soviet side had never accepted the 115 number, but in Jackson Hole, the 
Soviet side had said it would accept 100.
 Continuing, Bartholomew said that the Soviet side also had pro-
posed the previous night that conventional ALCMs would have func-
tionally related observable differences (hereafter FRODs) from nuclear 
ALCMs. But the MECM provided for differences observable by national 
technical means (NTM) and on-­site inspection (OSI). OSI in this case 
was a major step on the U.S. part to answer Soviet concerns.
 Third, Bartholomew noted that the Soviet paper had also pro-
posed a maximum capacity of 16 ALCMs on existing heavy bombers, 
although the paper itself acknowledged 12 had been agreed in the 
MECG.
 Fourth, the Soviet paper had called for attributing maximum real 
numbers for future heavy bombers, i.e., maximum as equipped. The 
MECG, by contrast, set 10 as the attribution and 20 as the maximum to 
be deployed on future heavy bombers.
 Bartholomew completed his comments by noting that the newly 
delivered Soviet paper called for all heavy bombers to be subject to 
inspection, but the MECG provided only for the inspection of heavy 
bombers tested to carry ALCMs and also former heavy bombers.
This was not an exhaustive list of U.S. concerns, Bartholomew 
stated, but it was sufficient to demonstrate the great difficulties that the
