174
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Now, I believe in de´tente with the Soviet Union. To me it means
progress toward peace. But the effects of de´tente should not be limited
to our own two countries alone. We hope to persuade the Soviet Union
that one country cannot impose its system of society upon another,
either through direct military intervention or through the use of a
client state’s military force, as was the case with Cuban intervention in
Angola.
Cooperation also implies obligation. We hope that the Soviet
Union will join with us and other nations in playing a larger role in
aiding the developing world, for common aid efforts will help us build
a bridge of mutual confidence in one another.
Fourth, we are taking deliberate steps to improve the chances of
lasting peace in the Middle East. Through wide-ranging consultation
with leaders of the countries involved—Israel, Syria, Jordan, and
Egypt—we have found some areas of agreement and some movement
toward consensus. The negotiations must continue.
Through my own public comments, I’ve also tried to suggest a
more flexible framework for the discussion of the three key issues
which have so far been so intractable: the nature of a comprehensive
peace—what is peace; what does it mean to the Israelis; what does it
mean to their Arab neighbors; secondly, the relationship between secu-
rity and borders—how can the dispute over border delineations be es-
tablished and settled with a feeling of security on both sides; and the
issue of the Palestinian homeland.
The historic friendship that the United States has with Israel is not
dependent on domestic politics in either nation; it’s derived from our
common respect for human freedom and from a common search for
permanent peace.
We will continue to promote a settlement which all of us need. Our
own policy will not be affected by changes in leadership in any of the
countries in the Middle East. Therefore, we expect Israel and her
neighbors to continue to be bound by United Nations Resolutions 242
and 338,4 which they have previously accepted.
This may be the most propitious time for a genuine settlement
since the beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict almost 30 years ago. To
let this opportunity pass could mean disaster not only for the Middle
East but, perhaps, for the international political and economic order as
well.
4 UN Security Council Resolution 242, adopted in November 1967, affirmed that the
fulfillment of the UN Charter required the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. UN Security Council Resolution 338, adopted in October 1973, called for ne-
gotiations among Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and Syria aimed toward establishing a just and
durable peace in the Middle East.
