Haiti 789 5. The main threat to continued stability arises from the President’s ill health. Without Duvalier, a struggle for power would be certain to occur. The military would be likely to seize control, but probably would be unable to stabilize the situation. The outcome would probably be a prolonged period of instability in which pro-Castro elements would certainly strive to gain control. (Para. 22) Discussion 6. Background. Haiti is an overcrowded and impoverished country: its levels of production, income, health, and literacy are the lowest in the Western Hemisphere. Its politics are highly personal, but reflect underlying tensions between a long-­established mulatto elite, a rising Negro elite, and the city mob of Port-­au-Prince. The mass of Negro peasants is, for the most part, politically inert. 7. Since the end of the U.S. military occupation (1934), it has been normal for a Haitian President to complete his six-­year term of office, to seek to perpetuate himself in power, to be thereupon overthrown by a military junta, and to be fairly promptly replaced by a successor selected by the junta in private consultation with leading politicians. Following the overthrow of President Magloire in 1956, this customary though extra-­constitutional procedure broke down when the contending political factions could not agree upon a successor. After several interim governments had been overthrown by popular disorder in Port-­au-Prince, the army, in September 1957, finally procured the popular election of Dr. Francois Duvalier. He was bitterly opposed by the mulatto elite and by organized labor in Port-­au-Prince, but was enthusiastically supported by the Negro elite and was generally popular among the peasants. 8. The Political Situation. Until the spring of 1959, Duvalier’s tenure of power was precarious. Opposition leaders in exile were actively conspiring against him with some encouragement from the new regime in Cuba. An invasion of exiles with Cuban support was imminently expected. The army could not be relied upon to resist it. Duvalier’s control of the internal situation depended primarily upon the terror inspired by his notorious “secret police.” The Haitian treasury was virtually empty. At this point the situation was stabilized by the receipt of $6 million in U.S. budgetary support and by the arrival of a U.S. Marine Corps mission to reform and revitalize the Haitian military establishment. These measures were significant, not only for their direct effects, but more importantly as signs of U.S. interest in sustaining the Duvalier regime. This indication of U.S. support was largely responsible for the absence of an attempt against the regime in May 1959, when President Duvalier was incapacitated by a severe illness.
