generally accorded to foreigners by the laws of the place where
the property is situated.”
The Department has noted the discussion reported on pages two and three
of your despatch No. 374 of December 18, 1923, which you had with the
Austrian experts, in regard to the application of the closing words of the
first of the foregoing three paragraphs, namely:
“… and generally to do anything incidental to or necessary for the
enjoyment of any of the foregoing privileges upon the same terms
as nationals of the state of residence or as nationals of the nation
hereafter to be most favored by it, submitting themselves to all
local laws and regulations duly established”.
and confirms your explanation made to them that the condition relates to all
matters dealt with in the paragraph. A similar condition in more condensed
form, namely;
“… upon the same terms as nationals of the country”.
is included in the second of the foregoing paragraphs.
This Government understands the condition of reciprocity required in the
last of the foregoing paragraphs to relate to the laws of the political division
by which the acquisition, possession and disposition of immovable property
are governed. The Department infers from the discussion in your despatch
that in Austria the matter is governed by national legislation and that the
law is uniform throughout the Republic. In the United States these matters
are governed by State law. Therefore, nationals of the United States who are
citizens of states which grant to citizens of foreign countries the right to
acquire, possess and dispose of real property would have the right under the
provision here proposed to the treatment generally accorded by the laws of
Austria to nationals of foreign countries on condition of reciprocity.
Nationals of the United States, citizens of States which deny to citizens of
foreign countries the right to acquire, possess and dispose of immovable
property would obtain no rights in Austria under the paragraph. The right of
citizens of Austria in the United States to acquire, possess and dispose of
immovable property, would be recognized in States in which such rights are
