States does not believe that the conclusion of a treaty such as it has
proposed will preclude the possibility of another war. It does believe,
however, that the danger of war would be greatly lessened were the Powers
of the world to join in such an instrument as it has suggested.
I am, however, unable to believe that France intends rigidly to insist upon
the form of treaty which she submitted on April 20. Neither can I believe
that the French draft accurately represents the views of the other interested
Powers. I am therefore still hopeful that a form of treaty may be agreed
upon which records unmistakably the determination of the nations of the
world not to go to war with one another. The United States would gladly
sign such a treaty without qualification or reservation. It is prepared,
however, to consider any modifications or qualifications of its draft which
may be necessary by reason of the special position of any of the interested
Governments provided the treaty is not vitiated thereby.
There seem to be six major considerations which the French Government
has emphasized in its correspondence and in its draft treaty, namely, that the
treaty must not (1) impair the right of legitimate self-defense; (2) violate the
Covenant of the League of Nations; (3) violate the treaties of Locarno; (4)
violate certain unspecified treaties guaranteeing neutrality; (5) bind the
parties in respect of a state breaking the treaty; (6) come into effect until
accepted by all or substantially all of the Powers of the world. The views of
the United States on these six points are as follows:
(1) Self-defense. There is nothing in the American draft of an anti-
war treaty which restricts or impairs in any way the right of self-
defense. That right is inherent in every sovereign state and is
implicit in every treaty. Every nation is free at all times and
regardless of treaty provisions to defend its territory from attack
or invasion and it alone is competent to decide whether
circumstances require recourse to war in self-defense. If it has a
good case, the world will applaud and not condemn its action.
Express recognition by treaty of this inalienable right, however,
gives rise to the same difficulty encountered in any effort to
define aggression. It is the identical question approached from the
other side. Inasmuch as no treaty provision can add to the natural
