280
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
hind parliamentary immunities while endeavoring disrupt public
order. He told Shah that in any event he might find it necessary arrest
Kashani in view latter’s open incitement to rebellion. Shah had hesi-
tated and had said he must examine constitutional aspects problem.
Qavam had thereupon informed Shah that unless he cld be given free
hand in this emergency by Shah, he wld be compelled to submit his res-
ignation. He asked Shah to think matter over and give him decision
earliest possible moment. Late yesterday evening Qavam was in-
formed by some of his advisers that Shah was still hesitating and that
during course day, Ala, Min Court, had had three hour conversation
with Kashani. Qavam infuriated at news that Court was carrying on
conversation with Kashani after latter had engaged in treasonable acts,
immed sent his resignation to Shah orally through Ala, Court official
who happened to be visiting Qavam at time.
3. According to emissary who brought me above info, Qavam had
recd no (rpt not) reaction from Shah re his resignation and was sitting
idly at his residence maintaining he no (rpt no) longer PriMin.
4. Upon receipt this info, I called immed on Ala to obtain his ver-
sion. Ala astonished at news that Qavam had resigned and maintained
there must be some misunderstanding. He had just talked over tele-
phone with Shah who told him that yesterday afternoon Qavam had
asked Shah for authority to arrest Kashani and that he (Shah) was hesi-
tating whether or not (rpt not) to give authority for act which might be
unconstitutional. Ala told me he had informed Shah that subversive
movements were being encouraged by failure of govt to act decisively
and that Shah shld not (rpt not) allow quibbles re constitution prevent
Qavam from taking steps necessary to forestall general conflagration.
In my presence Ala called in his Deputy Human to inquire whether
latter had heard that Qavam had submitted resignation. Human also
expressed astonishment at news which I had brought and said there
must be some misunderstanding. Unsuccessful steps were made get in
touch with Ala. Ala went at once to discuss matter with Shah and to en-
deavor persuade latter to agree to dissolution of Parliament or to some
other measure which might give Qavam adequate powers to preserve
law and order.
5. Ala also told me that he had not (rpt not) seen Kashani since
early morning July 18. Ala seemed to believe that some intriguers had
been trying to cause difficulties between Shah and Qavam. Ala said
that he wld like to call on Qavam and come to understanding with him
if he cld do so without being compelled to pass through rows of
“courtiers” usually to be found in Qavam’s residence. He wld appre-
ciate it if I wld send message to Qavam and let Qavam know what he
had told me. I sent this message immediately on return to Emb and un-
