“aggressor” and by exceptions and qualifications stipulating when nations
would be justified in going to war, its effect would be very greatly
weakened and its positive value as a guaranty of peace virtually destroyed.
The ideal which inspires the effort so sincerely and so hopefully put
forward by your Government and mine is arresting and appealing just
because of its purity and simplicity; and I cannot avoid the feeling that if
Governments should publicly acknowledge that they can only deal with this
ideal in a technical spirit and must insist upon the adoption of reservations
impairing, if not utterly destroying the true significance of their common
endeavors, they would be in effect only recording their impotence, to the
keen disappointment of mankind in general.
From the broad standpoint of humanity and civilization, all war is an assault
upon the stability of human society, and should be suppressed in the
common interest. The Government of the United States desires to see the
institution of war abolished, and stands ready to conclude with the French,
British, Italian, German and Japanese Governments a single multilateral
treaty open to subsequent adherence by any and all other Governments,
binding the parties thereto not to resort to war with one another. The precise
language to be employed in such a treaty is a matter of indifference to the
United States so long as it clearly and unmistakably sets forth the
determination of the parties to abolish war among themselves. I therefore
renew the suggestion contained in my note of January 11, 1928, that the
Government of France join with the Government of the United States in
transmitting to the British, Italian, German and Japanese Governments for
their consideration and comment the text of M. Briand’s original proposal,
together with copies of the subsequent correspondence between France and
the United States as a basis for preliminary discussions looking to the
conclusion of an appropriate multilateral treaty proscribing recourse to war.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
9 The text of this note was also communicated through the respective
American Embassies to the French, British, German, Italian, and Japanese
Foreign Offices.
