30
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Possible Future Developments
11. Although the USSR will continue to apply strong political and
psychological pressures against Iran in an effort to force the gov-
ernment of that country into submission, it is considered unlikely that
the Soviet Union would be willing to resort to direct armed interven-
tion by organized USSR military forces at this time. Nevertheless the
possibility of such armed intervention cannot be entirely ruled out. In
the absence of such armed intervention Iran is probably capable of
maintaining successful resistance to Soviet pressure and could be ex-
pected to maintain its alignment with the free world provided it has
confidence in United States and United Kingdom support and can pro-
duce competent political leadership able to overcome the existing
feeling of frustration and hopelessness among the mass of the people
and to implement the planned economic and social reforms, delay in
the execution of which is now seriously threatening the internal sta-
bility of the country. Since these conditions necessary for the mainte-
nance of Iran’s westward orientation and resistance to Soviet pressure
may not continue to exist, it is possible that the United States may be
faced in the future with one or more of the following contingencies:
First Contingency: The Iranian Government adopts a policy of “neutrality”
in the “cold war” and seeks a modus vivendi with the Soviet Union.
12. Continuing deterioration of the situation in Iran has created a
feeling of hopelessness and a public psychology inherently dangerous
from the point of view of Iran’s determination to resist Soviet pres-
sures. Present Soviet tactics in Iran are designed to convince the Ira-
nians that they have nothing to fear from the USSR and it seems certain
that in their search for security many Iranians are impressed by the
present “friendly” policy of the Soviets. Unless the United States can
convince them of the real issue at stake, they will insist on a gov-
ernment in power not unsympathetic to Soviet approaches. Such a gov-
ernment, fearing overt Soviet action and feeling that it has been left
alone to its fate, might seek some sort of understanding with the Soviet
Union, possibly along the lines of the agreement of 1946. Such an un-
derstanding would permit Soviet economic exploitation, amnesty to
political prisoners, legalization of the Tudeh Party and its eventual par-
ticipation in the government, and would open the door to a gradual
taking over of the country by local communist and Soviet agents.
13. Current United States measures in Iran are designed to prevent
this first contingency. If nevertheless the contingency did occur, the
United States could, in conjunction with the United Kingdom and with
little risk in proportion to the possible gain, take positive steps, in-
cluding covert measures, to support pro-Western elements and effect
Iran’s alignment with the free world. The alternative course of action,
