Non-Proliferation
945
abroad to the dangers that nuclear proliferation would pose and to the
importance of deterring proliferation. We have also made progress in
renegotiating some of our nuclear cooperation agreements, gained new
adherents to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and won limited
support from other nuclear suppliers for restraints on sensitive nuclear
exports, particularly in the case of exports to Pakistan.
At the same time, and especially because of the insecurity of global
energy supply that was accentuated by events in Iran,3 our efforts to
restrain the use and transfer of sensitive nuclear technologies and ma-
terials are still viewed by many governments as an unacceptable in-
fringement on their nuclear energy development plans. These gov-
ernments defend their nuclear energy plans primarily on political
grounds, specifically on their right to increase their energy independ-
ence and to undertake related technological development.
As a result, although our INFCE consultations show a growing
consensus between ourselves and several of our industrialized partners
on most issues concerning the nuclear fuel cycle and sensitive tech-
nology transfers, we have not been able to win many other govern-
ments’ support for our fundamental position: that non-proliferation
concerns, as well as technical and economic factors, indicate that the
transfer and use of sensitive technologies should be significantly re-
strained and delayed.
In talks with us even the Canadians, whom we view as close allies
in our non-proliferation effort, have voiced doubts about the effective-
ness of an attempt to deny sensitive technologies to the developing
states even if they accept safeguards and give other non-proliferation
assurances. Canadians argue that such a discriminatory approach
could weaken the NPT. They also stress their interest in maintaining an
option for Canadian enrichment and reprocessing facilities.
If the problems of access to peaceful nuclear technology and nu-
clear arms control cause a serious confrontation at the June 1980 NPT
Review Conference, the NPT regime, which has served us so well over
the last decade, could be significantly undercut. The situation would be
even more acrimonious if the outcome of INFCE appears discrimina-
tory or if SALT II and a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty are not con-
cluded before the conference. We are currently consulting with the
other NPT depositary states (UK and USSR) and other key countries to
promote a more productive atmosphere at the conference.
3 In the wake of the Shah’s decision to leave Iran, the nation’s new government sus-
pended oil exports, which affected the world’s energy supply. See Foreign Relations,
1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980, Documents 181, 182, 187, 188, 189, 192,
193, 194, and 200.
