3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
903
7. He said the American press with gusto suggested and reported
rumors to the effect that the Soviets are delivering weapons to Iraq or
Iran. The USG makes no attempt to set matters straight, although it
knows the truth. He would take this opportunity to say again that the
USSR was not making any arms deliveries to Iran or Iraq. Finally, he
said, the Soviets had nothing to recant, it was the US which was respon-
sible for the military buildup in the Gulf area. Restraint and coolhead-
edness by great powers were in the interests of all, including the US
“and the countries which are carrying out US policy.”
8. I replied that the shipping lanes of the Persian Gulf area are a
lifeline of the industrial world and it appeared that the Soviet Union se-
riously underrated the importance of this to US interests. Shipping had
come under threat and insurance rates had jumped up. Gromyko’s re-
marks underemphasized the vital importance involved. That’s why
our fleet was there, and I noted that there was also a Soviet fleet in
the area, my careful reading of the record of the New York conver-
sation was clearly that both sides, not just the Soviet side, had given
warnings.
9. Gromyko came back at this, saying that the distorted public
statements made by the US side had not been made by the Secretary. It
was up to us to measure precisely the responsibility, but the President
had repeatedly said that the US had warned the USSR. There would be
no objection if it had been truthfully revealed who said what in what
sequence, but all had been distorted.
10. I tried to bring Gromyko back to the question of vital interest,
saying that we had no interest in getting involved in the Iran/Iraq con-
flict and that we did not consider the oil deposits of the area to belong
to us. We had no idea or desire to take oil by force which now had be-
come the thrust of his conversation. But so long as people were willing
to sell us oil—the industrial world received a substantial portion of its
oil from this area—then it was our vital interest to see that we got the oil
out. Our fleet presence could be reduced with the reduction of tensions
in the area and progress toward a peaceful settlement of the conflict. I
could see no reason why this position would bring us into conflict with
the Soviet Union.
11. At this point, saying that it was in the interest of avoiding con-
flict that we not have any surprises or misinterpretations, I took up
orally points in paragraph 4 reftel regarding RD deployment. Gromyko
listened in silence and gave no reaction.
12. Gromyko cooly and abruptly ended the exchange by saying
“our approaches and reasoning are so different that it would be diffi-
cult to erect any bridges between them. The substance of all this is that
