242  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
NSC, such comments may be submitted to the President, through the 
Chairman of the Subcommittee, for consideration. The Chairman of the 
Subcommittee, in consultation with the Director of the Subcommittee 
Staff, will prepare regulations and establish procedures for the handling 
of highly sensitive information2 required in the preparation of an eval­
uation report so as to safeguard its security on a strict “need-­to-­know” 
basis and to preclude the assembly of an unwarranted amount of sensi­
tive information in one document. Such regulations and procedures shall 
not be finally adopted until the other members of the Subcommittee have 
been consulted concerning them.
6. Subcommittee members are designated to act as individuals, 
but each shall have the right to consult, at his discretion and under 
appropriate security safeguards, with his agency or committee prior to 
Subcommittee action on matters normally within the cognizance of his 
committee or agency. In subscribing to the reports and recommenda­
tions of the Subcommittee the individual members shall not be expected 
to assume responsibility for technical matters or conclusions not nor­
mally within the cognizance of his own parent committee or agency. 
Reports as submitted to the Council should show, so far as possible by 
textual footnotes, any dissents by Subcommittee members.
7. The Subcommittee will have a Staff, composed of individuals 
assigned by member agencies, as required by the Director, and under 
the direction of a Director whom I shall designate. The Director may 
be compensated through the National Security Council from contribu­
tions by the member agencies. Individuals assigned to the Staff from 
each military service and by the Central Intelligence Agency should 
normally serve for two years and be so appointed that, to insure conti­
nuity, not more than fifty per cent will vacate each year.
8. The Net Evaluation Subcommittee hereby established is empow­
ered under the terms of this Directive to call on any agency of the 
Government for relevant information, evaluations, and estimates, sub­
ject only to establishment of appropriate security regulations and pro­
cedures for the handling of highly sensitive information as provided 
under paragraph 5 above.
9. Distribution of each completed Subcommittee report will be 
determined at the time by me.
Dwight D. Eisenhower
2 Information such as that relating to war plans, new weapons and equipment, tech­
niques and tactics for their employment, the vulnerability of U.S. defenses, and domestic 
and foreign intelligence sources and methods. [Footnote is in the original.]
