206
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
not made Chinese ratification an explicit condition for entry into force,
they had strongly implied it. He said he was not aware of any US–PRC
discussions on CW questions.
9. US CW program. In response to questions from UK reps,
Leonard (US) said principal problem with US stocks was not deteriora-
tion, but rather obsolescence of munitions, which cannot be arrested.
He noted that no decision had yet been taken on the DOD L budget re-
quest for funds to construct a binary Chemical Weapons production
facility.
10. Confidence-building visits. Following up on FRG proposal at
the UN special session on disarmament, Von Arz (FRG) provided Dels
with draft letter4 to the UN Secretary General inviting UN members to
send experts to a workshop on verification of ban on manufacture of
Chemical Weapons. He said workshop would involve visits to four
chemical plants and a round-table discussion. Tentative workshop
dates are March 14–16, 1979. Burns added that UK was considering
possible invitation in the committee on disarmament for experts to visit
the former UK nerve agent pilot plant at Nancekuke, Cornwall. (This
facility is now being demolished.) He said trip could include visit to a
commercial organophosphorous chemical plant and a display of mili-
tary chemical defensive equipment. Burns said UK visits might follow
immediately after FRG workshop. In response to FRG and UK requests
for US reaction on timing of visits, Akalovsky said on personal basis
that mid-March, 1979 would not appear to affect the US–USSR negotia-
tions adversely. He said US would provide official reaction as soon as
possible.
11. Committee on Disarmament (CD). Burns (UK) asked what can
be done in the CD on Chemical Weapons. He noted interest of majority
of CD members in having a meaningful role in negotiation of a CW
convention. Burns suggested that CD might first discuss technical
methods for destruction of CW stocks and then take up possibility of
destruction of such stocks at an international facility. Akalovsky (US)
responded that General US view was that for now it would be best to
avoid introducing controversial points into the CD. Effort in the CD to
work out some part of a CW convention in isolation from the rest
would not be productive. He added that the concept of an international
destruction facility was interesting and would be given consideration.
4 The draft letter is recorded in telegram 21800 from Bonn, November 28. The West
German Government said in the letter that it considered “the conclusion of a convention
concerning an effective and comprehensive ban on chemical weapons as an already ex-
isting means of mass destruction a matter of urgent priority.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D780490–0710)
