North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 879 global problems as hunger and disease. It would go a long way toward meeting the developing countries’ aid demands, although they would still press for initiatives in such other areas as trade and commodities. Obtaining Congressional support for an increase of this magnitude would be extremely difficult. VI. Your Decisions Your Decision on Strategy for Concessional Assistance Strategy #1: Concentrate bilateral concessional aid on helping poor countries—with SSA, non-concessional aid, and concessional aid for technological collaboration going to middle-income countries. (Favored by Treasury, OMB, and the Brookings study on the grounds that it would concentrate aid on (i) the people who need it most, because they live in countries that have less recourse to such outside resources as World Bank loans than middle-income countries; (ii) the countries where it could have the most beneficial leverage on the recipients’ policies, because it will constitute a larger share of the total resources than it would in middle-income countries.)29 Strategy #2: Concentrate on helping poor people in poor LDCs with the flexibility to reach poor people in middle-income nations as well. (Favored by State, AID, and the NSC staff on the grounds that this strategy might reach the largest number of poor people, would give the US the opportunity to develop cooperative relationships with the largest number of LDCs, and would provide substantial flexibility to meet varied objectives including regional programs, as in the Caribbean, while allowing us to balance our interests between poor countries and middle-income countries, as well as between economic and political purposes, provided that these purposes could be served by programs that would help the poor.)30 Strategy #3: Follow multi-purpose strategy, with substantial attention to the political purposes of bilateral development aid, on the grounds that this will afford us greater flexibility than either strategies #1 or #2, since aid would not be limited to helping poor people. Since this strategy would place more emphasis than strategies #1 or #2 on political and security factors in programming bilateral development aid, it would make it easier to use bilateral development aid to advance such political goals as non-proliferation and regional collaboration.31 29 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option. 30 Owen wrote “Supported by Peter Bourne” at the end of this paragraph. Carter indicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.” 31 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option.
