Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 93 will follow. I think when we do make a mistake we ought to be frank about it and say we erred and this is the corrective action that we will take. And we will try to correct our error, and we will try to do better next time. “I think the American people will respond well. And I think other nations that look to us for leadership will respond well, also. “I want to make sure that we eliminate in our own country those vestiges of hatred or discrimination or deprivation of human rights that we still retain so that when we do criticize other countries, or when we do speak out to deplore the loss of those rights in other nations, that we, ourselves, might be free of justified criticism. “Well, all these matters that have just come to my mind as I stand here before you are important to us all. And I just want to be sure that we work in harmony to alleviate tensions and to reinspire those who can legitimately, I hope, in the future look to us for justified inspiration.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pages 237–238) Carter spoke at 2:37 p.m. in the Dean Acheson Auditorium at the Department of State and then answered questions from Department and Agency for International Development employees. Prior to his remarks, Carter toured the Department’s Communications Center and typed a message on a teletype machine to the Embassy in Paris. 24. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, February 24, 1977 Topics for Discussion at Cabinet Meetings Issue for Decision The President wants two Cabinet members to take 10–15 minutes each at future Cabinet meetings to discuss interesting concepts or functions of their departments—with a preference, according to Jack 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981: Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 2/16–28/77. Unclassified. Drafted by Vogelgesang. There is no indication that Vance saw the memorandum.
