1398 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 821. Despatch unnumbered from Geneva1 Geneva, August 8, 1957 SUBJECT China Talks—69th Meeting 1. I opened 69th with following statement: a. “In looking over the record of our nearly two years’ of negoti­ ation on the vital topic of renunciation of force, I am concerned that despite the many months of discussion there has been no progress since early 1956. Indeed I might even say that with the submission of your draft of May 11, 1956 much of the progress which had been achieved before then seems to have been wiped out. I am deeply concerned with this because the threat to peace in the Taiwan area which prevailed when we first began discussion of this topic still exists and, in some respects, has increased. Your side has continued building up its armed strength in the Taiwan area while at the same time continuing to make clear that it will use this armed strength if necessary to achieve its pol­ icy objectives. b. The basic views of my government as to the question of renunci­ ation of force remain those which I set forth in our meeting on October 8, 1955. You will recall that I stressed that the U.S. was not proposing that either side abandon its views or give up the right peacefully to pursue its policies, or that either side renounce the right to defend itself. I simply sought, and I still seek, an agreement whereby both sides would renounce force as a means of pursuing their respective policies, both generally and particularly in regard to the Taiwan area. Such a reciprocal renunciation of force we regarded, and still regard, as an essential first step toward the peaceful settlement of differences between our two governments. c. At our October 27 meeting you submitted a draft agreed announcement dealing with the subject of renunciation of force. As you will recall we found your draft deficient in its omission of any reference to the right of self-­defense and in its failure to relate renunciation of force to the Taiwan area. We also felt that your suggestion for a foreign min­ isters meeting was, at best, premature at that stage when your side was still unwilling unequivocally to renounce the use of force with respect to the Taiwan area. In our draft agreed announcement of November 10 we attempted to use language which would be mutually agreeable, not 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–857. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Johnson. Received on August 12.
