Colombia 375 CO–36. Memorandum of a Conversation1 Bogotá, September 16, 1960. [Enclosure] Letter from the Ambassador in Colombia (McIntosh) to the Special Assistant in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Devine)2  Bogotá, September 15, 1960. Dear Mr. Devine: I refer to your letter of August 313 enclosing copies of draft papers [text not declassified] proposing ways and means of responding to President Lleras’ request for assistance in combatting the violence and banditry problem. Your letter and these papers have been most helpful to me and to other members of the Country Team in understanding the problem confronted by the Department [text not declassified]. I heartily agree that the ideal solution would be to come up with an agreed upon and mutually accepted program on the basis of which Presidential determination for use of the necessary funds could be sought. However, [text not declassified] it appears that the Department must take the responsibility of proposing an assistance program which, on the one hand, will be responsive to President Lleras’ request and, on the other hand, will form the basis for requesting Presidential determination on the use of MAP. Urgency is of the essence. The Colombian Government officially requested our decision some 15 months ago. Our only answer to date has been to send a Survey Team to Colombia for the dual purpose of ascertaining whether the violence situation justified our seeking a Presidential determination for the use of Mutual Security Act assistance and to come up with possible recommendations for eventual use by the Colombian Government in the anti-­guerrilla campaign. While the GOC cooperated fully and whole-­heartedly with the Team, and the team concluded its field survey last December, we as yet have not submitted to 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files. Secret; Official-Informal. 2 pages not declassified. 2 The source text is a carbon copy bearing Ambassador McIntosh’s typed name. 3 Not found in Department of State files.
