International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 USTR’s authority to initiate discussions with the Japanese on a possible Orderly Marketing Agreement if you felt that relief was in the national interest. (USTR would probably have to be authorized to negotiate the full range of U.S.-Japanese auto-related issues, including the cab chassis tariff and the final disposition of the 201 case.) USTR might, in fact, conclude such an agreement before the USITC completes its report to you. You could not, however, implement an agreement until you receive the USITC’s report. It is conceivable that agreement could be reached with Japan by late October and implemented in November under this approach. Should you await the final USITC report before deciding to grant relief, it is unlikely you could reach an agreement prior to mid-November and implement it before next year. If the Japanese were unwilling to conclude an agreement, you would have to impose across-the-board relief on imports, including imports from Europe and Canada—through tariffs, tariff rate quotas, or quotas—since in initiating discussions with Japan on restraints, you would have effectively made the decision to grant relief. Your request to the USITC for an accelerated USITC investigation would state that while you are not prejudging the outcome, a number of recent developments in the auto industry (e.g., high import penetration, poor financial results, layoffs, depressed sales, idle small car capacity) have heightened public concern about the current and future condition of the auto industry. You would indicate that you share that concern and feel that, given the importance of this issue to the nation, expedited USITC consideration of this case and expedited consideration of relief should it find injury, is warranted. You would recognize the need to give a fair hearing to all parties and stress the importance of doing so, but also stress that failure to move more rapidly may cause more serious complications. The advantages of this approach are: —Demonstrates your recognition of the urgency of the situation and is an initial signal that you may be prepared to modify your position and provide relief. —Lays the groundwork for you to modify your position on trade restraints, within a legally established framework. —Only approach under consideration here that offers the possibility of increasing auto employment and production in the near term, even though increases may be small. —In moving up your decision, you will assure domestic unions and firms that they will have an early decision. It demonstrates your concern and will be regarded as a significant step. —Send signal to Japanese auto companies not to aggressively push exports and expand capacity.
