Romania 731 supporting Romania and its policies of independence. Nevertheless, Romania’s membership in the Warsaw Pact and probable opposition in the Congress are serious obstacles. 4. Before deciding on next steps, we would like to have greater confidence than we now have that Admiral Dinu’s request represented a serious and continuing Romanian interest in a military supply relationship. Accordingly, at the Ambassador’s discretion the Defense Attache should make an appointment with Admiral Dinu and convey the points in para 5. 5. Talking points: —Careful consideration has been given in Washington to the approach you made on March 6 concerning the possibility of US military sales to Romania. —As was the case in 1975–76, any such sales to a member of the Warsaw Pact raise legal and political questions, although some legal obstacles have since been relaxed. —We want to approach the matter with a constructive attitude, although we would not want to raise expectations that could not be fulfilled. —Before considering the Romanian request further, we would appreciate having a firm indication that the Government of Romania remains actively interested in pursuing the question of US military sales. —If it is, we would like to have specific ideas of the kinds of articles you might wish to purchase. We could not provide such items as major weapons systems or sensitive military technologies, but we would be prepared to hear other requests. If the Romanian interlocutor responds by referring to the list handed over in 1975, the Defense Attache should answer as follows: —We will report your interest to Washington. —You should be aware, however, that the 1975 list contained a number of items which involve sensitive military technology or major weapons systems. 6. Begin FYI. Following, for Embassy’s background, is list given us in 1975: Portable radar station for tactical reconnaissance; Grenade thrower—adaptable for man-portable armaments; Marksman passive device—for aim at the target—for gun, stun gun and machine gun; Launching device for portable anti-aircraft missiles and portable anti-aircraft missiles designed for air defense against low speed and low level flying attacking aircraft; self-propelled anti-aircraft missile
