Chapter 4, February–April 1990  545
the forces of each side so that they are inherently more stabilizing. I 
believe we can do more toward this end in the current START negoti-
ations, without delaying their conclusion, and also set the course for 
even more stabilizing measures in future negotiations that could begin 
immediately after START. In particular, I believe we should consider 
the elimination of mobile MIRVed missiles as part of the current START 
agreement. Then, in follow-­on negotiations, we should eliminate all 
land-­based MIRVs.
Let me emphasize that I put considerable priority on the prompt 
completion of the current START agreement. In fact, I would suggest 
that you and I be prepared to initial the draft treaty during the upcom-
ing Washington Summit to signify that we have agreed on all the major 
substantive issues. However, I believe a ban on mobile MIRVs could 
be incorporated into the current START agreement without delaying 
its completion. To achieve such a ban, I am prepared to cancel our rail-­
garrison system in exchange for the elimination of Soviet mobile SS-24s. 
I know you have several trains already deployed. The United States has 
a system that I am ready to deploy rapidly, but I would prefer another 
course, to ban these mobile-MIRV systems now before our two sides 
have even more invested in them and their elimination becomes that 
much more difficult.
I also am prepared to agree to the mutual elimination of silo-­based 
MIRVed missiles. Certainly this bold step would take more extensive 
negotiations, but our agreement on this goal could be the foundation 
of follow-­on talks that could begin as soon as substantive agreement is 
reached on the current START Treaty. I also would note that if our two 
countries are able to agree to the eventual elimination of all MIRVed 
ICBMS, the US will be willing to defer our remaining concerns about 
heavy ICBMs to the follow-­on negotiations.
I hope we will be able to announce agreement on all three goals—­
banning mobile MIRVs in START, initialing the START Treaty at the 
June Summit, and beginning follow-­on talks immediately to elimi-
nate all land-­based MIRVS—­at the meeting between Secretary Baker 
and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze next month. If, however, you are 
unable to agree to consider a ban on mobile MIRVs in the current nego-
tiations, an alternative would be for the two sides to announce, follow-
ing the April Ministerial, an agreement to begin follow-­on talks once 
the current START agreement is initialed that would have as central 
objectives the near-­term elimination of mobile MIRVs, followed by all 
land-­based MIRVs.
I have asked Secretary Baker to outline these ideas to Foreign 
Minister Shevardnadze when they meet in Namibia in order to be in 
a better position to have substantive discussions about this proposal 
when they meet in Washington in April.
