Peru 1071 go there or stay if they did. He stated that most of the Indians who had migrated to the upper Huallaga (between Tingo María and Tarapoto) had stayed less than a year. The South was urgent. He gave first priority to a road from Sandía to the Tambopata. The Indians were already moving into the Tambopata area in large numbers even though they had to go and come and carry their produce by trail. The terrain was difficult but the distance short and the Indians had proved they wanted to settle there. He would like to see the road built as a dramatic example of U. S.-Peruvian cooperation, surveyed by U. S. Army engineers using helicopters, jointly financed and built by the Peruvian Army with the engineering equipment already furnished by the U. S. (Beltran is keenly interested in using the Army, and other services where practicable, for constructive development of the country and also in popularizing it, within the Army and without, to bulwark the country’s future internal order. He also shares our views on the value of using the conscription period for civic and technical training.) I shared his interest in the dramatic but reminded him that no real engineering studies had been made of a Tambopata road, of the time it took to get from conception through studies, financing and construction to completion, and the slow progress being made on the nearby, similar purpose, Smathers-­financed Macusani-San Gabán road. He agreed to expedite progress on the latter but insisted on the advantages of a dramatic approach to the Tambopata road and of constructing it “a la Yanqui” rather than “a la criollo”. I agreed to look into the possibilities, primarily of ICA financing a study by U. S. and Peruvian engineers of the practicability of the road. He is now pushing his Commission on Housing and Land Reform to complete its study on the latter subject by the end of this year and hopes to be able to take specific measures next year. Livestock Development I told him that former Minister of Agriculture10 had nearly completed studies of a program designed to make Peru self-­sufficient in meat and that I had found Washington favorably disposed to consider a loan for this purpose, provided the price of meat was freed from control as had now been done. He had not known of this and was delighted. He thought the first step should be studies of pasturage, on the coast, in the Sierra and in the jungle, and then the importation of improved breeds. Technical assistance would be needed. I asked about the financing of the local expenditure. He thought it should be done by the Banco 10 Reference presumably is to Emilio Foley, Peruvian Minister of Agriculture, March 20–July 19, 1959.
