3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
828
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
if necessary, after studying the substance of the points I had raised
more fully. Gromyko then stated the following:
5. Afghanistan
You emphasize that Afghanistan is the main event which has
brought about the deterioration in relations between the U.S. and the
Soviet Union and which is responsible for the general deterioration in
the international situation. We categorically reject this. We believe that
the problem has been artificially exaggerated. Afghanistan is not the
main problem, especially if it is viewed factually. In any event, Afghan-
istan should not be viewed as a problem resulting in negative conse-
quences for U.S.-Soviet relations and for international relations in gen-
eral. The U.S. completely distorts the meaning of Soviet actions and the
introduction of Soviet forces into Afghanistan. We introduced those
forces to help Afghanistan repel aggression and did so according to the
UN Charter and our treaty with the Government and leadership of Af-
ghanistan. We have not violated anything by that action and have acted
in accordance with international law. We categorically reject all these
distortions of the situation which are made by Washington. We shall
withdraw our forces after we are requested to do so from the Afghan
Government and, of course, if there is such a request. Also, our with-
drawal is dependent on whether or not interference and intervention
cease from Pakistan and Iran and they stop fighting against the legiti-
mate Government of Afghanistan. The withdrawal of our forces will be
accomplished also when an agreement is reached and it is guaranteed.
The question of a withdrawal of our forces before that is beside the
point. Those who raise such questions are wasting not only their time
but our time. We have expressed our position publicly and Leonid
Brezhnev has done so on more than one occasion. Our position has
been explained to the United States and I repeated it the last time in my
meeting with Secretary Muskie.4 Our position should be clear to you.
Why does the U.S. continue to take such an unrealistic position on Af-
ghanistan after all these explanations? We are aware of what Wash-
ington and the West wish to see happen (in Afghanistan) but are you
prepared to take a realistic position? If the U.S. were prepared to be
more or less objective, a common language can be found but, I repeat,
only if you are prepared to look objectively at the situation and take an
objective position.
Concerning the Afghan Proposal which was recently made and
which the U.S. has been critical of, it seems to us that the U.S. under-
estimates the significance of that proposal. If you do wish to settle the
situation around Afghanistan, your attitude would be different. The
4 See Document 278.
