916  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
placed before the Council. The President, Mr. Gray continued, might or 
might not want to authorize a war-gaming exercise, but no doubt he 
would be interested in the views of the Council on the subject. Mr. Gray 
then summarized the paragraphs of the war-­gaming paper dealing with 
purpose, scope and cover. At the conclusion of his summary, he informed 
the Council that this problem had been discussed by the Planning Board 
the day before and that the general feeling of the Board was that it was 
worth serious consideration and would help answer such questions 
as, Should Planning Board Members be relocated with their respective 
agencies or be relocated in a body? Mr. Gray said in the abstract he could 
support either answer to this question, but felt that a clearer idea could 
be obtained by war-­gaming. In conclusion Mr. Gray suggested that if 
the Council thought well of the war-gamming proposal, it might wish 
to await conclusion of the game before recommending to the President 
changes in the current relocation plan.
Mr. Patterson said he thought a war-­gaming exercise would rep­
resent a great gain not only to the NSC, but also to other agencies, and 
noted that OCDM might be taking another look at the OPERATION 
ALERT exercise. With respect to the issue which had arisen over blast 
protection at Front Royal, Governor Hoegh intended to confer with the 
Secretary of State and the Director, Bureau of the Budget, at an early 
date on the principles of blast protection.
Mr. Gray noted that the relocation plans now call for the Secretary 
of State to be at Front Royal, with other Cabinet Members at various 
other locations, and asked whether the President in time of emergency 
would be satisfied to have his principal advisers scattered, in view of 
transportation difficulties and the danger of repeated attacks. Mr. Gray 
believed the President might want his principal advisers with him. 
Concepts of this kind had never really been tested, because relocation 
heretofore had been based largely on the idea of restoring the country 
after a nuclear attack. Another concept which might be tested by the 
war-­game would be the condition which would arise if the enemy’s 
first attack were directed solely at our retaliatory capability, with our 
population left largely intact, followed by an ultimatum which called 
upon us to surrender or suffer attack on our population centers. Mr. 
Gray called attention again to the fact that the war-­gaming paper pro­
posed that war-­gaming take place under cover of, but not as a part of, 
OPERATION ALERT. Mr. Patterson felt that this was a correct concept.
Secretary Dillon thought it would be desirable to determine 
whether a study would be advantageous before jumping straight into 
a war-­game. He was very concerned about the question of “visibility” 
and, on the basis of past experience, he was inclined to be pessimistic 
about preventing leaks. It would be particularly unfortunate to have 
the war-­game exercise leak if it dealt with the concept last described by
