1956  795
Was it not outright interference in internal affairs of sovereign country 
in trying to make his side do something or to refrain from doing some­
thing in regard to Taiwan? Was it not fact his side had always resolutely 
rejected such a proposition?
25. Wang said question we now discussing was question of mak­
ing declaration renouncing use force. In making such a declaration, we 
should make clear that issuance such declaration and actual solution 
of practical matters between two countries China and U.S. were two 
separate matters. It did not seem to him practical for us to think that 
issuance declaration itself resolved practical matters between us. He 
believed I also in agreement with him this point. Such being case, we 
should attempt resolve issues between us step by step.
26. Wang said such declaration between us must not contain any 
prerequisites. Such declaration must not involve domestic matters 
either side. And points set forth in such declaration must be such as 
are acceptable both sides. If we had such a common understanding 
then we would be able settle this question of issuance of declaration. 
It especially important that we should recognize that issuance such a 
declaration merely gave expression desire two of us to resolve disputes 
between two countries in peaceful manner and declaration did not pre­
judge outcome of settlement of issues between our two countries or 
how it finally would be accomplished.
27. Wang said if as I had said such declaration should include 
the most important dispute between our two sides it would tend give 
impression of confusing expression of the desire with the result of the 
final settlement. If my point view adopted, it difficult avoid situation 
in which one side would attempt make its policies prevail over that of 
other or, in other words, impose its views on other. It did not seem to 
him that if we put matter in this manner it would help bring us closer to 
solution this matter. Therefore, as he had said, purpose in making such 
declaration must be one of merely giving expression desire both sides 
for peaceful settlement international disputes between China and U.S. 
in Taiwan area. At same time, such declaration should give expression 
determination of two sides to relax the crisis in Taiwan area.
28. Wang said I had categorically stated that it not intention my side 
require them abandon their position regarding disputes Taiwan area, or 
to give up their views respect respective merits positions both sides 
thereto, and had categorically stated it not my intention demand they 
give up or abandon their views regarding holding Foreign ­Ministers’ 
conference. By making such categorical statement, did I mean say I pre­
pared withdraw self-­defense clause from draft announcement? Could 
this statement be interpreted as saying I would not require his side, 
following issuance declaration, to prejudice their right of liberating 
­Taiwan in exercise their sovereignty in this internal affair of China?
