Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I ment, commodities, and technology. Our economic aid, as well as that provided by other developed nations, also makes a crucial contribution to their well-being. For some countries—particularly the low-income nations—it is the principal source of foreign exchange and technical assistance. But for many others, it serves as an essential complement to other components of their development strategy. In addition to America’s economic involvement in the developing world, our political interests are strongly engaged as well. Developing countries are often key participants in the quest for peace. Regional stability and peace in the Middle East, southern Africa, and elsewhere cannot be achieved without the cooperation of developing nations. Achieving progress on the global issues which directly affect peace— arms restraint and nonproliferation—depends in large measure on strengthening political ties between the industrialized and developing worlds. Our ties to developing countries are essential in many other areas which affect our national security: in deploying our armed forces and in maintaining access to straits, ports, and aviation facilities. But the peace and stability we seek in the world cannot be obtained solely through the maintenance of a strong defense in concert with others. The social unrest which breeds conflict can best be prevented if economic growth and an equitable distribution of resources are realized. As Pope John XXIII so eloquently stated: “In a world of constant want there is no peace. . . .” Foreign Assistance Programs In view of the stakes involved, our foreign aid goals must be matched by our performance. The Carter Administration is asking the Congress to authorize and appropriate $8.4 billion for our economic, food, security assistance programs, and contributions to the international financial institutions this fiscal year. About 16% of this sum represents government guarantees and will not result in actual spending. We are requesting these sums because we believe that foreign aid can and does work. We believe it can have a direct impact on economic growth and the maintenance of peace. Let me give you a summary of what we are trying to do. First, in the area of bilateral economic assistance, we are trying to determine the most effective way to channel this aid to stimulate economic growth and alleviate poverty. In doing so we are implementing a strategy which targets our resources directly on the needs of the poor. Called the “basic human needs” approach, this development strategy seeks to help people meet such basic needs as nutrition, shelter, education, and health care. It is not an international welfare program. It is, in-
