Comprehensive Test Ban
553
226.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
Washington, January 19, 1979, 0045Z
14457. Subject: CTB Negotiations: UK Statement at US/UK Bilat-
eral Meeting, January 17, 1979.
Following is the text of the opening statement presented by Am-
bassador John Edmonds, CTB Delegation leader, during the US/UK bi-
laterals held in Washington on January 17–18, 1979. Begin text:
1. On 14 September,2 during our last bilateral consultations in
Washington, I set out what we saw as the important outstanding issues
facing the United States and British Governments in the Comprehen-
sive Test Ban Negotiations. They were:
A. The duration of the treaty;
B. The question of what happens after the initial duration;
C. Permitted experiments;
D. The verification arrangements, including the National Seismic
Stations required for a treaty of relatively short duration.
2. For various reasons, the last round of negotiations, from 29 Sep-
tember to 14 December, was not very productive. There was definite
progress only on the first of these four issues. The US proposal that ne-
gotiations should proceed on the basis of a three-year treaty was ac-
cepted by the Russians—and by the UK, although we stressed that our
final position on duration would depend on the entire treaty package.
The other three issues are still before us, and we look forward to a full
discussion of them today and tomorrow.
NSS in the UK and dependent territories.
3. NSS is the subject on which there has been the greatest change
since September. I think it fair to say that the Soviet proposal of 27 No-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790026–1078. Se-
cret; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to the Mission in Geneva and Moscow. Drafted
by Barbara Schrage (ACDA/MA); cleared by Joseph Hulings (S/S); and approved by
Thomas Davies (ACDA/MA).
2 Telegram 234612 to London, September 15, reported the UK Government’s posi-
tion on the CTB negotiations. Edmonds said his government had four objectives: to “curb
the development of new types of nuclear warheads by the nuclear weapon states without
adversely affecting Western security;” to “contribute to the improvement of East/West
relations;” to “show the world that 3 nuclear weapon states are capable of giving prac-
tical effect to their long-standing commitment to genuine measures of arms control;” and
to “make a worthwhile contribution to our non-proliferation objectives by attracting the
support and adherence of important non-nuclear weapon states, especially those who
are not parties to the NPT.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780376–0747)
