XIII
Sources
Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
The Carter Library is the best source of high-­level decision making 
documentation for U.S. national security policy from 1977 to 1980. A 
number of collections within the National Security Affairs files are par-
ticularly relevant in this regard. Within the Brzezinski Material, the Sub-
ject File contains documentation on strategic modernization, nuclear 
doctrine, arms control, missile warnings incidents, and the defense bud-
get. A separate collection, Brzezinski Donated Material, contains addi-
tional documentation on nuclear doctrine and overall national security 
strategy. Within National Security Affairs, Staff Material are key docu-
ments pertaining to defense and security produced by Fritz Ermarth, 
Samuel Huntington, William Odom, Victor Utgoff, and Jasper Welch 
in response to Presidential Review Memorandum 10, “Comprehensive 
Net Assessment and Military Force Posture Review,” which President 
Carter signed on February 18, 1977. The National Security Council 
Institutional Files, which are also at the Carter Library, contain the min-
utes and preparatory staff work for meetings in advance of Presidential 
Directive 18, “U.S. National Strategy,” which President Carter signed 
on August 24, 1977, and Presidential Directive 59, “Nuclear Weapons 
Employment Policy,” which President Carter signed on July 25, 1980.
List of Sources
In addition to the paper files cited below, a growing number of 
documents are available on the Internet. The Office of the Historian 
maintains a list of these Internet resources on its website and encour-
ages readers to consult that site on a regular basis.
Unpublished Sources
National Archives and Records Administration,  
College Park, Maryland
RG 59
Office of the Executive Secretariat, Official Working Papers of S/P Director 
­Anthony Lake, 1977–January 1981, Lot 82D298
Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, Atlanta, Georgia
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material
Agency File
Brzezinski Office File
Country File
