662
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
— (E) In meeting with congressional committees, Sadat intends to
brief them on current area situation. He noted Numeiri/Mengistu
meeting in Freetown had been a failure and that Qadhafi had only a
few days ago spoken of concluding a military pact with Ethiopia. He
also alluded to the PDRY attack on YAR as further evidence of the dete-
riorating area situation. The Sudan, he contended, is now in grave
danger. He might have to act to defend it. In saying this, he did not
mean that he contemplates an attack against Libya, but that he has to
take into account that the Sudan is now likely to be threatened both by
Ethiopia from Eritrea and in the west from Libya. He saw situation de-
veloping in accordance with Soviet desires. Soviet purpose, Sadat in-
sisted, is to neutralize Egypt. For this reason, he noted, GOE is pre-
pared to assist Oman and Somalia. He hoped Congress would
recognize seriousness of situation and be willing to assist him in
meeting it without insisting on previous conclusion of treaty.
— (F) Sadat continued that he will invite House and Senate “to
write a treaty as they would between USG and any friendly state” for
use with Israel. He would sign it without reading it. His sole condition
is that treaty must be on equal basis and not rpt not try to make “super
power” out of Israel. Later in our talk he modified his earlier statement
somewhat by saying that President Carter and he should, during their
upcoming meetings, agree on what they regard as a fair and just treaty
and present it to the Congress for endorsement.
— (G) The primary purpose of his visit to the U.S., Sadat reiterated,
is to place the Israeli problem before the American Congress and
people in proper perspective after the Iranian situation. Everything in
the area, he pointed out, is heading toward area-wide “hatred” for Is-
rael. He hoped that USG will not accept Israel as its “vanguard” in area
because this would mean that USG receives same “hatred.” Israel will
do nothing without getting something for it.
— (H) After he had asked Congress and American public to “re-
lieve me of my commitment to you because Israel is not ready” Sadat
said that he would call UN Security Council to meet in order to discuss
situation. He would discuss details of what he has in mind when he
meets President Carter. USG support will be necessary.
— (I) Sadat reaffirmed that he remains committed to the two CDAs
and is prepared to reaffirm this.
— (J) Towards end of our meeting Sadat indicated that he hopes to
come back with USG commitment to increase economic assistance to
Egypt for development purposes (“Carter Plan”) and to provide arms
for use in meeting Soviet threats to Middle East and Africa.
6. If President Carter disagreed on certain points or has other
views, Sadat said that he will be pleased to have them. He hopes it will
at the very least be possible to agree on general lines. If what he pro-
