392  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
of the system, and (3) to its distinctiveness, as a system sufficiently 
different from Poseidon and Trident to require very different Soviet 
countermeasures.
Those to whom I have talked, and I admit that they are only a 
small sample, believe that this in-­shore submersible system is much the 
most attractive in sight technologically, economically and militarily, if 
we think simply in terms of what a new secure second-­strike strategic 
system should be like. Unfortunately, it is bureaucratically unattractive 
both because it offers no role for the Air Force and because it relies on 
exactly the kinds of vessels and capabilities that the Navy resists. As 
recent events have shown us again, the Admirals like large ocean-­going 
ships, preferably with nuclear power, and they think in terms of insur-
ing the survivability of each of these monstrous units, rather than in 
terms of the deterrent effect of a large set of small vessels that survives 
by numbers, not by individual “invulnerability.”
If anyone can bend the uniformed bureaucracy to technical and 
strategic reality it is the President, and if any President has the intel-
lectual and moral equipment for the task it is this President. There is a 
world of difference between what a President can command and what 
the ablest Secretary of Defense can manage.
Obviously, the technical and economic premises on which this 
memorandum is based need to be tested. Judgments of this importance 
cannot be rested on conversations in Colorado or on the hunches of 
even the most gifted of civilian scientists. But it is equally obvious that 
the service bureaucracies are not organized with a view to providing 
the best possible solutions to problems of this sort; they are organized 
for the survival of their own preferred symbols of status. The secure and 
closely controlled second-­strike weapon is nobody’s favorite, except 
when it happens to be a manned bomber or an ocean-­going nuclear 
powered submarine. Minuteman itself is serving well for twenty years, 
but it was not designed by military men, and their bumbling efforts to 
replace it show that left to themselves they will not get the job done.
