1979 653 The President asked if anyone knew how much money might be saved with smaller missile. (jocularly) Bill Perry responded that $2–3B might be saved, if one assumed that the alternative would be to proceed with both missiles. (C) Secretary Vance commented that in his view the 192,000 lb. missile was politically the best choice and would provide the best bargaining position with the Soviets. He disagreed with Stan Turner’s arguments that the Soviets might try to stay ahead of our efforts to achieve a survivable land-­based deployment. (S) The President said that Stan is apparently saying that proceeding with the Triad option would lead to a larger Soviet threat—Stan responded that that was not quite his point. (C) The President said the problem he saw with Stan’s calculations was that they placed too much emphasis on our current vulnerability. The President argued that it would be better to show the Soviets that we are resolved not to accept their attempts to make us vulnerable, and that if we do so, they will respond better than Stan is suggesting. (S) Secretary Vance again stated that he likes our position better if we proceed with the survivable triad option. (C) David Aaron remarked that the Soviets might simply want to match our numbers of warheads in which case proceeding with the dyad option will pose the larger problem for our arms control interests. (C) George Seignious noted that going to the large numbers of warheads provided by the dyad option creates a situation that would place maximum stress on our verification capabilities. This is because the Soviets will be more motivated to proceed with mobile systems, and they may elect to proceed with SS–16 type systems which are particularly difficult to verify. (TS) The President then noted that he’s not prepared to decide this issue now. He must first understand better the possibilities for achieving a survivable land-­based deployment mode. (U) Bill Perry began the discussion of ground-­based deployment modes by describing the track mobile system in the covered trench. He said that he believes that this is the best system because it has two modes of survival, its position is normally hidden, and it can randomize its position in a very short period of time if desired. He said that this system was designed to deploy missiles on large trailer erector launcher systems that would be the size of railroad locomotives, and would be capable of moving at maximum speeds of approximately 30 knots. He said that the system was designed to enhance two features: verifiability and survivability. (C) Dr. Perry went on to describe two classes of mobile deployment modes. The first, which he called “full-­mobile systems”, included the
