Chapter 5, May–June 1990  741
Bartholomew: I will ask Amb. Burt to address START, and bring us 
up to date on the discussions with Nazarkin.
Burt: My review is fairly gloomy. Amb. Nazarkin and I reviewed 
non-­circumvention,3 and the positions have not changed overnight. For 
us this is an issue that could mean no treaty on START.
On mobiles, verification and sublimit, there is a technical question 
to be addressed with verification. While the US did not like the Soviet 
ideas, there are possibilities we could work with. We can follow up in 
a technical group.
On heavy ICBMs, we are prepared to close with 2 flight tests per 
year. Nazarkin is prepared to close with a reference to heavy missiles in 
the statement on future negotiations.
On Backfire, I outlined the three elements of our position—­no 
intercontinental capability, a ceiling of 400, and inclusion of all Backfire 
in the ATTU in CFE—­and made clear the limit had to cover all Backfire.
On third country basing and warhead destruction, we reiterated 
existing positions.
On phasing of reductions and PPCM we made no headway, and 
I suggest the technical group should also address phasing of reduc-
tions as well as PPCM. I recommend the technical group get under-
way first thing tomorrow morning. Heavy ICBMs, non-­circumvention, 
and Backfire could be handled at the political level, mobile verification, 
PPCM, and phasing of reductions by the technical group.
On the joint statement on future negotiations, we dealt with a draft 
text that became considerably more complicated as a result of the dis-
cussion last night. Despite that, I can report there are only two basic 
differences.
First, the third para deals with the discussion in future negotia-
tions of the relationship between offense and defense. Here the Soviet 
Union has bracketed the entire para. We may have a solution to keeping 
the para, the only solution acceptable to us—­continue negotiations on 
ABM and space, in which the sides will work toward the goal of an 
early outcome. We would maintain the existing framework of negotia-
tions, with no subordinate role for defense and space in the overall NST 
negotiations.
Second, another para deals with the US effort to seek measures 
that reduce the concentration of MIRVs. The Soviets gave us some ideas 
and we will consider them. So now the sides have to consult among 
themselves.
3 No memorandum of conversation was found.
