No. 742; and Haiti, July 8, 1926, Treaty Series No. 746)85 and of a part of Article IX of the Anglo-Austrian Treaty, be inserted in Article VII of the draft treaty under negotiation as the fourth paragraph thereof: [Here follows the fourth paragraph of draft article VII quoted infra.] Fifth paragraph. One further change in Article VII is suggested, It has developed that in certain customs districts of some countries there is a practice of affording to some favored nation privileges not accorded to American commerce. It appears that as such practice is not the result of any express provision of treaty, laws, or regulations, it may be claimed that it is not within the most favored nation provisions of the fourth paragraph of the draft as originally written, now the fifth paragraph. While this Government has not concurred in such an interpretation of that paragraph, it proposes, in order to avoid misunderstandings in regard to such practices, to insert in the paragraph the phrase “by treaty, law, decree, regulation, practice or otherwise.” As the proposed phrase only clarifies and does not alter the meaning of the paragraph, it is hoped that the Austrian Government will have no objection to its acceptance. The complete text of Article VII revised in accordance with the foregoing suggestions is as follows: “ARTICLE VII “Between the territories of the High Contracting Parties there shall be freedom of commerce and navigation. The nationals of each of the High Contracting Parties equally with those of the most favored nation, shall have liberty freely to come with their vessels and cargoes to all places, ports and waters of every kind within the territorial limits of the other which are or may be open to foreign commerce and navigation. Nothing in this treaty shall be construed to restrict the right of either High Contracting Party to impose, on such terms as it may see fit, prohibitions or restrictions of a sanitary character designed to protect human, animal or plant life, or regulations for the enforcement of police or revenue laws.
