Chapter 2, January–June 1989 39 number to each existing type of ballistic missile) and for future types to base throwweight limits on the greater of (a) the sum of the weight of reentry vehicles (RVs), post-­boost vehicles (PBVs), and penetration aids or (b) a normalized value that takes into account the range at which it was demonstrated; and the existing U.S. Throwweight protocol. (S) On April 19, 1989 the PCC will address: 3. Non-Deployed Missiles. — The need for limits on non-­deployed ballistic missiles and if so, on which types; — The current U.S. approach to monitoring such limits, including through tagging, perimeter portal monitoring, and restrictions on storage locations; and — Pre-­inspection movement restrictions. (S) In conducting this portion of the review the PCC may assume that an adequate tagging system can be devised, recognizing that such a system has not yet been demonstrated. (S) 4. Limitations on Air-Breathing Systems. The existing U.S. position regarding bomber and air-­launched cruise missile limits including: — The U.S. objective of achieving a START regime that does not constrain long-­range, non-­nuclear armed, air-­launched cruise missiles; — How to count ALCMs on heavy bombers; — How to distinguish ALCMs from long-­range conventionally-­ armed cruise missiles; and, — The range threshold for treaty-­accountability as an ALCM. (S) On April 26, 1989, drawing on the defense strategy review of (a) the relative benefits to the Soviet Union and the United States of nuclear-­ armed, land-­attack, sea-­launched cruise missiles and (b) U.S. plans for the mobile ICBM program, the PCC will address: 5. Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles (SLCMs). The existing U.S. position that there is no regime for verifying nuclear SLCM limits or bans, which does not entail unacceptably intrusive onsite inspection that would compromise operational security, disrupt operations, unacceptably constrain conventional SLCMs, or jeopardize our “neither-­ confirm-­nor-­deny” policy with respect to nuclear armed ships and thus that the sides should instead make non-­binding declarations of their nuclear (but not conventional) SLCM plans. (S) 6. Mobile ICBMs. Issues associated with mobile ICBMs including: — Whether to alter our formal position banning such missiles; — If so, what numerical constraints to seek on them; — Whether to consider an option banning MIRVd mobile ICBMs while allowing single-RV mobile ICBMs.
