668 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement utilize all requisite force to attain its objectives, opposing the aggres­ sion with clear determination despite the risk of general war. If during the course of hostilities general war becomes a clear probability, the U.S. will have to decide in the light of the circumstances then existing whether it is in the U.S. interest to alter its original objectives. 144. Notes by Killian for Presentation to the President1 Washington, March 4, 1959 In some respects, the analysis we present to you is a follow-­up on the report that the Technological Capabilities Panel made in 1955—­the report in which we recommended that our ballistic missile program be given top national priority. The preparation of the analysis which Dr. McMillan is going to pre­ sent to you was initially prompted by a technical appraisal which the Science Advisory Committee has been making of our anti-­ballistic mis­ sile program, including the technical aspects of early warning. Among the conclusions reached by the Panel studying this complex technical problem are the following: “1. The Nike-Zeus system cannot be a factor in protecting the retal­ iatory force before 1964 or 1965. “2. In general the tactics of dispersal, hardening, concealment through mobility, and quick reaction upon early warning, all seem more certainly effective, and more inexpensively effective, than active defenses, for protecting the retaliatory force. Furthermore, these tactics are available and can be implemented to an effective degree relatively soon. “3. The Panel believes that these ‘passive’ tactics should be con­ sidered as the basic anti-­missile defenses for both the aircraft and the missiles of the U.S. retaliatory force. We urge in the strongest terms that they be exploited more fully, and more rapidly than present plans call for.” The analysis also reflects our interest in techniques and principles for achieving a greater degree of stability in our deterrent position in a period when possible uncertainty in intelligence and in estimates of relative strength, together with rapid technological change tend to augment the uncertainties in our deterrence. Of course, one of the 1 Source: Anti-­missile program and maintaining deterrence. Top Secret. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology.
