893.5045/66: Telegram [Document 498] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, June 4, 1925—5 p.m. [Received 5:45 p.m.] 202. My 200, June 3, 11 a.m.80 Morning of June 3 bands students throughout Peking harangued passers-by on Shanghai incidents and violently upheld following demands which also were printed on handbills: Punishment of those responsible for Shanghai killing from consuls to Indian policemen; release and indemnification of arrested students; apologies from foreign governments to Chinese people; aid strikers in Shanghai, Tsingtau, Japanese mills; abolition of foreign concessions and extraterritoriality; withdrawal of foreign military forces from China including war vessels; abolition of unequal treaties and special privileges; economic boycott against foreigners; refusal to afford foreigners service or food; overthrow traitorous Chinese Government; overthrow imperialism. Japan and Great Britain singled out for most bitter attack. Latter apparently considered responsible for Shanghai police. 2. In the afternoon orderly parade some thousands of students representing 23 schools including missionary institutions conducted demonstration along above lines. Called on President and Minister for Foreign Affairs. On being refused permission to enter Diplomatic Quarter most acquiesced but small band extremists headed by woman student attempted forcible entrance and failed as gates were closed. Other entrances guarded but no clash occurred. Street lecturing continues today and it is rumored that students plan systematic continued demonstrations. Apparently little local interest except among students and Chinese journalists. 3. American educational institutions apparently embarrassed by desire of their Chinese students and faculties to issue violently denunciatory statements. In an effort to curb these extravagant declarations and yet convince Chinese people of their impartial and just position, faculties of some American and union missionary institutions have published statements reflecting on actions of Shanghai police and sympathizing with demands for the abolition of “resented privileges” enjoyed by foreigners. In informal conversations with representative American missionaries, Legation has indicated grave inexpediency of such pronouncement at this stage.
