128
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
of these can be termed vital. We have four critical national interests;
two of them vital. These four are listed below in priority order:
A. It is vital to prevent the turbulence in Iran, or the outward drive
of a Shiite state, from disrupting the flow of oil from the Western shore
of the Gulf.
B. It is vital to deny Iranian oil to the Soviet Union and to keep
Iran out of the Soviet sphere of influence.
C. It is critical to avoid serious confrontation with the USSR.
D. It is critical to keep Iranian oil flowing to the West.
In subsequent paragraphs, each of these goals is viewed in geo-
political terms.
A. The Flow from the Gulf
2. The “quarantine” of Iran is ranked first because the loss to the
West of the oil of the Arabian Peninsula and Iraq would threaten its
collapse. The Iranian debacle can impact on the Gulf States in at least
three ways:
—Export of radicalism, either leftist or Muslim, leading to political
instability. Production facilities would be subject to physical damage
and export flows to political uncertainty.
—A reinforcement of the growing tendency among exporting states
to see a reduction of production as the most desirable course in a
period of short supply and unspendable national revenues.
—Military interruption of oil flow from the Gulf by a power control-
ling the Straits of Hormuz. Such a power might be a resurgent Iran,
the USSR, or conceivably Iraq if Iran became even weaker.
3. So far, the industrial economies of the West and Far East have
proved remarkably resilient; they successfully weathered the crisis of
1973–74 both in energy supply and money flows and are managing
reasonably well with the uncertainties of Iranian supply; they have
come to understand their vulnerability and taken some tentative steps
to reduce it. The non-oil LDC’s have done less well and their ability
to absorb an even greater shock is questionable.
4. Cessation or severe reduction of the oil flow from the Gulf,
however, coupled inevitably with price rises on a scale hitherto unimag-
inable, would test and perhaps even break the resilience of the West.
It would produce at the least severe depression and inflation. Turmoil
in the LDC’s would contribute by interrupting the supply of other
commodities. In such a situation, the stability and orientation of major
U.S. allies, and of the U.S. itself, could no longer be assumed. The
USSR and its allies, with a basically autarchic economy, would be
shielded from these effects. In simplest terms, the present world power
equation, in which the military strength of the USSR is roughly balanced
by the economic and technological strength of the West, would be
fundamentally and perhaps irretrievably changed to the detriment of
the West.
