1955 317 renounced the use of force to achieve what they believe to be legitimate and even urgent goals. It is an essential foundation and preliminary to the success of the discussions under Item 2 that it first be made clear that the parties to these discussions renounce the use of force to make the policies of either prevail over those of the other. That particularly applies to the Taiwan area. The acceptance of this principle does not involve third parties, or the justice or injustice of conflicting claims. It only involves recog­ nizing and agreeing to abide by accepted standards of international conduct. We ask, therefore, as a first matter for discussion under Agenda Item 2, assurance that your side will not resort to the use of force in the Taiwan area except defensively. The U.S. would be prepared to give a corresponding assurance. These reciprocal assurances will make it appropriate for us to pass on to the discussion of other matters with a better hope of coming to constructive conclusions.” Hoover 242. Telegram 790 to Geneva1 Washington, September 27, 1955, 12:52 p.m. 790. For Johnson. New York’s 4, paragraph 5. Following is text of statement which has been cleared with Defense regarding unaccounted for American military personnel. “On July 16, 1952, the Foreign Minister of the PRC notified the Swiss Government that the Government of the PRC had decided to recognize the Geneva Conventions of 1949 on Treatment of Prisoners of War. “On July 27, 1953, the responsible leaders of the communist forces in Korea signed the Armistice Agreement which resulted in the cessation of hostilities in Korea and provided clear agreement on the handling of prisoners of war, including the specific require­ ment of each side to furnish a full and complete accounting on all 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2755. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated Niact to USUN as telegram Tedul 5. Drafted by Godel (Defense) and Osborn; cleared by Godel in draft, McConaughy, and Sebald.
