National Security Policy  617
241. The Soviet leaders probably believe that at some stage the 
Arab nationalist movement can be given a revolutionary turn toward 
Communism and brought under Soviet control. They believe that a 
sharpening of the Arabs’ conflict with the West, to which their propa­
ganda and Communist subversive elements in the area can contribute, 
will facilitate this development. To the extent that such a revolutionary 
turn towards Communism actually takes place, the basic incompatibil­
ity of Soviet aims with those of the present leaders of Arab nationalism, 
whom the Communists regard as “bourgeois nationalists” playing a 
transient historical role, will emerge. Communist penetration and sub­
version of the nationalist movement may occur unevenly in different 
Arab countries and the Soviets may at some point be tempted to aban­
don their restraint and encourage a Communist takeover in some key 
Arab state, provided they consider the stakes high enough to compen­
sate for the resulting damage to Moscow’s relations with other Afro-­
Asian neutrals.
242. Insofar as Western influence is eliminated from the area the 
Soviets will seek to reduce Nasser’s pretensions and to make him 
increasingly their prisoner. They will try to deny him the opportu­
nity to pursue a truly neutralist policy in which he tries to keep lines 
open to both power blocs. They will seek to displace his influence over 
other Arab states with their own and to prevent the consolidation of 
Arab unity under his aegis. They will oppose his suppression of local 
Communist parties and try to bring these into the open as leaders of 
the nationalist movement. There are already some signs, in Iraq for 
example, that the Soviets are opposing Nasser’s leadership of the Arab 
nationalist movement in these ways. We believe, however, that they 
will be extremely cautious in their efforts to undermine Nasser and, 
before moving openly against him, will await a time when they believe 
that the local Communists have captured control of the mass movement 
or when Nasser has so isolated himself from the West that he can no 
longer hope to get its support against the Soviets and the Communists. 
An open conflict between Nasserism and Communist expansionism 
seems unlikely in the immediate future, but it might develop during 
the period of this estimate.
243. The Soviet leaders must be aware that the Western Powers 
are bound to attach the highest importance to the protection of their 
interests in the Middle East. How do they evaluate the possibility that 
their pledges of support to the leaders of the Arab nationalism, who 
cannot be fully controlled by them, may entrain the USSR in situations 
of great risk? Developments in the area over the past few years have 
probably led Moscow to place considerable confidence in the growing 
effectiveness of a Soviet deterrent against Western use of force to over­
throw an Arab government friendly to the USSR. The Soviet leaders
