72  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
the traditional elites. As a consequence of all these factors, many of the 
governments and the societies are unstable.
60. Basic antipathy for the US is relatively limited. Anti-US atti­
tudes tend to vary with time and circumstances. These attitudes are 
consistently maintained by the Communists, but in a number of coun­
tries they are also the stock-­in-­trade of some politicians who exploit 
the growing nationalism in the area. The Communists constitute a dan­
ger to the US largely because of their discipline and their alertness to 
opportunity. Over the longer run, the revolutionary pressures in Latin 
American society are irrepressible, and the society is destined to be 
gradually transformed. Insofar as the US is identified with the forces 
of change, as for example in Bolivia, it appears likely that US influ­
ence will be enhanced. In some cases, however, some unpopular ruling 
classes in Latin America—­often supported by US citizens—­have been 
able to retain power and have become identified in the popular mind 
with “Yankee imperialism” and “dollar diplomacy.”
IV. ECONOMIC PROSPECTS
61. A current source of concern is the emergence of weaknesses in 
the free world economy. By and large, the developed economies of the 
West have enjoyed unprecedented prosperity for the past several years. 
It now appears, however, that these economies are growing more slowly 
and that world trade is expanding at reduced rates. In some of the devel­
oped countries, a rise in consumption without corresponding rises in 
production has resulted in inflation and, in some instances, balance-­of-­
payments crises. More pronounced inflationary pressures have occurred 
in most of the underdeveloped countries as a consequence of ambitious 
development programs. Late in 1957 the US entered a period of eco­
nomic recession, and fears have been expressed abroad that the recession 
will develop greater intensity. Since the US accounts for about 40 ­percent 
of free world production, the economic prospects of other countries 
are greatly affected by the manner in which the US deals with its own 
problems.
62. If the US recession should terminate by mid-1958, other econo­
mies may not find it too difficult to make a satisfactory adjustment. On 
the other hand if the US recession is prolonged, some other countries 
will face increasingly serious economic and political problems, much 
of the blame for which they will place on the US. In any event, there 
is danger that some governments will seek to correct internal difficul­
ties by raising trade barriers, which would reinforce tendencies toward 
world recession. Thus far, however, greater concern has been expressed 
abroad regarding the course of US trade policy than about the now 
anticipated recession in US economic activity.
