3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
513
2. Acting Secretary3 called in Dobrynin evening of February 14
and, noting that he had been in touch with the Secretary, made the fol-
lowing points:
A. I want to express to you in the strongest possible terms our
shock over the role played by Soviet advisers to the Kabul police in
the events which led to the assassination of our Ambassador to
Afghanistan.
B. We have reports from highly reliable eyewitnesses that Soviet
advisers were intimately involved in the carrying out of the ill-advised
assault which resulted in Ambassador Dubs’ death. For example, a U.S.
Embassy officer on the scene saw a Soviet adviser helping arm an Af-
ghan policeman with full knowledge that the assault was to follow
momentarily, and despite repeated pleas from U.S. Embassy repre-
sentatives that no such assault be launched. We also have a highly reli-
able report that a Soviet adviser was present in the room in the Afghan
Interior Ministry in which the assault was planned.
C. I am not accusing the Soviet advisers of responsibility for Am-
bassador Dubs’ death. I am charging them with failure to heed re-
peated requests by our personnel that the assault not be undertaken.
D. The refusal of consultation by the Soviet advisers on the spot is
impossible to justify, given the fact that the life of the American Ambas-
sador was in jeopardy.
E. I ask you to furnish us with a full report of the actions taken by
the Soviet advisers involved in this tragedy. We have already protested
to the Afghan authorities.4
F. I wish to stress to you that this incident may well cause serious
damage to our relations. We are already receiving press queries about
the role that the Soviet advisers to the Afghan police may have played
in the incident. I strongly advise you to recommend that your author-
ities respond immediately and fully to the presentation I have made.
3. On a personal basis the Acting Secretary noted that he had had a
number of calls during the day from Capitol Hill and that the depth of
concern there was significant. He added that when the fact of Soviet
participation came out publicly it could have a devastating effect.
4. Dobrynin asked for clarification on several points, for which the
Acting Secretary read passages directly from reftel. He assured Do-
brynin that the eyewitnesses involved were US Embassy officials.
3 Christopher.
4 See telegram 1217 from Kabul, February 19, in which Bruce Amstutz, U.S. Charge´
to Afghanistan, reported on his meeting with Foreign Minister Hafizullah Amin; and
telegram 1274 from Kabul, February 20, in which Amstutz reported on Afghani efforts to
minimize the role of Soviet advisers in Dubs’s death. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D790077–1181 and D790079–0098)
