1014  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
leadership is presently in exile where they play an important role in the 
subversive planning of the political exiles.
The Embassy’s plan of action for the present and future is to con-
tinue to encourage the GOP to take steps towards democratic reforms, 
short of interference. [text not declassified] Possibly one might hope that 
the dissident clique of the Colorado Party, which has made its break 
based upon an insistence of democracy within the government, might 
be the most liberal group. This is more a political promise than a hope, 
based upon experience. [text not declassified] Then too, there is always 
the private enterprise motive in South American governments, which 
is certainly not absent in Paraguay. An overturn opens the door for two 
possibilities which are harmful to U.S. purposes:
1. Communist infiltration;
2. A blow to economic stability.
Because of the fact that the pledged stockholders of the Paraguayan 
Development Bank project are of all political shades, it is believed that 
the establishment of this bank will lend a measure of political stability 
guarding the economy.
Embassy’s Plan of Action for the Present and Future
1. Continue to encourage the GOP to take steps towards demo-
cratic reforms, short of interference.
2. Continue contacts with dissident political groups.
3. Continue to encourage the GOP’s support in the United Nations 
Organization and the Organization of American States and elsewhere.
4. Continue to encourage free labor movement in its contacts.
5. On every possible occasion reiterate our anti-­communist posi-
tion and our support to the free world in public statement as well 
as private. This should be the political theme of all personnel in the 
American Embassy.
6. Continue to encourage the GOP to improve its control of 
Communism.
7. Continue to expose international communist penetration into 
Latin America.
4. United States Information Service
Accomplishments and Goals
The American School has been chartered as a bi-­national institution. 
Kindergarden will open with 20 pupils (19 Paraguayans) September 
1. In March 1960 it is hoped enrollment will be 70 Americans and 
40 Paraguayans. Goal: Funds for “model” American school building.
Two American students are in National University under the 
Inter-American Cultural Convention. Paraguayan student will be in
