254
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister had agreed at Camp David to the American language
on a settlements freeze. On that basis, the President had conveyed the
GOI position to Sadat, who had in turn agreed to sign the Camp David
Agreements. The President was thus left in an extremely awkward po-
sition, and I had no doubt that this Israeli interpretation would cause
real problems in Washington.
6. Admitting he realized how badly this would go down in Wash-
ington, Dayan indicated he was extremely relieved that it was Barak
who had made their record of the meeting. The President would cer-
tainly not doubt Barak’s honesty, and his notes show clearly that
Begin’s memory of that evening was correct. Rosenne then read from
Barak’s notes a sentence in which Begin said, “I shall think about it and
I will write to you tomorrow.” According to Barak’s memcon, Begin re-
peated at the end of the meeting that he would consider the President’s
proposal and convey his response in writing the next day. That re-
sponse, in the form of a letter6 to the President, indicated the Prime
Minister’s agreement only to a freeze on settlements during the Sinai
negotiations.
7. I reminded Dayan that the President, having received that letter,
wrote his language back in and returned it to Begin via Barak. There
was no question that the President thought he had Begin’s agreement
to the U.S. formulation and had acted with Sadat in good faith.
8. Dayan then speculated on the roots of the misunderstanding. He
said that there had been whispering during the meeting in question
and separate conversations between the principals from time to time.
He did not doubt that the President believed his language had been ac-
cepted, but, Dayan repeated, that was simply not the case. The Israelis
regretted the misunderstanding, but the Prime Minister’s letter to the
President would commit the GOI to a settlement freeze for only the
three months of the Sinai negotiation. Again trying to find a silver
lining, Dayan stressed that after the three-month period, the issue of an
extension of the settlement freeze would come up and “then we shall
see.” But, the argument over whether the freeze was tied to Sinai or the
West Bank was inconsequential since both negotiations should last no
longer than three months. Rosenne said that Sadat has now publicly re-
ferred on three occasions since Camp David to Begin’s commitment for
a three-month freeze on settlements. Therefore, he argued, Sadat can be
under no misapprehension.
9. I responded that, given the complications of getting the Pales-
tinians and the Jordanians to participate in the talks, three months was
an extremely short period to conclude negotiations concerning the mo-
6 See Document 70.
