1082
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
restrict future Argentine options to develop the ingredients for nuclear
weapons.
[Omitted here is the body of the report.]
432.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Caracas, March 28, 1978, 3:30–4:40 p.m.
SUBJECT
International Political Issues: Panama Canal Treaties, Non-Proliferation, Middle
East, Africa, Belize, Nicaragua, and Conventional Arms Restraint
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs
W. Anthony Lake, Director, Policy Planning Staff
Robert A. Pastor, NSC Staff Member
Ambassador Viron P. Vaky
Guy F. Erb, NSC Staff Member
Venezuela
Carlos Andres Perez, President
Simon Bottaro Consalvi, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Manuel Perez Guerrero, Minister of State for International Economic Affairs
Valentin Acosta Hernandez, Minister of Energy and Mines
Carmelo Lesseur Lauria, Minister, Secretariat of the Presidency
Hector Hurtado, Minister of State, President of the Investment Fund
Ambassador Ignacio Iribarren
Dr. Reinaldo Figuerido, Director of Foreign Trade Institute
After exchanging cordialities, President Perez asked about Presi-
dent Carter’s preference with regard to an agenda. President Carter
said that he would like to discuss international political issues today
and economic issues tomorrow.2
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 56, Country Chron, Venezuela: 1–4/78. Confidential. The meeting
took place at Miraflores Palace.
2 On March 29, Carter and Perez discussed North-South Issues, Energy, the Carib-
bean, and the Law of the Sea. (Memorandum of Conversation, March 29, 1978; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Pastor Subject File, Box 63,
President’s Trip to Brazil and Venezuela (3/78))
