prepared to do all in its power to bring about at the earliest possible moment
the aspirations of the Chinese Government, but it seemed to him that tariff
autonomy should be coincident with the abolition of likin. He thereupon
asked for a frank statement as to the way in which it was proposed to
abolish likin. The Chairman called upon the other Delegations for a
statement of their views and Mr. de Warzée announced that Belgium in
principle was willing to grant China tariff autonomy, provided a transitory
period should precede its coming into force. He stated that, in his opinion,
tariff autonomy should be simultaneous with the abolition of likin. Count de
Martel stated that he was “prepared to consider in the most friendly and
generous spirit and to submit to my (his) Government any reasonable
proposal which may be put forward, with a view to meet the aspirations of
the Chinese Nation in regard to their Customs tariff.” Mr. Oudendijk stated
that he believed that the right of Tariff Autonomy was an inherent right
which belonged to the right of sovereignty, and that the Netherlands
Delegation would do its best to meet the wishes of the Chinese
Government. Mr. Cerruti stated that the Italian Government was in great
sympathy with the wishes of the Chinese Government to attain full tariff
autonomy, but that he considered the abolition of likin and tariff autonomy
connected questions and that the abolition of likin must precede full tariff
autonomy. Mr. Bianchi of the Portuguese Delegation took a similar view
and asked for a statement of China’s plan for the abolition of likin. Dr.
Wang stated that the Chinese plan for the abolition of likin would be
presented later and that he wished to hear from the other Delegates who had
not spoken on the subject of tariff autonomy. Mr. Kauffmann, of the Danish
Delegation, said that his views were similar to those expressed by Mr.
Strawn; and Mr. Michelet of the Norwegian Delegation declared that his
Government was prepared in principle to grant tariff autonomy, but that it
would be necessary to have more definite information concerning the
proposals of the Chinese Government before giving up any of the
stipulations contained in the Treaty between Norway and China. The
Spanish Delegate, Mr. Garrido, in very general terms, expressed
sympathetic interest in the aspirations of China and Mr. Ewerlöf, the
Swedish Delegate, stated that he was “very willing to discuss, in the most
liberal spirit, the proposals of the Chinese Government,” but that he could
not accept them without instructions from his Government. The Chairman
then expressed his appreciation of the declarations made by most of the
