322
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Ray opened with several questions concerning the Persian oil situ-
ation: did I think that it could be settled soon? mustn’t it be, in order to
avoid a collapse of the country? etc.
I answered these questions briefly, according to my opinions, but
parried details on the ground that the oil question could not be settled
until there were a government in Persia that wanted to settle it, and that
until there were such a government to make effective use of the rev-
enues it wouldn’t matter in any case. As for collapsing, the Persian
economy had been flat on the ground for 500 years and there was
nothing to collapse. I doubted that the Persians had a word in their lan-
guage for “collapse”, any more than they have for “development”
(which they don’t have, in our sense).
Other questions were asked about the Communists in various
Middle East countries, and my ideas as to what might be expected
when Ibn Saud dies, when Mossedegh gets out, when Noury Pasha re-
tires, etc.
After about a half hour of such discussion I asked Ray if I might
outline my own approach to the Middle East situation and indicate
what I considered to be the key problems so we could focus our atten-
tion upon them. This, I felt, would bring all these other questions into a
proper relationship. Ray said go ahead.
We can understand all these problems better if we approach them
from the general toward the particular. This guards against seeking a
remedy for some particular case within its own apparent circum-
stances, when in fact its causes lie elsewhere.
The unrest in the ME is part of the unrest among backward peoples
all over the world, but modified in the ME by its own history, religion
etc. Similarly in any ME country we find the general causes at work,
but modified by local circumstances. Thus if we describe the ME situa-
tion we find that we have gone a long way toward describing the con-
ditions in any one country, and have only to adjust it for a few local
factors to understand the particular case. On the other hand, if we begin
with the analysis of a particular case we can’t always distinguish be-
tween aspects which are peculiar to it and those which are deeper and
more general.
I then outlined the pattern of my own reasoning about the ME and
the special cases presented by the several countries. (This is described
in detail in other memos and will not be repeated here except in bare
outline.)
The problem can be entered at any one of several points, but since
it has finally to be intergrated in any case, let’s start with the “people”
and carry it along from there.
General movement among backward peoples to awaken and rebel
against (1) foreign domination, (2) corruption of own governments,
(3) misery of their own way of living.
