572
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
I believe that our discussions3 in Brussels have been very beneficial
in defining the points of difference, and in explaining the logic behind
our points of view concerning these differences.
The meeting also gave us the opportunity to discuss the latest
world developments in the Middle East, with special emphasis on Iran,
Turkey, Afghanistan and various Arab and African countries. I have
fully explained to you and to Mr. Dayan, the utmost importance of
achieving a comprehensive peace between Israel and its neighbours, as
a factor for ensuring the Arab world against foreign aggression or in-
ternal destabilisation. I also stressed the importance of linking the ques-
tion of the settlement in the West Bank and Gaza with the signing of the
peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. Moreover, I made it clear that it
would not be in the interest of peace in the world, and particularly in
the Middle East, if Egypt were isolated from the other Arab and African
countries, as a result of concluding the peace treaty with Israel. Such a
situation would be against the interest of security in the whole area. It
would also make it more difficult for Egypt to assume its natural and
essential role as the defender of other Arab countries when threatened
by aggression or destabilisation attempts.
During our meeting, I also pointed out the fact that all the other
Arab countries, even the hardliners among them, have not rejected the
principle of solving the Arab-Israeli confrontation by peaceful means. It
is also worth noting that the pact of the Arab League,4 signed in 1945
before Israel was created, does not contain any provision that may
be construed as being directed against Israel. Furthermore, the Arab
League Common Defense Treaty,5 which was signed in 1950 and came
into force in 1952, does not contain a single word against Israel. Thus, if
peace is established, this treaty cannot be interpreted as directed
against Israel. Rather, it will be the instrument enabling Egypt to coop-
erate with the other Arab countries for mutual defense, and for the
maintenance of peace and stability throughout the region.
I also stressed that the treaty between Egypt and Israel, along with
the solution of the Palestinian question in all its aspects according to the
Camp David Framework, must be of such a nature as to attract the Pal-
estinians and the other Arab countries to accept it and participate in the
peace process, not to isolate Egypt, force even the moderate Arab coun-
tries to take a harder line and reflect negatively on the constructive role
of the United States in the peace process.
3 See footnote 2, Document 162.
4 The full text of the Pact of the League of Arab States, signed March 22, 1945, is
printed in American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1950–1955, pp. 1243–1249.
5 The full text of the Treaty of Joint Defense and Economic Cooperation between the
States of the Arab League, signed June 17, 1950, is printed in American Foreign Policy: Basic
Documents, 1950–1955, pp. 1249–1253.
