Romania
671
moving to aid Bulgarians against Yugoslavs, why not kill two birds
with one stone and roll the tanks over Romania? In this case, logistics
support troops must be stationed in Romania which would amount to
occupation force.
C. While Romanian military pledges undying allegiance to Ceau-
sescu, and while he has a good track record in capturing and keeping
military support in internal politics, possibility that Soviets can estab-
lish faction in military favorable to their interest should not be excluded.
It may be harder to find pro-Soviets in military than in party, but, on
other hand, decades of close cooperation have left their mark, and
Romanian military weakness in any confrontation scenario will pre-
sumably incline some officers to join where they cannot resist. The
emergence of a pro-Soviet faction is of course most likely in case of
military intervention, but could also take place as result of severe
discreditation campaign against Ceausescu.
D. In military/economic sphere, Ceausescu would not hesitate to
throw most of the military into an economic endeavor such as mining
if shortages and strikes emerged. He has a sizable labor force potential
in the military.
E. Romania is vulnerable in its military supply relationship with
Soviet Union. Romania’s weapons and equipment inventory are all
Soviet except for some Shanghai class patrol boats. If the Soviet Union
and other Warsaw Pact country suppliers closed the valve, Romanian
military capability to conduct and sustain any type of operation would
be sorely limited. For example, MiG aircraft (and the Romanians report-
edly have the latest MiG–23’s) require huge inventories of spares [gar-
ble—across board?] the entire system (aircraft plus control radars plus
weapons). The Soviets can effectively control utilization through their
supply systems. The Romanians now seek to overcome this depend-
ency. Hence come efforts to produce ground support aircraft (Jurom),
tanks (improved version of Soviet T–55’s), artillery, small arms and
ammunition with Yugoslavia. At best, however, Romanian efforts
amount to “improved obsolesence.”
6. Conclusion
A. Although Romania and Ceausescu are vulnerable on such ques-
tions as ethnic Hungarian discontent and internal economic disruption,
we currently see no indications that the Soviets are using these vulnera-
bilities to try to influence Romanian behavior. Likewise we do not
believe other Romanian vulnerabilities such as military supply depend-
ence on Soviet Union and relative isolation within that portion of world
Communist movement controlled by Soviets, can be translated into
effective leverage for the Soviets to influence Romanian behavior. Con-
sequently, Soviet expressions of displeasure and anger over Romanian
bearbaiting probably ring rather hollow to Ceausescu. He must realize
