Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 5. I called Honecker’s attention to President Carter’s July 21 speech on US-Soviet relations.5 I noted our desire for strategic arms limitations, reduction in and freeze on new technology which would provide balanced security for both sides. I told Honecker we were seeking a comprehensive test ban on nuclear weapons and desired to move forward on MBFR. I also mentioned the Indian Ocean talks and the Secretary’s forthcoming meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko on SALT. I told Honecker we welcomed President Brezhnev’s depiction of President Carter’s speech as positive, and his willingness to seek solutions. I expressed the belief there was good reason to hope for continued development of detente. 6. I also told Honecker we recognized the difference in political systems which stems from history, different beliefs and values; certain competition would continue between the two systems. Nevertheless, there were overlapping interests; it was important for both sides to build on these common interests in order to develop cooperation between East and West based on mutual respect and equality. 7. US–GDR bilateral relations. Honecker mentioned the GDR May 12 aide memoire containing his government’s proposals for further developing relations with the United States. I noted that Foreign Minister Fischer had called this aide memoire to my attention in our meeting on August 19.6 Honecker said the GDR wanted to move forward in implementing these proposals, which were consistent with the Helsinki Final Act. 8. I told Honecker that I had discussed overall US–GDR relations with Ambassadors Cooper and Sieber, senior officials in the Executive Branch, and Members of Congress. I was aware there had been important step by step developments of our relations. I reiterated the administration’s desire to build on this record and to broaden and deepen relations. This desire for better relations was grounded in our wish to develop more stable and beneficial relations between the peoples of the East and West and to move forward on the current agenda on
