360
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
5. I called Honecker’s attention to President Carter’s July 21 speech
on US-Soviet relations.5 I noted our desire for strategic arms limitations,
reduction in and freeze on new technology which would provide bal-
anced security for both sides. I told Honecker we were seeking a com-
prehensive test ban on nuclear weapons and desired to move forward
on MBFR. I also mentioned the Indian Ocean talks and the Secretary’s
forthcoming meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko on SALT. I told
Honecker we welcomed President Brezhnev’s depiction of President
Carter’s speech as positive, and his willingness to seek solutions. I
expressed the belief there was good reason to hope for continued
development of detente.
6. I also told Honecker we recognized the difference in political
systems which stems from history, different beliefs and values; certain
competition would continue between the two systems. Nevertheless,
there were overlapping interests; it was important for both sides to
build on these common interests in order to develop cooperation
between East and West based on mutual respect and equality.
7. US–GDR bilateral relations. Honecker mentioned the GDR May
12 aide memoire containing his government’s proposals for further
developing relations with the United States. I noted that Foreign
Minister Fischer had called this aide memoire to my attention in our
meeting on August 19.6 Honecker said the GDR wanted to move for-
ward in implementing these proposals, which were consistent with the
Helsinki Final Act.
8. I told Honecker that I had discussed overall US–GDR relations
with Ambassadors Cooper and Sieber, senior officials in the Executive
Branch, and Members of Congress. I was aware there had been impor-
tant step by step developments of our relations. I reiterated the adminis-
tration’s desire to build on this record and to broaden and deepen
relations. This desire for better relations was grounded in our wish to
develop more stable and beneficial relations between the peoples of
the East and West and to move forward on the current agenda on
5 Carter spoke on July 21 at the 31st Annual Meeting of the Southern Legislative
Conference in Charleston, South Carolina. While acknowledging the deep philosophical
and cultural differences between the Soviet Union and the United States, Carter expressed
his conviction that the Soviet Union and the United States would continue to reach
agreements in areas of mutual interest. If the Soviet strategic buildup could be controlled,
Carter said, “then we are prepared to limit our own strategic programs.” The President
also stressed that the administration’s commitment to human rights was neither a ploy,
nor targeted at any one country, and that U.S. policy remains the “sincere expression
of our deepest beliefs as a people.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pp. 1309–1315)
6 Bolen reported on his conversation with Fischer in telegram 6855 from East Berlin,
August 19. The discussion covered human rights, the issue of claims between the two
countries, as well as progress on the cultural convention. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D770300–0700)
