members would be left with a modified protocol, in the event of America’s withdrawal.

The Polish representative replied that the Conference ought not to discuss the United States’ leaving the Court before it had entered it. He added that Secretary Kellogg’s letter to the League stated that if any machinery was necessary to give the United States the right to participate in the election of the Court judges, it should be established after the reservations were accepted and the United States was a member. This same procedure could be followed to meet other American demands. He believed that the way was paved for the Belgian proposal, which had been heard earlier in the session, and which had brought up the question of the form of the procedure which might be followed to meet the reservations. He stated, with regard to reservation 2, concerning the election of judges, that although the Covenant did not refer to the assistance of non members of the League at the Council or Assembly, it did not forbid it, and cited instances in which non member States had assisted. Mr. Dinichert (Switzerland), referring to the Belgian proposal, believed that the question of form was more difficult than that of substance, but that the Conference should not consider the United States as a member of the League, but as a State participating in the work of the Court. In his opinion, there were three possible methods of procedure. The first was for the Conference to ask an interpretative resolution from the Assembly as to whether it was necessary to interpret the Covenant. The second, if the United States was not satisfied with the present position, the signatories of the Court might ask it to modify its statutes. Thirdly, as suggested by the Polish representative, a Conference might be called to complete or modify the Statutes. The favorable consideration granted to the Polish proposal was undoubtedly due to the realizing of the delegates to the Conference that there exists a growing opposition, in the American Congress, against the United States’ participation in the Court and that there exists a strong possibility that adhesion might be defeated if the question were returned to the Senate. While the Conference actually adjourned on the grounds that the members
