National Security Policy  933
would be immediately and wholly responsive to national defense needs. 
A stimulus to the purchase of uncompromised cargo aircraft would be 
given if such transfer of business were limited to those carriers which 
demonstrate a willingness and ability to so modernize their cargo fleet. 
The progressive transfer of MATS business, appropriate reductions in 
average rates, [and the enactment of legislation offering U.S. guarantee 
loans for the purchase of new all-­cargo aircraft]5 in addition to a contin­
ued rapid growth of commercial demands for air cargo service, should 
stimulate development of a modern air cargo fleet.
11. It is the general policy of the Federal Government that it will not 
carry on any commercial activities to provide a service for its own use if 
such services can be procured from private enterprise through ordinary 
business channels.6 Exceptions to this policy are permitted for various 
compelling reasons including national security and “relatively large and 
disproportionately higher costs.” In this connection it should be noted 
that Congress included in the FY 1960 Appropriation Act a provision that 
$85 million of the funds appropriated for MATS would be available only 
for the procurement of commercial air transportation service (passenger 
and/or cargo). In denying funds in FY 1960 for procurement of ten jet-­
powered cargo aircraft for use by MATS, Congress also stated in an offi­
cial report that “adequate transport capacity for this portion of the MATS 
mission exists in private commercial aircraft during the present cold war 
situation, and in the civil reserve air fleet in the event of mobilization”.
12. The Government requires the immediate availability of the civil 
air cargo fleet to assist in meeting military and mobilization require­
ments in time of war, national emergency, or whenever a military situ­
ation requires. There is a strong difference of view within the Executive 
Branch as to whether the U.S. Government does now have immediate 
availability of the civil air cargo fleet to meet these requirements and 
as to whether present arrangements under which the Civil Reserve Air 
Fleet is on call by the Government are adequate.
13. The expansion of a civil air cargo fleet would have the bonus 
effect of contributing to the fuller utilization of existing U.S. aircraft 
production capacity to the extent that U.S. (rather than foreign) manu­
factured aircraft are purchased.
14. The operation, under the U.S. flag, of an uncompromised effi­
cient air cargo fleet would enhance the prestige of the United States, 
particularly in those overseas areas served by that fleet, and would 
promote our objective of maintaining U.S. leadership in international 
civil aviation. Uncompromised cargo aircraft developed for U.S. use 
5 Treasury and Budget propose deletion. [Footnote and brackets are in the original.]
6 See Bureau of Budget Bulletin 60–­2, September 21, 1959. [Footnote is in the original.]
