56 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 19. Memorandum From Robert Hormats and Michael Armacost of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, April 5, 1977 SUBJECT President’s Letter to Prime Minister Fukuda on Televisions We were surprised,2 indeed concerned, about the final letter to Fukuda which the President sent via Ambassador Strauss.3 During the meeting with Fukuda the President put forward the 2.5 million figure as an acceptable figure for 1977 exports.4 He did not press for the Prime Minister’s agreement on the spot. He acknowledged that the figure would be considered high by U.S. labor and business circles. Fukuda was prepared to strike a deal on the spot; his advisors suggested that he hold off until he had a chance to consult with his Cabinet and business circles. But the Japanese by no means rejected the figure. However, this letter implies that having been unable to reach an agreement in Washington, we are going to make another effort to reach a compromise.5 In fact, of course, Strauss intends to propose a considerably lower figure—and the line about failing to reach agreement is simply a shallow pretext for seeking a better deal. To make matters worse, Strauss apparently indicated to Ambassador Togo that the President did not put forward a U.S. position during his talk with Fukuda, but that the number he discussed was really one which was given to him by a U.S. official who had earlier 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 40, Japan: 1–4/77. Confidential. Sent for information. 2 Brzezinski underlined the phrase “We were surprised” and wrote above it, “I was, too!” 3 Attached but not printed is an unsigned April 4 letter from Carter to Fukuda, which is different from the letter attached as Tab A to Document 18. The final version of the letter is also in telegram 76428 to Tokyo, April 6. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850106–2091, N770002–0455) 4 See Document 12. 5 The relevant section of the letter reads: “Another important matter which I know is of considerable concern to both of us is trade in color television sets. Since we discussed this subject but were unable to reach an agreement, I have had the opportunity to examine the Trade Commission’s Report and the latest trade figures. I therefore think that it is important for us to take a fresh look at this problem without regard to previous positions. I believe that we can arrive at a figure which meets our mutual interests. It would be desirable if Ambassador Strauss and you or your representatives can reach an understanding on an appropriate level of imports, so that this issue might be resolved before the Summit.”
