3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
38
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ment. The USSR has not and does not infringe on a special status of
West Berlin and the appeal to facilitate alleviating the tensions in that
area is sent to a wrong address. The fact that there still appear compli-
cations is connected with a quite definite policy of the FRG, which is
pursued with the connivance of the three Western powers and in fact is
aimed at eroding the Quadripartite Agreement and its corner stone
provision that West Berlin does not belong to the FRG and cannot be
governed by it. And the attempts to violate that provision constitute a
very slippery way leading to the exacerbation of the situation. We pro-
ceed from the fact that the Quadripartite Agreement is to be observed
strictly and steadfastly by all parties concerned. We shall strive in every
possible way not to allow a return to the period when West Berlin
served as a constant source of dangerous frictions and conflicts.
Without going now deeper into the details I shall say that your
letter does not indicate at all any changes also in the US approach to
such issues as the settlement in the Middle East or the correcting of the
situation in the field of trade and economic relations between our coun-
tries, which would testify to an intention to really move to their suc-
cessful solution.
And now the last thing. A so called question of “human rights” is
raised again in the letter. The way we qualify the essence of this ques-
tion and US administration’s behavior in this connection was recently
communicated through our Ambassador.3 This is our position of prin-
ciple. We do not intend to impose upon your country or upon other
countries our rules but neither shall we allow interference in our in-
ternal affairs, whatever pseudo-humanitarian slogans are used to
present it. We shall resolutely respond to any attempts of this kind.
And how in general should we regard the situation when the US
President sends messages to the General Secretary of the Central Com-
mittee of the CPSU and at the same time enters into correspondence
with a renegade4 who proclaimed himself an enemy of the Soviet state
and speaks out against normal, good relations between the USSR and
the US. We would not like to have our patience tested in any matters of
international policy including the questions of Soviet-American rela-
tions. This is not the way to deal with the Soviet Union.
Those are the thoughts, Mr. President, which occurred to my col-
leagues and to myself in connection with your letter. I did not choose
rounded phrases, though they might have been more pleasant. The
question is about too serious things to leave a room for any ambiguities
or understatements.
3 See Documents 10 and 11.
4 Reference is to Sakharov.
