Colombia 337 Ministers.6 The date of the meeting was, as the Foreign Minister pointed out, purposely left very vague. The purpose would be to discuss the whole question of economic cooperation in the Hemisphere. I did not like the general tone of the Note and mentioned to the Foreign Minister that I didn’t think we would be altogether in agreement with him, but that he of course had the right to express his own views. I particularly took exception to a paragraph suggesting that cooperation has not been as close and ample as it should have been. The Foreign Minister immediately said that he had not intended this as a criticism of the United States but rather as a statement of the undeniable fact that the Latin American republics have not cooperated among themselves. He would re-­draft this paragraph and make this clear. I said there were several things which I would like to take up with him. I first asked whether he had ascertained whether Lleras intended definitely to decline the President’s invitation to visit Washington in November. The Foreign Minister said he had unfortunately failed to ask Lleras this the one time he had seen him, but he would telephone me and let me know. I then referred to the fact that the Banco de la Republica was letting us have only [illegible in the original] pesos to the dollar on money which we are drawing against payments for agricultural surpluses. Under the present exchange system this seemed to be in clear contravention of the terms of our agreement, and I hoped that instructions would be issued to the Banco de la Republica to pay us in accordance with these terms; i.e., certificate rate plus 10%. The Foreign Minister said that the 10% matter was being handled in Washington and I agreed to this. I noted that the Colombian Government was now collecting the 10% from purchases of surplus products. He agreed to take this matter up. I then said that I did not wish to discuss the entire religious question but there was one aspect of it which did seriously concern me. The Catholic Church was apparently putting on a systematic campaign against the Embassy and the Consulate at Cali in connection with this question. I said that I was accustomed to attacks and they didn’t worry me, and that it was of course the privilege of the Catholic clergy to say what it wanted. However, it seemed to me extremely injudicious under the present circumstances to wash all of this dirty linen in public. The attacks completely misrepresented the position of the Embassy and the Consulate. They alleged that we were trying to Protestantize the country by distributing food, whereas the fact was that we were distributing the food through the Catholic clergy. Bishop Alvarez Restrepo had 6 No copy of the draft note described here was found in Department of State files.
