Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1063 – limitations on throw-weight, – construction of new silos for heavy ICBMs, and – attribution of warheads to new types of ballistic missiles, including the application of the “40 percent” rule. DOWNLOADING/NEW TYPES TRADE-OFFS — We would then address two major, unresolved issues - downloading and the new types definition. — These issues are related in the sense they both address concerns about breakout potential. — We can assess the breakout potential inherent in downloading existing missiles with some confidence because we know how many warheads each missile has proven capable of carrying. — For new types, the breakout potential is more theoretical since it is based on judgements concerning capabilities that have not been directly demonstrated. — In terms of the larger U.S. objectives, it may be better for us to hold firm on limiting the known breakout risks associated with downloading, and allow some latitude on the new types definition. — Such a trade-off accepts that new types of missiles may, or may not, have a breakout potential, but it also builds on the realization that to take advantage of the new types definition, the Soviets will need to make significant investment in development and deployment of new missiles. — That’s the perspective that leads to the following approach. DOWNLOADING — The first issue concerns the downloading of warheads from existing types of ballistic missiles. — We want to be able to download Minuteman III from three to one or two RVs. The Soviets already have de facto downloaded their SS–N–18 from seven to three RVs. — We ought to draw the line on downloading at these two systems. Otherwise, we will just allow the Soviets to keep adding to their breakout potential up to the more than 2000 warheads they proposed. — That would not make strategic sense and would not make political sense. The START treaty would be roundly attacked on the Hill and the critics would be right. NEW TYPES DEFINITION — On the question of how to tell when a missile is a “new type,” we have maintained a simple principle: a new type missile must be genuinely new and verifiably different from any existing ballistic missile. — The two sides have already agreed on criteria that reflect this principle.
