Afghanistan 39 The leader and founder of the extremist Parcham faction is now the Vice President and Deputy Prime Minister in President Taraki’s Government. The overwhelming majority of the remaining members of the Government are all of the same hue. Paragraph 8 of the ruling Khalq Party’s manifesto issued in October 1977, specifically mentions the Durand Line, the recognised international frontier between Pakistan and Afghanistan, as a “colonial imposition” and pledges support to the so-called “national movement of the people of Pakhtoonistan” in our territory. In his very first press conference on May 6, 1978, the new Afghan President raised the matter of the Durand Line saying, of course, that he wanted a peaceful settlement of this border issue with Pakistan.6 The entire flavour and rhetoric of the new regime in Kabul conform to classic communist norms. The country itself has been re-named the “Democratic Republic of Afghanistan” on familiar lines. The regime’s lip service to Islamic values and non-alignment is transparent enough. The need for such camouflage to gain time for the regime to consolidate its position, is evident. If we go along with these professions in an effort to ensure the continuity of the dialogue we had initiated with President Daoud, this does not mean that we are under any illusion or have been lulled into a false sense of security by the regime’s protestations. We know that the Afghan barrier has been breached and our country lies directly in the path of the flood which rolled out of Czarist Russia in the last century and is now flowing in full force towards the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf. It is the nature of the response to this situation which is the subject of controversy among our friends and allies. This is unfortunate because time is running out. Nothing will stop the Soviet Union from pursuing its expansionist policies if events encourage it to believe that smaller countries are expendable in the overall context of America’s global strategy. In our estimation the advent of the leftist regime in Kabul is an event of historic proportions. The change is of a fundamental nature which will have a profound impact on the balance of power in our region and beyond. Its consequences for Pakistan are incalculable. These and related matters are receiving our urgent attention. I am convinced that these are of deep concern to you also and hope that you will be able to spare some time to give attention to the measures 6 The press conference was reported in telegram 3697 from Kabul, May 8. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780194–0927)
