294
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
and sovereignty. I could put teeth in this by reaffirming—in response
to Agha Shahi’s now three-month-old query—the applicability of our
1959 bilateral to the present situation in Afghanistan. We have really
dithered on this matter far too long, in my judgement—the Iran hostage
situation, elections in India, and the 21 November events here
notwithstanding.2
7. I could be authorized, perhaps, to take this a step further by
formally requesting, on behalf of my government, a consultation as
envisaged under the 1959 bilateral; events in Kabul over the last 72
hours would seem to me to merit no less a reaction than this. For the
request to originate with us (instead of with Pakistan) demonstrates
both concern and initiative on our part to a Pakistani leadership made
ever-more anxious about the ominous Soviet presence and blatant
“occupation” of a neighboring Islamic country, at a time when they
have reason to question the prospects for effective USG support.
8. Such a démarche on my part would have even greater impact
if at least a portion of what I would be instructed to say could be cast
in the form of a letter to President Zia from President Carter, expressing
concern about the 25–28 Dec. developments in Kabul and soliciting
Pakistan’s views about the meaning of these developments.
9. I could envision a Presidential text that would include the
following thoughts: Quote: Dear President Zia: I am deeply distressed
at the blatant exercise of Soviet power we have seen in Kabul during
the past several days. It is a cruel and brutal violation of the norms of
international discourse and relations, and it must not be allowed to go
unchallenged by the world community, most especially Afghanistan’s
fellow Islamic nations. For my part, I want to convey to you my own
sense of deep concern about the events taking place in Afghanistan
and to solicit earnestly your appreciation of developments there as we
assess in Washington and with our friends what precisely should be
the nature and character of the American and free world response. I
want also to reassure you, at this difficult moment for Pakistan, of
the continuing American commitment to the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. Finally, I wish to assure
you of my desire for the closest of consultations between our two
friendly governments as we assess how best to cope with the new threat
to the region posed by the Soviet actions in Afghanistan. Unquote.
10. While not attempting to get into longer-range matters for deci-
sion within the USG as we come to grips with the USSR’s power grab
in Kabul, I nonetheless want to add that we have exhausted the efficacy
of oral diplomatic assurances. We have been reassuring the Pakistanis
2 See footnote 10, Document 102.
