698 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 The Prime Minister should state that Iran has been through a most difficult and exhausting period of economic and financial chaos; that the new government has definite plans and programs for the financial and economic rehabilitation of the country and proposes to move as rapidly as possible to get the country on a sound footing; but that there is the greatest need for immediate assistance to tide the country over during the short-range period and also to enable the programs of agricultural and economic improvement, that the new administration has in mind, to be launched. The President could reply to such a request stating that he was most sympathetic to the trials and problems of the country of Iran and its people, that he had taken note of the determination of the new government to do everything within its own possibilities to help itself, and that he understood the need for immediate assistance to tide over, etc. He could also say that accordingly he had directed the Foreign Operations Administration to proceed immediately with the development of appropriate programs of support. 3. Governor Stassen thought that we should get off this additional guidance to the field in very short order, but he wished to have us check it with General Smith before doing so. He was particularly anxious to be sure that General Smith would approve of this approach, as being the right one. 4. Governor Stassen also recommended that the Ambassador take up this matter at the earliest feasible moment with Mr. Warne and obtain his assistance and guidance. He explained that Mr. Warne is a very able and energetic representative of FOA who should be brought into the act and who should be able to make a substantial contribution— and also since Mr. Warne will have to assume responsibility for the administration of any new programs that may be developed. 5. I pointed out to Governor Stassen the fact that our representatives had put us on notice of the fact that Zahedi’s appreciation of the financial situation was unrealistic and that he had some very fanciful notions concerning the feasibility of certain programs for social and economic betterment. Our information further indicated that Zahedi would require some very firm and realistic guidance, and that he had been warned against making impossible promises in his early speeches. (I showed Governor Stassen the reports of the early speeches which indicate that Zahedi has not been too mindful of this advice to date.) 6. Concerning the possibility of our receiving help from FOA on the $5 million immediate requirement, Governor Stassen said that he did not think that FOA could very easily do this. He did not believe that it was appropriate for him to provide cash to us for secret payments, and he said that he thought this was “exactly the kind of thing we (CIA) have our reserves for—and that we (CIA) should draw upon our re-
