(b) Can the reduction of armaments be promoted by examining possible means for ensuring that the mutual assistance, economic and military, contemplated in Article 16 of the Covenant, shall be brought quickly into operation as soon as an act of aggression has been committed? (a) This Government believes that no useful end can be attained by the consideration of the subject of war potential which would be involved in the attempted application of most of the points enumerated above. From the standpoint of the limitation of land armament it appears that the only factor which might form a basis for a formula for the limitation of land armament is a limitation on the basis of population or area, providing such a limitation is taken as a direct ratio preferably applied only to metropolitan* area or population. However, it is possible to place an arbitrary limitation on the size of the peace-time military establishment, including equipment and trained reserves without reference to war potential. Factors in the establishment of this arbitrary limitation might include the standardization of the character and term of service, preferably through the abolition of conscription for peace-time procurement. In regard to naval armament, the factors listed in this question likewise cannot usefully be considered in arriving at a scale of naval armaments permissible to the various countries, whether one takes into account the separate factors mentioned under this head or all of them combined. Any attempt to apply any or all of these factors to a scale of naval armament permissible to the various countries would lead to endless confusion and serve no useful purpose. Substantial progress has already been made toward the limitation of naval armament by fixing a definite tonnage ratio on certain classes of vessels for various countries. This ratio was not reached by the consideration of unrelated and for the most part indeterminate factors such as those listed in Question V. Any departure from the principle already established at the Washington Conference would only tend to jeopardize the progress toward further limitation of naval armament. Among the factors which appear to give no promise of usefulness in arriving at a limitation of either land or naval armament are:
