1190  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
might have opportunity seeing their performance. All this indicated 
fervent desire among people for cultural exchange. As Wang knew 
we here had seen performances Peking Opera and acrobatic troupe. 
Could any of US gentlemen say these performances contained any 
political propaganda? They were sorry they had not had opportunity 
see American theater but were sure they would look forward to seeing 
American theater. This showed that feeling and desire of two people 
were same.
25. Wang understood Lt. Col. Ekvall very much interested in stud­
ies of Chinese national minorities and had actually written some works 
in that respect. They would welcome Lt. Col. Ekvall sometime visiting 
their country so he could continue work and achieve desires. Or could 
there be any harm done to US if Lt. Col. Ekvall were to come to China 
and complete work? As Wang had said such exchanges were in interest 
both countries and they would hope US would give favorable consid­
eration their proposal this respect.
26. I said if Wang’s country really interested in improving relations 
I could not too strongly stress that it fundamental it abandon its policy 
of hostility and threats of force involving US and agree our differences 
would be settled only by peaceful means, and demonstrate its willing­
ness carry out first agreement we reached. I and my government con­
tinued hope this could come quickly.
27. Wang hoped I would be in position give favorable consider­
ation to proposal they had made at next meeting.
28. Wang said he had nothing further and suggested next meeting 
be held Thursday, October 4. I agreed.
Popper
722.	 Letter 45 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 45
Geneva, September 22, 1956
Dear Walter:
Well the 58th meeting is over. There is not much to add to what 
I have said in my telegrams. Their exchange proposal is obviously 
designed to produce something having more public appeal than trade. 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
