1957 1321 786. Letter 65 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 65 Washington, February 11, 1957 Dear Alex: 1. Developments in the issue of travel of newspapermen to Communist China have not been very favorable for us. The press is giv­ ing strong support to Stevens and Worthy. Apparently they have been able to whip up a certain amount of public support for their position. Worthy appeared on Eric Sevareid’s nation wide newscast Sunday after­ noon February 10 and probably evoked quite a bit of sympathy for his position. Worthy left Moscow before the Embassy received our instruc­ tions, and he refused to submit his passport to the Legation in Budapest for restrictive endorsement. He also refused to say yes or no on the passport hearing which was offered him, placing his case in the hands of the Civil Liberties Union. When Worthy passed through Immigration at Boston his passport (by decision) was not taken up or restrictively endorsed. As I see it this will make it difficult for us to follow through in Stevens case. Look Magazine plans to fight the case of Stevens and Harrington. Presumably there will be a passport hearing in Washington when Stevens returns to this country. Stevens was given the choice of a hearing in Moscow or Washington before restrictive action was taken, and Look Magazine instructed him to choose a hearing in Washington, which will presumably take place a few weeks hence. The decision to seek to restrict the passports was taken with some reluctance in view of the local uncertainty but our hand was more or less forced by the press release of December 28 in which it was stated flatly that the passports would be made valid for return to the U.S. only. We did soften the proposed action by making it clear to our Embassy in Moscow that we did not require Stevens to come home. The instruction was to endorse the passport “upon departure from the Soviet Union, valid for return to the U.S. only”. This would enable Stevens to continue his assignment in the U.S.S.R. without interrup­ tion. However Look has elected to bring him home in late March in order to fight the case. We are faced with a flat defiance of the Department by Worthy, and strong resistance short of defiance in the case of Look Magazine and Stevens. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official– ­Informal.
