3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
444
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
more about what was being done now on Shcharanskiy’s behalf. He
had, however, met with Mrs. (Avital) Shcharanskiy in Geneva recently
and she had been helpful in advising the Secretary on her husband’s
situation.
On the “refusenik” question, the Secretary told Gold we had been
presenting the replists to the Soviets on every suitable occasion and will
continue to do so.
As regarded Mr. Gold’s comments to the effect that there had been
little affirmative action on all of these matters recently, the Secretary
said he would have to disagree with that assessment. The President
and he had talked about Shcharanskiy to other heads of government
after the recent Bonn Summit.3 Unfortunately, it had not then been pos-
sible to agree on a common statement. They simply had been unable to
do it. Some governments had their own problems with the Soviets
which precluded their taking a strong public position on the Shcharan-
skiy trial. For example, the Germans had finally been successful after
many years in convincing the Soviets to permit thousands of German-
speaking people to emigrate from the USSR. The German Government
was thus chary about joining in a common statement condemning the
Shcharanskiy trial for fear that the Soviets might retaliate by shutting
off the flow of German emigrants. And different countries had different
problems with the idea of a common statement because of their own re-
lationships with the USSR.
Insofar as the future was concerned, the Secretary said that he con-
tinued to watch the figures on emigration of Jews from the Soviet
Union. In these he had detected a strange pattern in recent months. He
noted that thus far this year the number of Soviet Jews allowed to emi-
grate has been higher than in any year since 1972–73.
With respect to the dissidents, it seemed as though the Soviet Gov-
ernment had decided to run right down the list and hit each dissident
hard. The Secretary asked Ambassador Shulman to give his views on
the dissident trials. The Ambassador said that the Soviets apparently
made a decision at the beginning of this year to clean up the dissident
movement. By sending some of the leading dissidents out of the
country, an act which left the rest in disarray, the Soviets seemingly
hoped to clear out the nests of dissidence and put a stop to the problem
once and for all. They probably also took a look at the first quarter
(1978) trade statistics with the US which were off notably from the same
period a year ago, and decided they had nothing to lose in trade by
moving against the dissidents at this time.
3 See footnote 1, Document 136.
