1010 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 203. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, February 22, 1991, 1653Z 2219. Subject: START: Another Deadline Missed 1. Secret—Entire Text. Overall Outlook 2. Things have moved back into the normal hectic schedule following the visit of the ungroup and their Soviet counterparts. As you are well aware, this visit did not produce the breakthroughs we had hoped for and people here are rather discouraged as a result. Obukhov and his group stayed last week and we worked hard on them. We had the impression that the two delegations were staging debates for the education of the Moscow visitors (except Obukhov who needs no such education). If we were successful, these efforts will result in new instructions from Moscow. Obukhov returns this Sunday (February 24), perhaps with some helpful new ideas. Generals Peresypkin and Ladygin will also be here. If Obukhov caves on everything next week, we could have a treaty in March, but this is highly unlikely. The litmus test for near-­term progress will be whether he brings enough flexibility to let us solve the heavy bomber/ALCM and size criteria issues quickly. 3. If we do not get these breakthroughs, there is strong sentiment building here for a break, presumably coinciding with Rick’s departure. It would be strongly resisted by the Soviets, but it might sober them up a bit. In any case, the reasons for a break are self-­evident given the stalemate on several key issues and the fact that none of us came prepared to stay beyond late February. My own scenario would have a break from roughly mid-March to mid-April. This would allow two months to finish the treaty in time for what I see as the next deadline—­a June summit. This is plenty of time to finish if both sides decide they really want to do so. 4. If we are to meet such a goal, it is imperative that both sides stop piling on complications. On our side, I would put into this category the new demands we are making on telemetry. For years, we have had high confidence that we would do just fine if the encryption stopped and there were no encapsulation. I am no expert on this subject, but I can see no real justification for all these new highly intrusive and highly 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D910177–0150. Secret; Priority.
