Afghanistan
905
and reach an understanding with Pakistan, the only country in a posi-
tion to inhibit activities of freedom fighters.
6. Now, however, said Zia, there had been a new development of
which he had not himself yet been fully briefed, and he would let Acting
Foreign Minister Shahnawaz explain what had happened. Shahnawaz
prefaced his remarks by saying that new Soviet Ambassador Smirnov
and aide who accompanied him both spoke excellent English and there
could be no question of misunderstanding, as had occasionally hap-
pened with previous Soviet Ambassador. Original approach to Shahna-
waz had led to meeting at which Soviet Ambassador made his pitch
to Zia, Shahi and Shahnawaz. In course of outlining his proposal for
a regional conference Ambassador Smirnov had at least three times
made following statements in reply to questions put to him by Pak side.
—A. Soviet-Afghan side would be prepared to open dialogue under
auspices of UN Special Representative.
—B. Participation in talks by Kabul regime as party and not govern-
ment was acceptable.
—C. Discussions would not imply recognition of Babrak Karmal
government.
—D. Soviet and Afghan Ambassadors at UN would be instructed
to follow agreed line.
7. Shahnawaz went on to say that they had told Smirnov that they
would inform Waldheim of proposal and advise him that he could
check directly with Moscow if he wished. Smirnov had inquired about
what reaction there would be from Iran, and Zia had said that was
one question Pakistan could not answer. Zia then put question to
Smirnov on whether Soviet Union prepared to withdraw its forces.
Smirnov replied that Soviets would do so as soon as outside interference
stopped. Paks then challenged this view of situation, but finally agreed
that there was basis for proceeding with initiative. Soviets requested
no publicity, but Paks insisted that some public statement would be
required. Shahi’s carefully worded public remarks constituted that
statement.
8. Then, said Shahnawaz, on January 9 Soviet Ambassador called
seeking urgent meeting with Zia. Shahnawaz replied that Zia was out of
town but if it was a matter of real urgency he could call at Shahnawaz’s
residence. Message that Smirnov brought was that President Zia and his
government had given an interpretation to Pak-Soviet understanding
which was “not quite correct.” Therefore Moscow had not sent instruc-
tions to delegations in New York. In addition Babrak Karmal regime
had informed Soviets it would not accept any initiative that came under
UN resolution. Finally Pakistan had introduced Iran into equation.
Babrak Karmal had reacted to this by saying that only bilateral talks
