Dominican Republic  483
In view of a distinct possibility that the Government of 
Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo might face a crisis or fall before the end 
of 1960, it is of great importance that the United States work, without 
exposing itself to charges of violation of non-­intervention commit-
ments, towards assuring insofar as possible that any successor govern-
ment is reasonably friendly to the United States and in harmony with 
U.S. objectives for Latin America. In particular, the coming to power 
during the critical months ahead, of a Castro-­like government in the 
Dominican Republic might very well set in motion a chain reaction, 
replacing the Government of Haiti and probably one or more gov-
ernments in the Central American area with governments more in 
consonance with Castro’s way of doing things than ours. Such a devel-
opment, added to the Panamanian problem, could give rise to a much 
more serious situation in the Caribbean than we now face and would 
seriously jeopardize our chances of effectively dealing with the Cuban 
situation.
It will admittedly be difficult for an experienced leadership 
friendly to the United States to fill the vacuum in the Dominican 
Republic if and when the Trujillo regime goes, and we cannot be cer-
tain that anything we can do would make such a result certain. The 
authoritarian regime which has governed the Dominican Republic 
for a generation has effectively liquidated and enfeebled virtually 
all potentially rival and democratic leadership while the current 
‘anti-dictatorship’ feelings of Latin American and the inevitable urge 
to settle old scores upon the exit of the dictator will tend to give an 
opening to the radial leadership supported by Castro and, in many 
cases, infiltrated by pro-Communist elements.
There are, however, several factors which give some hope and an 
opportunity worthwhile taking to reach our goals. Among the profes-
sional and commercial classes, including the active student elements, 
of the Dominican Republic there is growing determination to take 
action to supplant the Trujillo regime with a more democratic regime 
which would, however, not be patterned on, or susceptible to guid-
ance from, Castro. These elements are usually friendly to the United 
States, although of late there has been growing resentment against us 
for not playing a role in overthrowing Trujillo. Certain elements among 
them think they have, or are working on obtaining, military support 
and may if they can get organized make an attempt to overthrow the 
government at an early date. Whether or not this attempt takes place or 
succeeds, it is primarily to this group that we must look for a govern-
ment in accord with our interests because (a) at present, in the event of 
the death, incapacity, assassination, or overthrow of the Generalissimo, 
it appears improbable that his regime can long be successfully carried 
on by any member of his family or other strongmen, and (b) the more
