292 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement meant that although thinking people realize the full implications of the Cuban situation the masses are inclined to applaud the GOC, in other Latin American countries as well as in Chile. The Minister went on to say that in his view it would be better to try to isolate Cuba than to act directly against it. He considered that isolation would not necessarily remedy the situation there or materially change that existing in other countries, but that it would be least likely to make things worse. He described the recent visit of Cuban emissary Lechuga to Santiago to obtain Chilean agreement to attend the conference of under-­developed countries which the GOC is attempting to promote. The Minister said that Lechuga had received a flat refusal in Chile, but that in Peru the government did not refuse his request due to the influence in the Peruvian Government of the APRA party through Raúl Porras, the Minister of Foreign Affairs. “If you note this situation in Peru, where the Government is conservative,” the Minister went on, “you can imagine what it might be in others with less conservative administrations.” In this situation, the Minister said, any strong action by the U.S. Congress would be likely to be dangerous. The best solution would probably be for the Congress to grant to the Executive permission to proceed in accordance with the circumstances. The Secretary said that this authorization has been requested. He then asked whether the Foreign Minister would advise our sending our Ambassador back to Havana. The Foreign Minister replied affirmatively, saying that it would be unfortunate to give the Cubans any opportunity to divert the attention of the public of the hemisphere from matters of substance to matters of form. CH–33. Memorandum from the President’s Staff Secretary (Goodpaster) to the President’s Assistant (Persons)1 Washington, March 7, 1960. MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL PERSONS During the President’s visit to Chile, President Alessandri expressed to him very great concern over the impact of our copper stockpile on world copper markets, referring specifically to the fact that it “overhangs” the market, and to recurrent rumors from time to time 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Project Clean Up, “Chile.”
