entertained as to the necessity of this policy and the beneficial results which
would accrue from it to all the people of the Nation, its wisdom must now
be considered thoroughly demonstrated. It may not have appeared to be a
novel or perhaps brilliant conception, but it has turned out to be
preeminently sound. It has not failed to work. It has surely brought results.
It does not have to be excused as a temporary expedient adopted as the
lesser evil to remedy some abuse, it is not a palliative seeking to treat
symptoms, but a major operation for the eradication at the source of a large
number of social diseases.
Nothing is easier than the expenditure of public money. It does not appear
to belong to anybody. The temptation is overwhelming to bestow it on
somebody. But the results of extravagance are ruinous. The property of the
country, like the freedom of the country, belongs to the people of the
country. They have not empowered their Government to take a dollar of it
except for a necessary public purpose. But if the Constitution conferred
such right, sound economics would forbid it. Nothing is more destructive of
the progress of the Nation than Government extravagance. It means an
increase in the burden of taxation, dissipation of the returns from enterprise,
a decrease in the real value of wages, with ultimate stagnation and decay.
The whole theory of our institutions is based on the liberty and
independence of the individual. He is dependent on himself for support and
therefore entitled to the rewards of his own industry. He is not to be
deprived of what he earns that others may be benefited by what they do not
earn. What he saves through his private effort is not to be wasted by
Government extravagance.
Our national activities have become so vast that it is necessary to scrutinize
each item of public expenditure if we are to apply the principle of economy.
At the last session we made an immediate increase in the annual budget of
more than $100,000,000 in benefits conferred on the veterans of three wars,
public buildings, and river and harbor improvement. Many projects are
being broached requiring further large outlays. I am convinced that it would
be greatly for the welfare of the country if we avoid at the present session
all commitments except those of the most pressing nature. From a reduction
of the debt and taxes will accrue a wider benefit to all the people of this
country than from embarking on any new enterprise. When our war debt is
