February 1951–February 1952
3
the organization which they undoubtedly hoped would eventually
lead to their absorption of the northern areas.
Soviet Objectives:
The pattern of recent Soviet activity with regard to Iran seems to
show that the assimilation operation is looked upon by them as two-
phased. One gets the impression that Soviet policy would be immedi-
ately served through the acquisition of the land area adjacent to Baku.
The proximity of the Baku oil fields and their vulnerability to air attack
certainly must make it extremely desirable that a protective buffer soon
be carried out to the south. Iranian territory, in fact points like a dagger
at Baku.
The foregoing theory was borne out several years ago by the state-
ment of a former Soviet Military Attache´. When discussing the
“menace” to the Soviet Union inherent in the presence of American
Military Missions in Iran, that official remarked that while the Soviets
had placed many factories, airplane hangers, et cetera, underground
they obviously could not do so with the oil fields or refineries. Conse-
quently, the presence of potentially hostile military personnel adjacent
to such an essential operation had to be a continual source of worry.
The second phase of the assimilation operation, the absorption of
what remained after the acquisition of the northern area, would be both
easy and difficult. The severance of the northern area would leave Te-
heran stranded more or less in the middle of the desert. Part of its food
supply could be cut off or turned on and off at will. A good part of the
country’s population, and much of its fertile and productive land
would be gone. And the balance of the country could easily be flooded
from the Soviet controlled zone with well-tutored Iranians. The diffi-
culty would come in the southwest, when the British began to feel the
pinch of events.
There are undoubtedly many other factors in the Iranian problem
which must be significant to the Kremlin. Certainly global strategy will
receive its due attention, and Soviet control of the northwestern area
would have an important effect upon the Turkish position. That, how-
ever, is primarily within the realm of the military. Also, Iraq and the
countries lying between it and the eastern shores of the Mediterranean
would be affected by the penetration of Iran. However, while recog-
nizing possible external effects this study will concern itself only with
the internal aspects of the problem.
The Iranians and Communism:
The number of real Communists in Iran is comparatively very
small. A good estimate probably would be one person per thousand.
The member of Iranians who out of desperation induced by the unsatis-
