1004 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX term FMS financing program at substantial levels were established. Because of this risk we do not recommend cash flow financing across the board; rather we propose this method of financial implementation only on a selected basis to begin important programs in FY 80 and 81 and only drawing on committed but not yet spent funds from the original $1.5 billion program. We believe that limiting the use of cash flow financing in this manner meets previous objections and limits our financial exposure to an acceptable level. Cash flow financing (up to $320 million available) in combination with new FY 81 funds (e.g. $225–350 million) would make available up to $545–670 million to begin new programs in FY 1981. This will help bridge the gap until a more substantial program can begin in FY 82. Equipment Only F–16 aircraft and M60 tanks pose policy issues. Their release poses no serious arms control or arms transfer issues given the quantities under consideration and the quality of equipment in neighboring countries. We have sold identical or superior equipment to other friendly nations in the area. Tactically, Israel could object in hopes we will provide it more equipment and we will need to conduct extensive consultations with Congress before any formal proposal is made. Because of production line problems the tank sale may have to be notified to Congress relatively soon. F–16s might wait, although we need a decision in principle to permit us to continue our discussions with the Egyptians. We have looked at less capable equipment such as F–4s and M48A5s from the U.S. inventory, but have concluded we cannot strip U.S. forces without adversely affecting U.S. combat capability. We might be able to provide up to 15 F–4s and some M48A5s if we can buy back M48s from Jordan. This may change over time and we will keep the situation under review. Congressional and Israeli Implications A substantial continuing FMS program for Egypt will come as no surprise to either Israel or to the Congress. Israel will probably not object as long as the program does not threaten its security—which any feasible programs do not—but it will certainly bring pressure to increase its own security assistance level. Congress has been supportive of our security assistance to Egypt. We will have to guard against Congressional attempts to wedge the Egyptian program in under the overall level or to cut crucial programs in other countries. Once we have your decisions, we plan to consult closely with key members and committees about the emerging program.
