National Security Policy 797 still some disagreement within the military establishment. I said that I feared, for example, that the Chief of Staff of the Army would not find the footnote compatible to his thinking and that he had tended to interpret the language in paragraph 12 a in a way quite different from the interpretation placed upon it by the Chief of Staff of the Air Force and by the Secretary of Defense. Thus, I felt that the problem with respect to this paragraph as we would discuss it in the NSC meet­ ing on July 30 would be whether he wished to allow those who found themselves in disagreement, to speak to it, recommending that he do so. The President agreed and said that he would welcome any further comments but he was in accord with my suggestion that this be the last meeting on the subject. I then showed the President the draft of paragraph 16, which is attached. I pointed out to him that it defined local aggression as con­ flicts occurring outside of the NATO area. This draft recognized that the engagement of sizeable US and USSR forces in NATO could not be considered local aggression and that short of such a situation we were reaffirming our commitment to NATO and NATO planning. The President agreed with this say­ ing that in such a situation the decision could not be a unilateral US decision. I also called the President’s attention to the world “balance” in the second line, pointing out that the Defense Department would proba­ bly object to it (it having been a State Department submission at the Planning Board) and that I personally would recommend against it in the light of the footnote to paragraph 12 a, and also because the refer­ ence here was to capability and not to forces. It seemed to me that what we really required was a flexible and selective capability. The President agreed and felt also that in the third line, the word “as” should be changed to “in cases” and the inter-­lineation in the attached draft was in his own hand. 8. At this point Mr. McCabe and Mr. Haskins came into the meeting. I introduced Mr. Haskins to the President, pointing out to the President that the subject of the discussion was the Jackson Committee study. The President began by stating that Mr. Haskins had been desig­ nated his representative in accordance with the guidelines agreed upon by the President and Senator Jackson. He then made the following points: (1) There is a precedent for a Presidential representative to sit in at Congressional hearings in the case of the Immigration Committee, an arrangement which the President had established with General Swing. When that Committee has dealt with special cases (presumably the admission of defectors to this country under the exceptions procedure
