National Security Policy  599
additional divisions could be moved across Finland and a maximum 
of nine divisions could be ferried from Denmark to southern Sweden. 
Additional reinforcements might be water-­lifted across the Baltic from 
the USSR to Sweden, and airborne forces could be used in securing 
debarkation facilities.
182. Against Greece, Turkey, and the Middle East. Forces available for 
operations in this area include 44 line divisions and 2,750 tactical and 
naval aircraft in southern and southwestern USSR. For operations west 
of the Black Sea, lines of communication would be adequate to support 
as many as 10 divisions against Greece or as many as 16 against Turkey, 
but not more than a total of 22 could be supported concurrently. At 
most, 14 of these divisions could be supported in an extension of this 
campaign into northwestern Anatolia, while seven divisions from the 
Caucasus could move against eastern Turkey. Three additional divi­
sions could be water-­lifted to the northern Turkish coast, provided that 
port facilities could be secured. One or two airborne divisions could be 
employed in the area. Lines of communication could support a force of 
15–20 divisions in offensive operations against Iran.
183. In the Far East. The USSR has 31 line divisions, approximately 
2,350 tactical and naval aircraft and sizable naval forces available in this 
area. These forces could renew hostilities in Korea, either alone or in 
conjunction with North Korean and Chinese forces. One airborne divi­
sion could be employed against Japan. A seaborne force equivalent to 
three lightly-­equipped divisions could be launched against Japan, using 
a mixed group of ships and other craft. Provided port facilities could 
be secured, fully-­equipped forces equivalent to 5–6 divisions could be 
landed almost immediately in a follow-­up operation. The same tech­
nique could be used in other areas of the Far East within range of land 
based aircraft. Adverse climate, terrain and logistic environment would 
probably limit operations in Alaska to one airborne division and a sea­
borne force of about 6,000 troops.
Naval Forces
184. During the postwar years, Soviet naval forces have been 
greatly strengthened by an intensive building program concentrated 
on light cruisers, destroyers and submarines. The Soviet submarine 
force is the largest ever assembled by any single power; over half of 
its present strength consists of long-­range craft of postwar design and 
construction. Due to a recent slow-­down in the naval construction 
program, which included a temporary halt in submarine production, 
there has been little quantitative change in Soviet naval forces since 
last year. We estimate Soviet naval strength as of 1 October 1958 at 28 
cruisers, about 140 destroyers and 80 destroyer escorts, and about 440 
submarines. These totals include vessels of postwar design numbering 
20 light cruisers, 110 fleet destroyers, 80 destroyer escorts, about 260
