442 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Basing mode failures can be divided into two categories, failures by natural causes, and failures due to an unforeseen ASW vulnerability that gets exploited by our opponents. As far as natural causes are concerned, our oldest SSBNs have been operating for nearly 20 years and the complete gamut of required submarine evolutions through launch of the missile has been run through hundreds of times. Given this testing, and the fact that the Trident SSBN is already on the way and will have been in operation for many years by the time the current SSBNs will be retired in large numbers, the risk of a catastrophic failure of our SSBN force by natural causes seems extremely small. The relatively significant possibility is that of a catastrophic ASW breakthrough—­and even this doesn’t seem very large. Thus, the ICBM force’s significant marginal contribution to hedging against catastrophic failures—­is in its ability to hedge against the loss due to a catastrophic ASW breakthrough, of whatever capabilities are provided uniquely by missiles. Note, however, that the bomber forces can do anything except destroy their targets in less than [less than 1 line not declassified]—­which takes us back to the issue raised on page 2—­given the likelihood that any homeland-­to-­homeland nuclear exchange would take place only after a deep crisis lasting a period of days or weeks—­how important is it to hedge against the loss of our ability to deliver nuclear weapons on target within less than [less than 1 line not declassified] of the decision to do so? Wouldn’t the value of the Soviets’ time-­sensitive targets have been reduced to a minimum long before an exchange of nuclear weapons begins? Can Modernizing the ICBM Force Give US Capabilities Provided by the Two Legs of the Triad but at Less Cost? In my opinion, the arguments we have been through so far seem to make less than a compelling case for modernizing the ICBM force to retain a full Triad. Thus, if we want to make a reasonably strong objective case for modernizing the force, we need a positive answer to this last question. The most up-­to-­date source we have for judging the relative costs of modernizing our strategic forces is the PD–18 follow-­on study on modernizing the ICBM force.2 That study estimates the costs of deploying and operating additional strategic forces through the year 2000 at $5–7 million per arriving warhead for an ICBM system, $8–11 million per arriving air launched cruise missiles, and $15–17 million per arriving Trident warhead. While these figures indicate that arriving ICBM RVs would be somewhat cheaper than arriving ALCM and Trident 2 See Document 93.
