290  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
CH–32.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of 
the Office of East Coast Affairs (Briggs)1

Santiago, March 1, 1960.
US/MC/14
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files, Lot 64 D 559, CF 1596. Confidential. 
Information on the source text indicates that this memorandum was approved in the 
Office of the Secretary of State on March 8.
United States
Secretary Herter
ARA - Mr. Rubottom
Embassy, Santiago – Mr. Krieg
ARA/EST – Mr. Briggs
Chile
Germán Vergara Donoso, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs of Chile
Carlos Vial Infante, Minister of 
Defense of Chile
SUBJECT
Cuban Situation
The Secretary stated that he would very much appreciate the 
Foreign Minister’s views on the situation in Cuba, which is very dis-
turbing to us. When we asked our Ambassador to come home, the 
Secretary went on, the personal attacks in Cuba on the President, the 
Vice President, and the Secretary himself had become so inflammatory 
that we feared that serious danger to American citizens might result 
were these attacks continued.
Since our Ambassador left Havana, some friends of Castro from 
other Latin American countries have spoken with him of the danger 
of this foolish course and he has moderated his tone to some extent. 
Nevertheless, we note with concern that he is surrounding himself 
increasingly with people of Communist orientation and that the influ-
ence of persons of this type is extending rapidly into the schools, the 
labor organizations and the army, as well as in the government itself.
We have no quarrel with Cuba on the basic question of land reform, 
which we fully recognize is a matter of national sovereignty; but tre-
mendous confusion is occurring in the implementation of the Cuban 
agrarian reform law and this confusion leads to doubt as to the intent or 
the ability of the Cuban Government to provide the full, adequate and 
effective compensation that is required for American interests affected 
by expropriation.
The Cuban Government recently sent us a note, the Secretary 
continued, requesting that we enter into discussions with them, but 
containing the proviso that these discussions can only be undertaken 
provided that the United States agree that neither its Executive Branch
