present were delegates to the Assembly, there is reason to believe that they were glad of an opportunity to postpone further immediate action and observe the reaction in the American press to the questions so far under discussion. The Belgian representative, in discussing the problems raised by the fifth reservation, said that if the United States had a real interest in any question, it is an indisputable fact that the Court could only give an advisory opinion with the consent of the United States. It was only right that if America did not take part in the discussion, it could not be bound by an opinion. Also, its intervention might force the Court to declare incompetence. He cited as a precedent the case of Eastern Carelia when, owing to a protest by the Soviet authorities, the Court refused to take jurisdiction.30 He argued that the United States would possess the same right of protest. He believed that in this reservation, the United States did not ask any new privilege, but only preserved a privilege which it already possessed. The difficulty lay in the word “claims”. The United States appeared not only to be asking the right to intervention when a question concerned her, but was also asking that the fact of an intervention, without any proof of actual interest, should in itself be regarded as preventing the Court from giving an advisory opinion. It was a question if the Conference could go that far. The reservation was addressed not only to the Council and to the Assembly, but to the Court. It was impossible to declare the Court incompetent; neither a single member, nor all of them, could do this. A country could appear before the Court and give its views, but could not declare the Court incompetent. With regard to the right of veto, he stated that the comparison is not between the rights that the United States now desires and the rights already possessed by Council members, but that the comparison lies between the rights which the United States was claiming by reservation and the power which members of the Council might exercize improperly and unfairly. If a Council member were interested, it could not vote; but by declaring an interest in the case, it could vote and block a decision. If the American reservation said “claims and has interest”, there will be no difficulty; presuming the Court agreed that the United States had an interest. In conclusion, he asked if it could not justly be said to the United States “If you claim this right which you say Council members possess, as there is
