900 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement I am not surprised that you discovered discrepancies in the figures given in the new Defense Department list of missing military person­ nel. NA discovered the same discrepancies in reviewing the figures and called them to the attention of Defense. Corrected sheets have been pre­ pared by Defense for your book and are forwarded herewith. There is also enclosed an additional sheet with detailed information on Captain Malcolm Edens which should be filed under Tab 2 in your book. There is enclosed a copy of the “accounting” given by the Chinese Communists in UNCMAC last February. We delayed sending it to you expecting a more detailed report from UNCMAC, but it later turned out that this was all they had. As you will see it is far from satisfactory. We have been working with Defense on an instruction to UNCMAC asking further specific questions about the accounting. This has not yet gone out due to clearance problems in Defense, but we expect it to go shortly and we will see that you get a copy. The feeling here in both State and Defense was that we should exhaust all possibilities in Panmunjom before we ask you to bring the matter up again in Geneva. The Prisoner Book which we would like back if you do not need it is a gray loose leaf binder containing miscellaneous memoranda and other documents collected by Ed Martin when he was Prisoner Officer here. Please send it by air pouch. Dave Osborn should be familiar with it. With the increasing Congressional interest in the problem of Americans detained in Communist China, and queries as to what the Department has done about this problem in the past, we felt this book would be needed more here than in Geneva. Mr. Robertson is having a little stomach trouble again and is sup­ posed to be taking a rest in bed. However he is insisting on staying on the job for at least a couple of weeks. He is planning to take two weeks rest in bed around the end at this month. It was good to get your letter No. 26. Messrs. Phleger, Robertson and Sebald read it too and we all found it of particular interest. We hope you and Pat had a good relaxing Easter weekend in Paris. Regards and good luck, Sincerely, Walter P. McConaughy Enclosures: 1. Additional Sheet for Tab 2 of Defense Book. 2. Copy of the “accounting” by Chinese Communists in UNCMAC. 3. Army Telegram No. FE 800650 from CINCUNC Tokyo. 4. Copy of letter to General Swing.
