Eastern Europe Region
129
is nourished. These programs were at a low ebb in 1977, at a far lower
level of real-dollar input than they had been ten years earlier. They
have received modest increases each of the past four years but are still,
at a total expenditure of less than $5 million per year, funded at levels
which do not enable them to exploit the new opportunities for penetrat-
ing the Communist world with ideas and information which are con-
stantly developing.4 Samizdat and tamizdat available for republishing
and distribution into Eastern Europe and the USSR are becoming avail-
able at a much faster rate than they are able to take advantage of
because of limitations of funds and manpower. (S)
Realization of the importance of Islam, national self-assertion
among the Muslim peoples of the USSR (as well as Christian peoples
such as the Balts, Ukrainians and Georgians) and the ferment and
feedback generated by events in Iran and the Soviet invasion of Afghan-
istan, (inter alia the resultant suppression of dissidents of which the
Sakharov exile is only the most flagrant example) are developments
which have highlighted new opportunities. Existing resources are inad-
equate to meet these opportunities. Existing manpower working on
these subjects is insufficient to do all the research and operational
planning that is required. (C)
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Programs for exploiting dissidence in Eastern Europe and the USSR
(and perhaps Cuba as well?) are, comparatively, in terms of the continu-
ing effect they generate within Communist societies, the most cost-
effective activity the U.S. Government undertakes. (U)
• While maintaining and refining its verbal commitment and demonstra-
tive public actions in behalf of dissidents and human rights in these countries,
the Administration should urgently consider immediate increases in
resources allocated to these activities. At a minimum they merit classifi-
cation as essential national security operations subject to real annual
increase of 3–5% on a par with defense outlays.5 (U)
•
The creation of one or more semi-autonomous institutions for sus-
tained implementation of human rights goals, with perhaps a combi-
nation of governmental and private funding, should be urgently
studied. (C)
• Expansion and refinement of radio programming by all instrumental-
ities available—VOA, RFE/RL—should be undertaken at a steady
tempo. (U)
4 Brzezinski highlighted the two sentences above in the margin.
5 Brzezinski wrote “reprogramming of books” in the margin.
