1955 597 32. Wang said I had said at last meeting that even if this was case it was not violation agreement. I had again this morning made reference to my previous statement. However that statement is sheer sophistry. 33. Wang said this requirement of Immigration Naturalization ­Service has nothing in common with arrangements generally required of foreign nationals before they effect their departure. 34. Wang said it entirely understandable that Chinese students may not be able make their return for time being whether because they not yet completed studies or because they might be delayed by other personal affairs. 35. Wang said by requiring these Chinese students proceed Taiwan U.S. obviously subjecting them further threat so that in future they will not dare demand return mainland of China. 36. Wang said as far back as last April State Department had admitted that “some Chinese students may refrain from applying to ­Immigration Naturalization Service for permission return to mainland for fear of being refused”. And now U.S. not only failed take measure eliminate apprehension created during long period in which they been subject obstruction and threat but has further adopted threats against them. This is entirely in violation letter and spirit agreed announce­ ment. PRC side demands that U.S. side promptly remove such regula­ tions which violate agreed announcement. 37. Wang said it is U.S. side which has violated agreement reached on first item. Yet U.S. side has been making accusations against PRC side without any grounds. U.S. Secretary of State and other spokesmen have reversed the merits of this case by accusing PRC side of alleged failure implement. In view of this Chinese Government has decided make statement on this question. 38. Wang said he must point out from series of statement made by US on first item of agenda it appears U.S. side has regarded agreement as purely unilateral requirement PRC side assume obligations while US side not bound. U.S. side not only failed provide PRC side and ­Indians with facilities but laid down regulations in violation of the agreement. He urged U.S. side implement agreement and still considered we should proceed item two discussion. 39. Wang said in course discussion of second item it is U.S. side which suggested renunciation force in international relations. It was also U.S. side which demanded that two sides make statement this respect. PRC side has not only put forward reasonable draft but again submitted new draft drawn on basis points that have been agreed or may be agreed. 40. Wang said at previous meeting I had stated as result of effort PRC side there had been considerable progress in talks. At last meeting
