1336  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Enclosure
Memorandum of Conversation
Washington, April 26, 1958
SUBJECT
Meeting with Disarmament Advisors—April 26, 1958
PARTICIPANTS
Secretary Dulles
General Gruenther
Mr. Robert Lovett
Mr. John McCloy
General Walter B. Smith
Ambassador Wadsworth
Mr. Philip J. Farley
Admiral Lewis L. Strauss
Mr. Donald A. Quarles
Mr. James Killian
The Secretary said that it was urgent that we do something to erase 
the picture which people abroad hold of the United States as a milita­
ristic nation. This is a false picture which is belied by the facts. But it 
is difficult for the United States to change this picture in view of the 
way in which our press selects and publicizes sensational incidents and 
statements. In this respect the Soviet Union, with its ability to control 
what is known about it, has an advantage over a free society like that 
of the United States. This picture of continued military emphasis in 
the United States hurts us and probably causes us to lose more than 
we gain from small technical military advances. While our position is 
understood by the governments of our most important allies like Japan, 
the United Kingdom and Germany, these governments are in various 
respects in a precarious position.
It is thus imperative that actions be taken which will make evi­
dent the United States interest in peace and in controlling armaments. 
A review has been underway by the interested United States agencies. 
The result to date has been to indicate that generally the familiar major 
areas of arms control must be considered in examining the possibilities 
for new initiatives. It does appear possible to break up the disarmament 
package. Already we have separated out the Arctic Zone and are plan­
ning an initiative on this April 29 in the Security Council. We have also 
recently emphasized the possibility of commencing technical studies 
of inspection of various disarmament measures as a practical way of 
making a start.
The Secretary then proceeded to review the position on the various 
elements of the present disarmament package.
1. Tests—The President’s Science Advisory Committee has recently 
reached a conclusion that an inspected test suspension at the end of 
the HARDTACK series would be in the interest of the United States on
