362  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
in their mind, was a sense of our own military inadequacy for the era 
of strategic parity but also a sense that more of what SAC is doing may 
not help much.
One point to draw out in the question of C3I and the longer war is 
the “incentive structure” in the Pentagon for C3I budgeting. C3I funds 
are taken largely from the service budgets. The Air Force prefers new 
bombers and fighters if asked to choose between them and new C3I 
costs. So do the Navy and Army dislike surrendering their hardware 
to pay for the NCA’s C3I. Thus, it is difficult to find a sustained and 
powerful military interest in C3I. This is a key issue for Duncan who 
is chairman of the WWMCCS Council, the group which addresses the 
overall C3I budget and structure of the World Wide Military Command 
and Control System.
At NORAD, things were not as sharply focused as elsewhere, but 
General Hill’s briefers were pleasantly appalled to have the opportu-
nity to answer many of your questions. Drawing out the Soviet SSBN 
threat to our C3I and the inherent asymmetry in the geography were 
two points they obviously had not expected the occasion to make. A 
number of other questions you asked gave them a chance to raise bur-
ied issues with Bill Perry. The solar interference with DSP coverage, for 
example, and the escalating space activity which NORAD is asked to 
monitor while much of its capability is eroding are two matters of con-
siderable importance, not only for tactical warning but also for ASAT 
concerns and arms control verification.
Although General Jones’ presence was useful in many respects in 
your probing and questioning, it also dampened things for you slightly. 
At Ellsworth AFB and at NORAD the local command structure was 
obviously as much worried about pleasing and responding to Jones as 
about dealing with you. They will have to face Jones again and again, 
but not you; thus they had to split their attention. Jones intimidated 
General Hill by telling him that his small welcoming ceremony for 
you—­involving a dozen troops—­showed that Hill has too many unem-
ployed personnel; otherwise he would not be able to afford the cer-
emony! Hill asked me several times thereafter if you were offended 
by the ceremony. I told him that you probably thought of it not as a 
personal thing but as a useful institutional symbolism that enhances 
the sense of purpose and coherence in his organization. I also learned 
that Jones did not desire to make the trip. “Someone” invited him twice 
before he “got the message.”
I cannot judge what Bill Perry took away, but your doctrinal and 
operational questions were not lost on him, and they clearly disturbed 
him at SAC. I was surprised that he did not challenge you more directly.
In summary, you have clearly opened the doctrinal debate within 
the SAC and NORAD circles on “deterrence” and “war fighting”, and
