Afghanistan
143
GB: I believe we should change the law only to report through the
select committees on intelligence. I bet we can do that.
ZB: I was on a plane with Chuck Percy the other day—he told me
that if we wish to do serious covert activities, the Senate will give us
overwhelming support now. The way to get going is to pick a place
and to try to do it.
GB: We have to put pressure on the intelligence committees to
control the leaks.
FC: I think they are in a mood to do it. That does not meet our
immediate problem, however. The law still requires us to brief seven
committees.
DN: If what is going on is already causing real problems for the
Soviets in Afghanistan, what additional benefit do we gain by getting
involved in it ourselves? Especially if we run the risk of having what
we are doing leaked and thus changing real perceptions in Moscow?
ZB: Another question that can be asked—if the insurgency is not
doing well, why help it? But you then come up again with the conclu-
sion that if you don’t do it, you lose an opportunity. You have an
important point re Pakistan. My inclination would be to pick from this
list those actions that we would only undertake with Pakistan if they
are willing to cooperate. If they are not willing to cooperate, we do
not do it. I would be inclined to go for the radio broadcasts. This is
an important mechanism for influencing political conduct. This can
only be done together with the Pakistanis. Then we could consider
some financial aid and send in a survey team to examine on-site possi-
bilities for other forms of support—all of these actions would require
cooperation with the Pakistani intelligence services. If they come back
and say no—then we have to reconsider.
DN: There is one other avenue—through the Saudis and through
the emigre groups if the Saudis will provide funds.
ZB: Would you be willing to do that without telling the Pakistanis?
DN: No.
GB: My feeling after reading this was that we should do whatever
we can without involving the Pakistanis so that they can say they know
nothing about what is going on.
ZB: Is that possible?
ST: We feel that we could only do a little of this and then we would
have to tell the Pakistanis.
ZB: This brings us back to David Newsom’s point—there may be
a leak. If it is a leak about something we are doing without the knowl-
edge of the Pakistanis, then we have a greater problem with them in
case of a leak . . .
