Shedd, Department Manager for Swift and Company, Chicago.91 The
President replied on July 26, 1928,91 and stated that he approved the
appointment of the persons named as the American representatives to the
Brussels Conference.
It is expected that the other representatives will be accompanied by Mr.
William B. Vallance, of this Department, Lieutenant E. M. Webster, United
States Coast Guard, Major William F. Friedman, War Department and Mr.
Harry F. Coulter, Department of Commerce, as technical advisors, Mr.
Fernand L. J. Dumont as translator and possibly four clerical assistants. The
delegation probably will sail from New York on August 25, 1928, and
should arrive in Brussels in sufficient time to confer with you before the
Conference is convened.
You are instructed to proceed to Brussels and you should arrange the
departure from your post so that you may arrive at Brussels not later than
September 8, 1928. You will, of course, be allowed your transportation
expenses and subsistence at the rate of fifteen dollars per day for the time
that you are away from your post in connection with this Conference.
For your information the Department encloses a copy of Documents of the
Committee on the Study of Code Language; a translation of the final report
of that Committee; a copy of a report by Major William F. Friedman
entitled “Report on the history of the use of Codes and Code Language, the
International Telegraph Regulations pertaining thereto, and the bearing of
this history on the Cortina Report”; a copy of the Stenographic Report of
the Hearing on July 25, 1928, regarding the Cortina report and a copy of a
letter dated June 29, 1928, and a questionnaire which was sent to a number
of the large users of the telegraph, cable and radio communication
facilities.92 The report of the Cortina Committee constitutes the agenda for
the Conference.
Specific instructions to govern the American delegation at the Conference
will be prepared and sent to you as soon as possible.
I am [etc.]
