March 27–December 31, 1979
863
Mubarak: We can accept the cruiser but need something better for
the navy. Foregoing main issue. Secondly, when you go to Japan,
please help to promote the Carter plan.5
Carter: Please don’t call it the Carter plan.
ZB: You can call it the Sadat plan. Carter talked to Schmidt.6 He is
willing to help more but the Egyptians are not spending the money that
is coming in. We need to know how the money that is approved is
being spent. We could send someone to see what the problem is—
perhaps a retired businessman.
Mubarak agrees aid not being spent well. A highly qualified man
should come as soon as possible.
Carter: To summarize: (1) we will get someone to come over to see
what obstacles there are. Mentions Miller as a possible choice; (2) I will
talk to the other heads in Tokyo about aid; (3) continue your bilateral
efforts to obtain aid.
Mubarak talks about postponement of Sadat’s trip to Japan.
ZB indicates how wary Japanese are about providing help to
Egypt.
Carter asks assessment of other Arabs.
Mubarak: We stopped attacks and expect now new contacts with
the Saudis through Oman. Hope for progress on Jerusalem. If there was
some progress, especially a religious council, it would help with the
Saudis. Reviews in general terms disagreements in the Arab world and
notes Iraqis and Palestinians are main source of pressure. Kuwait in-
vestments are still continuing in Egypt and 10 days ago a new one was
made.
Carter reiterates Camp David language good on Jerusalem. On UN
peacekeeping, will bring it up with Brezhnev.7 Urges Egyptians to raise
level of public concern over settlements. U.S. cannot be out front. Begin
tells us Sadat does not care.
5 See footnote 7, Document 259.
6 Reference is to Carter’s June 6 meeting with West German Chancellor Helmut
Schmidt. The memorandum of conversation from the meeting is scheduled for publica-
tion in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
7 Carter and Brezhnev discussed the presence of United Nations forces in the Sinai
during their June 18, 1979, meeting in Vienna. Brezhnev stated that the Soviet Union was
“resolutely opposed to any attempt to sanctify a separate Egyptian-Israeli deal through
the authority and prestige of the United Nations, inter alia through involement of U.N.
forces presently in the Sinai. Whatever arguments are marshaled in favor of continuing
the presence of U.N. troops in that area, such presence would mean complicity of and as-
sociation by the United Nations in actions which cannot lead to lasting peace in the
Middle East, but only the opposite. To expect the Soviet Union to support such a force in
this matter would be hopeless. The full record of Brezhnev’s conversation with Carter in
Vienna is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 206.
