Uruguay  1187
exchange to purchase Uruguayan petroleum needs from Argentina. 
This exchange of tourist services for petroleum would be greatly facil-
itated by the existence of a bridge or viaduct between Buenos Aires 
and Colonia in Uruguay (or a bridge somewhat farther upstream), and 
the financing of this construction project—­a viaduct with a petroleum 
pipeline attached to it—­might therefore be one of the most interesting 
objects of international financial cooperation to consider with a view 
to the encouraging and hastening of an inevitable long-­term trend in 
Uruguay an economic development.
This Embassy has hoped that it might be possible for Uruguay to 
develop highly skilled industries, because there are many very capa-
ble Uruguayan craftsmen and mechanics. However, the Embassy is 
inclined now to estimate that the prospects of the development of truly 
outstanding industries are rather poor, and the principal hope in this 
respect is that there may be greater development of the local indus-
tries which process Uruguayan raw materials, such as the woolen tex-
tile industry.
Attempting to project Uruguayan economic development in line 
with a realistic estimate of the situation which will probably exist ten 
years from now, it can be predicted that Uruguayans will be, on the 
average, only moderately better off than they are at present, and that 
any difference in their average situation will correlate quite closely with 
a possibly improved wool market (which, in turn, may be dependent 
upon new marketing opportunities that may develop in the United 
States from the Australian-United States conversations which have 
been recently initiated.)
Here follows a discussion of domestic political trends.
Regardless of domestic political trends in Uruguay, the prospects 
of continuing cooperative attitudes in relations with the United States 
and the Western World are good. These prospects could be reduced (1) 
by our not giving reasonable economic cooperation to Uruguay (2) by 
our falling behind, as a nation, in the worldwide economic, sociological, 
ideological and defense contest, or (3) by our departing from the inter- 
American machinery to take unilateral action in some situation such as 
in the Cuban case. However, assuming that we will devise increasingly 
effective means of economic cooperation, that we will continue to make 
every effort to make inter-American machinery more effective, and that 
our country will steadily gain in the worldwide contest, I believe we 
can count on Uruguayan political and ideological support.
Robert F. Woodward
