Special Session on Disarmament 1187 adherence to Protocols I and II of the Treaty of Tlatelolco.10 We would plan to raise this question with them again before the Special Session begins, urging them to make an announcement at the Session. We would anticipate that the topic of additional nuclear weapons free zones will receive considerable attention during the SSOD. We would plan to review the tactical situation during the PrepComs to determine whether to press for a more open attitude towards NWFZs, particularly in Africa. 5. Future Arms Control Forums. We are preparing an options paper on possible changes in the present co-chairmanship arrangements that will still be consistent with the special position of the US and the USSR in the forum. We will also be working with State and within the two upcoming PrepCom sessions on other proposals for new forums or changes in existing forums. I look forward to your reactions to these specific initiatives outlined above, as well as any comments you may have on other activities described, so we can proceed expeditiously with our program of work. 10 See Documents 438 and 446. 479. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron) to Vice President Mondale, Secretary of State Vance, Secretary of Defense Brown, and the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (Warnke)1 Washington, February 6, 1978 SUBJECT Backstopping Committee for the UN Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD) As you are aware, the United Nations General Assembly will be meeting in a Special Session on Disarmament from May 23 to June 28, 1978. Three meetings of the Preparatory Committee for the SSOD 1 Source: National Archives, RG 383, Records of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, FRC #383–98–0143, Bureau of Multilateral Affairs, Chemical Weapons, Disarmament, and CTB Files, 1970–85, Box 3, UN Special Session on Disarmament, Working Paper on International Mechanisms for Disarmament, August 1976–July 1978. Confidential. Copies were sent to Gilligan, George Brown, and Turner.
