50
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
suming he is convincing—that it was not due to him. Has Ford in fact
given any major foreign policy speeches?
2. Likely focus of the debate.
The discussion of foreign affairs—assuming the domestic discus-
sion is any guide—is likely to concentrate on no more than two or three
major themes of interest to the newspapermen. I would anticipate that
these themes would be:
1. East-West relationship (or detente);
2. Defense;
3. Middle East;
4. Maybe Africa.
These subjects should be well-covered in your briefing book. I
would only add that on East-West you ought to stress the excessive
promises made, Ford’s ambiguity on detente (the non-use of the word,6
the Solzhenitsyn incident,7 etc.), the indifference to human rights, etc.
You will probably be asked how you expect to negotiate more
toughly with the Russians, and what you propose to do to increase East
European independence. Your answers on these issues ought to be
well-balanced: tough on fundamentals but showing a willingness to ac-
commodate. With regard to the Russians, you might stress in general
that domestically they are quite weak (their economy is in difficulty,
there is social unease, the non-Russian nations are gradually becoming
restless), and hence that they need a genuine and truly reciprocal detente
quite as much as we. This is not a matter of forcing them to change their
system but of realizing that we do not need to appear as needing the
detente more than the Russians.
On the East Europeans, you might first say that the Republican po-
sition on Eastern Europe has been ambiguous, then go on to stress the
importance to us and to West Europe of both Romanian and Yugoslav
independence, also emphasize that it is in the general interest of Europe
that countries such as Poland become more autonomous. You could
6 Ford campaigned in Florida prior to the March 9 Republican primary there.
During a television interview, in response to a question regarding Chinese views on
de´tente, Ford commented: “I don’t use the word ‘de´tente’ any more. I think what we
ought to say is that the United States will meet with super powers, the Soviet Union and
with China and others, and seek to relax tensions so that we can continue a policy of
peace through strength.” The transcript of the interview is printed in Foreign Relations,
1969–1976, vol. XVI, Soviet Union, August 1974–December 1976, Document 268.
7 During the summer of 1975, the AFL–CIO decided to honor Soviet dissident and
author Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn at a banquet to be held at the Washington Hilton Hotel.
Meany invited Ford to attend; Helms and Thurmond requested that Ford meet with Sol-
zhenitsyn. Ford turned down both requests but later issued an open invitation for Sol-
zhenitsyn to visit the White House. Solzhenitsyn ultimately rejected the invitation. For
additional information, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XVI, Soviet Union, August
1974–December 1976, Documents 155, 156, 158, 163–165, 170, 171, 178, and 215.
