1955 185 L also thinks it important to maintain the character of any “agreed announcement” as two unilateral and independent (although intercon­ nected) declarations or announcements, and not an “Agreement”. You cannot properly have anything in the nature of a normal Governmental agreement with a regime which you do not recognize. While this may be a fairly fine point, it has validity, and I believe you would be well advised to avoid in the informal oral give and take of the sessions, any references to “agreements between governments” (paragraph 12 your 625). Any implication that Chinese in this country, even the few who want to return to the mainland, are “nationals” of the PRC, has danger­ ous connotations in L’s view, and is to be carefully eschewed. Phleger believes that the changes which Wang introduced or reverted to at the August 25 meeting (your 617) are all significant, although the significance may be cleverly disguised. Our 633 may seem to represent something of a hardening of the line, and this indeed may be the case. The callousness and cynicism with which Wang has dropped the pretence of full adherence to judicial procedures and admitted the political basis of the Chinese Communist handling of the prisoner question has caused a feeling of revulsion here as well as deep dis­ appointment. He has in effect demanded that we ransom our impris­ oned citizens with political concessions. Presumably he has done it in the knowledge that we cannot submit to that sort of extortion. Wang’s refusal to make any commitment on when the “remaining” Americans would be released, his linkage of the prisoner question with the status of relations between the U.S. and Communist China, and his attempt to blame us for the non-release of Americans whose cases have already been “cleared”, create painful dilemmas for us, but they also place the PRC in a most vulnerable position morally and forensically if unhap­ pily this issue should be forced into the propaganda field. The Secretary returns tomorrow afternoon. I anticipate there will be some weekend soul searching on this whole question. The request for the postponement of the Saturday, August 27 meet­ ing to next week was prompted by the belief that we have nothing to gain by such an early meeting when we are so close to a deadlock and with nothing new likely to come forth on either side so soon. The meet­ ing after a mere 2-day interval with nothing but repetition in prospect would be likely to tighten, maybe cement, the deadlock. This we want to avoid. We also of course still attach the very highest importance to avoiding a breakdown. We do not even want to take the initiative in proposing a recess on Item 1. Our only hesitation in asking for a post­ ponement of the next meeting was our desire to avoid any appearance of lack of zealousness in pressing for the earliest possible action on our detained citizens. We do not believe, however, that any reasonable person would construe the postponement under the circumstances as
