National Security Policy 1171 the Military Assistance Program is to provide the host country with a capability to resist Communist aggression by defending its borders and maintaining internal security. Therefore, any program designed specif­ ically for the development of U.S. capabilities to operate in Southeast Asia should be in addition to the existing programs for direct military assistance to the countries of the area. 8. At the time the Limited War Study was being prepared and sub­ sequent thereto, certain actions were being taken to facilitate operations in Southeast Asia. These include: a. Increased and reoriented military assistance to the countries of Southeast Asia. b. Deployment of additional Army forces to the Far East, e.g., an airborne battle group and additional Army logistical support forces to Okinawa. c. CINCPAC Operation Plan for Southeast Asia refined and approved. d. Additional Marine elements afloat with Seventh Fleet. e. Continued development of planning and coordination by SEATO forces. f. Action by Air Force to establish a limited stockpile of conven­ tional munitions in Thailand. g. Assignment of a third aircraft carrier to the Seventh Fleet on a continuing basis. h. Increased number of attack aircraft deployed in aircraft carriers with the Seventh Fleet. i. Programmed modernization of the Airlift Force. ($33,000,000 is programmed for the development of the so-­called SOR aircraft (long-­range jet powered cargo aircraft). For interim modernization $83,900,000 has been apportioned during FY 1961 for the procure­ ment of 16 C–130E aircraft. The FY 1962 program plans procurement of an additional 34 C–130E aircraft, making a total of 50 such aircraft. Consideration is being given to the procurement of 50 of the C–135 type aircraft.) j. Strategic mobility exercise scheduled for early 1961. (Airlift one Army battle group and deploy Composite Air Strike Force from Continental United States to Far East.) k. Periodic deployment of Composite Air Strike Force for training purposes. l. The Department of Defense has officially supported the Department of Commerce in its actions to maintain the National Defense Reserve Fleet at the best practicable degree of modernity and in sufficient strength to fulfill civilian and military requirements in national emergencies.
