National Security Policy  467
uses will probably be necessary. Fulfillment would raise urban housing 
space per capita above the level attained before forced industrialization 
was launched three decades ago, but would still leave the Soviet popu­
lation very poorly housed by Western standards.
67. If these and other programs to raise Soviet living standards 
retain their present priority, they will probably produce a gain of per­
haps as much as one-­fifth in per capita consumption between 1957 and 
1962. As has been true for the last two or three years, this increase will 
probably be spread over the bulk of the population rather than directed 
toward small favored groups. As a result, the regime will probably enjoy 
some increase in popular support. On the other hand, Soviet failure to 
make at least the above estimated progress towards higher living stand­
ards would considerably undermine Khrushchev’s attempt to create an 
image of a regime dedicated primarily to popular welfare and deter­
mined to fulfill its promises to the people. Such a failure would tend 
to weaken popular support and might even, by its effect upon worker 
incentives, damage the prospects for economic growth. To some extent, 
therefore, the regime’s freedom of action relative to the population has 
been diminished, and the cost of regaining it has been increased.
Foreign Trade
68. Foreign trade continues to be of minor importance to the Soviet 
economy, accounting for only about two percent of GNP. While earlier 
attitudes of rigid autarky have weakened somewhat, the USSR is still 
far from willing to abandon considerations of self-­sufficiency and to 
enter world markets whenever opportunities arise for economic gain. 
Trade is instead conducted for quite specific purposes, frequently 
political, and Bloc members or potential allies are preferred as trading 
partners.
69. Soviet imports and exports together rose by about one-­tenth 
in 1956 to a total of about $6.9 billion. Other Bloc states continued 
to account for about three-­quarters of this trade; exchanges with 
the European Satellites grew by about five percent, and those with 
Communist China fell as Soviet aid shipments declined. The USSR and 
other Bloc members continued to boost their trade with underdevel­
oped countries, and in 1956 five such nations—Afghanistan, Iceland, 
Egypt, Yugoslavia, and Burma—­conducted more than 20 percent of 
their total trade with Bloc partners.
70. The USSR’s harsh economic exploitation of the Satellites, 
which had gradually softened in the years following Stalin’s death, 
virtually ended late in 1956. As a consequence of policy decisions in 
the wake of the Polish and Hungarian crises, the USSR has assisted the 
East European regimes with new credits and the cancellation of old 
obligations, which together will cost about $2.5 billion over the next
