not essential or advantageous. I therefore abstain from voting on the resolution.” The Secretary stated that it was clear from this that General Lassiter has reserved his position all the way through and has kept a perfectly free hand in the matter. The Secretary then read from a telegram from Ambassador Collier70 in which General Lassiter was reported to have said in the meeting of April 26, in voting for a prolongation of the registration period that “this motion has been presented for the purpose of maintaining the status quo. In adopting it the Commission is not exhausting all its facilities [powers?]. Certain observations made by me in the sessions of March 1, 14, and 25, relate to this matter.” The Secretary said that right up to the very last General Lassiter has maintained his position without changing it and it was entirely wrong for the Chileans to go on any other assumption. The Secretary of course was not stating what the President as Arbitrator or even the Commission will do but he was merely pointing out these statements which apparently had not been taken into consideration in the Chilean Senate, certainly not by Senator Cariola. The Secretary then stated that he had received a telegram from Ambassador Collier70 stating that in a talk which he had had with the President of Chile on April 28, the President had shown very great irritation because of General Lassiter’s declaration last above quoted. Ambassador Collier had reported that the President had said that this was a clear and express declaration by the representative of the Arbitrator to hold up the juridical proceedings and in order to force Chile to accept good offices. … . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The Secretary then read the Ambassador a statement in yesterday’s Evening Star to the effect that Chile considered that the Department of State had not had the courage to prevent the commencement of registration and would not now have the courage to call the election off. The Secretary stated that we had not yet arrived at the moment to make any declaration but when the moment has arrived the proper decision will be taken but he did not want Chile to misunderstand his attitude at all, it was necessary that this should be made absolutely clear. The Secretary had not attempted to coerce Chile
