3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
396
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
to transfer weapons covered by the Treaty, to other states, then the
whole non-circumvention clause would be deprived of all meaning
and would be simply an empty barrel.
The Secretary said it was obvious to him that matters relating to
transfers which we have made to our allies and continued to make to
our allies should not be changed by the provisions of a SALT Treaty.
Clearly, however, if we transferred something that was prohibited by
the Treaty, that would be improper. He would suggest that this matter
be further discussed between Ambassador Warnke and Minister Sem-
enov in Geneva. He wanted to be sure that there was no misunder-
standing here.
Gromyko said that right now he was not at all sure that the two
sides had an identical understanding of the non-circumvention provi-
sion. Any particular past practice of the U.S. side was not in any way
binding on the Soviet Union. If the United States had transferred stra-
tegic arms such as strategic bombers, for example, to its allies, and if
strategic bombers were now covered by the Treaty, it should be ob-
vious that they should not be transferred to other countries. To be spe-
cific, if, e.g., the U.S. was thinking of transferring a missile or a strategic
bomber that were limited by the Treaty, to Britain, for example, or any
of the other strategic arms covered by the Treaty, these transferred
arms would increase the overall number of missiles in the hands of the
Western powers. That would be a clear circumvention of the provisions
of the Treaty. There was no question in his mind that in that case the
United States would have violated the Treaty.
The Secretary by way of an example pointed out that we were pro-
hibited by the terms of the Protocol from developing or testing mobile
systems other than launchers, except for one such system. Obviously, if
we transferred a banned system to our allies, that would constitute cir-
cumvention. On the other hand, if we transferred one strategic bomber,
for example, he was not sure that this would constitute circumvention
since it would not in any way change the strategic balance.
Gromyko objected and said that that would be circumvention in
any case. Where would the boundary be set as to what did and what
did not change the strategic balance? He felt that here it was necessary
to have an identical understanding and to abide by mathematical rules,
because if the United States were to do something in one area and the
Soviet Union do something in another area, that would raise all sorts of
suspicions and doubts, and this must not be allowed to happen. He
would ask the Secretary to explain this to U.S. allies. Incidentally, the
thought had occurred to him in the course of this discussion that the
delay at the SALT negotiations might be caused by the fact that the U.S.
needed time to transfer to its allies some of the arms that would be lim-
ited by the Treaty. He believed that could only complicate matters. He
