893.5045/109: Telegram [Document 524] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, July 3, 1925—7 p.m. [Received July 3—12:35 p.m.] 262. My 257, July 2, 1 p.m. 1. Heads of Legation at a meeting this morning was [were] informed of reply from senior consul at Shanghai to instructions to consular body set forth in my telegram aforementioned requesting a delay to July 6th in presentation to Municipal Council of decisions arrived at by Heads of Legation in respect of Shanghai incident in order that consular body might have time to provide for whatever steps might be necessary in consequence of notification to Municipal Council. 2. Heads of Legation are telegraphing consular body that instructions aforementioned must be carried out; that however in view of practical difficulties Heads of Legation accede to request for delay until Monday morning, July 6th, when decisions of Heads of Legation aforementioned will be given to Chinese Government and to Peking press. Reply to consular body concluded with the statement that Heads of Legation hope consular body can persuade Municipal Council not to resign but even if it does this must not impede execution of instructions of Heads of Legation. 3. From telegrams received by my Japanese and British colleagues I understand American consul general, Shanghai, has joined with Japanese and British consuls general, Shanghai, in telegraphing direct to their respective Governments urging reconsideration of decisions of Heads of Legation. I cannot too strongly request the Department’s support in this regard. I consider decisions of Heads of Legation just and proper; that they are also wise from point of view of general political expediency; that as set forth in paragraph 3 of my 255, July 2, 10 a.m., the decisions taken are necessary in order to place us on solid ground vis-à-vis Chinese public opinion in the event that negotiations for the settlement of the Shanghai incident be long delayed or impossible of achievement. On the other hand if negotiations are initiated this spontaneous action indicating serious view taken by the Heads of Legation of the Shanghai incidents will strengthen rather than weaken our position.
