596
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Are persons held clandestinely?
—Do persons “disappear” for protracted periods?
D. Denial of fair public trial
—Recognizing that legal systems vary, is a right to fair public trial
provided for by law? By practice or custom? Is this right honored in
practice?
—Are defendants entitled to counsel? Does counsel have free
access to defendants? May consultations between defendants and
counsel be held in private? Are there incidents of harassment of de-
fense counsel by the government?
—Are defendants made fully aware of the charges brought against
them? May they and their lawyers inform themselves of the evidence
on which the charges are based?
—Are the courts independent of executive or military control?
—Are there special courts to deal with security or political of-
fenses? If so, do they adhere to the same standards as control the courts
considering ordinary offenses?
—Are civilians tried by military courts? If so, under what circum-
stances? What standards control military courts?
—Have there been summary executions? Who orders or controls
them?
—On what basis if any have such practices been justified?
E. Invasion of the home
—Is the sanctity of the home safeguarded by law and/or custom?
Is it respected in practice?
—Are judicial warrants required before entering a home? What
standards control the issuance of warrants?
—Are there allegations of illegal entry into homes? If so, how fre-
quent are such allegations made? Are responsible officials disciplined
for unauthorized entries or are such acts condoned?
Section 2:
Government policies relating to the fulfillment of such vital needs
as food, shelter, health care and education
—What is the character of the country’s economy? Rural or urban?
Capitalist, socialist, mixed or what? Does it confront special problems?
—What is the distribution of income? Of wealth? Of land? Are
there efforts to bring about increased opportunity and equity? Is the tax
system progressive or regressive?
—Is property privately owned, and is this right protected?
—Is adequate shelter a significant problem?
—Is health care available? How extensively?
