200
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
up solid congressional backing, we should move to have them elimi-
nated, relying to the radios’ long-established corporate and manage-
ment structure as sufficient. (C)
63.
Letter From Paul Henze of the National Security Council
Staff to the Director of the International Communication
Agency (Reinhardt)1
Washington, June 13, 1979
Dear John,
Since the pressure of SALT and summits has prevented him from
doing so, Zbig has asked me to give you our reactions to the two
excellent studies you prepared in response to his request of February
9, 1979.2 We have reviewed them carefully and considered the choices
they present. Let me sum up our conclusions. (U)
We find your recommendations for technical expansion of VOA
during the 1980’s reasonable and justified in terms of basic foreign
policy priorities.3 We endorse them fully. We would like to see you
incorporate these plans in your budget projections for FY 1981 and
beyond. The political issues involved in setting up new transmitters
for broadcasting to south and central Asia should be systematically
assessed as soon as possible so that negotiations can get under way
and serious technical preparations can begin. Please assess these ques-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File,
Box 9, International Communication Agency: 6–8/79. Confidential. Copies were sent to
Vance and McIntyre. In a June 1 memorandum to Brzezinski, Henze outlined the VOA
position on language allocation and transmitter needs and recommended that the ICA
proposals be approved. (Ibid.) On June 5, Robert Gates returned the June 1 memorandum
to Henze and suggested that, given Brzezinski’s prior approval of guidelines on VOA,
he deal directly on those issues with Reinhardt. (Ibid.)
2 See footnote 3, Document 61. In a March 7 memorandum to Brzezinski, Reinhardt
outlined VOA language priorities. Tarnoff wrote to Brzezinski on March 24 that the
Department of State agreed with the position adopted by ICA on expanding VOA
language broadcasting with the exception of expanding Mongolian programming since
“Russian broadcasts to the Soviet Far East remain an effective means of reaching the
Mongolian population.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Agency File, Box 9, International Communication Agency: 6–8/79) In his May 1 memoran-
dum to Brzezinski, Reinhardt forwarded the requested VOA transmitter study, including
recommendations for building additional transmitters. (Ibid.)
3 An updated version of these proposals were discussed at an SCC (I) meeting on
December 11. See Document 70.
