Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II been invited to attend court sessions. However, elections scheduled for October 1977 were postponed until the completion of former Prime Minister Bhutto’s trials for political corruption and murder, according to General Zia, the Chief Martial Law Administrator. Sri Lanka. The lifting of Mrs. Bandaranaike’s six-year-old state of emergency in February resulted in the release of many former insurgents who had been held without trial. Mrs. Bandaranaike held earlierpostponed elections in July 1977. Her successor, Prime Minister Jayawardene, fulfilled a campaign promise by releasing in November the last of the insurgents convicted in 1971; he also repealed the 1972 Criminal Justice Commission Act. Bangladesh. Several thousand prisoners were released and local elections were held, although an unknown number of political prisoners remain jailed and several minor political parties were proscribed as a result of army mutinies against the martial law regime. Morocco. The government continues to repress radical elements suspected of plotting to overthrow the regime, but the trend in recent months has been toward greater freedom and political liberalization. Domestic press censorship has been lifted, relatively free parliamentary elections were held in which all parties participated, and a new cabinet has been formed with multi-party participation. Nepal. Political parties have been banned since 1960, and the country remains, in effect, an absolute monarchy. On the other hand, the government released virtually all political prisoners in 1977, including Nepal’s leading dissident, B.J. Koirala, who was released from jail for medical treatment in the US. Koirala was re-imprisoned on his return to Kathmandu, however. Latin America Hemispheric attention was focused on the human rights issue to an unprecedented degree as a result of a combination of domestic circumstances and pressures from outside governmental, private, media, and UN sources. Some advances can be noted. —Significant political releases occurred in Chile, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Paraguay, and Peru. —State of siege regulations were lifted in Jamaica, El Salvador, and Nicaragua. —Barbados, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Trinidad, and Venezuela joined the US as advocates of human rights compliance. —The OAS meeting in Grenada endorsed the work of the Inter- American Human Rights Commission and committed the member states to renewed efforts on behalf of human rights observance.
