348
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
been invited to attend court sessions. However, elections scheduled for
October 1977 were postponed until the completion of former Prime
Minister Bhutto’s trials for political corruption and murder, according
to General Zia, the Chief Martial Law Administrator.
Sri Lanka. The lifting of Mrs. Bandaranaike’s six-year-old state of
emergency in February resulted in the release of many former insur-
gents who had been held without trial. Mrs. Bandaranaike held earlier-
postponed elections in July 1977. Her successor, Prime Minister Jaya-
wardene, fulfilled a campaign promise by releasing in November the
last of the insurgents convicted in 1971; he also repealed the 1972 Crim-
inal Justice Commission Act.
Bangladesh. Several thousand prisoners were released and local
elections were held, although an unknown number of political pris-
oners remain jailed and several minor political parties were proscribed
as a result of army mutinies against the martial law regime.
Morocco. The government continues to repress radical elements
suspected of plotting to overthrow the regime, but the trend in recent
months has been toward greater freedom and political liberalization.
Domestic press censorship has been lifted, relatively free parliamentary
elections were held in which all parties participated, and a new cabinet
has been formed with multi-party participation.
Nepal. Political parties have been banned since 1960, and the
country remains, in effect, an absolute monarchy. On the other hand,
the government released virtually all political prisoners in 1977, in-
cluding Nepal’s leading dissident, B.J. Koirala, who was released from
jail for medical treatment in the US. Koirala was re-imprisoned on his
return to Kathmandu, however.
Latin America
Hemispheric attention was focused on the human rights issue to
an unprecedented degree as a result of a combination of domestic cir-
cumstances and pressures from outside governmental, private, media,
and UN sources.
Some advances can be noted.
—Significant political releases occurred in Chile, Haiti, the Domin-
ican Republic, Paraguay, and Peru.
—State of siege regulations were lifted in Jamaica, El Salvador, and
Nicaragua.
—Barbados, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Trin-
idad, and Venezuela joined the US as advocates of human rights
compliance.
—The OAS meeting in Grenada endorsed the work of the Inter-
American Human Rights Commission and committed the member
states to renewed efforts on behalf of human rights observance.
