Preface
Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series
This volume is part of a Foreign Relations subseries that documents
the most important foreign policy issues of the administration of
Jimmy Carter. This volume focuses on U.S. policy in response to the So-
viet intervention in Afghanistan, a process that began with Moscow’s
growing involvement in Afghan politics following the Communist
revolution in April 1978 and culminating with the mass influx of So-
viet military forces in December 1979. Until the Communist coup that
overthrew President Mohammed Daoud Khan, U.S. diplomatic and
strategic interest in Afghanistan was minor, and focused largely on
stanching the flow of illegal narcotics through that country. Prior to
1978, Washington viewed Afghanistan as a relatively stable and
non-aligned country that did not figure prominently in the global Cold
War competition. Accordingly, Afghanistan was not a major focal point
for the first year and a half of the Carter administration. By 1978, at the
first sign that Afghanistan may fall into the Soviet orbit, Washington’s
interest in Afghanistan increased dramatically.
By the time Moscow launched a military takeover of the Afghan
government at the end of 1979, the Afghanistan crisis rose to the top of
the President’s foreign policy agenda as the administration sought
ways to coerce the Soviets to withdraw. In the days following the inva-
sion, the President and his foreign policy team adopted a triple-
pronged strategy of diplomatic pressure, economic sanctions, and co-
vert aid to the Mujahidin, the Afghan resistance fighters, with the help
of Pakistan. Carter’s policy laid the groundwork for what would be-
come the largest covert operation in U.S. history during the Reagan
administration, ending with the withdrawal of the last Soviet forces
from Afghanistan nearly a decade after the invasion.
Readers who wish to understand the broader context of the Carter
administration’s policy in Afghanistan should consult the chapter on
Pakistan in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XIX, South Asia. Be-
cause of Pakistan’s close coordination with the United States to fight
against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan (due in large part to its
leaders’ fears that Moscow sought domination of Pakistan), this
chapter is indispensable for understanding Washington’s strategic in-
terest in limiting Moscow’s threat to the region, and its tactical coordi-
nation with Pakistan to support Afghanistan’s anti-Soviet resistance
movement. Readers should also consult Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
VII
