762 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI you accept it, we both agree it would have a good impact in the context of the ongoing meeting of our two Presidents. Karpov: If they knew. Bartholomew: I have talked to my President and my Secretary of State. Those two know. Karpov: You would like this not to be in the form of a letter, you would prefer a declaration along the lines we have done for SLCMs. That is not the way we propose. Your own approach is closer to your heart. Second, your proposal says those systems are being dealt with in Vienna, in the context of CFE. If we say they are being dealt with in Vienna, there is no sublimit there. When we are talking about establishing a numerical ceiling on TU–22M, that is for START, not with regard to Vienna. There is a question for us. Any level with regard to the TU–22M should not prejudice our position in the Vienna talks with regard to aviation systems. Nazarkin: Let me try to clarify one point. If the Soviet Union provides an assurance it will not give Backfire intercontinental capability, what is the meaning of a ceiling on Backfire in terms of the START treaty? Bartholomew: The assurance on intercontinental capability and the number are two forms of the same thing. We ourselves make that clear in our draft declaration that Backfire will not be subject to limits under the treaty. This is how I answer your question. Nazarkin: Perhaps I did not make my question clear. If we provide an assurance that Backfire will not have intercontinental capability, I don’t see the logic of a numerical limit in START. Bartholomew: I said that at the outset. The two together—­the understanding on range and the understanding on number—­combined together are an assurance on intercontinental potential. I’d like to go back to something you said, I’d like to be clear. A policy statement by the Soviet Union that you will not exceed 400 Backfire, all Backfire, does not prejudice your position on CFE. This remains to be discussed. I think that was your question. I hope I have answered it. Karpov: But still the question remains about naval Backfire. Since the question of naval arms has long been a subject of our discussion with you, I see no prospect for success. But the problem of naval arms is not submarines with ballistic missiles or SLCMs, but also the question of tactical nuclear weapons on the seas. I wouldn’t like to go into that problem. This still leaves the question of how to settle the TU–22M. I can give an assurance that we will not give Backfire intercontinental capability. You say that assurance should be accompanied by a ceiling on the number. We are prepared to do that with regard to aircraft assigned
