North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 927 298. Memorandum From Secretary of Agriculture Bergland, the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne), the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski), the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat), the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (McIntyre), and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1 Washington, February 17, 1978 SUBJECT Presidential Commission on World Hunger BACKGROUND During the last session, the Congress passed a resolution calling on you to establish a Commission on Domestic and International Hunger and Malnutrition. Passage was unanimous in the Senate and 364 to 38 in the House.2 At a meeting on February 3 with key Congressional sponsors of the resolutions you announced that you planned to establish such a Commission.3 Following that meeting, you asked us to prepare an options paper on the subject. COMMISSION OBJECTIVES The first and most important step in charting the course of the Commission is to identify its objectives as clearly and completely as possible. Most of the remaining decisions regarding the make-up and operation of the Commission are largely dependent on the task assigned the Commission. Commissions can and are called upon to serve a variety of different purposes ranging from issue definition and basic fact-finding to the promotion of public awareness through public relations activities. We are persuaded that the Hunger Commission must be designed to pursue several related objectives including: 1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National Security Issues, Box 87, National Security Issues—World Food [6/30/1977–12/17/1979]. No classification marking. Bergland did not initial the memorandum, Rubenstein initialed for Eizenstat, and Bourne initialed for McIntyre. A stamped notation at the top of the page reads: “The President has seen.” 2 The House of Representatives passed H.Res.784 on November 1, 1977, while the Senate passed S.Res.271 on October 27, 1977. 3 The meeting, which began at 9:47 a.m. and ended at 10:10 a.m., took place in the Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation was found.
