January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1113
spect anytime, but it is up to them to tell us when, since they are the
ones who have held up completion of the basic Sinai agreement. (S)
—NAAA. The National Association of Arab Americans wants to
see the President to hear his story on the resolution. I am telling the
schedulers not to consider it. Strauss and Clift both say that receiving
this group is not the way to turn the issue off. (C)
—Rabbi Goren. Bentsur passed a message to me from Eppy (origi-
nating with Begin), asking for the President to receive Israeli Chief
Rabbi Goren, who is in this country. Yet I was told informally they
don’t really mean it: the last time Goren saw the President, he had un-
helpful things to say afterwards, but Goren leaned on Begin to make
the request. Better, Bentsur said, that he see the Vice President in a low-
key matter (and I will check to see whether there is any interest). As I
pointed out to Bentsur, this is a hell of a box for them to try putting us
in: if the meeting takes place, we gain little or nothing in terms of im-
proving relations; if we turn it down, someone will squawk. OK to
handle this through the VP, if he’s willing?4 (S)
—Jerusalem/Strauss. Strauss called with another idea, which he has
discussed with Solarz5 and will discuss with Vance. He would like
someone (perhaps even the President) to be in a position to say for New
York:
“While the ultimate status of Jerusalem remains to be resolved in
negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbors, we believe that, in
the context of a final settlement, Jerusalem should and will remain un-
divided, and should and will be (remain) the capital of Israel.”6
Clearly, only the last clause raises a question—and Strauss says
that maybe the words “should” could be dropped. I have not reached
Saunders yet on this and will let you know his reaction. Strauss will
welcome yours—and would like to have this decided as soon as pos-
sible. (S)
4 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Brzezinski wrote: “agree.”
5 Representative Stephen J. Solarz (D-New York)
6 Brzezinski circled the last clause of this sentence and wrote in the right-hand
margin next to it, “Are you recommending this? Is this in Camp David?”
