374
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
responsibility for intervention in Iran in the event of communist
aggression.4
6(b) It has always been a part of United States planning that in the
event of a Tudeh coup, the United States and United Kingdom would
respond militarily to a call for help by a legitimate Iranian Government.
There is little doubt that the Shah, if extracted from Tehran and prefer-
ably Iran, would welcome an opportunity to call for such support and
would be only too willing to establish a government-in-exile with a
claim to legitimacy. The British paper does not explore this contingency
nor the desirability of providing such a framework for action among
the southern tribes of Iran. While a tribal rising might not “seriously
embarrass” a central Tudeh government, it might prevent the commu-
nists from reaching the Persian Gulf and the oil fields.
7. General Conclusion
NEA questions whether there is any validity in the use of the verb
“compel” in discussing means of influencing the Iranian Government
“to prevent a further expansion of communist influence in Persia”. We
know of no practicable way to “compel” the Iranian Government to do
anything. Furthermore, it is not entirely certain that the best way to pre-
vent a Tudeh coup is to urge the Iranian Government to take action.
The best way in NEA’s view would be to negotiate an oil settlement and
the next best would be to provide financial assistance.
8. The arguments against the statements of section 8(a) have been
made above and NEA suggests a substitute paragraph:
8(a) “Whether to inform Dr. Mosadeq that we believe his gov-
ernment represents a nationalist bulwark against communism and that
without requiring commitments regarding the oil dispute, financial
aid will be forthcoming so long as he maintains control of the
communists.”
8(b) If the tribes are to be used at all, it is our opinion that it should
be done immediately after a Tudeh coup, before the new regime has
time to consolidate its power. Otherwise, it is to be expected that the
Tudeh will take effective steps to destroy the power of the tribes to re-
sist. “Use” does not necessarily mean an attempt to overthrow the new
government; it might merely mean denying certain southern regions to
the Tudeh authorities and preserving the tribal organization and
fighting potential against attempts to destroy them.
4 In the left margin next to this paragraph is a handwritten question mark.
