The third meeting of the Technical Committee to Draw up a List of
Luxuries for the Levying of the Washington Surtaxes, was held April 9,
1926, and various items on the so-called Luxury List which had been
discussed at previous meetings were taken up and disposed of. Considerable
discussion took place as to whether the classification of an article by
number would be the guide for the Customs authorities in determining the
duty to be paid upon a given commodity. Since there had been some
confusion in the numbers in making up the revised list considerable
difficulty was encountered in fixing the exact classification of some of the
commodities previously agreed upon. With a view to simplifying matters
Mr. Hornbeck suggested that the practical thing to do was for the Chinese
Delegation to withdraw from the list then under discussion such numbers as
did not appear in the list which they had discussed and agreed upon at the
last meeting. As Yin 77 was the list referred to, a checking up of the
numbers of the two lists (Yin 77 and Yin 85) showed considerable change
of numbers of commodities, and the sub-committee consumed considerable
time in straightening out this tangle. Practically all of the time of this
meeting was consumed in discussing articles which had by rearrangement
been transferred from one list to another, or added to a list through the
interchange of certain index numbers. The chief difficulty of the Advisers
was in arriving at a definite idea as to what constituted the articles in
Classes “A”, “B” and “C”, and also to determine whether they would use
the index numbers or the names of the articles in making up the final list.
Mr. Fox suggested that there be but one list prepared, namely a list of
articles paying 5 per cent, and that all other articles would be considered as
paying 2½ per cent surtax. Mr. Saburi said that the Japanese Delegation was
preparing a list according to tariff numbers only and that it would be
submitted in due course. Mr. Van Haute of the Belgian Delegation said that
he would also prepare a list giving the tariff numbers. It was finally agreed
that the Chinese Delegation should prepare a complete new list giving the
tariff number and the definition, and that the list would be circulated with
the time allowance of one week within which any Delegation might make a
recommendation or reservation as to a particular item. (See Appendix I,
Minutes of April 9, 1926, for revised list of articles liable to a total surtax of
5 per cent; commodities being re-arranged so that all goods of the same
kind are kept together; See Appendix II for list of articles liable to a surtax
of 5 per cent as agreed upon at the meeting of March 2, 1926; See Appendix
