544  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
sentiments in Latin America and by the USSR’s inability to provide 
the kinds of nonmilitary assistance Latin Americans need. Most Latin 
American governments are wary of Soviet overtures and concerned as 
much about Soviet expansionism as about US regional influence.
26. In Cuba, there are signs that the Soviets are continuing to 
strengthen their influence on the island as well as to upgrade Cuba’s 
military capabilities. There are differing views, however, on the extent 
to which the Soviet military presence on the island will grow:
—According to one view2 both the Soviets and the Cubans are 
aware of US sensitivities concerning the permanent basing of nontech-
nical or nonadvisory Soviet military personnel in Cuba and, for this 
reason, Moscow would be unlikely to station any combat or reconnais-
sance unit there permanently because it would exacerbate US relations 
with both the USSR and Cuba and further endanger Cuba’s position in 
the nonaligned movement.
—Another view3 can be summarized as follows: The Soviets con-
tinue to view Cuba as a means to expand Soviet influence in the West-
ern Hemisphere and to test US reactions to increased Soviet military 
use of Cuba. Although the Soviets retreated from their attempt to place 
offensive weapons on the island in 1962 and to use Cienfuegos harbor 
to support nuclear-­powered submarines in 1970, they continue to use 
Cuba in a variety of ways to support their objectives. The Soviets will 
probably expand their military use of Cuba. The most likely way would 
be to extend the frequency or length of their current naval ship or naval 
air reconnaissance deployments until their presence there becomes 
permanent; this would not require additional support facilities. The 
last naval deployment in 1978 lasted more than 90 days, the longest 
period overall involving a Soviet Navy task group in Caribbean waters 
since 1973. The Soviets are carrying out other military activities in Cuba 
[1 line not declassified] and there are indications that small elements of 
Soviet ground forces are on the island, although the nature of their 
activity is uncertain. (Possible explanations range from demonstrations 
or testing of Soviet equipment and tactics or training of local advisory 
and security personnel, to specialized training of Soviet tactical units.) 
Moscow is also significantly upgrading Cuba’s military capabilities by 
supplying its forces with equipment and by providing military advis-
ers and instructors to train Cuban forces. And, for the first time, the 
Soviets have given Cuba an F-­class submarine and MIG–23 Flogger air 
defense and ground attack aircraft, the latter with a range sufficient 
to reach the southeastern United States and the Panama Canal. Soviet 
pilots, already in Cuba, occasionally fly these aircraft, probably to main-
tain proficiency; this flight activity could be expanded in the future to 
include other roles.
2 The holders of this view are the Central Intelligence Agency; the Director, Bureau 
of Intelligence and Research, Department of State; and the Director, National Security 
Agency. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the 
Senior Intelligence Officers of each of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]
