with countries under mandate, or with their colonies and thereby defeat the principle of
equality of opportunity.
There is a further question of no little difficulty, which arises under the provisions of
the Convention restricting sales to recognized governments or belligerents. If this
Government does not extend recognition to a particular régime while other countries
extend such recognition, the result would be that other countries would be free to
export arms to that country and American manufacturers would be prevented from so
doing. This situation is taken into account in the modification of Article 3, Paragraph 1.
THE QUESTION OF THE PROHIBITED AREA
The Department desires you to support the position that the Convention as at present
drafted should be divided into two separate conventions—one dealing with publicity
and the control of the general export trade in arms, the other dealing with the special
supervision of the trade in the so-called prohibited zones which it is apparently the
desire of certain Powers to place under a further system of control. In this connection
you will note that the Department’s instruction of June 17th favored the division of the
Convention as above indicated and that on page 147 of the League publication47 there
is given a detailed statement as to the desirability of this procedure.
The Department believes that it would facilitate the consideration of the Arms Traffic
question in this country if the two questions, that of the general publicity and control on
the one hand and that of the prohibited areas on the other, were dealt with separately.
They are distinct problems. The latter only concerns this Government to a very limited
degree. The United States has no territorial possessions in the general region (i. e.
Africa, South Western Asia, etc.) which have in the past been considered as possible
prohibited areas. Further, neither this Government nor its nationals have ever engaged
in any considerable traffic in arms with this area of the world. The question of the
measure of control to be exercised in any such “prohibited zones” is largely a matter
for determination by the Powers which have colonies or mandates in this region,
provided, however, that no restrictions are imposed which would impair the principle
of most-favored-nation treatment.
Whether this Government could properly be a party to a convention setting up a control
of the arms trade in the prohibited areas can only be determined when the scope and
purpose of the convention is more clearly defined. In any event the Department would
not desire you to support any effort directed toward the placing in the “prohibited
zone” of sovereign States, such for example as Persia, which the Department notes has
already made vigorous protest against such action.
In taking up the discussion of the Convention, article by article, the Department will
deal further with this question of the “prohibited zone” in considering Articles 9 to 25
