320 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX issue came to a head at the KSC Central Committee plenum in December 1977, when Husak reportedly was again challenged by hardline opponents. Although information on the episode is sketchy, subsequent developments strongly suggest that the outcome represented a victory for Husak and the moderates. [classification not declassified] The results of the plenum first became apparent in a series of personnel changes. Jakes, who had directed the purges of the early 1970s as chairman of the Central Control and Auditing Commission, was removed from that position and elected secretary of the KSC Central Committee and candidate member of the Presidium. Nominally, this represented an advancement. In real terms, however, Jakes’s fortunes probably suffered. He lost his key role in cadre affairs and was made responsible for agriculture, where he has no experience and which could prove a perilous assignment. Moreover, two men whose views are unlikely to coincide with his were elected to the Secretariat at the same time: Mikulas Beno, an economist with close ties to Husak, and Jindrich Polednik, a youth leader who has stressed the need for economic improvement in a way that appears consistent with moderate thinking. [classification not declassified] Developments continued to favor the moderates through 1978. In March, the Central Committee removed from the Secretariat Cestmir Lovetinsky, a hardliner who had led the party’s cadre department since 1975. Lovetinsky’s cadre duties were assigned to Beno, and another loyal Husak supporter, economist Josef Haman, replaced him as a member of the Secretariat. Husak also used the March plenum to endorse an experiment in economic management devised by Finance Minister Leopold Ler. This controversial movement toward economic reform had apparently been approved over conservative opposition at the December plenum. [classification not declassified] Another indication of Husak’s strength was a reaffirmation of support from Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev during the latter’s visit to Prague in May 1978. Brezhnev’s increased esteem for Husak had already become apparent in May 1975, when Soviet Politburo member Andrey Kirilenko spoke of the “close and personal” relationship between the two. During the May 1978 visit, Brezhnev awarded Husak the Order of the October Revolution and referred to him as the “leading representative of Czechoslovak Communists.” Brezhnev then presented the Order of Lenin to Bilak, whom he described as “a loyal colleague of Comrade Husak.” The continuing role of the conservatives was thus acknowledged, but their subordinate position was made clear. [classification not declassified] Most signs indicate that Husak will remain the dominant figure within the Czechoslovak leadership for at least the next several years. At 66, his health is good. [4 lines not declassified; classification not declassified]
