land, the laws of five States permit aliens eligible to citizenship, resident or
non-resident, to own unlimited amounts of land, and the laws of one State
permit all aliens, resident or non-resident, with the exception of non-
resident Chinese, to own unlimited amounts of land. Five States permit
resident aliens but not non-resident aliens, to own unlimited amounts of
land, and four States permit resident and non-resident aliens to own limited
amounts of land ranging from 90,000 square feet to 5,000 acres. One State
permits aliens to own land on the basis of reciprocity. In no State do the
laws have the effect of placing Austrian nationals in a position relatively
less favorable than the nationals of any other country. The latest census of
the United States (1920) reveals the fact that approximately 88 per cent of
the aliens of Austrian birth resident in the United States at that time were in
States under whose laws aliens including Austrians may own land. In view
of these facts it would seem that the Austrian Government would be
warranted in saying that reciprocity in respect of the ownership of lands to
all intents and purposes exists in the United States so as to enable nationals
of the United States to enjoy the right to acquire and hold lands in Austria.
A tabulation giving a list of the States in each of the classifications
mentioned above is enclosed.81 You are authorized to give a copy of it to
the Austrian Foreign Office and to agree to an exchange of notes as
supplementary to the treaty under negotiation establishing the right of
nationals of the United States to own land in Austria. Drafts of notes are
enclosed.82 If material changes are made therein the notes should be
submitted to the Department for approval before they are agreed upon. It is
believed that they should not contain the names of the several States as
given in the enclosed tabulation, the summary of the classifications as set
forth in this instruction, or the percentage figure given above of Austrians
residing in States in which aliens may own land.
Should an agreement not be reached on the exchange of notes and the
Austrian Government should not accept the first paragraph of Article I of
the original draft without an accompanying exchange of notes, you are
instructed again to submit the proposal of this Government set out on pages
five and six of Instruction No. 459 of May 12, 1926, and quoted in part by
you on page seven of despatch No. 1106. The proposal was for the
