Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  325
Verification & Stability Measures (General)
11. In his opening remarks regarding verification and stability 
measures, Nazarkin said the Soviet side was ready to discuss the Bush 
initiative in detail. The Soviet side was ready to sign, at the ministerial, 
an “umbrella” agreement on principles for implementing trial verifi-
cation and stability measures. This document would contain general 
agreement on principles, which could be used as guidelines at the NST 
negotiations. Nazarkin hoped the draft he had previously given Amb. 
Burt would lead to agreement.
12. Bartholomew said the Soviet agreement to proceed with the 
verification and stability measures was a positive development. This 
comment was without prejudice to the question of the text proposed by 
the Soviet side, which would have to be reviewed in detail in the NST 
subgroup. The President’s initiative on strategic measures could have 
a positive effect on specific issues and on the whole START process, 
Bartholomew said. Soviet readiness to complete the strategic exercise 
notification agreement and the positive Soviet remarks on telemetry 
were encouraging. If these agreements could be concluded, he said, this 
would be a very positive development indeed.
13. Burt said he considered Nazarkin’s remarks on verification and 
stability constructive; the umbrella agreement could serve as a guide to 
work on verification and stability. The U.S. side was prepared, during 
the next two days, to discuss the draft agreement Nazarkin had pro-
vided. (See below for details of Burt’s remarks on specific measures.) 
Concluding his presentation on the U.S. verification and stability pro-
posals, Burt said he thought the sides could make rapid progress in the 
ministerial meetings and in Round XII in Geneva.
14. Nazarkin thanked Burt for his presentation of additional specif-
ics on the U.S. proposals. Nazarkin said he had not covered this subject 
in detail in his initial presentation because he thought the sides should 
focus first on those documents that would result from the Ministers’ 
meeting. There probably would not be sufficient time in Washington 
and Wyoming; details should be worked out in Geneva after the sides 
had agreed on general principles at the ministerial. The sides could 
exchange views in detail during the ministerial should time permit, 
but Nazarkin said they should focus first on items the ministers would 
need. Therefore Nazarkin had not discussed every U.S. proposal.
15. Thanking Nazarkin for his comments, Bartholomew said he 
had one observation and one question. If his understanding was cor-
rect, it appeared that it would be possible at the ministerial to agree 
on at least three of the seven verification and stability measures: exer-
cise notifications, Data Denial, and STOF (though Bartholomew had 
questions he would like to ask Nazarkin). In addition, Bartholomew 
said, there would be an umbrella agreement to cover all the measures,
