German Democratic Republic 395 Ms. Derian said that she had tried during the conversation in Berlin to lay the groundwork for an understanding of U.S. human rights policy, in particular for an understanding of why development of bilateral relations required that account be taken of that policy. She had sought then to keep the discussion general. Today she would like to speak more specifically. Ms. Derian said she knew that Mr. Goodby had passed over a copy of our divided families’ representation list. It was a smaller list than we have with some other countries, but it is very important for the people involved. The U.S. has also talked with the GDR about measures for expediting the handling of emergency visitation cases. This is one of the first things we raise because it is so important for the families. Ms. Derian said she was sure Ambassador Grunert had called attention to the wide reporting in the press of the new restrictions the GDR had recently placed on journalists. These restrictions had come as a surprise to the U.S. They were inconsistent with CSCE since they involve more restriction on the free exchange of ideas. This type of thing, when coupled with the new restrictions placed on Havemann and Heym, creates great interest in the U.S. Together they are serious barriers to the development of our relations. We hear about them from members of Congress and from the public. These steps give rise to an impression that things are not going well between our two states, that the CSCE Final Act is not being implemented. Thus tensions grow when things appeared to be going along well between our countries, just at the time of such an important and positive step as the Consular Convention. Ms. Derian said she wanted also to ask a question with regard to Jewish claims. She understood that the private American concerned with this question, Benjamin Ferencz, had proposed that the GDR export goods to the U.S. with the proceeds earmarked for compensation. She wondered how the GDR would react to this idea. She asked this question somewhat out of the context of the rest of her remarks because she understood that Mr. Ferencz may have some Congressional interest in special legislation to facilitate this but does not wish to pursue the idea unless there was GDR interest. She realized it was not possible for Dr. Nier to answer this question immediately, but she hoped he would think it over. If the idea appears interesting to the GDR, Mr. Ferencz could be advised. Ms. Derian said the last topic she wished to raise concerned military education in the schools. There was growing concern that part of the curriculum appears to deal with attitudes toward the West, that the teaching promotes hatred for the West among young people. This is out of step with CSCE. She wondered whether there was a reason for this. On one hand, the GDR seeks to improve relations; on the other
