3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
399
Minister Gromyko asked if he was correct in understanding the
Secretary to say that the United States insisted on the proposal the Sec-
retary had advanced in Moscow, in its pure, unchanged form.
The Secretary replied in the affirmative.
Gromyko said that that proposal was unacceptable to the Soviet
Union. Everyone would clearly understand that a free choice between a
new type of ICBM with a single reentry vehicle and a new type of ICBM
with MIRVs would provide an advantage to one side—the side that
would choose the MIRVed missile. Superficially the U.S. position
sounded as if it was in accord with the principle of equality of rights. In
actual fact, however, under either of those alternatives the United
States would have an advantage for a long period of time. He said that
the Soviet side had emphasized this fact a number of times. Such a situ-
ation would thus be totally contrary to the principle of equality, equal
security and inadmissibility of unilateral advantage. On this basis we
cannot reach agreement. He would add that the U.S. side seemed to
have treated the Soviet-proposed variants very lightly. He would re-
mind the Secretary that three variants had been proposed.
The Secretary noted that in the third variant the Soviet side had
proposed that the flight testing and deployment of all new types of
ICBMs, without exception, whether or not they were MIRVed, be
banned for the duration of the Treaty, i. e., through 1985. Our first alter-
native suggested that this be limited for the period of the Protocol. If
time was of concern in this respect, why not accept this ban for the pe-
riod of the Protocol? The Secretary would ask Ambassador Warnke to
say a few words on this subject.
Ambassador Warnke pointed out that, as the Secretary had said,
the Soviet third variant was essentially like ours with respect to ICBMs,
except that we were suggesting that the ban last for the period of the
Protocol, and that it be determined in the course of the SALT III negoti-
ations whether it would be continued. If the Soviet side was willing to
accept a ban for the period of the Treaty, we could see no reason why it
should not also accept it for the period of the Protocol. As for our two
alternatives, we felt that they were indeed in accord with the principle
of equal security, because each recognized that our force structures
were different. Today the Soviet side felt that its force structure re-
quired it to modernize ICBMs with a single reentry vehicle. We, on the
other hand, were not interested in modernization of non-MIRVed
ICBMs. Therefore, the exception suggested by the Soviet side would
not ensure equal security.
The Secretary added that we would in any case have to operate
within the sub-level of 820 MIRVed ICBMs.
Gromyko said it was obvious that the sides would have to remain
within the 820 sub-level. That question did not arise at all.
