Chapter 4, February–April 1990 471 The Secretary asked whether the Soviets would sign without a common understanding on prohibited and permitted activities. Shevardnadze said they would sign, but they would want to continue discussions on that question. At some time in the future, they hoped we would be able to reach an agreed understanding on permitted and prohibited activities. The Secretary said he just wanted to understand: there was no condition that we had to have a common understanding on withdrawal from START in the event that either side determines the other is not observing the ABM Treaty. If at the time we sign START we were observing the ABM Treaty, would the Soviet Union sign the treaty without any common understandings about the right of withdrawal? Shevardnadze replied that basically this was correct. Burt asked to clarify this point. It had been our understanding that the Soviets wanted the U.S. to agree to an understanding that there would be a right of withdrawal if the ABM Treaty were violated and that this was a precondition to implementing START. Was Shevardnadze saying we now did not need this? The Secretary said his understanding had always been what Burt had said. In Wyoming he had asked Shevardnadze whether the Soviets were delinking START and ABM and Shevardnadze had replied in the affirmative. Therefore, his question was whether we could sign a START treaty without any common understanding about the right of withdrawal in the event of future non-­observance of the ABM Treaty. Such a common understanding, he repeated, would prevent us from moving forward. He heard Shevardnadze just say that we could sign START as long as we were in fact complying with the ABM Treaty at the time of signature. Was it correct that the Soviets would sign without any common understanding about withdrawal rights beyond the general right under the supreme interests clause? Shevardnadze replied that his point was that the Soviets were prepared to sign without linking START specifically to the ABM Treaty. The Secretary asked whether this meant there was no link between signing a START treaty and reaching an agreed interpretation on permitted and prohibited activities? Shevardnadze said this was correct but negotiations should continue on the content of the ABM Treaty—­ whether we would have a broad or narrow interpretation, what was permitted and prohibited—­parallel to implementation of START and the elimination of strategic offensive arms. If either side violated the ABM Treaty, this would provide a right to withdraw from START. This might happen, but it was also possible the U.S. could choose not to violate the ABM Treaty; alternatively, we might reach some other kind of agreement covering additional elements beyond the current
