682
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
273.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, June 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Lockheed’s Request for Amendment to the International Traffic in Arms
Regulations Concerning C–130 Aircraft
This memorandum requests your decision on a request by Lock-
heed that the C–130 military transport aircraft manufactured by that
firm be removed from the category of “significant combat equipment”
on the United States Munitions List. This administrative designation
causes the C–130 to be within the definition of “major defense equip-
ment” contained in the Arms Export Control Act. That Act prohibits
commercial sales to non-NATO countries of major defense equipment
under contracts of $25 million or more, thus requiring that foreign sales
of three or more C–130s be handled under the Foreign Military Sales
(FMS) program. Lockheed complains that the FMS procedures are un-
duly protracted and that without commercial sales the production line
may have to close before the company receives sufficient FMS orders to
continue its operation. Also relevant, although not mentioned by Lock-
heed, is the Defense Department’s estimate that Lockheed receives ap-
proximately $500,000 more for a commercially sold C–130 than for one
sold under FMS procedures.
Background:
Since January 1969, most major items on the Munitions List, in-
cluding all listed military aircraft, have been designated as “significant
combat equipment.” The original consequence of designation as “sig-
nificant combat equipment” was that an export license would not be
given for commercial sale of a designated item unless the foreign pur-
chaser had given the Department of State direct assurances against
retransfer.
Last year, the significant combat equipment designation was given
additional legal significance by being made a part of the definition of
“major defense equipment” in the Arms Export Control Act. Munitions
List articles which, like the C–130, fall within the definition of major de-
fense equipment are subject to additional controls under the Arms Ex-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Mathews Subject File, Box 4, Arms Transfers: Policy (General): 6/77–4/79. No classifica-
tion markings. In the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum,
Carter wrote “To Cy. J.”
