traffic year, nine and a half million schillings. In 1927 probably no deficit. Appropriation of 26,400,000 schillings to Federal Railways in the budget for the year 1928 appears in this budget in the same amount also on the receipt side, and is therefore only a current [balancing?] item (formal reason: participation of Federation in gross traffic receipts by a 5 per cent traffic tax). 6. Austrian Post, Telegraph and Telephone Administration had no deficit in 1927 but a surplus of about 200,000 schillings. Similar results to be expected for 1928. This situation as in the case of the railways results after the full inclusion of all expenditure for interest and amortization of approximately 80,000,000 schillings appearing in 1927 budget, representing sums hitherto allocated from League of Nations loan for investment purposes. For the line Passau-Vienna, 16,000,000 schillings short-term credit was used. Of this sum in the first year 4,200,000 schillings were paid back and the clear profits obtained on these lines which shows that they pay exceedingly well. The construction of further long-distance cable lines [is] necessary in order to meet urgent requirements of traffic and to avoid the danger that the cable lines of neighboring countries will be utilized in international communication to the exclusion of Austrian lines. Only such lines will be established as are sure to pay. Redrafting investment plan for long distance cables, the costs for the improvement of the domestic Austrian telephone plants necessitated by the increase of traffic are of course included. 7. The investments planned for “other lines” concern a negligible participation of the state in the costs of the urgently necessary construction of the two new local lines and the purchase of motor engine cars for the local lines, guaranteed by the state but which have little traffic. Experience shows that the use of electric motor engine cars on such lines always pays well. 8. Data on the investments for tobacco, administration proper, monopolies and other undertakings are not given because according to the resolution of the control committee the
