564
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
it was finally agreed that he should be given a visa to travel abroad
for one year. The Foreign Minister said he guessed that Goma would
“speak up” once he departed. He said, “We are not scared. One person
cannot hurt us.”
The Secretary then asked about the facts of the case as Goma alleged
them in his press conference.3 Macovescu said that it is difficult to say.
He, Macovescu, does not know all the facts of the case but the Secretary
should understand that Goma is not a big writer in Romania and he
is a liar. Macovescu does not believe Goma. “It is not a problem for
us.” Macovescu said that we can talk together in general about improv-
ing human rights in Romania and improving the general situation to
provide better conditions for the Romanian people but let’s speak
frankly, “We cannot make a problem of Mr. Goma.” The Secretary did
not reply to this last remark of the Minister.
Middle East
The Secretary said he would like to return to a discussion of the
Middle East. He asked whether Romania would continue to be in touch
with the PLO. Macovescu replied they would not be in touch on a
continuing basis but would do so whenever the need arose. The Secre-
tary said that from our standpoint, we would like an updated reading
of PLO views as the situation develops over the coming weeks.
Macovescu said he would take these US interests into account. He then
reiterated that action from the US side would be helpful in determining
events. He said that the Americans are a courageous people and should
be capable of turning policies around and moving toward a real Middle
East settlement.
The Secretary asked whether the Romanians had any discussion
about the expulsion of the PLO from Cairo. Macovescu said that they
had no discussion on the subject but that they know the PLO representa-
tives who were allegedly expelled are still in Cairo. Macovescu said
that he knows that the relations between Arafat and Sadat were and
still are good and he does not believe that these relations have signifi-
cantly changed.
The Secretary asked how Arafat’s relations were with the rest of
the PLO, particularly with regard to the rejectionist element. Macovescu
3 Romanian dissident writer Paul Goma departed Romania in November 1977 for
France on a one-year tourist visa. Once in Paris, Goma held a press conference accusing
the Romanian Government of inhumane treatment of dissidents, of firing over 4,000
miners as a result of the 1977 unrest in Valea Jiului, and alleging that the Romanian
secret police had threatened him. He suggested that the assault on Radio Free Europe
Romania desk reporter Monica Lovinescu the previous week by unknown assailants
was a Securitate’s attempt to intimidate him and other dissidents. (“Rumanian Dissident
Makes Plea in Paris,” The New York Times, November 25, 1977, p. 2)
