716
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
If our committee permits the games to be held in . . . Germany, . . .
there will be nothing left to distinguish [the Olympic idea] from the
Nazi ideal. . . . It will take . . . years to reestablish the prestige of the
games and the confidence of the peoples of the world. Sport will lose its
beauty and its nobility and become, as it has already become in Nazi
Germany, an ugly, ignoble affair.4
The call for a boycott was rejected. And the reasons for rejection
are bone chilling—even across all these decades. Do not drag sports
into the arena of politics, they were told. It will destroy the Olympic
movement, they were told. It will only penalize our American athletes,
they were told. Solutions to political problems are not the responsibility
of sporting bodies, they were told. Let us take our Jews and blacks to
Berlin and beat the Nazis, they were told. If America refuses to go, we
will be the only ones left out in the cold, they were told.
Such reasons prevailed. Only weeks after American attendance
was assured, Nazi troops took the Rhineland; and Hitler readied Ger-
many for the games. His preparations cast uncanny foreshadows. For
he expelled foreign journalists, who told the truth about persecution.
He ordered his vicious propaganda concealed from foreign visitors.
And he too looked forward to legitimacy. As Joseph Goebbels boasted
on the eve of the Olympics, the Reich expected the games “to turn the
trick and create a friendly world attitude toward Nazi political, eco-
nomic, and racial aims.”
It worked. Not even Jesse Owens’ magnificent personal triumph
diminished Hitler’s international propaganda success—a coup he
linked directly to his master race doctrine. We revere Jesse in death as
in life; for he was an exemplary American, an inspiration to millions ev-
erywhere, and a personal friend loved by many of you here today. But
neither Jesse’s achievements in Berlin nor any words spoken at the
games prevented the Reich from exploiting the Olympics toward their
own brutal ends. Listen to Nazi War Minister Albert Speer’s report on
the Fuhrer’s mood as the happy spectators left Berlin: “Hitler was ex-
ulting over the harmonious atmosphere that prevailed. . . . Interna-
tional animosity toward Nazi Germany was plainly a thing of the past,
he thought.” Before long, the Nazi war machine scarred the face of Eu-
rope, and soon the night closed in.
The Need for Sacrifice
We are far from that time—but not from that script. Like you, I un-
derstand the ideals of sport—for sportsmanship is synonymous with
4 Jahncke wrote this in a November 25, 1935, letter to Count Henri de Baillet-Latour,
President of the International Olympic Committee. (“Jahncke Asks Ban On Olympic
Games: American Committee Member Charges Germans Violate Tenets of Fair Play,”
The New York Times, November 27, 1935, p. 2)
