968  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
606.	 Letter from Osborn to Clough1
Geneva, May 14, 1956
Dear Ralph:
Reading Walter’s latest letter, which came this morning, I feel bad 
about all the trouble you in CA and FE have had to go to on my account. 
Believe me I appreciate it from the bottom of my heart, and if there had 
been any alternative I would gladly have taken it. [text not declassified]
If I can take advantage of this extremely informal context, I’d like to 
broach an idea or two on the talks, mainly so that if the ideas reflect too 
much of a drift away from FE’s, you can write back and tell me they’re all 
wet. They are not official suggestions, not endorsed by the Ambassador 
(to whom I haven’t shown—but will show—this letter) and don’t even 
reflect any hard-­and-­fast opinions on my part.
1. Duration of Talks—We will presumably continue unwilling to 
force a break, so that duration is up to CHICOMS. Their position with 
respect to continuation of talks will reflect not only their appreciation of 
the value of the talks per se, as an instrument for promoting the trend 
towards accommodation and hurting the GRC, but also their estimate 
of the prospects for a FMC.
2. CHICOM Estimate of FMC Prospects—CHICOMS will presum­
ably not want to force the issue of a FMC before Nehru’s U.S. visit in 
July. Question is whether they will want to try to force the issue during 
Nehru’s visit, or whether they may not have another crucial date in 
mind, the presidential elections in November. They must be aware that 
we are not going to volunteer any movement towards a FMC, at least 
before November. They might be content to wait out November. On the 
other hand, they might try to put the Administration in a pre-­election 
dilemma, by threatening hostilities against the offshores unless we 
agree to a FMC. Either choice would be very painful, particularly just 
before election time, but the CHICOMS might figure that with the GOP 
campaign slogan “Peace and Prosperity” the Administration would 
choose the FMC as the lesser of two evils.
3. The Worth of a FMC—The thing that bothers me about a FMC, apart 
from the general damage that a FMC would do to the ­anti-­communist 
forces in the FE, is what would there be to talk about? Paradoxically, 
about the safest topic I can think of would be a meaningful renunciation 
of force. Still, in Europe especially, one senses how much the U.S. needs 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; 
Official–Informal.
