811.79620 Boeing Airplane Co./1
[Document 661]
The Assistant Secretary of Commerce (MacCracken) to the
Assistant Secretary of State (White)
WASHINGTON, February 4, 1928.
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: Mr. Ralph A. O’Neill of the Boeing Airplane Company,
Seattle, Washington plans to sail on the Steamship Southern Cross February
11 for Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. He also represents the Pratt and Whitney
Motor Corp. of Hartford, Connecticut. He is taking with him a Boeing
pursuit plane and a Boeing mail plane. At the end of six months, there will
be shipped to him a Boeing flying boat which is now in the process of
construction. Mr. O’Neill plans to give demonstration flights of these ships
for the army and navy air services of the various countries which he visits.
He is taking with him the necessary personnel and subsidiary equipment.
Mr. O’Neill’s contemplated route is as follows: Rio de Janeiro, Brazil to
Buenos Aires, Argentina; Buenos Aires, Argentina to Montevideo,
Uruguay; Montevideo, Uruguay to Buenos Aires, Argentina; Buenos Aires,
Argentina to Santiago, Chile; Santiago, Chile, to La Paz, Bolivia; La Paz,
Bolivia to Lima, Peru; Lima, Peru to Guayaquil, Ecuador; Guayaquil,
Ecuador to Bogotá, Colombia; Bogotá, Colombia to Caracas, Venezuela;
Caracas, Venezuela to Panama City, Panama. This is a contemplated
itinerary only and may be subject to change depending upon local
conditions. At the end of six or eight months, Mr. O’Neill plans to be in
Panama to assemble the flying boat, which will be shipped to him and to
reverse his route around South America, ending in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Will you kindly communicate the necessary information to the governments
concerned through the American Embassies and Legations and obtain the
necessary permission for this expedition to visit and fly in these countries.
Also, if possible, please obtain permission for the equipment of the
expedition to be entered and shipped out of the various countries free of
customs charges. It is suggested that Brazil, the Argentine, and Uruguay
