National Security Policy  705
and (3) State will warn the Poles that action will be taken under the 
Trading with the Enemy Act if any ship in which Communist China has 
ownership or interest visits U.S. ports. (In any case, the Council’s atten­
tion is invited to the fact that the Port Security restrictions on Polish 
vessels, as now set forth in our Polish policy, would become inoperative 
if approval is given to the State-­Treasury proposal to drop our present 
Port denial program.)
157.	 Memorandum of Discussion at the 405th NSC Meeting1
Washington, May 7, 1959
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 405th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, May 7, 
1959
Present at the 405th NSC Meeting were the President of the United 
States, presiding; the Vice President of the United States; the Secretary of 
State; Donald A. Quarles for the Secretary of Defense; and the Director, 
Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also attending the meeting and 
participating in the Council actions below were the Acting Secretary of 
the Treasury; the Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Attorney General 
(Items 1 and 5); Frederick Mueller for the Secretary of Commerce 
(Item 1); and the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission (Item 5). 
Also attending the meeting were the Chairman, Interdepartmental 
Intelligence Conferance (Item 1); the Chairman, Interdepartmental 
Committee on Internal Security (Item 1); the U.S. Ambassador to Iraq 
(Jernegan) (Item 5); the Director, U.S. Information Agency; General 
Curtis E. LeMay for the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of 
Central Intelligence; the Under Secretary of State; Assistant Secretary 
of State Gerard C. Smith; Assistant Secretary of Defense John N. Irwin 
II; the Assistant to the President; the Special Assistants to the President 
for National Security Affairs, for Foreign Economic Policy, for Science 
and Technology, and for Security Operations Coordination; the White 
House Staff Secretary; the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; the 
NSC Representative on Internal Security; the Executive Secretary, NSC; 
and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
1 Source: Agenda item 1: Port Security; Agenda item 5: Overseas Internal Security 
Program. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—12 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, 
NSC Records. Drafted on May 8.
