1234 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement through consultation to act in such a way as to accommodate the interests of both countries. Although everyone knew that Venezuela was moving in the direction of a modification of the 50–50 formula, it was not expected that any action would be taken until after the installation of the new Government, and then only after negotiations with the companies. Creole has stated that Betancourt had promised the company that no action would be taken with such negotiations. The consensus seems to be that Betancourt and his advisers were probably not consulted in advance concerning the new tax law, and that at best Betancourt was informed by the Government in very general terms several days in advance. This is Mr. Mann’s impression, and Betancourt informed our Embassy that he had known nothing of the tax change when he had promised Mr. Haight of Creole earlier in the week that closed door discussions with the industry would be held in advance of any changes in oil income distribution. Preliminary estimates reported by our Embassy of the effect of the tax revision on the oil industry are that it will vary according to the different companies’ incomes. Creole’s initial estimate is that it may result in a 65–35 per cent of the company’s profit, and that others in high income brackets will be effected to a lesser degree. New companies not yet out of the red would be effected in the future if and they move into higher income brackets. Reaction to the promulgation of the tax decree was not long in forthcoming. Duke Haight, President of Creole, issued a strong statement on December 22 at Marquetia airport on his departure for San José3 on a Christmas vacation. He said the Government’s action was a “hard blow” at the industry and that it “drastically altered the climate for foreign investment”. He said that by this action Venezuela became the first country in the world to break the 50–50 principle, “completely disregarding acquired rights and ignoring moral, if not legal, obligations to negotiate” with interested parties. He warned that an agreement reached by free negotiation “cannot be unilaterally terminated without destruction of confidence and understanding”. The present “unilateral, retroactive action provides no quid pro quo and reduces the incentive to further investment”, he said. He added that the new taxes were additional costs for the industry. The other oil companies agreed generally with Mr. Haight’s strong statement, with Shell sending a letter to the Minister of Mines on December 23 warning that abandonment of the 50–50 formula without prior discussions would have “grave consequences”. El Mundo 3 The source text reads “Jamaica” but was hand-­corrected to read “San José.”
