664
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
130.
Remarks by President Carter1
Washington, November 15, 1979
President Meany, Secretary-Treasurer Lane Kirkland, men and women of the
greatest labor movement in the world:
[Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks.]
But today we have other important matters to consider. For a brief
time this afternoon I want to speak with you and all Americans about
some fundamental principles upon which our Nation was founded and
which we must never forget. To some, these ideals may seem at times to
be old fashioned or outmoded. But we’ve been clearly reminded in re-
cent days that these principles mean just as much to us now as they
have ever meant during any time of critical decision in the history of
our Nation.
These fundamentals have old names to which we must continually
give new meaning—names like “strength,” “courage,” “patriotism,”
“independence,” “the love of freedom,” “human rights,” “justice,”
“concern for the common good.”
This is the 12th day that more than a hundred innocent human
beings, some 60 of whom are members of the United States diplomatic
mission, have been held hostage in our Embassy in Iran. For a rare time
in human history, a host government has condoned and even encour-
aged this kind of illegal action against a sovereign territory and official
diplomatic relations of another nation. This is an act of terrorism—to-
tally outside the bounds of international law and diplomatic tradition.
In this time of trial, our deep concern is for the lives of these brave
hostages, our Nation’s loyal citizens and faithful representatives. Every
American feels anger and outrage at what is happening to them, just as
every American feels concern for their safety and pride in their great
courage. This crisis calls for firmness, and it calls for restraint. And I’m
proud that this situation has brought forth calm leadership by officials
and private citizens throughout this country.
Firmness does require patience, and it requires perseverance.
Firmness also means measured action, deliberate actions that clarify
the real issues, reduce the likelihood of violence, protect our interests,
and ensure justice.
1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 2120–2125. The President spoke at
2:25 p.m. before the 13th constitutional convention of the American Federation of La-
bor–Congress of Industrial Organizations, meeting in the Sheraton Washington Hotel
ballroom.
