3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 250 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI can therefore, he said, not swear allegiance to the Soviet Government and consequently serve in the Soviet Army. Leonid is now threatened with legal prosecution. A court can sentence him to three years in a prison camp. This, then, is the current situation of my family: we are divided, my mother-in-law and one son, Alexander, living abroad. Our younger son, Leonid, is threatened with arrest any day, to face a three-year term in a prison camp. My wife Maria cannot go to her mother since the Soviet authorities refuse to regard that as the reunification of a family. I am not released and do not know why, since it is absurd to talk of secret work after not having worked in my specialty at all for nearly nine years. In the name of goodness and justice, in the name of humanity, please help my family reunite in Israel. Respectfully Yours. Vladimir Slepak. End quote. Matlock 70. Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President Carter1 January 12, 1978 Dear Mr. President, I have carefully studied your letter of December 22.2 First of all I wish to thank you for your New Year greetings and good wishes to the Soviet People and to me personally. On my own part, I sincerely wish you, Mr. President, your family and the American people peace and well-being in this year. Our point of view on a number of specific questions raised in your letter has already been brought to your attention lately. Recently I considered it necessary to address you specially on the question of neutron 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 69, USSR: Brezhnev–Carter Correspondence: 1–12/78. No classification marking. Printed from an unofficial translation. Found attached to a translated note from Dobrynin transmitting a message from Brezhnev to Carter regarding the characteristics of the Soviet satellite Cosmos-954. Brezhnev’s message, apparently transmitted by Dobrynin, is not printed. 2 Carter’s backchannel message, sent just before midnight on December 21, is Document 67.
