Romania
713
been to ward off Soviet pressure for further integration into the Warsaw
Pact and the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA). Ceau-
sescu has often stated that military blocs are an anachronism and has
actively campaigned for the simultaneous dissolution of both NATO
and the Warsaw Pact. Romania has not participated in joint Pact exer-
cises with combat troops since 1962 and does not allow such exercises
on Romanian soil. Romanian resistance to greater military integration
within the Pact reached its high point in November 1978 at a meeting
of the Pact’s Political Consultative Committee in Moscow, where
Ceausescu opposed Soviet attempts to force an increase in the defense
budgets of member states and to centralize control over Pact military
forces. Bucharest has subsequently assumed a more accommodating
stance toward Moscow on military issues, but has not retreated signifi-
cantly from the stands it took at Moscow.
Romanian opposition to economic integration within CEMA is also
long-standing. Indeed, it was the primary issue over which Romania
first broke with the Soviets. Last summer, at a major CEMA conference
in Moscow, Romania fought—with only limited success—Soviet
attempts to give the organization supranational powers in the areas of
decision-making and conducting negotiations with international orga-
nizations. Bucharest further distanced itself from its CEMA partners
this year by concluding a major trade pact with the EC—in direct
defiance of the Soviet preference for a multilateral approach toward
relations with the EC.
The Romanians have also clashed with the Soviets on a variety of
international issues they consider threatening to their foreign policy
autonomy, including the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea and the
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. Bucharest’s opposition to the Viet-
namese takeover in Kampuchea derives at least in part from Romania’s
close relations with China—the ousted Pol Pot regime’s principal ally.
Bucharest has opposed the Soviet move into Afghanistan because of
the obvious implications this latest demonstration of Moscow’s willing-
ness to intervene in a friendly or allied regime holds for Romania. The
Romanians also fear the resultant deterioration in East-West relations
will be detrimental to Romania’s interests. Ceausescu, who advocates
a negotiated solution to the crisis, is apparently coming under pressure
to fall into line with the Soviets on this issue.
Romania is highly vulnerable to a variety of Soviet pressures,
including economic pressure. The USSR supplies about a third of Roma-
nia’s total consumption of iron ore and, along with Poland and Czecho-
slovakia, about half its coking coal. As a result of Romania’s worsening
energy crisis and hard currency shortage, the potential for Soviet lever-
age has probably grown. Moscow has agreed to sell Romania a small
amount of crude oil for hard currency—approximately one million
