Afghanistan of Soviet military and economic assistance. The Communist victory protects this investment and ensures that at least for the near future, Moscow will remain—and probably improve—its position as the most influential foreign power in Kabul. The Soviets applauded Daoud’s coming to power in 1973, but in recent years had grown concerned over his efforts to rid his government of leftists and achieve greater independence from Moscow. Since Moscow’s relations with Afghanistan’s Communists have not always been close, the Soviets will move to strengthen their ties to the recently re-united Afghan Communist party. The Soviets will exploit these ties to influence any reorganization of Afghanistan’s party, military, and administrative institutions. They will proceed cautiously, however, in order to avoid creating undue anxiety in Afghanistan. Although Daoud’s removal will calm some Soviet concerns, it will also cause alarm about Soviet policy elsewhere in the region, particularly in Iran and Pakistan. The Pakistanis and Iranians suspect that the Soviets engineered the coup, and the Pakistanis are again fearful of a “Delhi-Kabul-Moscow” axis, noting that India and the USSR quickly recognized the new regime.4 Both nations will use the events in Kabul to try to elicit increased US military and political support. The Soviets profess to favor a calm and stable subcontinent with governments friendly to the USSR. Tensions and instability—the Soviets allege—create openings for greater Western or Chinese influence. However, Moscow’s previous successes in South Asia have been largely due to its exploitation of these same regional rivalries. Moscow would favor the eventual creation of a Marxist state in Afghanistan along the lines of a Cuba or Vietnam. At this point, however, the Soviets are probably more concerned with the new government’s stability in power and with minimizing the damage to Soviet interests elsewhere in the region than in the ideological and institutional purity of the new regime. The Soviets probably would be satisfied with a left-leaning, strongly pro-Soviet government with distinct nationalist colorings. Moscow almost certainly will press for greater support of Soviet positions on international issues, such as the Asian collective security system, and will expect the new government to refrain from any new initiatives toward Peking. However, it probably will not in the near term press the government to launch any far-reaching, radical reforms that run the risk of alienating large segments of the population. Moscow likewise will counsel caution regarding Kabul’s regional initiatives. Aware that several members of the new government have 4 The Soviet Union was the first country to recognize the new Afghan Government on April 30. India recognized the new Afghan Government on May 2.
