750 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI in their interrelationship. If we are going to preserve the structure of the talks in Geneva, this is what we are preserving. Bartholomew: I would like to insert after the phrase “strategic stability issues which will be of interest to them” the words “including a cooperative transition to the proper balance between strategic offensive and defensive arms.” Karpov: You know we cannot accept that. Bartholomew: Our insert is part of the formal US position. There is already a serious question whether we will have a joint statement on future negotiations. We are going backward very rapidly. Karpov: We are trying to clarify points of interest, find common ground. Bartholomew: What have Burt and Nazarkin have been doing? Already what they had achieved was on a knife edge. Karpov: Here we have a balance between offensive and defensive arms. Bartholomew: This clarification helps with the framework, but does nothing for my concern about continuing without interruption. In fact it is intended to interrupt. When INF stopped, START went on and defense and space went on. Karpov: INF finished everything for INF. Burt: Why should there be an artificial halt to defense and space when START ends. We understand the concept of interrelationship. But you are taking it in a mechanical way to an absurd degree, your approach is unsustainable. Karpov: Let us move on to the second section, and add at the end “including heavy ICBMs and mobile ICBMs.” Then we should include a clarification, giving priority treatment to highly survivable systems, “for example, mobile ICBMs.” Bartholomew: This does nothing to narrow our differences, in fact it sharpens them. Burt: Your language takes the focus away from the important objectives. The objective is not to reduce the concentration of warheads on heavy ICBMs, but to eliminate them. And sea-­based missiles are a better example of highly-­survivable systems. Your three suggestions ignore the US desire for a ban on heavy and MIRVed ICBMs. Karpov: Trident II is very accurate, and doesn’t differ from MX. Bartholomew: First, this formula is nowhere near satisfactory in addressing heavy ICBMs. Second, We are saying the objective should be a ban on MIRVed mobiles. I said to you earlier3 that this fits into a general pattern—­looking to the future, which is what this statement is all about. Our proposal is not that on day one the elimination of all 3 No memorandum of conversation was found.
