Human Rights 517 that the Jewish people embrace many races and colors and themselves uniquely suffered from the evils of racism. More than any other action, this decision served to shake the faith in and support for the United Nations on the part of the American people. Our Congress, in particular, unanimously adopted a resolution requesting that all U.S. participation in the Decade Against Racism cease until the link between Zionism and racism and the Decade was severed. “The United States Government wholeheartedly supports the unrelenting efforts being made by United Nations organs to combat the evils of racism and racial discrimination as these terms were understood when the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination was launched in 1973. We earnestly hope that these crucially important efforts in the struggle to promote human rights will not be upset or diverted by decisions taken at the World Conference. Therefore, on the eve of the opening of the Conference, the United States Government appeals to your government to use its influence in order to prevent any action by the Conference which either explicitly reaffirms the Zionism-racism decision or could be understood as having such an effect. This appeal rests upon the firm conviction that the resurgence of the Zionism-racism decision at the World Conference will not only grossly undermine United Nations efforts to cope with the serious problems of racism and racial discrimination which exist throughout the world, but will further seriously shake the confidence which the American people, and people of good will everywhere, have in the United Nations organization as an instrument for the establishment of peace based upon justice for all people. It comes, however, when strong efforts are being made to advance the cause of peace in the Middle East.” 2. For EC–9 posts: EC post capitals all strongly opposed the GA’s decision on Zionism-racism. However, in intervening period Africans succeeded in subsequent GA resolutions in watering down references to Zionism-racism to indirect mention of “relevant resolutions.” This permitted Arabs to say relevant resolutions meant Z–R and for Europeans to say it did not. Europeans have thus continued to participate in activities of the Decade such as the upcoming World Conference by interpreting indirect references as sufficient to break the linkage while U.S. and Israel have insisted that Z–R resolution be specifically repudiated. At recent Havana and Belgrade meetings of NAM, however, the NAM endorsed direct reference to Z–R and urged that it be raised at the World Conference Against Racism. EC participants are therefore faced with possibility of reaffirmation of the 1975 resolution equating Zionism with racism by direct reference and capitals should be made aware of the need to develop a strategy to prevent such explicit reference.
