550
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
undisciplined and unprofessional conduct that characterizes various
parts of the bureaucracy in the State Department.
This kind of thing does not have to go on. It did not happen under
Dean Rusk; it did not happen under Henry Kissinger; it did not even
happen under William Rogers. It is destructive, and I do think that you
should consult some of your close political advisers (Ham, Jody,10 etc.)
on how best to reassert more effective discipline. I do not wish to offer
advice along these lines because it could be misconstrued as being self-
serving.
In sum, if our foreign policy efforts are not only to be successful
but be perceived as such so as to contribute to your political strength in
1980, it is necessary to focus on those few issues which will come to fru-
ition at that time. And it is important that we do so with a genuine
sense of cohesion and loyalty. I want you to know that I myself and my
staff will do our utmost to refrain from contributing to public disarray.
A similar commitment elsewhere in the government should be re-
quired as well.
2. Trends
Attached are the maps I referred to at the beginning of this re-
port.11 They cover three time frames—1955, 1966 and 1979. Each map is
color coded as follows:
Blue
Aligned with U.S. or West
Light Blue
Non-Aligned but trending toward West (not
necessarily the U.S.)
White
Non-Aligned
Pink
Non-Aligned but trending toward USSR (not
toward communism per se)
Red
Aligned with USSR
I believe these maps, albeit in a simplified fashion, capture the sig-
nificant political changes that have occurred over the past two and a
half decades. Here are a few observations:
1. The most far-reaching changes have taken place in Asia—the Far
East, Southeast Asia and South Asia—and the most important of these
has been the PRC. The alignment of India has also shifted during this
period and it could be argued that India should now be considered
trending toward the West (light blue) rather than non-aligned (white).
The next year—and the fate of Indira Gandhi and the Janata Party—
10 Jordan and Powell.
11 Not printed.
