384 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV III. I have wanted to discuss this situation with you personally before making a recommendation to you on the Defense budget level for FY 1980. I plan to make such a recommendation in the next few days. As Secretary of Defense, I of course feel a particular responsibility for the adequacy of our military capability. But you should know me well enough to know that I am not by nature an alarmist, and that in matters of this kind I consider my position carefully. I believe I owe it to you to make you aware of my very deep concern. Harold Brown 88. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, September 18, 1978 SUBJECT ICBM Vulnerability Since late last year the Defense Science Board has been studying the ICBM vulnerability problem. The Chairman, Dr. Eugene Fubini, has just submitted the Board’s report. It is well done and highly relevant to some key decisions we must soon make. Enclosed (Tab A) for your information is an executive summary of that report. If, after reading this, you want additional background, I can send you a more detailed (18-­page) summary. I should note that the group’s conclusions on NCA survivability are, in my view, flawed by their lack of knowledge of our plans relative to that issue. While the Defense Science Board was conducting this study, similar and related issues were being examined by three other panels: An OSTP panel formed by Frank Press; a panel of the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board; and a university-­oriented panel of the Department of Defense knows as JASON.2 Bill Perry, Under Secretary for Research and Engineering, met with representatives from these four panels ten days 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Doctrine/C3I: 1978. Top Secret. 2 For the OSTP report, see Document 43. JASON (“July August September October November”) refers to an independent advisory panel of scientists that consulted for the Department of Defense.
