14  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
of the Vice President’s statements in support of NATO,2 we would be 
giving the wrong signal. The same thing would be true if we substi-
tuted two reserve brigades for active brigades. When we look at our 
active forces and pull out two from NATO, it will raise questions.
Secretary Brown: Your points are well taken, but they are superrog-
atory. They go beyond the question of what we really need.
Secretary Vance: You’re degrading readiness. The reserves can’t do 
the job.
Secretary Brown: These are late-­deploying units, primarily infantry. 
They’re relatively unimportant in NATO. It would not mean a substan-
tial reduction in capacity. This is a separate problem from what others 
see.
Dr. Brzezinski: I agree with Cy (Vance) on the active brigades. Wait 
until our world-­wide review is finished.3
Secretary Brown: You’re talking about perceptions.
Dr. Brzezinski: Politics is perception.
Secretary Brown: They’re two separate things.
Dr. Brzezinski: You have provided the military considerations; 
we will add the political. On the nuclear submarine and AWACS, we 
need to look at the European reaction. If we reduce our effort, they will 
reduce theirs.
Secretary Brown: That’s an appropriate issue. If we buy more, they 
won’t have to.
Dr. Brzezinski: We should develop a package on manpower, includ-
ing base closings.
Secretary Brown: That’s a good idea, but it’s not new. Nothing can 
be done by February 15. If we made manpower cuts it should be in the 
tail, not in the teeth. We have been talking to Congress about this.
Dr. Brzezinski: We should get an interagency group together.
Secretary Brown: We don’t need it for base closings. (to Dr. ­Brzezinski) 
I’ll discuss it with you. Do you know it takes at least two years to close a 
base. It takes one year for Congressional consideration and another year 
for the environmental impact study. We started to close the Franklin 
Arsenal in 1965 and are still getting complaints about it.
President Carter: That’s Fritz’ (Vice President Mondale) favorite.
Secretary Brown: I strongly agree on manpower reductions, but the 
package has to be large enough so that both the fiscal conservatives and 
the doves will get behind it and push it.
2 For Mondale’s January 24 Brussels address, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. I, 
Foundations of Foreign Policy, Document 16.
3 Reference is to PRM/NSC–10, printed as Document 4.
