Human Rights
303
—To a remarkable extent, given the traumas of U.S. society in re-
cent years, other societies continue to look to the U.S. as a model—not a
perfect model, to be sure, but the most relevant model available in an
imperfect world. Our ideas, techniques, values and institutions are per-
ceived as workable. The substantial Nigerian investment in the Amer-
ican educational experience (anticipated to exceed $135 million annu-
ally by next year), the Egyptian reopening to the Western market
economy, the overwhelming German celebration of our Bicentennial,
are simply examples.
—The reverse side of the coin is the tendency on the part of many
to dismiss the USSR as an irrelevant model, bankrupt of values, and es-
sentially unworkable.
In light of the foregoing, I recommend to you and the President for
consideration three specific proposals:
First, Human Rights Week (December 10–17) affords the President
an opportunity to address domestic and foreign constituencies simulta-
neously, with a discussion of the place of the individual in society, his
relationship to government and economy, the sources of our societal
values, their relevance to others. I would like to submit a draft speech
for consideration within a short time if you give preliminary endorse-
ment to this recommendation. USIA could facilitate live international
TV coverage by satellite; at a minimum we could place the text in the
hands of a very large number of important foreigners. We assume, of
course, that the President would deliver the speech before an appro-
priate specific audience or as an Oval Office address to the nation.
Second, assuming the President plans a year-end “State of the
World” message to Congress, the content and tone could usefully re-
flect some of the foreign preoccupations which the foregoing suggests. I
will forward, by November 28, some specific suggestions in this regard.
Third, the foreign environment we think we perceive has impor-
tant implications for the new International Communication Agency.
We gather the President will be reviewing the FY 1979 budget on De-
cember 6. I would like to send you background material and a few in-
formal proposals before that meeting.
