Comprehensive Test Ban 491 agreement on testing limitations after the 5-year treaty would be presented to the Senate for ratification. 2. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the test ban, as outlined, would involve significant military risks. In a memorandum9 which you forwarded to the President on 22 April 1978,10 the Joint Chiefs of Staff stated they believe that a test ban must allow continued testing at a level sufficient to: a. Maintain high confidence in the reliability of US nuclear weapons and hence confidence in the US nuclear deterrent. b. Avoid undesirable asymmetries which are otherwise likely to result due to the inability of the United States to verify compliance with the test ban. 3. (S) Recent discussions which the Joint Chiefs of Staff have held with Department of Energy officials and their laboratory directors, upon whom the United States must rely for technical judgments concerning the reliability of US nuclear weapons, have further underscored the requirement for continued testing to maintain stockpile reliability. These experts have stated that, under a CTB with zero testing over an extended period, stockpile reliability will be degraded. They have taken the position that the most current nuclear warheads and bombs in the US stockpile cannot be maintained without nuclear testing. Their current best estimate is that the required nuclear yield for that purpose is at [less than 1 line not declassified] With nuclear testing permitted at [less than 1 line not declassified] it is likely that the current nuclear weapon stockpile could be maintained in a safe and reliable condition. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have found these assessments persuasive. 4. (S) Based on available information, Soviet reliability problems may not be as severe, since the Soviets’ typically heavier weapons and larger payloads have allowed them to use coarser design criteria which are not as susceptible to problems as the high-technology US designs. This is likely to cause an asymmetric degradation of the stockpiles. Assuming that the Soviets recognize this, they may eventually perceive a strategic advantage, and the asymmetry therefore would become destabilizing. 5. (S) The announced intention to restrict resumption of testing to that necessary for weapons safety and reliability appears to preempt decisions concerning weapons development which are better made in the context of other arms control agreements. The United States may be 9 Reference: JCSM–119–78, 18 April 1978, “Comprehensive Test Ban (U).” [Footnote is in the original.] 10 See Document 193.
