Venezuela 1269 as described by the Foreign Minister,4 and Deptel 698 outlining the Department’s reaction to the conversation with the Foreign Minister.5 President Betancourt made clear in no uncertain terms that the Foreign Minister had stated accurately the Venezuelan position with reference to Trujillo. The President also confirmed that if he did not react immediately to an attack on Venezuela by attacking Trujillo he would be overthrown by the Armed Forces. In reply to a question the President confirmed that Gonzalo Barrios is going to Washington within the very near future and that his mission will be not that of Permanent Representative to the OAS but the very special one of introducing into the OAS a suggestion for action against Trujillo. He also made it clear that what Venezuela has in mind is not just a general anti-­dictatorship resolution but a very definitely pin-­pointed anti-Trujillo position. The President said that Trujillo is the one threat to hemispheric peace and every country in the Hemisphere should realize this. The President said that he is being subjected to great pressure to break relations with the Dominican Republic but he has opposed this action. He hopes to handle Trujillo through the OAS. He also said he is not concerned over Somoza or Stroessner; Trujillo is the enemy. With Batista, Peron and many Perezjiministas in the Dominican Republic certainly Cuba, Venezuela and Colombia can never feel secure and he feels that even Argentina should be concerned. He confirmed that one of the missions of the Foreign Minister on his trip to Buenos Aires for the Meeting of the 21 will be to discuss this anti-Trujillo move in the OAS with the Argentine, Uruguayan and Brazilian Governments. The President said that Castro will certainly not restrain himself long from an all-­out attack on Trujillo. Betancourt is convinced that unless Trujillo is made to leave by what he called “diplomatic means”, there will be an international war in the Caribbean - between Cuba, and the Dominican Republic - within two months. The President said that he would prepare and give Ambassador Sparks a copy of a memorandum outlining the basis for his accusations against Trujillo and for the Venezuelan position toward the
