854  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
Chinese Communists. This case is probably typical of what we are up 
against.
Hubert Graves told me at lunch on the 5th that he had just received 
an informal note from O’Neill stating that Chou En-­lai or Chang 
Han-fu—I forget which, had recently mentioned to a diplomat in 
Peiping that the PRC has a list of 200 Chinese who are in American pris­
ons, which the Chinese Communists are holding in reserve for possible 
future use. We surmise that the PRC does not intend to produce this list 
at Geneva, at least for the present, but is keeping it as an ace in the hole 
for exploitation when the recriminations start, if there is a break off. 
My guess is that if there is a list of 200, the great majority are American 
citizens of Chinese race, but this would not necessarily prevent the PRC 
from getting some propaganda mileage out of the list.
The Chinese Embassy here, and the large Chinese community 
in San Francisco and New York, are greatly upset over the extensive 
Federal Grand Jury investigation of the Chinese passport fraud racket. 
A very energetic Assistant District Attorney in San Francisco is pushing 
an unusually vigorous investigation there, with the officers of many 
Chinese benevolent, fraternal and family societies, being subpoenaed to 
appear before the Grand Jury with all their records. Many ill-­informed 
Chinese apparently think that the information sought is eventually to 
be turned over to the Chinese Communists as part of some deal grow­
ing out of the Geneva talks. It is a far fetched apprehension, but appar­
ently is real and widespread. The Chinese Embassy claims that many 
Chinese are in a state of near panic. We are sending you a copy of a 
memorandum of conversation on this subject.
In reference to the unaccounted for military personnel, Col. Monroe 
says Defense is working on the list of 450 and expects to have a revision 
ready about the middle of next week. There will be a reduction in the 
total number of names resulting from the identification of some addi­
tional bodies. There will also be some new information on many of the 
names. Also the list will show what the recent Communist “accounting” 
at Panmunjom was with respect to each name. (Incidentally, Defense 
will be sending a message to the MAC shortly stating we consider the 
accounting inadequate and spelling out why.) A copy of the above list 
will be sent to us and to you.
I think nothing further need be said about this at Geneva for the 
time being.
We spent last Sunday afternoon at the Department studying the 
Chinese Communist statement and deciding how we would handle it. 
I gather you agreed with our decision not to be hasty in our reply, and 
to itch it in a restrained key. Neither the Chinese Communist statement
