1352  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
simply matching action my government already taken, that is permit 
civilians both sides who desire do so to return. Evidence of third parties 
designated under our agreement of September 10, 1955 showed who 
had permitted that take place and who had not. Difficult foresee value 
further agreements between us when first agreement not carried out 
and when his side refused unconditionally to say our disputes would 
be settled only by peaceful means.
21. After Wang indicated he had nothing more to say I proposed 
next meeting Thursday, April 11. Wang agreed.
Gowen
798.	 Letter 55 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 55
Geneva, March 14, 1957
Dear Walter:
You will see that nothing remarkable developed at today’s meet­
ing. At the end I virtually dared him to make a move to break off if he 
wanted to but he didn’t accept the challenge.
First, I enormously appreciated your letter and the authority from 
the Department to take home leave if I desired to do so. Please express 
my personal appreciation to the Secretary at a suitable opportunity. 
Frankly, when I wrote to EE I had no thought whatever of the possi­
bility, and, as I told them, was thinking only of a quick trip between 
monthly meetings. However, I must confess that the prospect of some 
leave at home is most attractive, and opens up new vistas that I had 
not contemplated. [text not declassified] Therefore, to extract maximum 
advantage from the opportunity I  took advantage of your generous 
offer to set my own time and did not ask for the postponement this 
time. My present thought is at the meeting May 9 or thereabouts to 
ask for the following meeting July 11. This would enable me to leave 
directly from Geneva following the May 9 meeting, spend the week 
of May 13 in the Department, start leave the week of May 20 taking 
about six weeks ending about June 30, and be back in Prague for the 
July 4 reception, and then come down here for the meeting the follow­
ing week. This is, of course, always subject to any last minute develop­
ments either here or in Prague that would clearly make it undesirable. 
I would appreciate your letting EE know of this plan, and confirming 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Drafted by Johnson who signed the original “Alex.”
