International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 47 OPTION C—Seek postponement of legislative action pending development of the Administration position. We would then give urgent consideration within the EPG to new maritime initiatives other than cargo preferences.3 Potential initiatives include: —Support legislative and regulatory initiatives to facilitate expansion of the U.S.-flag dry bulk carrier fleet. (There are currently only 16 active U.S.-flag dry bulkers.) —Support “3rd Flag”4 legislation intended to eliminate predatory rate cutting practices of carriers, particularly Communist country carriers, who serve U.S. trades other than those with their own countries. Basic intent is to minimize Soviet merchant fleet inroads into U.S. foreign trade. —Support “all-American” route for Alaskan north slope gas vice trans-Canada route. All-American route would generate significant U.S. employment and would involve as many as 11 large U.S.-built liquefied natural gas-carrying ships and more ships in future years operating between Alaska and the West Coast. —Repeal U.S. Income Tax deferral provisions relating to shipping income received by foreign subsidiaries of U.S. corporations. This socalled “Subpart F” income exclusion constitutes a tax subsidy ($90 million to $140 million/year) to U.S.-owned foreign flag shipping. —Support additional bilateral shipping agreements. Opposed by many in the Executive Branch as contrary to U.S. free competition policy, such agreements are increasingly common and provide substantial benefits to ship operators. —Support extension of U.S. cabotage laws (Jones Act)5 to the Virgin Islands for oil. Legislation to effect this was reported out by the Senate Commerce Committee in 1976 and has been reintroduced. It would mean about 2,000 seagoing jobs and employment for about 25 tankers. 3 In a March 26 memorandum to Carter, Eizenstat indicated his support for Option C and suggested that if Carter decided in favor of Option C, he should consult selected Congressional representatives “to get their assessment of the strength of Congress’ commitment to Cargo Preference Legislation, as well as to give them a sense of involvement.” Eizenstat also advised a meeting between administration officials and maritime industry representatives “to explain why the Administration cannot support Cargo Preference and to discuss the alternatives we are interested in pursuing.” (Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 14, 3/28/77 [1]) 4 “Third flag” shipping refers to the carriage of cargo between two countries by a ship that is registered in neither the exporting nor the importing country, but instead in a third country. 5 A reference to the cabotage regulations in the Merchant Marine Act of 1920 (often referred to as the Jones Act), which stipulate that cargo transported between U.S. ports must be carried in ships that are built and registered in the United States and owned and predominantly operated by Americans.
