December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
793
Approve $1.5 billion in credits. Notify Harold Brown to prepare
the letter to General Ali accordingly.3
Approve $1 billion in credits.
Approve $750 million in credits.
3 Carter approved this option and initialed “J.”
229.
Memorandum From Willam B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 21, 1979
SUBJECT
Unresolved Issues (U)
1. Subphasing of withdrawal. Israel is sticking with the position of
not withdrawing from the Alma field until the end of the nine-month
period.2 Egypt says this is contrary to the concept of subphasing and
has suspended its agreement to send an Ambassador one month after
the completion of the interim withdrawal. This morning, Roy, Hal and I
developed a possible compromise proposal: withdrawal from the oil-
field in six months; arrangements to insure continued supply of oil to
Israel until normalization of relations begins; exchange of Ambas-
sadors on schedule. The six month figure is eminently defensible. We
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 55, Middle East: Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel, 1–3/79. Secret. Sent for
information. A stamped notation reads: “ZB has seen.”
2 When discussing the issue of Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai oil fields with
Lewis on March 20, Begin “articulated with great animation his resistance” to reducing
the 9-month withdrawal period. “Israel, he said, does not want to activate the U.S. oil
supply agreement if it is not absolutely necessary.” On the oil supply agreement, Begin
added that his “only quarrel” with the present formulation “is that he prefers two distinct
periods of ten and five years duration, rather than a single period of fifteen years. Begin
said he strongly prefers the latter, thus allowing [the] 1975 [U.S. oil] Commitment to
[former Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak] Rabin to fade into the history books. I [Lewis] told
Begin there was absolutely no chance that we would agree to an extension to twenty
years of the U.S. commitment and Begin replied he had no intention of requesting one.”
(Telegram 5599 from Tel Aviv, March 20; National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 8,
Pre-Signing Negotiations: Cairo, Tel Aviv, Washington & New York, 3/20–26/79)
