Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX withdrawal. This could take the form of a letter to you, and then you would write to Begin.6 —US Security Role. Israel will accept a US-manned early warning station7 in central Sinai which would provide information for both Israel and Egypt. Israel would also welcome a continuation of the US reconnaissance role. Dayan would like to talk further about our “responsibility”8 for the implementation of the treaty. —Side Letters. Israel has asked for a letter from us confirming that there is no “legal linkage” between the treaty and the West Bank/Gaza negotiations.9 Weizman also wants a letter from us stating that the timetable for Israeli withdrawal from Sinai will be contingent upon the completion of the new airfields in the Negev.10 —Memo of Understanding. Dayan wants to “review and update” all of our previous memoranda of understanding.11 —East Jerusalem. Secretary Vance has asked to see Begin in New York on Thursday to discuss Israeli plans concerning east Jerusalem.12 Egypt —Priority of Obligations. The Egyptian delegation has agreed to consider new draft language proposed by Secretary Vance. Their preliminary response has been quite encouraging.13 —Joint Letter. The Egyptians want some reference in the letter to a target date for holding elections for the self-governing authority. They also insist on making some reference to Egypt’s “special responsibilities” in Gaza.14 —Exchange of Ambassadors. The Egyptians will agree to the procedure suggested by Dayan whereby Sadat will write to you, and you will write to Begin concerning the exchange of ambassadors.15 —Security Arrangements. The Egyptians no longer favor an Americanmanned early warning station in Zone B. They prefer to have their own 6 Carter wrote “ok” and drew an arrow pointing to this sentence. 7 Carter underlined “US-manned early warning station” and wrote a question mark with an arrow pointing to this phrase. 8 Carter underlined “responsibility” and wrote a question mark with an arrow pointing to this phrase. 9 Carter wrote in the margin next to this sentence: “only if Egypt agrees.” 10 Carter wrote in the margin next to this sentence: “Camp David letter should be adequate.” 11 Carter wrote in the margin next to this sentence: “Be cautious.” 12 Carter wrote in the margin next to this section: “no.” 13 Carter wrote in the margin next to this section: “Cy work out.” 14 Carter drew quotation marks in the margin next to this section, indicating as in the above section, “Cy work out.” 15 Carter wrote in the margin next to this section: “ok.”
