660 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 140. Memorandum of Discussion at the 397th NSC Meeting1 Washington, February 26, 1959 SUBJECT Discussion at the 397th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, Febru­ ary 26, 1959 Present at the 397th NSC Meeting were the President of the United States, presiding; the Acting Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense; and Mr. John S. Patterson for the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization. Also present and participating in the Council actions below were the Secretary of the Treasury; the Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Acting Secretary of the Interior (Item 1); the Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Item 1) and the Attorney General (Item 2). Also attending the meeting were Mr. Alan N. Belmont for the Chairman, Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference (for Item 2); the Chairman, Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security (for Item 2); the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission; Admiral Arleigh Burke for the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Deputy Secretary of Defense; the Special Assistants to the President for National Security Affairs, for Science and Technology, and for Security Operations Coordination; Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; Assistant Secretary of Defense John N. Irwin, II; the Chairman, Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee; the White House Staff Secretary; the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC. There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the main points taken. [Omitted here is agenda item 1.] 2. PORT SECURITY (NSC 5802/1; NSC 5819, part 9; NSC Action No. 1862–­f; Memos for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated January 7 and January 26, 1959) Mr. Gray briefed the Council on the background of the problem and referred to a letter from the Attorney General to the Director, Bureau of the Budget dated February 25, 1959 which was handed out by Mr. Lay. (Copies of the briefing note, portions of which Mr. Gray used at the Council meeting, as well as copies of the Attorney General’s 1 Source: Agenda item 2: Port Security. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—5 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
