Romania
733
231.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Bucharest1
Washington, July 30, 1980, 1937Z
202085. Joint State-Defense message. Subject: US Military Exports
to Romania. Ref: Bucharest 5390.2
1. (S-entire text)
2. The meeting on July 1 between the DATT and Rear Admiral
Dinu appears to have been a useful exchange. We believe it important
to have an early second exchange to clarify more precisely what we
have in mind.3 We are particularly concerned that the Romanians not
build unrealistic expectations and that our exchanges reflect a careful
and constructive approach.
3. Our strategy at this stage is to give the Romanians a general
understanding of the kinds of equipment the US might be willing to
license for sale and the kinds the US is not prepared to license, and to
seek Romanian reactions to this approach. Begin FYI. Shortly we will
inform the Yugoslavs, who approached us, that the US would approve
an export license for the export to Yugoslavia of a US aileron drive
system to be installed in the wings of the Romanian version of the Jurom
jet fighter. This should not repeat not be conveyed to the Romanians
at this time. End FYI.
4. Accordingly, at the Charge’s discretion, the Defense Attache
should convey the following points to Admiral Dinu. Begin text:
—We found the exchange which took place on July 1 to be useful.
—In view of the interest in having further exchanges on this subject,
we wish to outline in greater detail to you our general approach.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 67, Romania: 4/80–1/81. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Sent for information Priority to
the White House. Drafted by Courtney, Farber, and Tumminia; cleared by Bartholomew,
Barry, Kreisberg, Siena, and Larrabee and in T; approved by Nimetz.
2 In telegram 5390 from Bucharest, July 2, the Embassy reported on the July 1
meeting between Dinu and the Defense Attaché. The Embassy reported: Dinu “expressed
his satisfaction with the meeting and the fact that the U.S. response had not been a
categoric ‘no.’” See footnote 4, Document 230.
3 The decision to approach the Romanians to seek clarification was taken at a July
23 MBB meeting. O’Donohue forwarded Secretary Muskie a briefing memorandum on
the status of the Department’s position on military exports to Romania on July 22
recommending that the Defense Attaché approach the Romanians again seeking clarifica-
tion. Muskie wrote in the margin “Clear cable and after Romanian response talk to
Congress.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Subject Files of
Edmund S. Muskie, 1963–1981, Lot 83D66, Box 6, Folder 1)
