260
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
uary 15. The Commission will not be able to proceed, however, until
the member states have approved it, and French consent will be key.
The French government is reluctant with the March parliamentary elec-
tions only a few months away and with widespread public concern
about imports from the third world and Japan. They have asked us to
minimize publicity over the 40 percent tariff cutting goal.
The ability of the EC Commission to press ahead towards a major
result in the MTN could depend on whether you can obtain a French
commitment to support, or at a minimum not to veto, tabling of the Eu-
ropean Community’s tariff offer by January 20. We can acknowledge
that the 40 percent cut should not be given major press emphasis. In-
stead the major focus should be on the improvement of trade rules in
such areas as subsidies, safeguards, standards, and government
procurement.
2. Safeguards.—The European Community has conditioned its ten-
tative support for a 40 percent tariff cut on the negotiation of a safe-
guard agreement that would permit them to restrict, on a selective
basis, imports for particular countries when they become disruptive. In
essence, they are saying that their economies can adjust to increased
competition from the U.S., but not from some of the less developed
countries, and perhaps Japan. We have indicated a willingness to work
out an understanding on this issue, but we have been reluctant to ac-
cept unlimited selectivity because it could open the door to protec-
tionism by making safeguards too easy to use; it could lead to a frag-
mentation of the world trading system and exacerbate North/South
relations; it could lead to a diversion of exports from the EC to the U.S.
market; and it could be used against us. We have insisted that any
move toward selectivity be circumscribed by conditions for its use and
better international discipline.
The French government has been pushing hard for selective safe-
guards, as part of their concept of organized liberalism. They consider
it essential to reduce public fears about a potential flood of imports
from the third world. Your ability to obtain assurances from French
leaders on tariff cuts is likely to depend, in part, on our willingness to
support them on this issue.
3. Non-Tariff Barriers (including subsidies and agricultural trade bar-
riers).—Both the U.S. and the EC have emphasized the importance of
non-tariff barriers in the current trade talks. We have made progress on
a number of these, but we have yet to make such progress on some of
the tough negotiating issues, such as plans for reducing barriers to agri-
cultural trade and rules for minimizing the trade-distorting impact of
subsidies. Disagreement on these issues evoke strong emotions on both
sides of the Atlantic, and in the absence of substantive solutions in the
MTN we are headed for a major confrontation that would tend to
