International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
649
THATCHER: In my judgment not enough attention has been given
to the need to fight inflation. Even before the oil situation inflation was
up in our countries. The oil price increase made inflation all the more
important. In the past people have expected the standard of living to go
up, and equated this with higher wages. The politicians took the words
of Keynes10 on deficit financing, but did not recognize the point about
the need for surpluses in good times. Strict control of money supply is
needed to control inflation. Inflation is cheating the savings of older
people. It transfers the savings of the elderly to working people. The
problem has been underway for 30 years and it won’t go away.
OHIRA: The problem of inflation is important. Inflation and slow
growth are two sides of the same coin. Unemployment is also urgent.
The problem is acute. I share Mrs. Thatcher’s views.
SCHMIDT: I concur with Mrs. Thatcher. There are temptations in
society to make up for oil price increases and the rise in the cost of
living by increases in nominal incomes. This does not work. I would
like to see this idea in the text of the Communique. I think we should
stress the last section on page 5 in the Communique “attempt to coop-
erate . . .”. We are not in a Keynesian situation today. He is not appli-
cable today.
GISCARD: Keynes addressed the situation of the 30’s with genius.
If he were here he would update his analysis. He might suggest valu-
able amendments to the Communique. With respect to the Commu-
nique we should not aim at pursuing deflationary policies in our coun-
tries in order to combat inflation. We should restructure our policy to
contain inflation. In France investment has not been a growth factor in
the last three years; consumers and trade have led. In the present situa-
tion you need increased investment to increase growth. This en-
courages savings in industry and encourages production. High infla-
tion and high unemployment are not satisfactory.
Our economic growth rate is not tied to rates of oil consumption.
There was a fixed relationship between growth and oil consumption.
We have broken that tie. We now attain growth with alternate energy
sources. We must invest in alternate energy resources. This will help on
growth as well.
ANDREOTTI: We need positive results from the Summit. Last
year we succeeded in part. Countries with greater economic possibil-
ities increased their growth rates and this helped other countries to
grow. Italy will maintain its undertaking of 4% growth.
10 John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946) was an influential British economist and ad-
viser to the U.K. Government. Among his many accomplishments, he conceptualized a
new approach to macroeconomics that focused on the role of government in increasing
aggregate demand.
