North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 tainty.) In order to encourage the LDCs toward the more constructive of these two outcomes, we will consult actively with them prior to the next meeting of the CIEC at official level (April 26–27). With regard to the specific issues: Issue 1. All agencies agree that the US should support a common fund which permits a pooling of the funds of various buffer stocks and includes a provision for World Bank lending to supplement these funds. This will be seen as a demonstration of US flexibility, although it will not meet all the demands of the LDCs.2 Issue 2. All agencies recommend that the US negotiate a substantial World Bank general capital increase—which is important to many of the medium-income LDCs, particularly in Latin America—and indicate our willingness to do so at the Summit and/or at the CIEC Ministerial.3 Issue 3. The agencies agree on the desirability of a public pledge by the US to seek major increases in foreign aid, but they differ on specifics—whether to announce our intention to seek a five-year doubling of aid appropriations (from the FY 77 base) or only to signal an intention to seek substantial increases. State, AID, HUD and Labor support the “doubling” option. Treasury, OMB, CEA and Commerce prefer the “substantial increase” option. There is a risk in offending Congress by an implied precommitment to double aid, which could endanger aid increases we are now seeking for FY 78, and there would be advantages to avoiding such an announcement before completing our aid review. However, a “doubling” announcement would demonstrate a sustained multi-year Administration commitment which might help deter annual piecemeal, Congressional cuts, and it might help stimulate similar efforts from Germany, Japan and OPEC. A pledge to seek major increases in foreign assistance is highly important and I recommend that you approve it. A “doubling” announcement, although beneficial from a foreign policy perspective, is not as critical; a commitment to a “substantial increase” would also be quite useful. Approve pledge to seek a “substantial increase in foreign aid” Announce intent to seek a “doubling of aid appropriations” Disapprove4 2 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation. 3 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation, writing in the adjacent margin “for hard loans.” 4 Carter indicated his disapproval of this recommendation, writing in the margin “‘more effective aid’ ok.”
