Non-Proliferation
955
376.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to Denis Clift of the National
Security Council Staff1
Washington, October 12, 1979
SUBJECT
Status Report on Current Non-Proliferation Issues
In response to your request,2 we have prepared the following brief
summary of current non-proliferation issues. Please let me know if you
wish further elaboration on any of these issues.
Pakistan (Secret/Nodis)
Pakistan continues to pursue a nuclear explosive capability, in-
cluding development of enrichment and reprocessing facilities to ac-
quire weapons useable material and development of the non-nuclear
elements of a nuclear explosive device. We believe that Pakistan will
not be able to accumulate enough fissile material from its enrichment
and reprocessing activities for a nuclear explosive for at least two to
three years, but there are recurring reports that Pakistan might test a
device within the next six months, perhaps with material acquired
from abroad. We cannot exclude this possibility.
We have terminated foreign assistance to Pakistan in accordance
with the Symington amendment3 (PL–480 continues), and we have re-
peatedly told high levels of the Pakistan government that we will not
be able to respond to its legitimate security and economic development
needs as long as it continues its present nuclear activities. Some of our
allies, the PRC and the Soviet Union have also expressed their concerns
to the GOP.
Foreign Affairs advisor Agha Shahi will be in Washington next
week for consultation on security questions, including the nuclear
issue. We are also consulting with our allies with a view to developing
a common approach to the Pakistan problem.
1 Source: Carter Library, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Box 2, Talking Points for For-
eign Policy Breakfasts: 7/79–12/79. Secret; Nodis; Eyes Only.
2 Not found.
3 The
Symington
amendment
introduced
by
Senator
Stuart
Symington
(D-Missouri) required the President, when furnishing development assistance under the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and making sales under the Agricultural Trade Develop-
ment and Assistance Act of 1954, to take into account (1) “the percentage of the recipient
or purchasing country’s budget which is devoted to military purposes, and (2) the degree
to which the recipient or purchasing country is using its foreign exchange resources to ac-
quire military equipment.” (The Foreign Assistance Act of 1967, P.L. 90–137, approved on
November 14, 1967; 81 Stat. 459)
