Chapter 2, January–June 1989  179
Although the United States has indicated to the Soviets that we 
believe a future START Treaty must provide for movable ICBMs, we 
have provided no details and no treaty text. There is as yet no agreed 
verification approach for such ICBMs.
In developing the ICBM modernization options in the defense strat-
egy review (NSR-12) little consideration was given to movable ICBMs. 
There is no program within the Department of Defense to develop such 
ICBMs. Some believe that, now that the President has made an ICBM 
modernization decision, the United States no longer needs to protect 
the option of deploying movable ICBMs, and that we should cease 
attempts to include provisions protecting such an option in START. We 
would not want to allow the Soviets this option if it would not be exer-
cised by the United States.
Others believe that, until it is clear what the Congress will do, we 
can not rule out the prospects that we will need to find an alternate 
solution to both Peacekeeper and small ICBM deployment in order to 
ensure ICBM survivability. Further, those who hold this view note that 
the President’s decision results in only part of the ICBM force being 
survivable, and that we may wish to increase the survivability of the 
remainder of the force in future years.
Finally, some believe that, even if additional mechanisms for 
enhancing ICBM survivability are desirable, as a practical matter by 
the time a movable ICBM could be deployed, the United States should 
be in a position to enhance ICBM survivability through the deployment 
of strategic defenses. Others believe that strategic hard point defense 
may work particularly well in conjunction with a multiple shelter bas-
ing approach.
Options—Movable ICBMs. Three options exist:
— Option 1—Drop further consideration of movable ICBMs in 
START.
— Option 2—Continue to insist that a future START Treaty include 
provisions allowing movable ICBMs; defer detailed discussions with 
the Soviets; develop detailed verification scheme for such ICBMs.
