First Responses
61
gan’s government was even more suspicious of radical Palestinian
activity in Iran. We cannot rule out the possibility, however, that the
PFLP is involved with at least some faction of the group occupying
the Embassy. For a number of years the PFLP has had contacts with
Iranian leftists. [portion marking not declassified]
The Palestine Liberation Organization’s Role
[1½ lines not declassified] Principal PLO leaders, however, moved
quickly to gain what international and American good will they could
from the situation. They presumably believe they gained a minor vic-
tory in the relaxation of Washington’s ban on contacts with them, but
their primary goal appears to be the major improvement in their image
if they can play a mediating role in obtaining the release of the hostages.
[portion marking not declassified]
[Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.]
27.
Memorandum for the Files1
Washington, November 13, 1979
The Danish Ambassador phoned at 12:45 today, November 13 to
forward a summary of the Danish Ambassador in Tehran’s account of
the EC–9 meeting with Bani Sadr at 11:00 AM Tehran time today
(November 13):2
The EC–9 Ambassadors reaffirmed their humanitarian concerns
regarding the occupation of the U.S. Embassy and reinforced their
earlier protest regarding the violations of international law.
The Danish Ambassador in Tehran commented that Bani Sadr
appeared after 45 minutes of discussion to take the EC–9 concerns
seriously and agreed to look into the betterment of the hostages’
conditions.
1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Swiss Channel. Secret.
Drafted by Suddarth. Copies were sent to Constable for the Iranian Working Group,
Saunders, and Newsom.
2 The British Embassy in Washington retransmitted the text of a message, November
14, from the British Embassy in Tehran to the Foreign Commonwealth Office, which
was a written account of the meeting. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
Material, Middle East File, Box 30, Subject Files, [Retained] 11/1/79–11/15/79
