International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
353
The Economic Policy Group3 met Monday, March 20, 1978, to
discuss possible actions.4 We are sending you a separate decision mem-
orandum on the anti-inflation measures considered by the EPG.5 The
present memorandum deals with measures to improve the trade
deficit.
Oil Imports
All agencies recommend that you call in the Congressional leader-
ship6 before your foreign trip7 and urge expedited action on the Energy
Bill—and in particular on COET—in view of the mounting dollar crisis
and associated domestic economic problems, and that you then make a
public statement reflecting your discussion with the leadership.
(Talking points and a draft statement are attached at Tabs B and C.)8
Decision
Agree to meeting9
Date/time10
Disagree
However, two EPG agencies—DOE and DPS—dissent from the
view that you should mention the possibility of administrative action
on oil imports at this meeting and in the subsequent public statement.
These agencies believe:
3 In attendance were the Vice President, Stu Eizenstat, Secretaries Blumenthal, Mar-
shall, and Kreps, OMB Acting Director McIntyre, Ambassador Strauss, Ambassador
Owen (NSC), CEA Member Gramley, Under Secretary of State Cooper, CWPS Director
Boswoth, and DOE Assistant Secretary Alm. [Footnote in the original. Alvin Alm was the
Assistant Secretary of Energy for Policy and Evaluation from 1977 until 1980.]
4 Cooper provided his impressions of this meeting in a March 22 memorandum to
Vance. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under
Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81D134, Box 3,
Memorandums from RNC to Secretary, Deputy Secretary, 78)
5 A March 21 memorandum from Blumenthal to Carter contains the EPG recom-
mendations on anti-inflation initiatives for Carter’s decision. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 16, Economic Policy Group Execu-
tive Committee: 1/78–3/80)
6 Suggested list of members is at Tab B. [Footnote in the original.]
7 Carter traveled to Venezuela, Brazil, Nigeria, and Liberia March 28–April 3.
8 Tab B, attached but not printed, consists of an undated paper, “Talking Points for
Use with Congressional Leaders, Protecting the Dollar by Acting on Oil Imports,” and
another undated paper, “Suggested attendees for meetings on energy and the dollar.”
Tab C, attached but not printed, is an undated paper, “Press Conference Statement.”
9 Carter indicated his approval of this option, writing in the adjacent margin:
“While I’m gone, you, Miller, Cy can brief 3 or 4 key members of Congress. J.”
10 Carter wrote “any time after my trip—sooner/better” above this option.
