928 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement some letter he had received had suggested, but at least in some ceremonial spot along with the American flag. He thought that particularly since we recognized Panama had residual sovereignty this would be a natural gesture and he remarked on the fact that at our bases in Spain only the Spanish flag is flown; the American flag is not flown at all. He then said that if it was not illegal (and he asked that the Departments of State and Defense study the matter) and if there were no mob action or violence on Saturday, he would even like to see a statement made on Sunday5 that henceforward the Panamanian flag would fly at some appropriate place in the Zone.6 In leaving I said that we all had our fingers crossed on what would happen tomorrow and that if there was no serious trouble we should certainly be thinking of measures which could be taken to improve our position in Panama since there was no doubt that it was a serious and long-­term problem. In conclusion I suggested and the President agreed that at his regular news conference this morning Jim Hagerty should say some­thing to the effect that in reflection of the President’s interest and close following of the situation in Panama he had asked me to give him a personal report on my recent trip. 5 November 29. 6 On November 28, Major John S. D. Eisenhower, the President’s Assistant Staff Secretary, telephoned Deputy Under Secretary of State Merchant and inquired about the question of flying the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone on Sunday, November 29. Merchant reported that he had asked the Legal Adviser to study the legality of such an act; that he had raised this question with Secretary of the Army Brucker and with Governor Potter while he had been in Panama; and that Brucker and Potter had objected to this measure. In view of Brucker’s and Potter’s opposition and the fact that there would undoubtedly be a demonstration in Panama on November 28, Merchant informed Eisenhower that, in his opinion, immediate action on the flag was out of the question. Eisenhower agreed with Merchant’s assessment and said he would report Merchant’s recommendation to the President and also inform the President that he also supported Merchant’s conclusions. (Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Merchant, November 28; 719.00/11–2859) PM–27. Editorial Note On November 28, 1959, mobs of demonstrators again attempted to enter the Panama Canal Zone. Prevented from entering this area by the Panamanian National Guard, the rioters proceeded to the business district in Panama City where they smashed windows and looted American commercial establishments. Twelve American soldiers and eighteen Panamanians—National Guardsmen and civilians—­received treatment
