530  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
E. Tomorrow is my country’s holiday of Thanksgiving; it is tragic 
that on this day, two and a half months after we issued our agreed 
announcement fourteen Americans covered by that announcement 
remain in prison, separated from their families. I can only urge that 
your government, in interests of improving relations between our gov­
ernments and furthering prospects for success in these talks, complete 
implementation of its commitments without further delay.
2. I continued with prepared statement on renunciatuon of force 
as follows:
A. I have since our last meeting carefully reviewed our discussion 
thus far with respect renunciation of force. I have particularly reviewed 
statements which you have made in this regard including your state­
ment at our last meeting.
B. In doing this I have been seeking to find basis upon which it 
would be possible make progress in our search for agreement on text 
for public statement. I am encouraged by progress we have thus far 
made with respect to principles, but our difficulties now seem revolve 
in large part around words with which express those principles. I have 
tried, and will continue try, make my best constructive efforts toward 
this end and I hope you will also do so. I am satisfied that, if we both do 
this, our agreement in principle is wide enough permit us reach agree­
ment on words.
C. Mr. Ambassador, I am sorry have to say that I do not feel that 
your statement at our last meeting constituted such constructive effort. 
As I said at time, it was confined to generalizations, most of which were 
of very controversial character and of little pertinence our immediate 
task. I have tried at previous meetings explain why I felt your draft of 
October 27 did not best meet situation. I also made effort in my draft 
of November 10 meet both points of view. In spite of these efforts you 
simply rejected my draft and demanded that I accept your draft. It is 
hard for me to reconcile this with genuine desire make progress.
D. In your statement at our last meeting you entirely ignored 
statement made in my November 10 draft clearly setting forth that 
announcement was without prejudice to pursuit by each side of its poli­
cies by peaceful means. You entirely ignored clear wording of draft and 
alleged that it constituted requirement on your government renounce 
its views and policies. I want make it absolutely clear that draft consti­
tutes no such requirement with respect to views and peaceful policies 
of your government. Draft provides that your government will simply 
state it will not initiate use of armed force to implement those policies. 
US Government at same time will renew its often repeated statements 
in this regard. I cannot see how any reasonable person can possibly 
misinterpret this proposal on part of my government and say that it
