September 18–December 16, 1978 395 will simply be no takers. In brief, a completely separate Egyptian- Israeli peace is all we can hope for. The Saudis and Jordanians will retreat back into their passive, possibly even negative posture, just as they were beginning to emerge. If instead we decide to make an issue out of Begin’s most recent decision, we will have a big political flap on our hands and we may delay the conclusion of the Egypt-Israel peace negotiations. The steps available to us are the following: —Suspend McGiffert trip3 to Israel indefinitely. —Review outstanding economic and military programs and delay some items. —Ignore Begin’s visit to New York in early November—no invitation to Washington. —Presidential statement at next week’s press conference condemning settlement activity as an obstacle to peace. —Release publicly answers to King Hussein’s questions. —Suspend US involvement in Egypt-Israel peace negotiations. —Suspend routine high-level visits to Israel. I realize that the President faces a very difficult choice, especially on the eve of elections. On foreign policy grounds, I think a case can be made for sticking to our position and trying to put some teeth into it, even if the Egypt-Israel negotiations are temporarily affected. But any such decision should be made only after very careful analysis of all the alternatives. My point in this memo is simply to highlight some of the main considerations. 3 As part of a Middle Eastern trip which was also scheduled to include Egypt and Jordan, McGiffert was scheduled to visit Israel for talks November 1–5. (Telegram 266572 to Amman, October 21; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780431– 0230) 114. Editorial Note On October 27, 1978, President Jimmy Carter received King Khalid bin Abdul Aziz Al-Saud, the King of Saudi Arabia, at the White House for a luncheon meeting. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Khalid in the Map Room from 12:04 p.m. to 12:22 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) After an exchange of courtesies, Carter discussed the Palestinian situation and the United States’ “need
