February 1951–February 1952
51
12.
Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Berry) to
Secretary of State Acheson1
Washington, April 3, 1951.
SUBJECT
The Iranian Situation
With reference to my memorandum of March 142 outlining the Ira-
nian situation, there follows a summary of more recent developments:
The high state of tension that developed as a result of Razmara’s
assassination has continued. A few days after this murder, the former
Minister of Education in Razmara’s Government was shot and later
died, and rumors spread regarding further assassinations. Martial law
in Tehran was declared by the Shah on March 20 for a period of two
months and Parliament adjourned for the Iranian New Year holidays.
More recently, plots were reportedly uncovered involving planned
attempts on the lives of the Shah, Prime Minister Ala and other offi-
cials who were suspected of having moderate views regarding
nationalization.
A succession of strikes broke out last week in Abadan and nearby
oilfields, the original cause being a reduction by AIOC of living allow-
ances for its workers. These strikes, which initially involved only a few
employees, quickly expanded as a result of agitation by members of the
illegal Communist Tudeh Party, posing as members of the National
Front group which spearheaded the popular move for nationalization.
(The National Front has not yet publicly disassociated itself from the fa-
natical religious brotherhood, Fedayan Islam, members of which assas-
sinated Razmara and his Minister of Education.) The strike now in-
volves between twelve and fifteen thousand employees, whose
demands upon the company have reportedly increased to substantial
proportions. The Shah has declared martial law in the military district
which includes Abadan and the southern oilfields. We have learned of
no immediate prospects of settlement.
Prime Minister Ala, in view of the seriousness of the situation, con-
vened an emergency session of Parliament on April 2 but, in the ab-
sence of a quorum, the Parliament was compelled to adjourn. Mean-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/4–351. Top Se-
cret. Drafted by Gray and Rountree.
2 For the text of this memorandum, explaining the implications of Razmara’s assas-
sination for the escalating Anglo-Iranian oil dispute, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol.
X, Iran, 1951–1954, pp. 9–11 (Document 5).
