1955 97 80. Telegram 458 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 13, 1955, 9 p.m. 458. From Johnson. Re Mytel 457. Propose hand Wang following draft text “agreed announcement” next meeting (to be released following Wang’s unilateral announce­ ment results “review” cases detained Americans promised today): “Ambassadors of USA and PRC have agreed to announce the meas­ ures which their respective governments have adopted with respect to return of nationals of each located in country of other. With respect to Chinese nationals residing in US, Ambassador Johnson on behalf of US Government has informed Ambassador Wang that: “1. USA recognizes that Chinese nationals in US who desire return to PRC are entitled do so and declares that no Chinese national who desires depart US for PRC is being prevented from doing so. This includes all those Chinese nationals who were at one time prevented from departing US. “2. Embassy of Republic of India in US will be authorized assist return to PRC of those Chinese nationals who desire to do so as follows: “(A) If a Chinese national believes that contrary to declared policy of US he is encountering official obstruction in departure he may so inform Indian Embassy and Indian Embassy will, if it deems such com­ plaint valid and if desired by PRC, intervene on such national’s behalf with Government of US. “(B) If a Chinese national in US who desires to return to PRC has difficulty paying return journey, Indian Embassy may render him financial assistance needed to permit his return. “3. Government of US will give wide publicity to foregoing arrangements and Embassy of India in US may also do so. With respect to American nationals residing in PRC, Ambassador Wang has informed Ambassador Johnson on behalf of PRC that: “1. PRC recognizes that American nationals in PRC who desire return to US are entitled to do so and declares that no American national who desires to depart PRC for US is being prevented from doing so. This includes all those American nationals who were at one time pre­ vented from departing PRC. “2. Embassy of UK in PRC will be authorized to assist return to US of those American nationals who desire to do so as follows: 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1355. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.
