296
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
visit of the Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade and the new agreement
reached in the scientific and cultural exchanges field. He saw those as
positive factors and hoped we can move in that direction. He said we
want to move forward but must deal with the two problems.
6. Chnoupek said he will meet again soon with Ambassador Byrne.
The claims issue was the main problem in bilateral relations. He said
he is grateful the Secretary mentioned the visit of the Deputy Minister
of Foreign Trade on the occasion of the meeting of the Economic Council
and hopes he will have access to appropriate officials.3 The Secretary
said he will. Chnoupek said the Czechoslovak side has tried to come
forward to meet the US side on the scientific and cultural agreement.
As for the journalists and Charter 77 Chnoupek said he has discussed
those matters with everyone he has met. The discussion of internal
affairs was a matter of reciprocity. When the US presents a list of articles
about the US taken from the Czechoslovak press, Czechoslovakia has
a list of articles about it taken from the US press. Sometimes, as in the
case of Charter 77, it becomes a concentrated issue. Chnoupek said it
is a question of which came first, the chicken or the egg. He referred
to dreadful articles in the US press calling Ambassador Johannes a
KGB spy. The Secretary said he had missed them. Chnoupek wondered
what the US wants when the “official press”, not to speak of Radio Free
Europe, speaks of a normalized Czechoslovakia. He said the ideological
struggle will be continued and the US will not praise Czechoslovakia
as a Communist country. The US follows a different road and Czecho-
slovakia believes in different goals. In the bilateral dialogue, ethical
norms should be observed. Chnoupek apologized for bringing all this
up in the first meeting but said it was necessary to clarify matters and
this had been the first chance in three years for such a discussion. He
said he would report the Secretary’s views immediately to the President
and to the government.
7. The Secretary thought that in human rights matters the Belgrade
Conference can be, and he thought will be, a constructive dialogue.
The US is not approaching it in a spirit of confrontation, or with a
view to engaging in polemical rhetoric against any other country; but
we are approaching it in a spirit of serious review of where progress
has been made, when progress has not been made and to develop
guidelines to help us make progress in the future. The Belgrade Confer-
ence is a forum in which there can be discussion of new initiatives.
The Secretary hoped a better understanding and a strengthening of
3 Jakubec visited the United States in October 1977 to attend the U.S.-Czechoslovak
Economic Council meeting. The Department reported his October 28 meeting with Vest
in telegram 259591 to Prague, October 29. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770399–0115)
