54  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
U.S. Goals in D&S
The U.S. goal in D&S, at least at the outset in March 1985, was 
largely damage limitation—­to avoid constraints on SDI beyond those 
already contained in the ABM Treaty that would prevent us from deter-
mining the feasibility of advanced defenses and making an informed 
decision on whether to deploy.
We saw little need for a new agreement on defenses. For the time 
being, the ABM Treaty met our needs. It enabled us to conduct the SDI 
feasibility testing we required (especially when we moved to the Treaty’s 
“broad” interpretation in October 1985); it permitted us to withdraw 
with six months’ notice should we later decide to deploy; and in the 
meantime, it served as a barrier to sudden Soviet ABM deployments.
For these reasons, we had not been interested in 1985 in a D&S negoti-
ation and had only acquiesced as the price for Soviet acceptance of START 
negotiations. But while agreeing to set up a D&S forum, we  rejected 
Soviet linkage of START to D&S—­as well as the Soviet rationale that, in 
the absence of severe constraints on defenses, deep reductions in offen-
sive forces would undermine stability. We argued instead that strategic 
defenses and deep reductions in offensive forces could work together to 
promote a more stable world less reliant on the threat of retaliation by 
offensive forces. Indeed, one of our main objectives in D&S has been to 
engage the Soviets in a dialogue on how, should defenses prove feasible, 
a “cooperative transition” to such a world could be managed.
As negotiations proceeded—­and particularly as Congress began 
cutting SDI spending, opposing the broad interpretation, and legis-
lating restrictions on testing to enforce its preference for the narrow 
interpretation—­our approach to D&S shifted subtly. D&S became not just 
a damage limitation exercise but potentially a device for facilitating SDI. 
For example, instead of simply rejecting testing limits that would pre-
vent us from fully exploiting the broad interpretation, we would insist 
on provisions that clearly acknowledged our right to proceed under that 
interpretation. Such provisions would later help protect the program 
from Soviet efforts to persuade the Congress that planned SDI testing 
was inconsistent with U.S. ABM and D&S obligations.
This shift late in the Reagan Administration toward using D&S to 
facilitate SDI did not, however, involve a change in our position on 
START-D&S linkage. We still maintained that START should go for-
ward even in the absence of agreement on D&S. What we were saying 
is that, if a D&S agreement is reached, it must be helpful to the program, 
not just harmless.
The Major Issues in the D&S Negotiations
After an 18-­month stalemate in D&S, agreement was reached at the 
Reykjavik summit on a framework for meeting the Soviet concern that 
defenses be constrained while START reductions are proceeding. The
