893.00/6305: Telegram
[Document 592]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 24, 1925—3 p.m.
[Received June 24—7:31 a.m.]
246. Following from American consul, Amoy.
“June 23, 10 p.m. Situation has assumed a graver aspect resultant insistence
of unruly elements to demonstrate on Kulangsu. Municipal Council acting in
the interest of International Settlement have requested consular corps naval
protection. Requests have been addressed to their respective naval authorities
by the British and Japanese consuls. They have requested that their vessels
rendezvous at Chapel Island, Amoy, in view of the gravity of the situation
and the statement by the Chinese today that they could not guarantee
protection of life and property in the Settlement, together with request of
Municipal Council and the announcement of the latter that the Settlement
police were insufficient to protect foreigners and property in the Settlement,
as well as the fact that a Japanese or a British naval vessel and landing party
would only precipitate or aggravate local situation. I recommend naval
assistance capable of putting ashore at Settlement landing party of about 100
be sent immediately and anchor outer harbor off Standard Oil Company
installation Sung Sua, Amoy. Such action would not be misconstrued by the
Chinese authorities here who would cooperate. Boycott with the possibility
of a general strike against the British and Japanese appears inevitable and
will probably take place here 25th or before. Student and other agitators
active. Boycott against the two abovementioned powers already commenced
at interior points. Regarding oil situation I have seen and persuaded General
Chang at Changchow today to cancel tax, and supplies are again moving.
General Chang has advised me all Americans which amount to
approximately 100 at Changchow are perfectly safe and well there and there
is every reason to believe he will afford the necessary protection if required. I
have exceeded my telegram allowance by approximately $25 gold. Urgent.”
Pertinent parts repeated to commander in chief.
MAYER
