760  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
discussion of the Geneva conversations on the first two pages, and in 
the Secretary’s exposition of the reasoning behind our China policy, 
stated in very broad terms, from page eight through the middle of page 
eleven. The discussions of trade controls against ­Communist China and 
the off-­shore islands issue were also of more than ordinary interest.
4. Contingent Press Release in the Event of a Break-­Off.
Early last week we decided that we should have a carefully 
drafted press release ready for instant use if Wang should break 
off the Geneva talks. Our early draft was considerably revised by 
the ­Secretary. The enclosed statement which was approved by the 
­Secretary on ­February 9, is substantially his original draft with some 
very slight amendments which he accepted. This statement represents 
an effort to strike a just balance of strength and restraint. You will 
see the various touches designed to show up the weaknesses in the 
Communist position without burning all the bridges. If you have 
any suggestions on this, it will not be too late to consider them, again 
assuming that the talks will continue.
5. Robertson-­Koo Conversation of February 1.
You will be interested in reading the record of the long conver­
sation of February 1 between Amb. Koo and Mr. Robertson. Koo had 
returned the day before from consultations in Taipei and, stimulated 
by the strength of the sentiment he had encountered in Taiwan, he gave 
the most vigorous presentation of the GRC objections to the Geneva 
talks that we have yet had from him. I believe you will find much of 
interest in the tact that Mr. Robertson took in answering Koo’s argu­
ments and questions.
In connection with the foregoing you will also want to study the 
reassurances which we gave to the Chinese Government in our Aide 
Memoire of Feb. 13 in answer to their Aide Memoire of Jan. 25. The 
Chinese Aide Memoire was repeated to you from Taipei as their 159 
to Geneva. Our Aide Memoire went to Taipei as the Department’s 481 
and has been repeated to you by pouch. It should arrive at the same 
time as this letter. Our Aide Memoire was personally approved by the 
Secretary on Feb. 11.
We are working on a talking paper on the Geneva conversations 
to be used by our representative at a forthcoming session of the NATO 
Deputies sometime early in March. It seems that Amb. Perkins will 
have to make this presentation. Livy Merchant feels that it is important 
to give our NATO allies a fairly full confidential briefing on the current 
situation in the talks right away. He feels it cannot wait until the next 
ministerial level NATO session in April which will be attended by the 
Secretary. It is unfortunate that the presentation to the Deputies will 
have to be made by a representative who has had no opportunity to
