National Security Policy 993 to establishment of three very large radars in the U.S. which would give coverage up to a height of 2000 miles against objects with a one square meter cross-­section and up to 4000 miles against objects with a ten square meter cross-section. This system is estimated to cost about $20 million per radar. The next element in the system is an [text not declassified] intercep­ tor satellite system. This is now under consideration—not under devel­ opment. He described the operation of satellites having such a purpose. In addition, there is some possibility that the Nike-Zeus system could be used to knock down satellites initially at altitudes of 150 miles, per­ haps later at altitudes up to 1000 miles. A nuclear weapon explosion would be used to accomplish the destruction. Dr. Kistiakowsky commented that this proposal raises a difficult policy question—whether we should in fact create a capability to inca­ pacitate satellites. We have supported proposals for the peaceful use of space, utilizing definitions which would permit the use of reconnais­ sance satellites. Mr. Gray suggested that the emphasis should be on detection and inspection, rather than on shooting satellites down. The Soviets have a great quantity of information about the U.S., and recon­ naissance by satellite is not important to them. As previously men­ tioned in the discussion, it is of tremendous importance to us. Dr. York said it would take about seven years to develop the kind of [text not declassified] interceptor satellite that is being discussed. It will cost a very considerable amount of money. If we wish to have this capability, we must start now to develop it, however. Dr. Kistiakowsky recommended that the project not be advertised publicly. The President agreed and said we should simply state we are investigating outer space. Dr. York said we could simply state that we are working on methods of achieving rendez-vous. [text not declassified] Secretary Herter said that, in connection with disarmament studies, there is a recommendation to seek an agreement not to use explosives in outer space. He wondered whether inspection can be made as to whether satellites contain explosives. Dr. York said such an inspection could be made on the ground, but could not be made in flight. Mr. Herter asked whether such an inspection on the ground would interfere with our uti­ lization of reconnaissance satellites. Dr. York said we would not be able to keep secret the fact that a satellite is designed for reconnaissance pur­ poses, if it is to be inspected. However, so long as cameras are allowed to be flown in satellites, there will be no problem. [text not declassified] A.J. Goodpaster Brigadier General, USA
