“Third: that the time limit for the taking of the plebiscite vote commence to
be reckoned from the date of the civil and military evacuation of the
provinces of Tacna and Arica, etc.”
This request is governed by the observations of the Arbitrator on the first request since
this request also goes beyond the scope of the authority of the Arbitrator under the
Terms of Submission and the findings of the Award in that it is predicated on the “civil
and military evacuation of the provinces.”
“Fourth: that it be declared that Peruvians who have resided in Tacna and
Arica for five years and who have been expelled by the Chilean authorities,
have not lost the character of residents.”
As heretofore pointed out the Arbitrator in fixing the qualifications of the voters did not
have the advantage of having before him requests for findings in that regard on the part
of Peru. He nevertheless considered the questions involved with great care in the light
of the evidence and arguments submitted by both parties. The various provisions of the
Award on this subject are interrelated in a general plan. Compliance with this request is
therefore not only impossible because of the finality of the Award but unnecessary and
inadmissible because it would involve the revision of a plan which was carefully
drafted and which in its entirety in the opinion of the Arbitrator does justice between
the parties.
“Fifth: that the Honorable Arbitrator arrange for the residents to be required
to prove the character of the occupation or industry in which they are
engaged and from which they gain their livelihood, since this would be the
only method of avoiding fraud,” etc.
It is the duty of the Plebiscitary Commission to consider all the evidence as to the
qualifications of voters in order to prevent fraudulent voting. This request should
therefore be brought to the attention of the Commission for its consideration.
“Sixth: that it be taken into consideration with reference to the provisions
contained in that part of the Award relative to the qualification of voters, by
which the right to vote is taken from a person who has been imprisoned by
virtue of a judicial sentence for common crimes, that trials for such alleged
offenses have for years been instituted by the Chilean authorities, a party
interested in the present controversy, on ostensible, simulated and fraudulent
grounds, for the very purpose of putting such Peruvians out of the way and
incapacitating them from voting in any eventual plebiscite.”
The Arbitrator is not clear as to the precise meaning of this request. The Award
provides, p. 42:
