723.2515/2661: Telegram
[Document 345]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, October 16, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received October 17—5:42 p.m.38 ]
87. [Paraphrase.] Your telegrams Nos. 72, October 8, 6 p.m., and 74,
October 13, 4 p.m. I have talked personally and intimately with President
Leguía and have explained the vital importance of a settlement of the
Tacna-Arica question to all American countries, especially to Peru and
Chile. I asked him if he could not, speaking frankly and personally, suggest
some practical way out. The President agreed with me on importance of a
settlement and said that he thought it could be brought about. The difficulty,
he said, was the disposition of the city of Arica; that this involved a matter
of sentiment for Peru and that cession of the city to Chile would create
sharp and dangerous situation in Peru. He did not say, but I think he feels,
that cession of Arica City would lead to overthrow of his Government and
that the state of chaos which would then ensue in Peru would entail loss of
what has been gained during his administration for the economic
development and the material progress of his country.
The President said that he felt that Peru would be willing to accept
neutralization, or nationalization, of the provinces immediately, whatever it
might be called. During our conversation he asked me what I understood by
“internationalization.” I said that it might be interpreted in more than one
way but that I should use the word to mean the establishment of an
independent government for the provinces under the joint protection, either
express or implied, of all the other republics of South America. I said that
some question had been raised about the expenses of such a government as
had been sketched, and also about danger of other countries secretly
influencing or manipulating the provinces. The President replied that he
was unable to see how there would be opportunity for influence of that
nature to be exerted if the provinces were demilitarized. He said that once
the present military control were lifted, the provinces would then assert
