Non-Proliferation
1013
than tripled; world plutonium stockpiles (most of it of US origin) have
grown substantially and appear likely to increase at least tenfold in the
next decade. Our own nuclear R&D budget, which we said in 1977 was
to be restructured to defer the breeder and develop safer alternatives,
continues to fund the breeder at excessive levels and to ignore alterna-
tive technologies. While our 1977 objective was to prevent the develop-
ment of plutonium fuel cycles, we have continued to cooperate with
other countries, permitting Japan, the UK, and France to reprocess
large quantities of US-supplied spent fuel to support such fuel cycles.
The fault was not with the Carter policies. They rested on three
basic principles which seem at least as self-evident today as in 1977:
that certain nuclear materials (HEU and plutonium) are explosives and
if available in nuclear power programs will make possible rapid con-
version to weapons; that misuse of these materials cannot be prevented
or adequately controlled by international inspection (safeguards) or
any political institution yet devised, and that the technologies which in-
troduce these materials into common use could be deferred for at least
many decades without economic penalty. While the dangers of pluto-
nium are obvious, what is not generally understood is that a single fuel
charge for a breeder reactor would contain enough high-grade pluto-
nium for hundreds of nuclear weapons; that is comparable to the total
stockpile of the US or the USSR in the early 1950’s and is a major stra-
tegic threat. Safeguards, whose purpose is only to detect diversion of
materials to unauthorized use, are meaningless when dealing with ma-
terials which can be made into bombs within a week. Plutonium-fueled
reactors are economic only at uranium prices exceeding $100 per
pound based on 1977 breeder capital costs; the current cost of uranium
is $30 and falling, breeder costs are soaring and these trends now seem
likely to push the economic utility of breeders well past 2050.
The failure of US policy in the face of all this has been a failure of
will and of implementation at the working level of US government. The
policy was entrusted to a bureaucracy which cared less for these facts
and their clear implications than for diplomatic harmony. Intimidated
by the reactions of foreign nuclear bureaucracies, our diplomats recom-
mended, in a series of critical decisions, actions which quickly eroded
both the substance and credibility of our policy. The British and French,
poised on the brink of heavy investments in reprocessing plants eco-
nomically dependent upon US MB–10 approvals, watched us agree to
Japanese reprocessing of our fuel, insisted upon commitments to sim-
ilar approvals as the price of their participation in a misguided interna-
tional debate (INFCE) which we did not have the votes to win, watched
our performance, and decided to ignore us. In response, we approved
every single reprocessing request ever presented to us, and adopted a
set of guidelines which guaranteed that these projects would succeed
