330
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Recommendation:
That you ask the Vice President to chair a series of meetings as out-
lined above, with staff help from the NSC and the State Department.4
3. Targeting of Foreign Assistance to Countries that Respect Human Rights
Existing statutes prescribe certain rules which must be followed in
allocating US foreign assistance (including Security Supporting As-
sistance, AID programs, PL–480 and others), political-military interests
impose additional constraints, as does your recent decision to target US
assistance to poor people, primarily in low income countries. Never-
theless, within these boundaries, there is still flexibility to channel more
money and aid to countries where there is a good, or improving,
human rights record. We follow this policy now in theory, but not in
practice. The country-by-country and program-by-program budgeting
process has simply not provided for this kind of analysis. We should be
able to look at overall assistance levels (from all programs) and over a
period of years be able to point to clear trends—decreases for egregious
violators, increases for others.
Recommendation:
That you approve this policy change.5
4. Speech for Human Rights Week
December 10–17 is Human Rights Week. This is an international as
well as a US designation. I recommend that you deliver a short (5–7
minutes) speech on this occasion which USIA would carry to interna-
tional audiences via satellite.6 Most of the support for your policy
comes from people, rather than governments, and this speech would be
addressed directly to them. It might briefly review human rights im-
provements around the globe during the past year, and then turn to the
setbacks and the magnitude of the problem that lies ahead. In empha-
sizing the global nature of these concerns, the speech should focus on
events in international forums—the UN, the OAS, and Belgrade. It
might indirectly allude to the fact that in 1975, Izvestia hailed the Hel-
sinki Final Act as “a new law of international life” thereby supporting
our claim that human rights concerns transcend national boundaries.
You might also want to address in personal terms, the motivations and
the goals that lie behind US human rights policies. These are only pre-
liminary ideas—if you approve the speech, I will work with Fallows on
a draft for your consideration.
4 The President approved and initialed this recommendation.
5 The President did not approve or disapprove the recommendation but noted:
“Fritz assess.”
6 See attachment, Document 89.
