Non-Proliferation
1001
394.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
PA 80–10482
Washington, November 1980
Deadlock at the NPT Review Conference: Causes and Consequences
Key Judgments
The recent conference in Geneva to review the nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty (NPT) failed to produce a declaration assessing
how effectively the treaty has been implemented over the past five
years. None of the 75 participants questioned the need for or basic pur-
pose of the NPT, but they were unwilling to make the compromises
necessary to reach a final declaration reaffirming the value of the treaty.
Widespread concern now exists that the failure to reach a consensus
will undermine confidence in the global nonproliferation regime.
Causes of Failure
A longstanding conflict over the intent of the treaty between the
nuclear weapons states and nonnuclear weapons states, primarily
those in the developing world, was the root of the problem. Ever since
the negotiation of the NPT in the late 1960s, the two groups have dis-
agreed over the delicate balance of rights and obligations in the treaty.
The developing nations have consistently argued, and did so forcefully
at the conference, that the problem of nonproliferation is a matter of
controlling the nuclear arms race between the nuclear powers as well as
containing the spread of nuclear weapons to other states. The three nu-
clear weapons states that are party to the treaty—the United Kingdom,
the Soviet Union, and the United States—prefer to emphasize the con-
tainment purposes of the NPT, arguing that a global nonproliferation
regime is valuable in its own right and its implementation should not
be made dependent on progress in the arms control area.
The developing nations at the conference, acting as spokesmen for
the Group of 77 (G–77), alleged that there had been no meaningful
progress toward disarmament since the 1975 Review Conference and
insisted that their viewpoint be expressed in a final declaration. They
also sought commitments from the nuclear weapons states to increase
the role of nonnuclear weapons states in arms control negotiations.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
Oplinger/Bloomfield File, Box 50, Proliferation: Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Con-
ference, 9–11/80. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Original paragraph classifi-
cation and handling restrictions not declassified.
