1955 299 spent 40 days to reach agreement and after agreement two more weeks had passed. It would not contribute to progress of talks if we now ret­ rogressed. This was an obstruction to our entering upon discussion of item two. (He then made statement on higher level talks contained immediately following tel.) 15. I replied I was pleased to note arrangement apparently being made so that UK could undertake functions in his country as set forth in agreed announcement. 16. I had to make it clear I could not consider that agenda item one was finally disposed of until it had been made clear all Americans in his country who desire to return had been enabled to do so. We had issued agreed announcement which I expected would facilitate resolution this question. We each undertook obligations in that announcement. We each agreed third countries would have certain functions in each of our countries. Third countries could be of some assistance, but there were portions of announcement which could only be implemented by our own governments. I had fully, frankly and completely informed him immediately of action we had taken to implement announce­ ment. I thought it entirely reasonable that we should expect from his side information regarding steps taken to implement announcement. In announcement each government had stated it would further adopt measures so that Chinese and Americans who desired to do so could expeditiously exercise their right to return. He had asked whether all Chinese in the US who desired to leave could immediately do so. My answer was, yes. There was no action my government had not taken which it could be expected to take in order to permit Chinese in the US to return. I had already informed him of the numbers who had left US for Far East. If any Chinese were still remaining in US today it was entirely at their own choice. 17. Although he had said he could not accept my statement that 19 Americans were still detained in his country and although he had accused me of again putting forward question of 19 I had done so and must continue to do so until they were enabled to return. Whatever reasons might be given, there certainly was no more effective meas­ ure which could be taken for detaining a person than keeping him in jail. He had said I stated I had no intension of interfering with his legal processes or sovereignty or of dictating to him what measures he should take, and that was correct. I referred only to that portion of agreed announcement which contained a statement by him on behalf of his government that his government had adopted and would further adopt measures so Americans could expeditiously return. I was not attempting to tell him how to implement the agreement. I was merely asking for information on how it was being implemented.
