374  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
We have checked with Reg Bartholomew, who says that he is reflect-
ing Secretary Baker’s views when he argues that the START delegation 
should be authorized to make the shift on mobiles now. Reg makes 
the point that to do otherwise would make a mockery of the Wyoming 
Joint Statement which observed that the U.S. side “was withdrawing” 
its proposed ban on mobiles. He notes that the Delegation can easily be 
instructed to make a statement that it will have to reverse its position 
on a mobile ban in the event Congress does not come through on the 
funding.
We have also checked with Steve Hadley and Howard Graves who 
feel strongly that no changes should be made in Geneva until the con-
tingency has been satisfied. Howard makes the further point that no 
written decision on this issue has ever been made, nor has a JCS repre-
sentative been present at any meeting that might have substituted for 
a formal decision.
NSC staff believe that the long-­term bureaucratic costs are not 
worth overruling OSD and JCS on this issue. Although the Soviets will 
charge us with reneging on the Joint Statement, our Delegation should 
be able to temporize for the necessary two or three weeks, aided in part 
by a reiteration of the Baker statement that “the U.S. is withdrawing its 
proposal to ban mobile ICBMs in START, contingent on the funding by 
the U.S. Congress of U.S. mobile ICBMs.” If the delay is longer, we may 
have a significant problem in Geneva. In the meantime, our Delegation 
should be instructed to develop a detailed proposal for incorporating 
the mobiles language into the joint Treaty text, so they can proceed in 
Geneva promptly once the contingency is removed.
RECOMMENDATION
That our mobile ICBM proposal remain unchanged in Geneva. Our 
START Delegation should be authorized to reiterate Baker’s statement 
that “the U.S. is withdrawing its proposal to ban mobile ICBMs in START, 
contingent on the funding by the U.S. Congress of U.S. mobile ICBMs,” 
and to develop a detailed proposal for merging our mobile ICBM provi-
sions into the Treaty text.3
Ginny Lampley, John Gordon, Bob Blackwill and Condi Rice 
concur.
3 Gates initialed approval on behalf of Scowcroft.
