582  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Chemical and Biological Warfare
130. Current Soviet tactical doctrine recognizes the potentialities 
of CW and BW as useful complements to other weapons. Soviet mil­
itary forces receive thorough training in the offensive use of CW as 
well as in defense against it. A stockpile of CW agents is believed to 
be maintained at the World War II level and may have been increased. 
It probably consists of the nerve agents, principally Tabun (GA) and 
in lesser quantity Sarin (GB), as well as standard agents such as mus­
tard. A nerve agent of the “V” type, far more persistent and toxic than 
the “G” agents, may have been in production in the USSR since 1956. 
Research is probably also under way in the field of nonlethal, incapac­
itating agents.
131. The Soviets possess standard munitions, for the dissemination 
of toxic agents by artillery shells, and it is probable that a supply of such 
munitions is normally carried by artillery units. CW agent dispersion 
by bombs and aircraft spray is also contemplated. Improved aerosol-­
producing devices necessary to the effective employment of “V” agents 
are believed to be under development. It is also possible that CW war­
heads have been developed for certain types of guided missiles.
132. The existence of an active Soviet BW research and develop­
ment program has been confirmed, through identification of a research 
center and field test site as well as through extensive Soviet literature 
applicable to this subject. While most known Soviet research is also 
applicable to public health problems, we believe the Soviet program 
includes research on antipersonnel, antilivestock, and possibly anti­
crop agents. There is no evidence of the existence of a mass-­production 
facility for BW agents, but existing plants for the production of biolog­
icals, together with other laboratories, could easily produce BW agents 
in quantities sufficient for clandestine employment and probably for 
larger-­scale use.
133. In the field of defense against BW and CW, present Soviet capa­
bilities are at least comparable to those of the major Western nations, and 
in the case of CW are probably superior. Soviet troops are well-­equipped 
with satisfactory CW defense items, many of which are also suitable for 
use in defense against BW. The current issue gas mask affords adequate 
protection against inhalation of known toxic agents, and articles of pro­
tective clothing issued to all troops afford protection against toxic agent 
spray and area contamination. Extensive programs continue to indoc­
trinate the civilian populace as well as military personnel in defensive 
techniques.
Electromagnetic Warfare
134. We believe that at present the USSR has an appreciable capa­
bility for jamming Western radars at frequencies up to 10,000 mc/s and
