304  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
negotiations in diplomatic history (over 450 pages of joint draft text 
with 1,000 or so brackets), but the Washington bureaucracy has devel-
oped the habit of micromanaging negotiating issues while deferring 
tough decisions on policy issues. In a nutshell, START, to quote a senior 
OSD official, could well turn into “the MBFR of the 1990s,” an endlessly 
complicated diplomatic charade.
5. Assuming we want to avoid this, we need to exploit the oppor-
tunities for movement that high-­level U.S.–Soviet meetings, especially 
summits, will offer us. To do this, I suggest we follow a two-­track 
approach. The first-­track would consist of your full-­dress ministeri-
als with Shevardnadze, including the associated arms control expert 
meetings. Based on our work here in Geneva, I believe that a month 
or so before each meeting you should select two or three key START 
issues that are “ripe” for agreement. After the necessary spadework in 
Washington, you would then be in the position to move these issues to 
closure with Shevardnadze. Meeting separately, the experts should not 
only prepare the ground for your handling of big-­ticket items, but they 
should also shoot at resolving some second-­tier issues on their own.
6. Looking toward your September meeting, I have, at Reg’s sug-
gestion, discussed an agenda of START-­related issues with my counter-
part. Briefly, they are:
— Verification and stability: Here I think our goal should not 
only be to get the Soviets to buy onto the concept—­they have already 
indicated they will. We should try to go further by having you and 
Shevardnadze sign the strategic exercise notification accord and also 
getting him to agree “in principle” to the idea of quickly completing 
accords on one or more of the other six proposals.
— ALCMs and heavy bombers: of the “big” START issues still 
in dispute, I believe this is the one that is most amenable to solution 
right now. The issue is really a collection of many differences, including 
ALCM counting, range and distinguishability. If both sides are ready to 
engage in a little horse-­trading, I don’t see any reason that it couldn’t be 
resolved next month. I will have a specific proposal for you when I get 
back to Washington next week.
— Mobile missiles: the big question here is whether funding on 
the Hill for the MX rail garrison and the Midgetman is secure enough 
to enable us to lift our proposed ban on mobiles. If it is, this is a move 
we could take at the ministerial, either by permitting both rail and 
road-­variants, or by taking the riskier, but more stabilizing step of only 
allowing single-­warhead, road-­mobile systems.
— Warheads vs. launchers: This is a mostly theological issue that 
has its origins in the SALT II debate. Because it is the source of so many 
brackets in the treaty text, I would hope that the arms control experts
