3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
426
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
troduction of new types of strategic missiles and on modernization of
existing types of strategic missiles.
I would first like to review where we stand on the issues of new
types of ICBMs and SLBMs and of modernization of existing types.
In previous discussions we have proposed a ban on testing and de-
ployment of new types of ICBMs in the protocol. This would prohibit
introduction of new types of ICBMs through 1980 while we discuss
how to deal with this issue in SALT III.
We have also indicated that we could accept a ban on testing and
deployment of new types of ICBMs through 1985, except that either
side could test and deploy one new ICBM, MIRVed, or non-MIRVed.
This would permit you to go ahead with the new, single RV ICBM,
which fits your force structure, and would permit us to proceed with a
new MIRVed ICBM, which would fit into our force structure. This
would provide for equality and equal security on both sides.
Either of these proposals would represent a satisfactory solution of
the ICBM new types issue.
In the context of a protocol ban on new types of ICBMs, we could
agree to a ban on new types of SLBMs, allowing for continued testing
and deployment of Trident I and for the SS–N–18.
In the context of a ban on new types of ICBMs through 1985 with
one exemption, MIRVed or non-MIRVed, for each side, we could agree
to a ban on new types of SLBMs for the same period, with one exemp-
tion. In our case this would be the Trident II, and in your case this
would be the Typhoon (RSM–52). Under this proposal, Trident I and
the SS–N–18 would be considered existing types.
You have proposed a ban on new types of ICBMs for the protocol
period, except that each side would be permitted to test and deploy one
new type of ICBM with a single reentry vehicle. This proposal would
prevent us from testing any new missile, while allowing you to go
ahead with a new single RV ICBM for which we have no program and
no need. This is inequitable and unacceptable to us.
You have also proposed a ban on new types through 1985, with the
same exemption for a new single RV ICBM. This is even more
one-sided:
—The U.S. would have no new ICBM for the duration of the 1985
agreement, since we have no program or requirement for a new single
RV ICBM.
—The Soviet Union would, however, be able to deploy its entirely
new type of single RV ICBM.
Finally, you have proposed a ban on the testing and deployment of
new types of ICBMs through 1985, without exception. This proposal in-
dicates that you can forego a new single RV ICBM. In that sense, it rep-
