1198 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Discussion: While the voluntary restrictions of petroleum imports begun several months ago has worked reasonably well, there are increasing signs that the Congress may be inclined to give favorable consideration to more severe restrictions in the form of tariffs and/or quotas which would seriously damage our relations with Venezuela, Canada, and other oil producing countries, possibly as the price for extending the Trade Agreements Act. The Venezuelan problem has been intensified by the coming into production of new wells in concessions held by companies which have just entered the Venezuelan picture. The pressure on the market of this additional production at a time when demand for oil is slackening may break the price structure at any time, according to informed observers. Of the four alternatives ahead: (1) continued voluntary restrictions; (2) mandatory curbs imposed by Executive Act under Article 7 of the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act; (3) import restrictions imposed by the Congress; and (4) export controls by Venezuela, No. 1 would obviously be the best from our viewpoint as well as that of Venezuela. No. 2 would be preferable to either 3 or 4 and may be required by the developing situation. Although No. 3 would be ruled out as distasteful to the U.S. oil industry, the application of Venezuelan good offices to facilitate the partition of the U.S. import market from Venezuela among the major and new producers might save the voluntary program. Venezuela can be expected to be especially interested in the price factor. It is very much in the U.S. interest to obtain Venezuelan understanding and support, if possible, of whatever program we embark upon. The Perez Jimenez Government was restive under the voluntary plan and the Embassy has reported that the present Junta Government may react strongly to making the import controls mandatory. However, every effort should be made to explain to the Venezuelans the nature of the U.S. problem and to make this consultation meaningful rather than simply informative. The Venezuelan Chargé Dr. Carlos Pérez de la Cova has responded favorably to frank talks by Mr. Mann and myself. We all agreed that it is essential that someone from this Government go to Caracas to discuss the problem frankly with the Junta, the Cabinet, and key political leaders. Subject to your approval, I will undertake such a trip since I have not yet visited Caracas in my tenure as Assistant Secretary. My having been the head of the U.S. negotiating team for the revised trade agreement with Venezuela in 19522 could be expected to facilitate the task considerably. This agreement, under which we are now exporting nearly $1 billion annually to Venezuela, would probably not survive unless Venezuelan cooperation is obtained. 2 For documentation on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. IV, The American Republics.
