January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1375 This was the most difficult, interesting, satisfying and frustrating experience of his life. It included his share of heartburn. Ambassador Evron said that Ambassador Linowitz sometimes gave heartburn to others, as well! (laughter) Ambassador Linowitz said that he wished he had! He had played a small part—but was immensely grateful. There is one point, which he raised last night with the Prime Minister. He (Ambassador Linowitz) would be personally unhappy if the process came to a close on Inauguration Day, without a record of what had been done, either a joint summary—such as the Memorandum of Understanding or other document—or a report. He hopes that there can be agreement to do this, for the record for the next administration and for history. It would show we were slowly making progress towards implementing the Camp David agreement. The President said that this would please him. The optimum would be a joint report they could agree upon. Alternatively, Ambassador Linowitz could give him a unilateral report, with a copy to the others for the record. Ambassador Linowitz said that we tried this with the Memorandum of Understanding; but predictably there had been problems. He had wanted us to be able to say: here we are. The President asked why not try to have an assessment made of the progress that has been made, and delineate outstanding items and areas of disagreement. This might be done at the November 17th meeting.3 If not, he will ask Ambassador Linowitz for a report. The Prime Minister said that if it is a problem of a common assessment by the three countries, and a matter of summing up the negotiations, that could cause some unresolved questions to be brought up. He would favor a document on what we have achieved. Some time was indeed lost, but there are achievements. He will need to consult his colleagues on the idea. He would prefer as much agreement as possible. Ambassador Linowitz said that he would be happy to try preparing a draft. The President said that we will try. The Prime Minister said that it should be positive: what we achieved—for example, that for 32 years there was a state of war and five wars. Officially there were four wars, but non-officially there were 3 A summary of the November 17 trilateral U.S.-Israeli-Egyptian meeting was sent in telegram 25364 from Cairo, November 18. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870047–2004)
