January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1375
This was the most difficult, interesting, satisfying and frustrating expe-
rience of his life. It included his share of heartburn.
Ambassador Evron said that Ambassador Linowitz sometimes gave
heartburn to others, as well! (laughter)
Ambassador Linowitz said that he wished he had! He had played a
small part—but was immensely grateful. There is one point, which he
raised last night with the Prime Minister. He (Ambassador Linowitz)
would be personally unhappy if the process came to a close on Inaugu-
ration Day, without a record of what had been done, either a joint sum-
mary—such as the Memorandum of Understanding or other docu-
ment—or a report. He hopes that there can be agreement to do this, for
the record for the next administration and for history. It would show
we were slowly making progress towards implementing the Camp
David agreement.
The President said that this would please him. The optimum would
be a joint report they could agree upon. Alternatively, Ambassador Li-
nowitz could give him a unilateral report, with a copy to the others for
the record.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we tried this with the Memorandum
of Understanding; but predictably there had been problems. He had
wanted us to be able to say: here we are.
The President asked why not try to have an assessment made of the
progress that has been made, and delineate outstanding items and
areas of disagreement. This might be done at the November 17th meet-
ing.3 If not, he will ask Ambassador Linowitz for a report.
The Prime Minister said that if it is a problem of a common assess-
ment by the three countries, and a matter of summing up the negotia-
tions, that could cause some unresolved questions to be brought up. He
would favor a document on what we have achieved. Some time was in-
deed lost, but there are achievements. He will need to consult his col-
leagues on the idea. He would prefer as much agreement as possible.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he would be happy to try preparing a
draft.
The President said that we will try.
The Prime Minister said that it should be positive: what we
achieved—for example, that for 32 years there was a state of war and
five wars. Officially there were four wars, but non-officially there were
3 A summary of the November 17 trilateral U.S.-Israeli-Egyptian meeting was sent
in telegram 25364 from Cairo, November 18. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P870047–2004)
