Chemical and Biological Weapons
197
are drafting for possible sponsorship by depository powers. End
summary.
2. US and UK representatives held bilateral consultations on
Chemical Weapons limitations in London on Tuesday, August 15, 1978.
Salient points are summarized below:
A. In response to questions from UK Del about outlook for round
eight of the US-Soviet Chemical Weapons negotiations, US reps re-
ported that Russians do not expect to have much new material to
present. However, there has been no evidence of a deliberate Soviet
slowdown. The US Del will put emphasis on resolving outstanding
issues and on drafting common language in areas of agreement.
B. British Del head (Burns) inquired whether US had considered
submitting partial initiative to the CCD which left verification section
blank. He said that pressure from other CCD members might force
Russians to make concessions on verification. US Del head (Flowerree)
responded that US had no plans for such a partial initiative and consid-
ered it important to resolve verification issues before submitting an ini-
tiative to the CCD.
C. US reps outlined proposal to be made to Soviets for confidence-
building measure involving exchange of information on chemical pro-
tective activities. They also indicated that Washington agencies were
considering possibility of allowing conversion of chemical agent pro-
duction and filling facilities to peaceful purposes, under appropriate
safeguards.
D. After Burns raised question of an agreed estimate of Soviet CW
stocks, US reps conveyed suggestion for quadrilateral consultations
late in year as instructed Reftel. US reps said that US envisioned partici-
pation of political, military, and intelligence representatives. Burns
stressed importance of US–UK intelligence conference scheduled to
begin in late October, but agreed that quadrilateral consultations
would also be useful and said he could support US proposal for such
consultations.
E. Burns said that UK had no plans to make statement at the CCD
during informal CCD meetings on Chemical Weapons week of August
21–25. Looking ahead to UNGA, UK had prepared draft CW resolution
along lines of last year’s resolution (text septel).3 He thought that as in
past it might be appropriate to ask Canada and Poland to act as
sponsors of resolution.
F. British presented further information on former UK chemical
agent production facilities. There would be no objection to having in-
spectors walk through former production buildings owned by Imperial
3 Not found.
