Romania
639
Brezhnev, and the visit of Chairman Hua. (We and INR have sent you
separately an analysis of Ceausescu’s current international posture.)
Our conclusion is that Ceausescu needs his relations with the US as
much, if not more than he did before. It is in our interest to play to
that reality and trust that in time they will get over the Pacepa affair.
The Romanians have come back again on Pacepa (Tab A),3 demand-
ing that he be extradited. We believe that, because of the conjunction
of the Pacepa case and Ceausescu’s current exposed position in interna-
tional affairs, it would be advisable, via some specific positive steps,
to reiterate our continued commitment to improved US-Romanian
relations. We propose the following:
Instruct Ambassador Aggrey to tell Andrei that the President is
prepared to send a special emissary to Romania soon. The Romanians
like the idea of special emissaries (you recall Pungan).
The emissary would:
—Report candidly on Pacepa, stressing that we had no part in his
decision to defect.
—Report on the Camp David Summit (which Ceausescu would
welcome because of his earlier role in the Middle East talks), and seek
a full briefing on Hua’s visit.
—Present concrete evidence of our continued interest in bilateral
economic cooperation by informing the Romanians of USG approval
of certain pending export license cases of special interest to them.
—Tell Andrei that you are looking forward to meeting with him
at the UNGA, especially to discuss various international issues.
We also have a Vance-Ceausescu letter, now awaiting NSC clear-
ance, on the Middle East Summit which reiterates the President’s per-
sonal interest in good bilateral relations.
Who to be the special emissary?
There are two good candidates for special emissary: Christopher
and Nimetz. Both will be in the area in the coming weeks on other
business.
The Deputy Secretary would be the highest level official (other
than Secretary Bergland) to visit Romania in this Administration.4 As
3 Attached but not printed at Tab A is telegram 5749 from Bucharest, August 16.
4 During his visit to Bucharest May 23–24, Secretary of Agriculture Bergland met
with Manea Manescu, as well as several other Romanian officials. The Embassy transmit-
ted a summary of his meetings and discussions on May 25, in telegram 3594 from
Bucharest. (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
Lot 92D412, Box 6, Romania-US—Econ)
