Covert and Overt Operations 745 involvement in the management of the hostages’ welfare and in accounting for them. —To increase steadily tangible pressure by the OECD states and, where possible, to encourage other states to take more limited measures against Iran; in this context by portraying Iran’s holding of hostages as offensive to the world community, to broaden the confrontation to Iran vs. the non-communist world. —To engage key Iranians in discussions that could lead to an understanding on (1) a scenario for hostage release when the Majlis is convened; (2) the role of key leaders during the Majlis consideration; and (3) actions by the U.S. or third countries that would facilitate a release decision by the Majlis. The issues to be decided are the degree and timing of new pressures, if any, and the nature of a broader diplomatic effort. Maintaining Pressure We have the following range of choice in maintaining or expanding pressures on Iran: —We can maintain the sanctions the U.S. now has in place and press the Europeans to proceed on their present course by following through on the decisions made at Luxembourg.3 This would seem an essential minimum. —We could take some additional steps to expand our own sanctions (see Tab 2 for a list of possible steps).4 In deciding whether we should impose additional sanctions, we face the possibility that a new cycle of growing expectations and then deeper frustration could be stimulated within the U.S. and new divisions with the Allies created, conveying weakness to Iran at a time we should be emphasizing the strength of the Allies’ stand. Another issue is whether such steps would best complement a diplomatic effort now, or should be held in reserve as a threat during the Majlis’ meetings. Once implemented, we would have little left with which to threaten. —Additional pressures may be possible through covert action. A great deal of disruptive activity is already under way in Iran which has no U.S. involvement but which most Iranians assume is Americaninspired. These disruptions and the assumption of American involvement heighten fears in Iran that we have important assets that could undermine the revolution. In an Iranian context, the advantage of covert options is that although the Iranians will assume we are playing a 3 See footnote 6, Document 253. 4 Tab 2, untitled and undated, is attached but not printed. It lists “further measures the President indicated might be imposed” and “additional non-military sanctions most previously considered.”
