March 27–December 31, 1979 947 Vice President Mubarak said that the second issue is military. He had talked with Harold Brown and David McGiffert on two items:5 the Air Force and the Navy. They had discussed the long-term plan. First, there are the 35 F–4 Phantoms. Then there would be other modern aircraft, starting in 1983. This puts the Air Force and Egyptian power in an awkward position. They have had no replacements since 1973. They had some MiG–23s, but they are all grounded or transferred to the States (sic!).6 The bulk of their planes are Mirages. These are not sufficient for their pilots and stability of the air force. There is Afghanistan and Aden; there is trouble involving Kuwait and Bahrain (which they had expected long ago). He has talked with Saudi Crown Prince Fahd about the Soviet position in Aden, which is dangerous. The situation could lead to a cancer in the Arabian Peninsula. It could be carried to the Gulf and oil. The UAE is open; Kuwait is open. Only Oman is strict enough in letting people in. With the others, it is easy for the Communists to work and build themselves up there. Therefore there is trouble in Bahrain and Kuwait. Two years ago, Bahrain froze its Parliament with six Communist members. They are afraid of the situation. Trouble has started. With regard to Sudan, the U.S. knows the problem, linked to Libya. Ghaddafi is doing what he can to remove the Sudanese regime. This means getting at Egypt, and means a Soviet plan. If they “reach” Egypt, they will push Communist groups, and find other countries easier to act against. On Morocco, Hassan asked for Egyptian help. Egypt sent four C–130s, each carrying eight tons of arms. They did this in secret, on request. Morocco wants to carry on relations, but secretly. So many Africans are against Morocco dealing with Egypt. So they have sent 27 tons and are contracting for other arms, with the Arab Organization. They said ok, and Morocco should send transport, to limit the amount of arms (?). Also, Somalia and Chad have asked Egypt for ammunition and machine guns. And these demands on Egypt affect the power of its armed forces. If the Soviets feel its power is going down, particularly in the Air Force, and the Soviets feed elements to other Air Forces, then there will be an imbalance. Egypt has 74 fighters; Ghaddafi has 154. Libya has 2,700 tanks, and will get 1,000 more later. Egypt has 1,700 tanks. In the correlation of forces, Libya alone has more arms. This doesn’t mean it will dare do anything to Egypt, if they use Libyan crews in the tanks. But others are there—the East Germans and the North Koreans (which are said to be only for training, not for con- 5 The memorandum of conversation of Mubarak’s meeting with Brown, September 17, is in the Washington National Records Center, OSD Files, FRC 330-81-0446, DEM Memcons/Reporting Cables. 6 According to an August 3 memorandum from Gates to Kimmitt and Sick, Vance, Brown, and Brzezinski decided at their luncheon meeting the same day to “proceed quietly with the purchase of Egyptian MIG 23’s.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 12, Egypt: 8–9/79)
