348 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Jim Fallows has been consulted on this outline. I have also invited Harold Brown to make inputs into the preparation of this speech.4 Are we heading in the right direction with this outline?5 4 According to an NSC Correspondence Profile, Brzezinski sent a March 3 memorandum to Brown requesting his views. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 64, Speeches: Wake Forest University: 10/77–3/78) Brown’s March 18 reply is ibid. 5 The President indicated his approval by checking the “Yes” option. He wrote “but” next to the option and drew a line from it into the lower margin where he added: “ok—Let Harold have a major input. I want it to answer questions raised by Sam Nunn, Goldwater & others, & also to teach the average American what we have & are doing. Keep language simple—not too much theory—J.” He continued: “p.s. One or two newsworthy specific items would help. (ASAT—MX—CM—CTB—SALT, etc).” 72. Address by President Carter1 Winston-Salem, North Carolina, March 17, 1978 [Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks.] This morning I would like to talk to you about our national security—where we now stand, what new circumstances we face, and what we are going to do in the future. Let me deal at the beginning with some myths. One myth is that this country somehow is pulling back from protecting its interests and its friends around the world. That is not the case, as will be explained in this speech and demonstrated in our actions as a nation. Another myth is that our defense budget is too burdensome and consumes an undue part of our Federal revenues. National defense is, of course, a large and important item of expenditures, but it represents only about 5 percent of our gross national product and about a quarter of our current Federal budget. It also is a mistake to believe that our country’s defense spending is mainly for intercontinental missiles or nuclear weapons. Only about 10 percent of our defense budget goes for strategic forces or for nuclear deterrence. More than 50 percent is simply to pay for and support the services of the men and women in our Armed Forces. 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 529–535. The President spoke at 9 a.m. in Wake Forest University’s Wait Chapel. Following his address, he attended a reception for Representative Steve Neal (D–North Carolina).
