1956  797
would be interpreted by us, and I sure by world, to mean only exactly 
what it said. And what it said did not prejudice his views. I therefore 
still found it extremely difficult see why he not able agree to it unless 
his intent was that U.S. in this declaration abandon its views.
37. Wang said first thing he would like say was that we still in stage 
of discussing proposed declaration. Today he had made effort try make 
clear purpose making such declaration, and that in making such dec­
laration does not mean that issuance declaration itself will resolve our 
disputes, nor will issuance declaration itself constitute final settlement 
disputes.
38. Wang said it might be recalled that joint communique between 
our two governments on July 25 last year only set forth that we would 
discuss such other matters at issue between two sides. It did not single 
out exact matters to be discussed.
39. Wang said what we discussing today is question of making 
declaration in view of existence of confrontation of policies two coun­
tries in Taiwan area. Dispute between us very grave indeed. This dis­
pute caused solely by U.S. occupation Taiwan. Problem we facing is to 
indicate by what means this dispute might be resolved.
40. Wang said declaration we now discussing just such a decla­
ration in order to indicate desire of two sides for peaceful settlement 
of disputes between two countries. Such desire very important thing. 
Important though it is, yet it not final solution. With regard outcome 
dispute, we had set forth in declaration determination of two sides to 
strive seek means for realizing solution.
41. Wang said practical and feasible means they had in mind was 
exactly meeting of Foreign Ministers U.S. and China.
42. Wang said he believed by separating these two matters, could 
greatly facilitate carrying out of task before us.
43. Wang said international disputes between China, U.S. must 
be separated from domestic issues between China and Chiang. These 
two matters which distinctly different can be separated. Could it be 
said that U.S. intends discuss China’s domestic affairs in talks between 
China U.S? They had categorically stated in past and repeated over and 
over again that they would resolutely oppose such proposition.
44. Wang said turning now to question of self-­defense, he had 
stated that every country entitled to right self-­defense in accordance 
with spirit of U.N. Charter. But he had also pointed out at same time 
U.S. not justified in claiming right self-­defense in Taiwan area.
45. Wang said I had also stated in past that they did not object in 
principle to right self-­defense. Should he interpret this as agreement on 
my part, instead of this clause, to rewrite draft in accordance with U.N. 
Charter in same manner as their first draft of October 27?
