442 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX breakfast discussion3 with the President. In passing this on, Boutros said he emphasized that he was raising nothing new; all the points he made to the Israelis he has been making since the Washington talks began. What is new, he said, is President Sadat’s insistence that these are prerequisites for signing the peace treaty. He said the Israelis had seen a “new Boutros” tonight. Exchange of Letters There must be a timetable as follows: —Negotiations begin one month after ratification. —Elections five to six months after that. —Military government withdrawn one month after elections. —Redeployment of troops one month after the military government is withdrawn (this could be in an Israeli letter to the U.S.). Boutros said Dayan agreed to everything except fixing the date for the election but without that date, the others which follow are meaningless. Sadat insists on a timetable which makes clear that all of the above will be completed by the end of the interim withdrawal period. Boutros also asked for Gaza elections to be held first, which Dayan adamantly refused. Boutros said he heard for the first time tonight that Israel’s interpretation of Camp David is that the Military Governor will be transferred but not abolished. This obviously came as a disquieting revelation to him. Unilateral Israeli Moves Boutros said Dayan agreed on moving military government headquarters, an amnesty for political prisoners, and an end to restrictions on political activity but rejected any unilateral steps to permit the return of displaced persons for family reunification purposes. Boutros says he did not suggest it to Dayan, but would be prepared for these unilateral steps to be recorded in an Israeli letter to us. Gaza Boutros said Sadat is adamant on the need for an Egyptian presence; what he really wants is a military presence but Boutros knows this is not possible. He suggested a resident Egyptian Mission which the Israelis could describe as a consulate. Dayan said this might be pos- 3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Vance participated in a breakfast meeting with Carter, Brzezinski, and Jordan from 7:31 a.m. to 9:02 a.m., November 10. No memorandum of conversation for this breakfast discussion with Carter has been found. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
