442
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
breakfast discussion3 with the President. In passing this on, Boutros
said he emphasized that he was raising nothing new; all the points he
made to the Israelis he has been making since the Washington talks
began. What is new, he said, is President Sadat’s insistence that these
are prerequisites for signing the peace treaty. He said the Israelis had
seen a “new Boutros” tonight.
Exchange of Letters
There must be a timetable as follows:
—Negotiations begin one month after ratification.
—Elections five to six months after that.
—Military government withdrawn one month after elections.
—Redeployment of troops one month after the military gov-
ernment is withdrawn (this could be in an Israeli letter to the U.S.).
Boutros said Dayan agreed to everything except fixing the date for
the election but without that date, the others which follow are mean-
ingless. Sadat insists on a timetable which makes clear that all of the
above will be completed by the end of the interim withdrawal period.
Boutros also asked for Gaza elections to be held first, which Dayan
adamantly refused.
Boutros said he heard for the first time tonight that Israel’s inter-
pretation of Camp David is that the Military Governor will be trans-
ferred but not abolished. This obviously came as a disquieting revela-
tion to him.
Unilateral Israeli Moves
Boutros said Dayan agreed on moving military government head-
quarters, an amnesty for political prisoners, and an end to restrictions
on political activity but rejected any unilateral steps to permit the re-
turn of displaced persons for family reunification purposes.
Boutros says he did not suggest it to Dayan, but would be pre-
pared for these unilateral steps to be recorded in an Israeli letter to us.
Gaza
Boutros said Sadat is adamant on the need for an Egyptian pres-
ence; what he really wants is a military presence but Boutros knows
this is not possible. He suggested a resident Egyptian Mission which
the Israelis could describe as a consulate. Dayan said this might be pos-
3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Vance participated in a breakfast
meeting with Carter, Brzezinski, and Jordan from 7:31 a.m. to 9:02 a.m., November 10. No
memorandum of conversation for this breakfast discussion with Carter has been found.
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
