1955 237 Wang explained it was necessary to use this wording in Chinese because we were not discussing all the tens of thousands of Chinese in the US but only the question of those who desired to return. I said it was very clear as it stood, and addition of this phrase introduced new ideas. It was very clear from introductory paragraph we were discussing “measures” taken by respective governments and obviously remainder announcement referred to these measures. If we introduced word “problem” or “question” it would break-up central thought which was “measures” taken by governments. Wang asked if we agreed inclusion “the question of” in Chinese text and leave English text as it was. I agreed. He then asked if title for announcement could be made to read: “Agreed Announcement of the Ambassadors of the USA and the PRC”. Our title “Agreed Announce­ ment” was very simple and not very formal. I objected that such a change made title longer and said there was virtue in simplicity. Full subject was already stated in opening para­ graph. However, after some discussion I agreed to use full title as given in Chinese text. At Wang’s request I initialed changes inked in on carbon copy Sep­ tember 6 draft and he furnished me with clean copy Chinese announce­ ment. He then said, “have we reached formal agreement?” I replied “we have now agreed to release the announcement”. Wang asked if we could release it simultaneously at 5 pm Geneva time, as that was most convenient for Peiping. I said I was prepared agree earlier hour but 5 pm acceptable. Wang then read from a prepared statement. He said he was glad we had finally reached agreement at our 14th meeting after long discussion. In accordance with his earlier statements he wished to advise me of the results of the reviews of cases of Americans who had committed crimes: first, his government had decided upon the early release prior to com­ pletion of terms of their sentences of three Americans: Harold W. Rigney, Walter A. Rickett, Levi A. Lovegren. Second, following seven Ameri­ cans would be deported: Lawrence Robert Buol, Frederick D. Gordon, Joseph Eugene Hyde, James Gerald Joyce, Dilmus T. Kanady, Dorothy ­Middleton, Sarah Perkins. These 10 Americans who had violated laws of China would be deported to Hong Kong within a few days. He continued that, with respect to other American civilians, cases would be individually reviewed in consideration of agreed announce­ ment and with regard to crimes committed by each one. We would be advised from time to time of results these reviews through office of Charge d’Affaires of UK in China. I thanked him for this information and said I hoped in accordance with announcement other cases would be expeditiously handled and
