National Security Policy 805 Paper 59–98/1); (c) Specific guidelines for Phase IV to be developed by the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization in consultation with the interested agencies, through the Interagency Test Planning Group. Funding of the Delegate Agencies’ Civil Defense and Defense Mobilization Function—Gov. Hoegh described the manner in which Executive Branch agencies have been buffeted about by conflicting instructions from the House Appropriations Subcommittees—which this year have all but cut out funds for the “delegate agencies”. (Under this “delegate agency” program, for example, the Labor Department prepares emer­ gency manpower plans, HEW would prepare a HEW post-­emergency attack health and welfare plan, etc.—this being considered a more proper execution of departmental responsibilities than to have OCDM itself hire new people of its own to do such planning.) Gov. Hoegh and Sec. Flemming emphasized that this “game” between the Executive and Legislative Branches has this year turned into a “procedural tragedy”. The President spoke very strongly about the need for enough non-­ military defense to ensure that our $40 billion military defense effort is not wasted. The feeling was expressed that the degree of balance between these two aspects of our national security program borders on the ridiculous; the cuts the House has made in civil defense could make our military defense nearly useless. The President expressed his strong conviction that civil defense and defense mobilization activities are as vital to the total national security program of the country as is the armor around a tank; convinced that these activities are in effect armor around our nation and our civilization, the President approved Director Hoegh’s initiating steps which would: (a) Bring to the attention of the Congressional Leaders the severe cuts made in the delegate agency financing; (b) Have prepared a supplemen­ tal appropriation making up the amount cut below the FY 1960 budget request for the delegate agencies, together with a strong transmittal mes­ sage setting forth the President’s views; (c) Enable an Administration-­ wide effort to be made, through speeches and other public statements by Cabinet and agency heads (except State and Treasury), to bring forcefully to public attention the vital requirement for balance in our national secu­ rity program, i.e., an effective non-­military as well as military defense. [Omitted here is the remainder of the minutes.] L.A. Minnich, Jr. Copy to: Mrs. Whitman (2) Mr. Gray Mr. Minnich (Note: This account based on Mr. Patterson’s summary memorandum prepared for General Persons’ information and on the Record of Action.)
