1955 507 internal affairs. China has repeatedly stated that conditions permitting it will strive liberate Taiwan by peaceful means. Means by which Tai­ wan is liberated, however, is matter China’s internal affairs and US has no right interfere. This cannot be made subject Sino-American talks. 37. Wang said on other hand US national objective Taiwan area is to continue encroachment China’s territory of Taiwan and continue interference Chinese internal affairs. US has already used force and threat of force attain such aggressive national objective. 38. Wang said I had skipped over this fact and refused discuss such concrete issue as withdrawal US armed force Taiwan area. At same time US has demanded through use of general term national objectives China recognize status quo in Taiwan area, continued US encroach­ ment Chinese territory Taiwan and US interference in Chinese internal affairs. This can in no way be complied with. 39. Wang said at last meeting I had asked whether intent of his draft was that force not be used except in self-defense. Taiwan is Chi­ nese territory and US use of force in that area places China in defensive position. Just as China cannot go to Honolulu to put up defenses in respect to US, so US has no grounds put up defenses in Taiwan area in respect to China. 40. Wang said in spite this situation China proposes settle through higher level negotiation question relaxation and elimination of tension in Taiwan area. If it is intent that China and US settle disputes in Taiwan area by peaceful means, this intent finds expression in his draft agreed announcement. However, if it is intent that China renounce exercise sovereign right over Taiwan and recognize US encroachment, this sim­ ply will not do. 41. Wang said I had suggested that point was not whether a situa­ tion was internal or external but whether force prejudiced international peace and security. His side could not accept confusion of domestic and international issues. 42. Wang said everyone knew Chinese people had liberated main­ land and many coastal islands including Hainan, in process of which they had not at any time threatened international peace and security. On contrary, victory had indisputably promoted stability of situation in Far East and made immense contribution to international peace and security. On other hand, US had encroached on Taiwan and interfered with liberation Taiwan and coastal islands, giving rise to situation which threatened international peace and security. 43. Wang said it was for sake of safeguarding international peace and security that he had proposed Sino-US meeting on higher level to settle through negotiation question of relaxing and eliminating tension in Taiwan area. Yet I had at last meeting objected to linking agreed announcement to conference of Foreign Ministers.
