3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 July–December 1978 487 good-neighbour relations cannot in general be regarded by us otherwise but as affecting the interests of our security. We believe that the situation emerging around Iran requires clear and explicit statements to be made on our as well as on your part on nonadmissibility of outside interference in the internal affairs of Iran. It would serve the interests of both our countries as well as Iran itself. On our part we intend to state publicly our position concerning the necessity for all states to refrain from interfering in the developments taking place in Iran. In our deep conviction in the situation prevailing in Iran and around it it is especially important that the USSR and the US would be strictly guided by the principles of the UN Charter, by the interests of universal peace and international security. I would appreciate it you give us your position on the question raised by me. Sincerely, L. Brezhnev5 5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 159. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, November 17, 1978, 4:01–4:48 p.m. PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin Zbigniew Brzezinski 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 5, USSR (General), 9/77–12/80. Secret. The meeting took place in the White House. Carter initialed the first page of the memorandum. Brzezinski recalled in his memoirs that he and Dobrynin “had prolonged exchanges” on the Woodbridge Two. “At times the arguments were quite heated, especially when I insisted that the execution of the Soviet citizen would jeopardize any possible deal on the Soviet spies. Dobrynin kept insisting that this matter was none of my business, but I pointed out to him that the Soviets themselves had made it our business by generating a letter from the prisoner addressed directly to Carter, pleading for assistance. That step had been taken presumably to embarrass Carter, but it enabled me to argue that the Soviets had thereby made it also our concern.” (Power and Principle, pp. 338–339)
