1052 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX to persuade any representative Palestinians to join the negotiating process, it seems to me our objective should be to produce sufficient evidence that things are moving in the negotiations to defuse Arab and third world reaction to normalization. In other words, we should try to have enough to show after eight months of negotiations not only to demonstrate that we take seriously the May target date but to give pause to the Saudis and other moderate Arabs, including moderate Palestinians, about launching new efforts to further isolate and punish Egypt. 4. Proceeding from these premises, my conclusion is that we need to take a hard look at ways in which we can help make something happen at the Sadat/Begin summit. Therefore, while I subscribe to much of Sam Lewis’ analysis (Tel Aviv 26726),5 I do not agree that we can wait until after the summit to decide whether and how we can begin to inject some substance into our full partner role. 5. Trying to influence what comes out of the summit can admittedly be a tricky exercise. We cannot get out in front of Sadat or appear to be pressing him to move more rapidly than he is prepared to do. This would be dangerous vis-a-vis the Israelis, and could also arouse Egyptian expectations that we are prepared to deliver more than may be possible through our own efforts with the Israelis. 6. At the same time, Vice President Mubarak and Prime Minister Khalil have independently suggested that President Carter communicate with President Sadat about the need to seek concrete progress at the summit. This suggestion results from their concern, based on the experience of the last two Sadat/Begin summits, that Sadat will again be reluctant in the intimate atmosphere of the summit to introduce a note of controversy and will, in fact, end up making further gestures to Begin on bilateral issues (e.g., accelerating the pace of normalization beyond what is called for in the peace treaty) without getting anything in return. An additional consideration is that, even if Sadat decides to press Begin harder this time than he has before, he will do so in such a
