1052
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
to persuade any representative Palestinians to join the negotiating
process, it seems to me our objective should be to produce sufficient ev-
idence that things are moving in the negotiations to defuse Arab and
third world reaction to normalization. In other words, we should try to
have enough to show after eight months of negotiations not only to
demonstrate that we take seriously the May target date but to give
pause to the Saudis and other moderate Arabs, including moderate Pal-
estinians, about launching new efforts to further isolate and punish
Egypt.
4. Proceeding from these premises, my conclusion is that we need
to take a hard look at ways in which we can help make something
happen at the Sadat/Begin summit. Therefore, while I subscribe to
much of Sam Lewis’ analysis (Tel Aviv 26726),5 I do not agree that we
can wait until after the summit to decide whether and how we can
begin to inject some substance into our full partner role.
5. Trying to influence what comes out of the summit can admit-
tedly be a tricky exercise. We cannot get out in front of Sadat or appear
to be pressing him to move more rapidly than he is prepared to do. This
would be dangerous vis-a-vis the Israelis, and could also arouse Egyp-
tian expectations that we are prepared to deliver more than may be
possible through our own efforts with the Israelis.
6. At the same time, Vice President Mubarak and Prime Minister
Khalil have independently suggested that President Carter communi-
cate with President Sadat about the need to seek concrete progress at
the summit. This suggestion results from their concern, based on the
experience of the last two Sadat/Begin summits, that Sadat will again
be reluctant in the intimate atmosphere of the summit to introduce a
note of controversy and will, in fact, end up making further gestures to
Begin on bilateral issues (e.g., accelerating the pace of normalization
beyond what is called for in the peace treaty) without getting anything
in return. An additional consideration is that, even if Sadat decides to
press Begin harder this time than he has before, he will do so in such a
5 In telegram 26726 from Tel Aviv, December 21, Lewis analyzed the upcoming
summit between Sadat and Begin, concluding “we should not jump the gun by priming
either of the parties for action. If, however, Roy and others close to the world of Sadat
conclude that autonomy really is not on his agenda for the summit—which I find hard to
believe—then a message urging that substantive issues be addressed there should go to
Sadat, not Begin. And, finally, that if a call is made to Sadat, one should of course be made
to Begin, but that specifics should be avoided, and no suggestion of U.S. pressure should
be imparted. The message left with the Prime Minister should be simply this: that the
second stage of the Camp David process is, if anything, even more important than the
first in bringing about a settlement for the Middle East conflict and a lasting peace for Is-
rael, and that President Carter continues to watch closely how it is evolving. The un-
spoken message will be heard clearly: ‘If things don’t begin to move, I will have to get
into the act.’” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850040–2545)
