X
Preface
hensive negotiated settlement to the Arab-Israeli dispute begun in For-
eign Relations, 1977–1980, volume VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January
1977–August 1978. This volume begins with the August 8, 1978, accept-
ance by Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Egyptian Presi-
dent Anwar al-Sadat of President Carter’s invitation to meet with him
for talks at Camp David and continues until the end of the Carter
administration on January 20, 1981. The volume is organized into five
chronological compilations. Greater emphasis has been given to the
first seven months of the period covered by the volume; three compila-
tions are devoted to the period from August 8, 1978, until the signing of
the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty on March 26, 1979. This emphasis re-
flects the most intense period of U.S. diplomatic effort in pursuit of
what the Carter administration hoped would be the first stage of a com-
prehensive Arab-Israeli peace settlement. Indeed, during this seven
month period, the Arab-Israeli dispute reached its apex on the list of
U.S. foreign policy priorities, reflected in President Carter’s direct in-
volvement in the peace process at a level he had not reached previously
and would not reach again throughout his presidency.
The Camp David invitation in August 1978 was an important junc-
ture in U.S. involvement in the Middle East peace process begun by
Sadat’s historic visit to Jerusalem in November 1977, a process which
was languishing by the summer of 1978. Following the inconclusive tri-
partite talks at Leeds Castle in July of that year, Carter’s invitation rep-
resented an ambitious new step for U.S. diplomacy, one which sought,
through intensive, direct negotiations at the highest level, to do more
than merely continue an Egyptian-Israeli dialogue. For Carter, the goal
of Camp David was the establishment of concrete foundations for an
Egyptian-Israeli peace settlement, ultimately embodied in the two
“Framework” documents signed in Washington upon the conclusion of
the summit on September 17, 1978, in the hope of using this agreement
as the springboard for a more comprehensive peace. In doing so, Carter
placed the Arab-Israeli dispute at the center of the U.S. foreign policy
agenda in a way no U.S. President had previously attempted and cast
himself in the role of direct, personal mediator between Egypt and Is-
rael. The compilation on the Camp David Summit documents U.S.
planning for Camp David and the course of the summit itself. The
reader will note the relative dearth of official documentation, especially
memoranda of conversation, in the volume’s coverage of the summit.
According to members of the U.S. delegation at Camp David, no
written memoranda of conversation were kept of President Carter’s
discussions with Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat. Carter kept
his own notes of these meetings and afterward held debriefings with
his staff. Much of this material is now in the Carter Presidential Library
in Atlanta, Georgia, and has been incorporated into this volume as
much as possible. The volume also draws upon the portions of Presi-
