Chapter 7, January–May 1991 953 — The Soviets assert that accepting the position on downloading which they outlined in Houston (1250 warheads, two types, five RVs per missile) must be part of the overall package. — The Soviets have tied two relatively minor aspects of the rapid reload package to the issue of third country basing. Additional details and a proposal follow. The Basic Deal: PPCM for Bombers 4. On both the B1B and the B2, the Soviet paper is a walk-­back. On the B2, the Soviets claim that if we test a long-­range non-­nuclear ALCM, they can’t be certain that what was tested was not a long-­ range nuclear ALCM. Exhibitions might not help since even if OSI allowed distinguishing between a nuclear and non-­nuclear ALCM, their NTM couldn’t tell what had been tested. I told the Soviets that inspecting the B2 was not acceptable. Nazarkin said that they were prepared not to require any B2 exhibitions or inspections but only if we could offer a way to be certain that only non-­nuclear ALCMs were tested.3 5. On B1B distinguishing features, the Soviets have made three changes to the language we gave in Houston: — They require that “attachment joints for moving the bulkhead in the bomb bay” be eliminated. Nazarkin admits this is new. He claims that in Houston they didn’t have time to study our proposed elements of common ground and that these are their proposals. — They require that ALCM pylon attachment joints (except for the two jacking points) be “drilled or welded or eliminated by other equivalent method excluding their possible out-­of-­plant reconversion.” Nazarkin says that this is not a rejection of the approach we described in Houston provided that it meets the standard of being equivalent to drilling or welding in terms of not being reversible at an airbase. — They add “long-­range nuclear ALCM suspension pylons” to the list of items we will not locate at air bases for B–1 heavy bombers not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs. 6. The Soviet language states that locational restrictions on equipment for reconfiguring the B1B bomb bay and for loading ALCM pylons will “be verified during the implementation of the verification regime provided for by the treaty.” The only good B1B news is that Nazarkin confirms that this is intended to mean no new inspection 3 Gordon drew a short vertical line to the right of this sentence and wrote: “any ideas.”
