Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II the 1975 Declaration Against Torture.18 While perhaps less effective in the long run in directly improving human rights conditions than the establishment of a High Commissioner, this proposal or a similar one would seem to be less controversial and, therefore, more likely to gain approval in this session. The Third Committee currently is considering proposed resolutions on this subject. The office worked closely with the United Nations Mission in encouraging and then cooperating with the Secretary General of the United Nations in his effort to secure a resolution of the sit-in by families of disappeared persons in Chile, an effort which ultimately was successful. President Carter on October 5 signed the UN Covenants on Civil and Political Liberties and Social and Cultural Rights.19 HA and IO are working to protect NGO’s from attack during UNGA. There is some effort by the Southern Cone Latin American countries to have the credentials of some NGOs challenged. B. The Organization of American States: Following the OAS General Assembly at Grenada, our efforts to support and strengthen the Inter-American Human Rights Commission have yielded agreement from Haiti, Paraguay and El Salvador to permit visits by the Inter- American Human Rights Commission to their countries to evaluate human rights conditions. In addition, the momentum generated by the President’s signing the American Convention on Human Rights in June20 has influenced a half dozen additional countries to sign, bringing the total number of countries which have either deposited their signatures or agreed to deposit their signatures to 16. In addition, six countries have now ratified the Convention including Costa Rica, Colombia, Honduras and Venezuela. A good working relationship also has been developed with the Inter-American Commission such that an exchange of information has been possible on an informal basis (this should be held confidential). The accessions to the American Convention on Human Rights and agreements by several countries to permit visits by the IAHRC undoubtedly will place a greater focus on that Commission’s activities, ultimately strengthen it and make it a more active instrument for the promotion of human rights in the hemisphere. C. UNESCO: The preparatory conference met early in August to refine the proposals that were presented to the UNESCO Board in late September and early October, and to establish formal human rights 18 Reference is to the “Declaration on the Protection of All Persons From Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,”
