temporary outbreak of international animosities. The observance of this
covenant, so simple and so straightforward, promises more for the peace of
the world than any other agreement ever negotiated among the nations.
NATIONAL DEFENSE
The first duty of our Government to its own citizens and foreigners within
its borders is the preservation of order. Unless and until that duty is met a
government is not even eligible for recognition among the family of
nations. The advancement of world civilization likewise is dependent upon
that order among the people of different countries which we term peace. To
insure our citizens against the infringement of their legal rights at home and
abroad, to preserve order, liberty, and peace by making the law supreme, we
have an Army and a Navy.
Both of these are organized for defensive purposes. Our Army could not be
much reduced, but does not need to be increased. Such new housing and
repairs as are necessary are under way and the 5-year program in aviation is
being put into effect in both branches of our service.
Our Navy, according to generally accepted standards, is deficient in
cruisers. We have 10 comparatively new vessels, 22 that are old, and 8 to be
built. It is evident that renewals and replacements must be provided. This
matter was thoroughly canvassed at the last session of the Congress and
does not need restatement. The bill before the Senate with the elimination
of the time clause should be passed. We have no intention of competing
with any other country. This building program is for necessary replacements
and to meet our needs for defense.
The cost of national defense is stupendous. It has increased $118,000,000 in
the past four years. The estimated expenditure for 1930 is $668,000,000.
While this is made up of many items it is, after all, mostly dependent upon
numbers. Our defensive needs do not call for any increase in the number of
men in the Army or the Navy. We have reached the limit of what we ought
to expend for that purpose.
I wish to repeat again for the benefit of the timid and the suspicious that this
country is neither militaristic nor imperialistic. Many people at home and
