3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
831
The U.S. cannot really think that Washington’s camouflage can actually
hide that aspect of U.S. actions.
We resolutely condemn U.S. military action against Iran and there
can be no other approach. Iran did not invite you, you did yourself. No
one objectively can agree to your military action. We resolutely con-
demn any use of force in Iran in any form.
13. Cuba
We are for having the Cubans resolve their emigration issue and
problem themselves. They are free to resolve their emigration problem
in their own way. It is an entirely different problem how one or another
government may assess the Cuban Government’s policy. As far as we
know, Cuba is doing nothing which goes beyond its sovereign rights.
The U.S. is exploiting this question for hostile purposes against Cuba.
This fact is demonstrated in the southern part of the United States, and
especially in Florida facing Cuba. The U.S. is a big country. Why is this
all necessary? These actions can backlash against your policy. U.S.
policy can find no justification beginning with your presence in Guan-
tanamo and ending with the emigrant issue. I will confine myself to
these remarks on this issue.
14. Upon the completion of Gromyko’s remarks I told him that I
would, of course, communicate what he said to my government and
that it would be useless at this point to try to address each point he had
made, many of which I took strong objection to. I then singled out some
of his key statements for rebuttal and made the following comments.
15. Since the beginning of our relationship with the Soviet Union
we think there has not been anything that parallels the Soviet Union’s
invasion of Afghanistan which was recognized as a non-aligned state. I
stressed the importance of the historical implications of the Soviet
Union’s actions and that they had endangered international stability
and peace. The Soviet Union must understand this. It is now necessary
to find a way to make some progress in removing tensions lest the
world situation become even more dangerous. In this respect the Soviet
Union must live up to its responsibilities as a world power.
16. I questioned Gromyko’s remarks on U.S. termination of arms
control negotiations. It was evident that withholding SALT II ratifica-
tion was our decision and that we recognize our responsibility to move
forward on that at the appropriate time. However, it was the Soviet in-
vasion of Afghanistan which forced the postponement of SALT ratifica-
tion. Also, I was unaware of the U.S. unilaterally terminating any major
arms control negotiations. Concerning TNF negotiations within the
framework of SALT III, I stressed that what was important was to make
forward movement in arms control negotiations wherever we can and,
thereby, reduce tensions. That is why the U.S. is prepared to begin pre-
liminary exchanges on TNF without preconditions or delay even before
