3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
640
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
gade training activity on September 3, is marginal at this point and not
a strong reason for withholding the demarche. (S)
The NSC Staff expressed similar concerns as Defense about next
steps and our policy objectives. It was pointed out that a demarche
could easily draw a Soviet denial and the statement of a Soviet position
which would become firm and difficult to change later on. It was also
pointed out that a demarche could, on the one hand, cost us an intelli-
gence loss through the cancellation of the September 3 exercise, or on
the other hand, demonstrate disdain for our demarche by letting the ex-
ercise take place. Finally, it was explained that State has an answer to
public reactions in the event of disclosure of the confirming evidence of
the Soviet ground forces presence: we are planning to raise the issue at
a much higher level when Gromyko comes to the United States in Sep-
tember, and we have scheduled meetings of the NSC principals on the
matter in early September. Furthermore, the recent Shulman/Barry
demarche to the Soviet Embassy has already communicated the
seriousness with which we view a Soviet ground force presence in
Cuba. (S)
No agreement was reached on whether or not to make a demarche.
It was decided to ask Secretary Vance to take up the issue by telephone
with Dr. Brzezinski and Acting Secretary of Defense Claytor.3 (S)
The wordings of the State Department draft demarches for the So-
viet Union and Cuba were edited extensively by the group to leave the
greatest latitude for policy choices later on and to reduce the possible
difficulties we might encounter with the Soviets, Congress, and Senator
Stone. There was some discussion of the advisability of including or ex-
cluding the Cubans as a recipient of the demarche and its significance
for the level of relations between our two countries. (S)
There was agreement on the revisions of the two demarches,
which were made as close to identical as possible. (S)
The President is to be made aware of the new intelligence before he
meets Senator Stone in Florida on Thursday.4 (S)
3 W. Graham Claytor.
4 August 30.
