Chile 233 In Chile this is not a matter of providing comforts. It is the difference between life and death for thousands of individuals. Out of Santiago’s population of one and one-­half million people, more than 200,000 live under tin cans. Another 500,000 are in what we would call slums in the United States. There will be frost on the ground here most mornings for the next four months. The other day we had two inches of rain in eight hours. People living as millions of Chileans live can’t stand such conditions and remain healthy and productive. We can’t build houses for everyone in Latin America, but we can give appreciable assistance. Technical assistance is being given but it alone is not enough. It must be accompanied by economic assistance utilizing private initiative and private means. To tap private capital and private savings might help establish a system of savings and loan associations such as we have in the United States, offering DLF money for initial capital in much the same way as our Government did in the early days of the Federal Savings and Loan System and as it now does through purchase of mortgages by the Federal National Mortgage Association; and we might extend FHA insurance to include investments in Chilean mortgages by United States private capital. 6) Increase our PL-4804 Title III program to the maximum to provide undernourished people the food we can’t sell. Create, support, or expand school lunch programs and other effective distributional means. Excellent progress has already been made with Title III in Chile but we would like to see it continue and improve. 7) Demonstrate that we do recognize the difference between a Dominican dictatorship and a Chilean democracy. We have already proved that giving the cold shoulder to the dictators is not the ideal way. Continue to treat them courteously and with sufficient cordiality to guarantee their cooperation where this is essential. Reflect the differences we recognize and feel by doing extra things for the true democracies. Wrap up some nice packages, some cultural, some financial, some political, but all of a type providing mutual benefits. Present them to the democracies, letting it be known we are doing so because they are democratic. 8) We must work to get the full benefits of the impact of the helpful things we do here, through better coordinated publicity and more expeditious action. We have often announced sizable loans at times or in ways which gave us practically no propaganda value. Others we have not announced at all. Often we have, without remark, let the Chileans give advance publicity about large sums they were seeking to borrow, so when we loaned less we got criticism instead of congratulations. 4 For the text of P.L. 480, the Agriculture Trade Development and Assistance Act of
