932 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II tones; and a viable, constructive U.S. role could have significant benefits in that regard. OES concurs in upgrading the U.S. role beyond present planning to the Option 2 level, given the above assessment that the U.S. posture is important to North-South relationships and coupled with the importance of global water problems in their own right. It is recognized, however, that the new initiatives selected to support this option will not—in the limited time available—have the benefit of being thoroughly weighed against the spectrum of development assistance needs beyond the water field, and also potential Administration initiatives in other areas. Recommendations 1. That we go forward in accordance with the second “Medium Posture” option and, accordingly, select a delegation headed by the Secretary of the Interior. Approve Disapprove Prefer Option 1 Prefer Option 37 2. That you or Mr. Christopher orally inform Governor Gilligan of the political importance you attach to the Water Conference and request that AID promptly submit suggestions to the Department for significant water resource initiatives which the U.S. can propose at that conference.8 7 Christopher checked this option and initialed. 8 Christopher neither approved nor disapproved this recommendation but added a handwritten comment below the approval and disapproval lines: “Please see last paragraph of my memorandum. W.C.” Reference is to Christopher’s February 9 memorandum to Toussaint, in which Christopher indicated that he had acted for Vance in making the determination regarding U.S. participation. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 7, Memos/Letters From WC to Bureaus) The last paragraph of the memorandum states: “I wish to emphasize, however, that this approach to the Conference does not imply that the U.S. delegation should take a passive or negative role. On the contrary, our delegation should be quite positive in supporting the importance of water management and receiving ideas from other delegations or the Conference secretariat on practical means of using bilateral and multilateral aid resources and U.S. technological capacities in cooperation with the water programs of interested developing countries. We should declare our determination to obtain, through this exchange of technical experience and ideas, the basis for developing new or expanded programs of U.S. assistance. Major U.S. aid initiatives would logically follow the Conference, which is, after all, a technical one, rather than an aid-pledging session.” (Ibid.) The March 29 NSC Global Issues Cluster Evening Report to Brzezinski, which references the conclusion of the water conference notes: “The U.S. Chairman reports that: A spirit of ‘harmony, accomplishment and optimism’ prevailed, and that all nations worked extremely hard to avoid confrontation on shared water resources.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 2–4/77)
