932
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
tones; and a viable, constructive U.S. role could have significant ben-
efits in that regard.
OES concurs in upgrading the U.S. role beyond present planning
to the Option 2 level, given the above assessment that the U.S. posture
is important to North-South relationships and coupled with the impor-
tance of global water problems in their own right. It is recognized, how-
ever, that the new initiatives selected to support this option will not—in
the limited time available—have the benefit of being thoroughly
weighed against the spectrum of development assistance needs beyond
the water field, and also potential Administration initiatives in other
areas.
Recommendations
1. That we go forward in accordance with the second “Medium
Posture” option and, accordingly, select a delegation headed by the
Secretary of the Interior.
Approve
Disapprove
Prefer Option 1
Prefer Option 37
2. That you or Mr. Christopher orally inform Governor Gilligan of
the political importance you attach to the Water Conference and re-
quest that AID promptly submit suggestions to the Department for sig-
nificant water resource initiatives which the U.S. can propose at that
conference.8
7 Christopher checked this option and initialed.
8 Christopher neither approved nor disapproved this recommendation but added a
handwritten comment below the approval and disapproval lines: “Please see last para-
graph of my memorandum. W.C.” Reference is to Christopher’s February 9 memo-
randum to Toussaint, in which Christopher indicated that he had acted for Vance in
making the determination regarding U.S. participation. (National Archives, RG 59, Office
of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 7,
Memos/Letters From WC to Bureaus) The last paragraph of the memorandum states: “I
wish to emphasize, however, that this approach to the Conference does not imply that the
U.S. delegation should take a passive or negative role. On the contrary, our delegation
should be quite positive in supporting the importance of water management and re-
ceiving ideas from other delegations or the Conference secretariat on practical means of
using bilateral and multilateral aid resources and U.S. technological capacities in cooper-
ation with the water programs of interested developing countries. We should declare our
determination to obtain, through this exchange of technical experience and ideas, the
basis for developing new or expanded programs of U.S. assistance. Major U.S. aid initia-
tives would logically follow the Conference, which is, after all, a technical one, rather
than an aid-pledging session.” (Ibid.) The March 29 NSC Global Issues Cluster Evening
Report to Brzezinski, which references the conclusion of the water conference notes: “The
U.S. Chairman reports that: A spirit of ‘harmony, accomplishment and optimism’ pre-
vailed, and that all nations worked extremely hard to avoid confrontation on shared
water resources.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global
Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 2–4/77)
