339 3 0/
8 S/800 8
VIII
Preface
for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski, a Soviet expert,
played a central role in the administration’s policy formulation to-
wards the Soviet Union. Brzezinski’s voice became the dominant one
during the last year of the administration with the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan culminating in years of increasing concern over the exten-
sion of Soviet power into Africa and Asia.
President Carter brought into office an emphasis on human rights
and a determination to include this issue as a major consideration in
American foreign affairs. This emphasis was not well-received by the
Soviets, who saw it as an intrusion into their internal matters, especially
with respect to the issue of Jewish emigration from the Soviet Union,
which became a major issue of contention. Carter’s emphasis on human
rights contributed to a decline of de´tente by the end of his presidency.
During the final year of the Carter administration, de´tente and the rela-
tionship with the Soviet Union withered, overshadowed by domestic
economic problems and the hostage crisis in Iran, and weakened by the
many areas of contention between the Soviet Union and the United
States.
Acknowledgments
The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the
Carter Library, Atlanta, Georgia. Special thanks are due to the Histor-
ical Staff of the Central Intelligence Agency, who were extremely
helpful in arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelligence
Agency. Melissa Jane Taylor collected, selected documentation, and ed-
ited the volume under the supervision of M. Todd Bennett, Chief of the
Europe and General Division, and Edward C. Keefer, former General
Editor of the Foreign Relations series. Kristin L. Ahlberg, Assistant to the
General Editor, reviewed the volume. Dean Weatherhead coordinated
the declassification review, under the supervision first of Susan C.
Weetman and later Carl Ashley, who both served as Chief of the De-
classification and Publishing Division. Stephanie Eckroth, Vicki E.
Futscher, and Erin F. Cozens did the copy and technical editing. Do Mi
Stauber, Inc. prepared the index.
Melissa Jane Taylor, Ph.D.
Historian
