Special Session on Disarmament
1229
(1) negative security assurances; and (2) the cutoff of the production of
fissionable materials for weapons purposes. Andy and three other
members of the delegation will meet with you on this subject on
Monday3 at 1:00–1:30.
Attached at Tab I is a memorandum from Cy Vance, recom-
mending that, in light of the delegation’s comments, you reconsider
your earlier decision on negative security assurances. Harold Brown
and I join in this recommendation.
Although the language of the proposed negative security assur-
ance that we worked out last month would have been cumbersome for
a major public address, its practical significance will be understood and
welcomed now by other states at SSOD. The Vice President told the
Special Session that “we are here to listen to the voices of other nations,
as well as to raise our own on behalf of arms control and disarma-
ment.” US flexibility on this issue could be offered gracefully as the
fruit of thoughtful listening and could enhance our leverage on other
issues, especially non-proliferation.
The proposed language of the assurance has been approved by all
the concerned US Government agencies, except for the JCS. The Chiefs’
principal concern is that this is a “slippery slope” and that there will be
further erosion in this position. The last eight words of the proposed
negative security assurance could give rise to varying interpretations.
The proposed assurance is consonant with the independent initia-
tives on this subject by the UK, Japan, and other countries, and has been
cleared with both the Koreans and the Germans. The language reads as
follows:
“The United States will not use nuclear weapons against any non-
nuclear weapon state party to the NPT or any comparable internation-
ally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear explosive devices, ex-
cept in the case of an attack on the United States, its territories or armed
forces, or its allies by such a state allied to a nuclear weapon state, or as-
sociated with a nuclear weapon state in carrying out or sustaining the
attack.”
In light of these considerations, do you wish to authorize our dele-
gation to state agreement with the language of the proposed negative
security assurances?
Yes4
No
Depending on your decision, we will supply appropriate talking
points for your meeting with the delegation on Monday.
3 June 12.
4 Carter checked the “Yes” option and wrote “J” in the right-hand margin.
