448 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI c. Ban on Aircraft Conversion. The U.S. may offer a provision to ban the conversion of aircraft originally constructed as an aircraft other than a bomber into an ALCM-carrying heavy bomber. (S) d. Ban on Multiple-Warhead ALCMs. The U.S. may offer a provision to ban multiple-­warhead nuclear ALCMs. (S) e. ALCM Distinguishability. The U.S. requires that future non-­ nuclear ALCMs not be subject to the numerical limits in START. To achieve this objective, the U.S. may offer the following measures to help distinguish between future nuclear and non-­nuclear ALCMs. (S) (1) ALCM-­carrying heavy bombers, non-ALCM heavy bombers, and former (i.e., non-­nuclear) heavy bombers would each be based at geographically separated bases. (S) (2) All nuclear and non-­nuclear ALCMs above the range threshold for START-­accountable ALCMs would have external differences that are visible to NTM, in addition to differences (e.g., shape, diameter, attachment point spacing) that are visible to on-­site inspection. (S) (3) For all nuclear ALCMs above the range threshold, the sides would exchange information with respect to these external differences and would exhibit the ALCMs in a way that confirms the information and distinguishing features. (S) (4) For all non-­nuclear ALCMs above the range threshold, the U.S. may agree to exchange information with respect to these external differences and exhibit the non-­nuclear ALCMs in a way that confirms the information and distinguishing features, provided this information exchange is not treated as part of the data MOU in START. (S) (5) The sides would permit access to designated weapons storage areas at all non-ALCM heavy bomber bases and former heavy bomber bases for the purpose of selecting a small number of non-­nuclear ALCMs (if any are present) and confirming (e.g., with a radiation detector) that they are, in fact, non-­nuclear. Other parts of these airbases, other strategic airbases, and all tactical airbases would be excluded from such inspections. (S) (6) The sides would permit inspections of non-ALCM heavy bombers of a type that have been flight tested with nuclear ALCMs above the START range threshold (e.g., B–1B) to confirm that they are not equipped to carry such ALCMs. Non-ALCM heavy bombers of types that have not been flight-­tested with nuclear ALCMs above the START range threshold (e.g., B–2) would not be subject to inspection for this purpose. (S) (7) The sides would permit inspections of former heavy bombers (e.g., B–52G) to confirm that they satisfy the requirements for conversion to former heavy bombers. (S) f. Range Threshold. The U.S. may accept a range threshold of 1000 km for START-­accountable ALCMs. (S) g. Former Heavy Bombers. The U.S. requires a continuing right to convert heavy bombers to “former heavy bombers” that would not be counted within the 1600/6000 START aggregates, subject to an agreed numerical limit on such converted heavy bombers between 100 and 115. (S)
