711.3212Anti-War/3: Telegram
[Document 76]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 29, 1928—1 p.m.
24. Your 27, June 28, 3 p.m. Reason why Brazil and other countries were
not included in this Government’s original invitation is as follows:
The French Government originally proposed that France and the United
States enter into a treaty in the same language that I have proposed for a
multilateral treaty. After giving very careful thought to the subject, I was
convinced that the United States could not enter into a treaty with France
that it would not be equally willing to enter into with all the other powers,
and I made a counterproposal that in the first instance the Governments of
the United States, France, Great Britain, Italy, and Japan enter into a
multilateral treaty which should be open to adherence to any other power in
the world. The object of this restriction at the beginning to a few powers
was to narrow the field of negotiation and to expedite conclusion of a
treaty; if we undertook negotiations with all the world powers, result would
be indefinite delay. The present fear of war, moreover, is principally in
Europe, and it was deemed most important to get the leading European
powers to sign the treaty and set forth this principle. Great Britain did not
wish to sign for the Dominions and India and requested that they be invited
as a part of the British Empire, so the proposal was extended to them. It was
also afterward extended to Czechoslovakia, Belgium and Poland, as they
are the only powers parties to the Locarno treaties of guarantee in addition
to the powers originally invited. Question was raised by France of whether
her signature to this treaty renouncing war would conflict with the
obligations of the Locarno treaties and other similar guaranty treaties in
Europe which France asserted required her to come to the defense of any
nation a party to these treaties if it is attacked by any other party. In order to
obviate question raised by France I acquiesced in the suggestion that the
