974  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
of the Panama Flag in the Canal Zone.” Accordingly, it was used by 
Secretary Herter in his presentation.)
The Secretary of State informed the President that agreement had 
been reached with Secretary Brucker that the Department of State will be 
represented on the Board of Governors of the Panama Canal Company 
at the Under Secretary of State level, the first appointment to be made 
when the next vacancy appears. He said that they had further agreed 
that each nomination would be a matter for consultation between the 
two Secretaries. Governor Brucker confirmed this agreement and, after 
a brief discussion of the topic, the President gave his approval.
The Secretary of State then informed the President that he and 
Governor Brucker had agreed it was neither necessary nor desirable 
to attempt at this time to establish the principle that future Governors 
of the Canal Zone should be civilians. The President remarked that 30 
years ago the defense of the Canal Zone was the most important ele-
ment in our relations but that with the development of missiles this 
factor was no longer controlling. Hence his general thought was that 
whereas the management should be in the hands of engineers the 
Governor should be a civilian. He agreed, however, that any such deci-
sion should be deferred at this time and left to the next President.
The Secretary of State then reported his agreement with the 
Secretary of the Army for the establishment of the primacy of the 
United States Ambassador over the Governor of the Canal Zone in mat-
ters affecting the relations between the United States and the Republic 
of Panama or any other nation. He indicated, and the Secretary of the 
Army concurred, that they had reached agreement on a draft letter to be 
sent by the President to the Secretary of the Army confirming this rela-
tionship.3 He also mentioned that the relationship of the Ambassador 
to CINCARIB would be worked out promptly in the future by himself 
with the Secretary of Defense and their agreement thereafter referred to 
the President. The President indicated his approval.
The Secretary of State then raised the question of the flying of 
the Panama flag in the Canal Zone. The Secretary said that, whereas 
Governor Brucker did not wholly agree with him, he believed that the 
Panama flag should be flown daily with the American flag in the plaza 
called Shaler’s Triangle in the Canal Zone opposite the Panamanian 
Legislative Building, with both flags raised and lowered by U.S. person-
nel only. He said that this act should be announced with the statement 
that the flag was being flown as an act of grace on the part of the United 
States in recognition of our friendship for the Panamanian people and 
our recognition that titular sovereignty resided in Panama. It should 
likewise clearly be stated that this unilateral act did not modify in 
3 A copy of the draft letter was attached to the memorandum intended for the 
President.
