United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 9 relief for domestic lead-­zinc industry aid, if a tariff increase proves unavoidable, limit its scope and duration and indicate our willingness to join a multilateral study of a lead-­zinc stabilization agreement; (2) oppose any increase in the currently stipulated tax on imported copper and be prepared to discuss the possibility of establishing a study group looking towards an international copper agreement; (3) study the feasibility of a western hemisphere oil commission to review the oil supply and demand situation; and (4) indicate U.S. willingness to cooperate in a multilateral coffee study group on a world-­wide basis. As to financial assistance, the more important recommendations are: (1) that the Eximbank continue its development loan program in Latin America and be prepared, if necessary, to make assistance available supplementary to IMF assistance, to help meet temporary payments problems; (2) that the reasons for the recently low volume of IBRD loans to the area be investigated and, if indicated, that efforts then be made to increase IBRD operations; (3) that U.S. public loans be made to state petroleum enterprises for certain very limited purposes when U.S. foreign policy objectives thereby can be served; and (4) that we study the desirability of an Inter-American development bank. In regard to the Sino-Soviet Bloc economic offensive in Latin America, it is recommended that the U.S.: (1) continue its existing policy of not opposing expansion of trade-­in non-­strategic commodities with the European Soviet Bloc; (2) maintain efforts to persuade individual countries, as appropriate, to minimize or eliminate their trade and financial arrangements with Communist China; and (3) alert countries to the political and economic pitfalls associated with certain aspects of trade with the Sino-Soviet Bloc. I Commodity Problems As producers of primary products, the Latin American countries are perhaps more interested in stable and remunerative prices for their commodities than in any other aspect of our economic relations. They feel they are particularly vulnerable because in most of the countries, foreign exchange earnings depend on only one or a few commodities. Generally, raw material prices decline sooner and stay depressed longer than do the prices for finished products. The traditional U.S. position has been strongly opposed to international commodity agreements. Wheat and sugar are exceptions. Efforts have been made in the recommendations below to ease gradually into a changed position on commodity agreements. 1. The lead-­zinc problem is an important one for which there is no easy solution. It seems realistic to assume that the Tariff Commission report will probably recommend maximum increases in duties and possibly even import quotas. Yet if increased protection is granted to
