International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
99
today do not have the same motivation. There is less concern with the
continuity of work. The struggle against unemployment calls for spe-
cific programs to find long-term employment rather than part-time
jobs. We should not say we are going to solve the unemployment with
a big rush forward because this would soon mean the application of re-
strictive measures.
My third point is on trade. President Giscard stressed structural
changes and the need for organized freedom of trade. We should safe-
guard the freedom of trade. If we want to guarantee freedom of trade,
we cannot repeat the same phrases as in 1960, 1967, or 1973. Public
opinion will not be impressed. We should make a collective commit-
ment not only to resist protectionism but also to deal with problems of
trade.
We also need access by exporters to important markets which are
closed not only because of customs duties, but other barriers as well.
The EC has given the developing countries great access and tech-
nology. A number of countries are now subsidizing their exports and
closing their markets to the developed countries. A lack of symmetry
cannot be supported in the future. If this exists, the negotiations cannot
deal with the problems in a climate of cooperation. Public opinion will
not allow cooperation. We should stress that the new problems require
new approaches, and give an acceptable content to the notion of trade,
demonstrating that it is not in conflict with the notion of employment.
A follow-up is a good idea. The Summit could lead to positive re-
sults on trade, economic growth, and employment.
Callaghan: This has been a useful discussion. We have overlapped
into other areas. One essential point which has emerged is that we not
only want a good declaration, but good results. We should relate the
declaration to our people.
I listened to Prime Minister Fukuda express his concerns and com-
pare this period to the period of the 1930s. I believe that President Gis-
card was the first to mention structural changes which makes this pe-
riod different from both the 1930s and the period before 1973. Prime
Minister Trudeau also added a point about the consequences of this for
ourselves and indicated the need to educate our people, the developing
countries, and the oil producers who do not understand the change in
the situation. Our communique should have a short analysis at the be-
ginning which points to these matters. We need an analysis of this
situation.
On the issue of inflation and unemployment, all of us are agreed
on the political consequences of high unemployment. Our number one
aim, as Chancellor Schmidt said, is to reduce high unemployment, par-
ticularly among the youth. But there are also serious inflationary pres-
sures which must be dealt with.
