Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III II. Tabling of Requests (November 1) —Requests would be made on agricultural tariffs, industrial tariffs of non-formula developed countries and of developing countries, and nontariff measures relating to agricultural and industrial products. Countries would use restraint in making requests on those nontariff measures that would be subject to codes agreed in the MTN (i.e., subsidies/countervailing duties, government procurement, standards, customs valuation). —A notification/consultation procedure is underway in Group Agriculture that covers both tariffs and nontariff measures. Similarly, notification/consultation procedures are underway for nontariff measures not being addressed in codes, including quantitative restrictions and customs matters other than valuation. The information being gathered in these consultations will aid countries in determining what requests to make of their negotiating partners. III. Tabling of Draft Codes (December 15) —Draft codes that could be used as a basis for negotiation would be tabled for those subjects for which no acceptable draft code has yet been tabled. These draft codes would contain bracketed language for those issues on which disagreement still exists. We expect to have draft codes for standards, government procurement, subsidies/countervailing duties, safeguards, and customs valuation. The current status of these codes is as follows: —An acceptable draft product standards code is already on the table and has been under consideration in the MTN for several years. —The OECD considered a draft government procurement code for several years and this draft was tabled in the MTN this year. This draft proved unacceptable and a new draft must be written. —The Canadians have tabled a draft text on subsidies/countervailing duties. This text has encountered considerable opposition, especially by the EC, and a new text will be needed. —The United States will table a draft safeguards code this fall that should be an acceptable basis for negotiation. —The European Community will table a draft customs valuation code this fall that should be an acceptable basis for negotiation. IV. Tabling of Offers (January 15) —All MTN participants will table offers on tariffs and nontariff measures. Offers on those nontariff measures that will be subject to general codes may not be necessary. Most industrial countries are expected to table tariff offers on industrial products on the basis of an agreed tariff-cutting formula. Tariff offers on agricultural products will
