3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
107
Gromyko said that in his view activities in the field of civil defense
were not a problem of first-rate importance. In terms of strategic sta-
bility they were not significant. He did not think that anyone would
deny the truth of such a view. Pursuing the question in these terms
might complicate the process of reaching agreement on really impor-
tant problems—the number one problem—limitation of strategic arms.
This did not mean that the Soviet side would be afraid to discuss this
question. If the United States attached importance to it, Soviet and
American specialists might be instructed to consider specific proposals.
The Secretary said that was good and very productive. He recalled
that when we had suggested discussing ABM limitations, it was said
that they were defensive weapons and did not affect the strategic bal-
ance. It developed, however, that both sides later agreed that ABMs
had an impact on that balance. Therefore, it would be useful to discuss
civil defense and its effect on the strategic balance.
WORLD DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE
Gromyko said that for a long time now discussions in the United
Nations and elsewhere had dealt with the possibility of convening a
World Disarmament Conference.7 The Secretary should not believe
that the Soviet Union alone was interested in convening such a confer-
ence; it did not expect any profit out of such discussions. The Soviet
Union had favored this idea for a long time because it believed that im-
plementation could be an important landmark on the road toward dis-
armament. First of all, he would have to explain that it often happened
that people mixed up two things—a World Disarmament Conference
and a Special Session of the UN General Assembly to discuss disarma-
ment. It might be asked what was the difference? The Soviet Union was
not opposed to holding such a session, and in fact had voted for the cor-
responding resolution, but it believed that this would not remove the
question of convening a World Disarmament Conference. What could a
General Assembly session accomplish, even with the best intentions? It
could adopt recommendations and pass resolutions but, according to
the UN Charter, the nature of such recommendations and resolutions
was that a government might accept them, or might not, or might
simply pigeonhole them. Gromyko was afraid that such would be the
result of a special General Assembly Session on Disarmament; already
the Soviet Union had voted for it. A World Disarmament Conference
was quite another thing. It would be held on an entirely different basis
from the standpoint of organization and procedure for taking deci-
sions. The juridical effect of decisions adopted would also be different.
7 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–2, Documents on Arms Control and Non-
proliferation, 1969–1972, Document 321.
