Chapter 6, June–December 1990  937
Downloading
 The Soviet Union is drafting a letter of assurances and clarifica-
tions on the SS–N–18. The US proposes that the SS–N–18 be dealt with 
in the context of downloading.
 The remaining issues with respect to downloading will be dealt 
with in the Geneva negotiations.
Rapid Reload
 The remaining issues with respect to rapid reload will be dealt 
with in the Geneva negotiations.
PPCM
 In the Soviet Union PPCM will be established at each facility pro-
ducing mobile ICBMs and their silo-­based variants. Currently these are 
Pavlograd and Votkinsk.
 In the US PPCM will be established at each facility producing 
the accountable stages of mobile ICBMs and their silo-­based variants, 
or such assembled missiles. The US currently has no mobile ICBMs. 
For purposes of reciprocity, the existing PPCM at Magna, Utah will 
be retained, and PPCM will be established at the facility produc-
ing the accountable stage of the peacekeeper ICBM. Currently this is 
Promontory, Utah.
 There will be mutually agreed restrictions on where solid rocket 
motors for mobile ICBMs may be located.
 There will be mandatory suspect-­site inspection (without right 
of refusal) at an agreed list of locations (other than mobile ICBM solid 
rocket motor production and test facilities) at which covert assembly of 
mobile ICBMs might take place.
Heavy ICBM Silos
 Construction of new silos for heavy ICBMs will be permitted 
only as replacements for existing heavy ICBM silos that have been elim-
inated in accordance with agreed procedures, so the number of heavy 
ICBM silos never exceeds 154.
 Construction of new silos for heavy ICBMs shall be only for 
replacement of silos destroyed by accident or in the case of other excep-
tional circumstances that require relocation of silos. If such relocation 
is required, the party planning to construct the new silo launcher shall 
provide the other party with the reasons and plans for such relocation 
in the JCIC prior to the beginning of any new construction. End Text
Baker
Unquote
Eagleburger
