262  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Option 4.  Require numerical limits on nondeployed mobile ICBMs 
and “modern” ICBMs (excluding SS-17 and 19). (favored 
by State and preferred by the DCI, although any option 1–5 
would be acceptable to the DCI)
Includes SS-24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and any 
future systems meeting a definition of “modern ICBM” 
which would be modified to capture only ICBMs that are 
transported fully fueled.
Option 5.  Require numerical limits on nondeployed ICBMs that have 
been deployed in a mobile mode. (favored by JCS as a 
fallback)
Includes SS-24 and 25, Peacekeeper (if deployed in a mobile 
mode), Small ICBM, and any future mobile ICBMs.
Option 6.  Do not require numerical limits on any nondeployed mis-
siles. (favored by JCS)
Decision24
START—Air Breathing Systems
Air Launched Cruise Missile (ALCM) Counting Rules. The issue is 
how to determine the number of ALCMs that would count against the 
6000 weapon limit.
Discussion
The current U.S. position is to attribute 10 ALCMs to each heavy 
bomber that is equipped to carry ALCMs, no matter how many ALCMs 
that bomber actually carries. Some have raised the question of whether 
our current position of under-­countering cruise missile in this way 
would favor the Soviets rather than the U.S. in the long run, given 
the asymmetries in air defenses. Others argue that, while the Soviets 
appear to be well positioned to take advantage of our current position, 
encouraging greater Soviet reliance on air-­breathing systems has been 
a central goal of the U.S. START position. Moreover, keeping open 
options for deploying more ALCMs under START could hedge against 
uncertainties in the B–2 program. Finally, they note that our current 
position sidesteps some difficult verification problems.
The JCS have proposed to change our position to an “as equipped” 
rule along the lines of what the Soviets have proposed. (Option 1). This 
would mean that we would attempt to count the number of ALCMs 
actually deployed, but it would not substantially improve verifica-
tion unless bombers are equipped for a number of ALCMs close to 
24 Bush indicated his approval of Option 1.
