936
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
375.
National Intelligence Estimate1
NIE 34–54
Washington, December 7, 1954.
PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAN THROUGH 1955
The Problem
To estimate probable trends in Iran in the light of the oil settle-
ment, with particular respect to: (a) the prospects for continued control
by Zahedi or other moderate leaders; (b) the outlook for economic and
political stability; (c) the probable extent of Iran’s will and ability to
contribute to US-backed regional security programs; and (d) the extent
to which continuing US assistance and influence will be important
factors in the situation.
Conclusions
1. Since Mossadeq’s downfall, political power in Iran has largely
reverted to the Shah and the conservative traditional ruling group. The
principal new features of the situation are: (a) the extent to which au-
thoritarian means have been used to curtail opposition; (b) the emer-
gence of the US as an acknowledged major influence in the situation;
and (c) the re-emergence of British political and economic influence.
(Paras. 13–14)
2. Zahedi’s chances of survival through 1955 are considerably less
than even. We believe that the most likely time for his replacement will
be shortly after the Shah’s return to Iran in February–March 1955. Iran
will probably remain, at least through 1955, in the hands of predomi-
nantly conservative governments acceptable to the Shah and Western-
oriented. Now that the oil dispute has been resolved, however, there is
likely to be a marked increase in political ferment which may weaken
the effectiveness of the government and facilitate a revival of extremist
influence. Moreover, even if the conservatives succeed in retaining con-
trol beyond 1955, they will remain vulnerable to a Tudeh or nationalist-
inspired flareup of popular feeling unless they make some progress in
satisfying popular grievances and in reducing popular distrust of the
government. (Paras. 21, 22, 24, 27, 41)
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79R01012A, Box 43, Folder 1,
(NIE 34–54) Probable Developments in Iran through 1955. Secret. The following intelli-
gence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelli-
gence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army,
the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. All representatives of the IAC concurred with
the exception of the Atomic Energy Commission Representative and the Assistant to the
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds the subject was
outside their jurisdiction.
