364
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
122.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 23, 1978, noon–1 p.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Luncheon with UK Prime Minister James Callaghan
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Kingman Brewster, U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom
Ambassador Henry Owen
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
UK Prime Minister James Callaghan
Ambassador Peter Jay, British Ambassador to the United States
Sir John Hunt, Secretary of the Cabinet
Kenneth E. Couzens, Treasury
William S. Ryrie, Minister (Economics), British Embassy, Washington, D.C.
Kenneth Stowe, Principal Private Secretary to the Prime Minister
T.D. McCaffrey, Press Secretary to the Prime Minister
Thomas McNally, Political Adviser to the Prime Minister
(The participants reassembled in the Private Dining Room on the
first floor of the Mansion. At 12:17, the President invited Secretary Blu-
menthal to continue the discussion.)
Secretary Blumenthal said that the Prime Minister is right that in the
Treasury there are experts and technicians who take theological views.
But he can assure him that Tony Solomon and Fred Bergsten have no
theological baggage. He sees two issues: first is the question of the
floating rate system—which we are trying to make work; second is the
question of whether the dollar alone can bear the burden in the future
as the reserve currency. There are burdens, we have learned, and a con-
nection with our domestic economy. There has been a rude awakening
with our trade percentage down—we had thought we could separate
the domestic and the international (factors?).
On fixed vs. floating rates, he joins those, in the United States and
Britain, who feel that the old fixed-rate system couldn’t work again.
The flexible rate system is best suited in a world where fundamental
changes are not finished. We need perhaps a decade of flexibility. He
feels that the flexible rate system is needed, but maybe it does not work
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 36, Memcons: President: 2–3/78. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Pri-
vate Dining Room on the first floor of the Mansion.
