January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1281 King Hussein said that at that point Begin arrived (laughter)! The President said that Begin went further on Sinai than the Labor Government. But he is more extreme about the West Bank. The Prime Minister agreed. The President said that Labor, whether under Meir or Rabin, had not been prepared to withdraw from Sinai or give up Sharm-el-Sheikh, etc. Begin has done some difficult things, and went against his political allies. King Hussein agreed. The Prime Minister said that it was hard now with the West Bank. The President said he understood. King Hussein said that he understood the President’s disappointment on Camp David concerning Jordan’s not supporting it. He had sent the President a letter then;13 and sent an identical letter to Sadat. The Prime Minister said that Sadat wrote to His Majesty from Camp David. The President said that Sadat had told him so. King Hussein said that Sadat wrote that he was adhering to the same line and to all the points he (Sadat) had made in the Knesset.14 Jordan had agreed about them. The Prime Minister said that did not include separating the process into two parts. It was a shock, therefore, when Sadat did so at Camp David and backed off on self-determination. The President said that from Sadat’s and his perspective, he (Sadat) did not abandon this in a separate agreement. He (Sadat) did not give up self-determination or the return of Jerusalem. He (Sadat) did not abandon it. Rather they went round it, and said that the agreement would be an interim one, to provide later negotiations on the final status, including Palestinian rights. This is the difference between His Majesty on the one hand and Sadat and himself on the other. The Prime Minister said that His Majesty is under the impression that the Israeli strategy has been to isolate Egypt, and they practically said to His Majesty that they wanted to solve the Egyptian problem and then Israel would absorb the West Bank. The President said he doesn’t doubt that goal. Israel prefers to keep the West Bank, Gaza, and Sinai, but at the root wants peace. Many Israelis see that, if they insist on keeping the West Bank, they will not have a permanent peace. At Camp David, it was agreed that Palestinians could join the talks in the Jordanian delegation, and others 13 See Document 121. 14 See footnote 2, Document 146.
