Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX President Sadat: Very good, because it will be a bad thing for both of us here in the area if we don’t make the peace at least with Gaza. President Carter: At least with Gaza? President Sadat: Yes. It will be detrimental for both of us. President Carter: The part about having a separate language on Gaza creates problems because it tends to separate Gaza from the West Bank. President Sadat: Gaza was taken from Egypt. I am asking them to return Sinai and leave Gaza. This is difficult. Those who were in Baghdad5 must not get the upper hand. President Carter: What specifically do you want with Gaza, Mr. President? President Sadat: I want Gaza to go on the line that we have agreed upon in Camp David and in the timing of the withdrawal. President Carter: We have in the document the fact that negotiations will begin in one month. President Sadat: It is very essential to know when the first phase of the evacuation will take place. This is the most of Sinai that we will be receiving and will be celebrating. We shouldn’t do this without Gaza. President Carter: Suppose the Israelis agree to move their military headquarters from Gaza as a unilateral step? President Sadat: The full autonomy still remains. President Carter: We agree that the full autonomy will be returned to Gaza and West Bank, and that elections will be held before the end of next year. But, I hate to separate Gaza from the West Bank as a separate case. President Sadat: Gaza has been taken, as I told, with Sinai. It will not be that this is a separate agreement. We should be upset, you and me. President Carter: I don’t quite understand why you want to separate Gaza, because this was not the agreement at Camp David. President Sadat: I don’t agree with the West Bank and Gaza being separated. Gaza was taken from Egypt. I cannot accept Sinai and leave Gaza. President Carter: Mr. President, I am not specifically sure what you want them to agree to on Gaza. President Sadat: This Gaza land was taken from Egypt along with the Sinai land. President Carter: What I have in mind on that is to have the Israelis agree, whether as a unilateral step to permit political campaigning; po-
