1180 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Linowitz suggested something like our Status of Forces agreements. Minister Burg said he had not heard of this idea. Prime Minister Begin said that Minister Burg speaks Rococo style. Ambassador Linowitz said that Status of Forces agreements apply to our military people abroad, and mean that they are subject to our laws. Minister Burg said that Israel’s settlers are citizens, not soldiers. Ambassador Linowitz said that he knows that Israel wants the law to apply to citizens, not property. Prime Minister Begin said they will think it over. The Vice President had said,12 and the President had said on European TV,13 that Israelis have the right to live on the West Bank, though they differ on the question of settlements. On an individual basis, they can’t send their people to Jericho, though they have the right to live there (as Arabs live in Israel). When Sadat came to Haifa,14 Sadat said that he saw Jews and Arabs living together. If a man goes to Jericho and buys a house, he will be killed by the PLO. Therefore, historically, Israelis have lived in groups, with a fence. But at Misgav’am the Palestinians broke through. This was a technical failure. Therefore, the settlements should be under Israeli jurisdiction. The President asked if this meant that, wherever an Israeli lives, Israel has jurisdiction. Prime Minister Begin said that this is true in Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza district, not everywhere. Minister Burg asked whether the President meant individuals or settlements. The President said both. Prime Minister Begin said that this does not apply in the U.S.—a person can become a citizen here after 5 years. The President said he meant this. 12 Mondale was reported to have made comments during a March 23 speech in New York that the United States recognized the rights of Jews to settle anywhere, including the West Bank. When asked about these reported statements the following day during the Department’s daily press briefing, Hodding Carter III stated that he believed that Mondale had “in fact” made “a more general statement based upon some fairly universal statements about what should be the rights of human beings.” (Telegram 77927 to multiple posts, March 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800150–0663) 13 A transcript of Carter’s April 13 interview with representatives of the British Broadcasting Corporation, North German Television (ARD), France Te´le´visions Antenna 1, and the Italian RAI–TV, is in Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, pp. 668–682. 14 See Document 288 and footnote 2 thereto.
