1274 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement underground tests. Large earthquakes produce disturbances which per­ sist for many hours and are often accompanied by aftershocks on several succeeding days which individually persist for many minutes. Natural seismicity of the earth varies considerably from one point to another within the USSR. (See Figure 9.) Natural seismicity is, in general, higher to the south near the Himalayas and along the eastern coast. The transmission characteristics of the earth for seismic waves var­ ies considerably with the distance between the source and the seismic observatory. (See Figure 6.) It will be noted that a distinct loss of sensi­ tivity occurs at distances between 500 and 1100 miles from the source. A second band of loss in sensitivity occurs between 2000 and 2700 miles from the source. Since all the stations of the existing network are beyond 1000 miles from known Soviet test sites, the seismic detection capabil­ ity for the existing system is not affected by insensitivity in this range. However, the region of loss in sensitivity at 2000–2700 miles does affect the seismic capability for detecting low yield subsurface shots with the existing network of stations. The reason for the loss in sensitivity in the range of 2000 to 2700 miles is believed to result from a rapid change in the physical characteristics of the mantle at approximately 1200 kilome­ ters depth which results in a dispersion of seismic energy at the surface for this particular range from the source. The effect of the transmission characteristics of seismic waves as a function of distance on detection by existing stations is shown in a map of the USSR in Figure 7. The areas of poor detection for surface tests resulting from this effect are cross hatched. Subsurface bursts in these areas will also be the most difficult to detect with the present net­ work. A reasonable estimate of yield for subsurface shots which would be detected in these areas is obtained by dividing the yield for surface tests by a factor of 25 for summertime conditions and by 12-1/2 for wintertime. Thus, general statements about seismic detection capabil­ ity cannot be applied uniformly to the entire Soviet-­dominated area. However, for tests within approximately 90–95% of the area some gen­ eral estimate can be made. Taking all the above factors into consider­ ation, it is believed that the present seismic detection capability is as indicated in Table IV. The capability indicated in Table IV applies to the clear areas in Figure 7. In the cross hatched areas, however, subsurface tests of 10–15 KT might escape detection by the present network.
