156
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
panders to this nationalism and to oppose what might be considered as
appeasement of the foreigner at the expense of Iran. However, it is im-
portant to recognize the potential ability of politicians in power to con-
trol the police and largely to monopolize the means of propaganda,
which can have at least short-run effects upon the basic nationalistic
feelings of the people.
The above is common ground to both Embassies. They disagree,
however, as to the extent Iranian nationalism will limit the freedom of
action of any future government.
The demonstrated political ability of Musaddiq as a shrewd leader
of the National Front minority and a demagogue who well under-
stands Iranian emotions and character, his personal prejudices against
the British, and his almost megalomaniac desire to act as champion of
the Iranian people in the struggle for “independence” are important
factors to be considered in the present situation. Aside from the popu-
larity of Mussadiq because of his oil program, which thus far seems to
be the only definite program of the National Front, much support is
brought to him by the demagogic Mullah Kashani, who is notoriously
venal and very probably would desert him if any of Mosadeq’s rivals
offered an inducement outweighing the “spoils” which he derives from
his influence with the present government.
C. The Shah might be a factor for stability, continuity of leadership
and resistance to communism in Iran. He appears, however, to have too
little confidence in his own influence; at least he apparently does not
regard it as opportune to endeavor to exert it against the present
government.
He has thus far been unable to use nationalist elements to
strengthen the Crown or to effect much needed reforms in the face of
the landowning-merchant oligarchy.
The Shah realizes that Musaddiq and Kashani, with their fol-
lowers, are anxious to limit his powers and he is also aware that Na-
tional Front hostility towards the Army arises from the fear that he
might use it against them. However, he currently feels if he should ac-
tively try to remove Musaddiq there could be an upheaval in which the
prestige and influence of the Crown would probably suffer.
The disappearance of the Shah would mean the loss to the western
world of a friendly and potentially powerful stabilizing element and
the ensuing struggle for power might lead to chaos which an organized
Tudeh Party would exploit.
D. The landowner-merchant oligarchy, with the support of pow-
erful religious leaders, has been one of the main obstacles to progress of
the Iranian people and to the development of the country’s resources. It
has tenaciously fought for maintenance of the status quo. While sup-
porting the Shah as a stabilizing factor in the country, it has obstructed
