Human Rights
39
ward its figures to Congress with a statement that it had not had time to
make a thorough study of levels, and that it would be reviewing all
levels and would consider withholding aid from countries on various
grounds, including human rights. This would give the Administration
time to work with various governments to get them to improve their
human rights records before putting any assistance cuts into effect.
12.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State-Designate
(Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, February 9, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
At your request, Tony Lake prepared the attached memorandum2
on human rights. Patt Derian and I reviewed the memorandum with
Tony. We are in basic agreement with him that the Department should:
—Move rapidly to pull together our best thinking on pending de-
cisions with human rights implications.
—Begin to bring human rights considerations to bear on the full
range of foreign policy issues and be prepared to lead a PRM exercise
on human rights.
—Establish as orderly a process as possible for dealing with
human rights matters.
However, it seems to me that the way to begin this process is for
me to call together the ad hoc Departmental group that Tony recom-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Memoranda to the Secretary—1977. No
classification marking.
2 Not attached. Lake’s memorandum is printed as Document 9. According to Borg’s
February 9 minutes of the “large assistant secretaries” staff meeting, held on February 8,
Vance “stressed the over-arching importance of the human rights question to the new
Administration. He said it was one of the most important issues we must face but noted
that we have not yet ‘come to grips with the fundamental problem.’ Phil Habib asked
about the status of the S/P study on this subject, and Tony Lake confirmed that the mem-
orandum would be coming forward later in the day. He said he would be meeting with
Pat Derian, the new Human Rights Coordinator, right after the staff meeting to discuss
the content of the memorandum. (Ms. Derian was introduced to the staff meeting at this
point.)” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840101–0914)
