Afghanistan determination to stand with our friends, but our actions must be substantive—they must go beyond what we might have been willing to do in 1978 or earlier in 1979. Moreover, they must be the result not of unilateral U.S. decisions, broadcast to the world, but rather of close consultation with the Pakistanis. The 1959 bilateral rests on a shared perception of the threat from the USSR, which continues. But we and Pakistan have drifted far apart on our perceptions of other aspects of the world situation, notably (but not exclusively) the Iran situation, nuclear non-proliferation, etc. U.S. actions aimed at reassuring Pakistan can achieve this purpose only if they are perceived to be reassuring in both Islamabad and Washington. They are not apt to be reassuring if they cause alarm in Pakistan or create false expectations here and false fears in India. Confidence in our efforts to reassure can be guaranteed only by close and meaningful and continuous consultations, if not by special emissaries, then by quiet diplomatic exchange. 21. (C) Pakistan and U.S.: As for steps remaining to be done, the agenda is potentially rich. —We have already reaffirmed the applicability of the 1959 bilateral in public; we need to do it formally, either by diplomatic note or, better, by inclusion of this subject in a letter from President Carter.3 We need quickly to engage in substantive discussions with the GOP on GOP needs, and I would add, we must be prepared to go much further than we have so far indicated if our will is not to be challenged and our aid discounted. Cash sales do not aid make. What we have said in public thus far has confused, rather than clarified, and it raises the prospect of our being wrongly blamed for one thing in Islamabad and for the reverse in New Delhi—to no one’s advantage except Moscow’s. —We probably need to consider GOP appeals to support the Afghan exiles in their continued fight against the Soviet-backed Government of Afghanistan. We should be mindful, however, that the exile community in Pakistan increasingly represents little more than itself and controls or is involved in activities only along the border. They have little relationship with or responsibility for the success of antiregime insurgents operating deep inside Afghanistan. Aid to refugees—now nearing 400,000—is another matter. —We need also to consider the whole of our support relationship with Pakistan, not just arms sales, however dramatic, symbolic, and relevant they may be. Our focus should be on arms and the means to pay for them, on economic assistance and debt rescheduling, as well as on P.L.–480 and other non-FAA disbursements. And we should not under-estimate the value of political support through consultations 3 The proposed letter is Document 159.
