suggested that, under the circumstances, it would be desirable to have direct conferences between representatives of the Embassy and the Alien Property Custodian. The Department of State replied by a communication of May 4, 1921,24 to the effect that no objection was perceived to such conferences or to interviews generally between members of the Alien Property Custodian’s office or of the Department of Justice, and representatives of the Embassy. The British Ambassador inquired whether it would be agreeable to the Government of the United States for a representative of the British Custodian to come to Washington to confer with the Alien Property Custodian, to which reply was made in the affirmative. In the early part of October, 1921, conferences were held between the Honorable P. F. Swain, representative of the British Public Trustee, and the Alien Property Custodian. A satisfactory understanding appears to have been reached with respect to the handling of claims of nationals of the respective Governments on account of enemy property seized by the other, and also with respect to the conflict of interests in enemy-owned securities. Mr. Swain requested the aid of the Alien Property Custodian in securing a transfer on the books of American corporations of certificates held by the British Public Trustee where no demand of the Alien Property Custodian had issued. The Alien Property Custodian agreed that all bearer securities in the hands of the Public Trustee which were the obligations of companies incorporated in the United States should be the property of the Public Trustee for England and Wales, and to lend his assistance in effecting a transfer on the books of the companies. Mr. Swain agreed that, where the British Public Trustee held certificates of stock and the Alien Property Custodian had demanded of the companies the right, title and interest in the shares represented thereby, the Public Trustee should forward such certificates to the Alien Property Custodian for his use and benefit. The results of the conferences were later the subject of several exchanges of notes between the British Embassy and the Department of State. Particular reference is made to the note, No. 936 of December 16, 1921, from the British Ambassador to the Secretary of State,26 enclosing two memoranda embodying Mr. Swain’s understanding of the arrangement reached between him and the Alien Property Custodian and requesting “confirmation of the
