648 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 136. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, February 12, 1959, 10:40 a.m. OTHERS PRESENT Secretary McElroy Secretary Quarles General Twining General Goodpaster Major Eisenhower The President called this meeting to discuss the 1968 projection of our atomic weapons requirements. In particular, he is concerned, in making our long-­term estimates, over the use of the actual term “requirements.” He feels that when we deal with numbers in these cir­ cumstances we should call them “estimates under bad conditions.” The President stated that he is not addressing right now the matter of $145 million for a plutonium reactor with a convertible feature. We are far enough down the road now that he is not going to fight that project. He dislikes, however, the process in which the Joint Chiefs of Staff state so-­called “requirements” to the Congress, causing the figures so listed to practically govern our future actions. The President emphasized that in this meeting he is merely desir­ ous of expressing his doubts and is not issuing a directive. He fears that we have developed a shibboleth which we are then required to live by. In short, we are not being governed by common sense. Mr. McElroy agreed that the difference between “requirement” and “estimate” is a technical question. However, the President pointed out that the use of the term “requirement” invites demagogues to treat these figures with the sanctity of the psalms and parables. Mr. McElroy expressed general agreement with this approach and pointed out that the figures ultimately used in this connection were greatly reduced from the original service submissions and were indeed considerably reduced from the requirements as stated by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The President, however, continued by recalling to mind a graph on our 1968 atomic weapons figures which indicated a stockpile which he considered astronomical. These figures as the President recalled, would be attained by July 1, 1958, if a certain new plant were installed. Without that plant, the figures would be reached by January 1, 1969. Some of these days, in his view, we are going to realize how ridiculous we have been and at that time we will try to retrench. In particular, the President 1 Source: Projected nuclear weapons requirements for 1968. Top Secret. 4 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
