German Democratic Republic
387
GDR press had carried a number of East German-authored diatribes
against Chinese. He also noted that others like Hungary had adopted
a rather slavish pro-Moscow foreign policy line, while pursuing their
own national interests.
7. Porter observed that, as its most advanced member, the GDR is
an important technology supplier to CEMA. For this reason alone, the
Soviet Union would not allow the strained economic fabric of the GDR
to tear. The GDR, however, has been finding it harder to obtain raw
materials from CEMA and to meet contracts for finished products. This
was producing greater tension in the relationship. Kaplan added that
the “resentment factor” should not be underestimated. Eastern Europe-
ans resent the GDR, because it is CEMA’s richest member, it is the
only one to enjoy it and, most importantly in their eyes, it is German.
Gray agreed but observed that resentment worked both ways, with East
Germans recalling the nature of the Soviets’ arrival in and occupation
of East Germany and probably feeling that their economy could
advance far more rapidly if not linked to that of the Soviet Union.
For the latter reason there is probably a desire among even the SED
leadership to eke out more independence in the economic sphere.
Blacklin (DOE) noted that resentment by its other CEMA partners
tended to force the GDR to rely more heavily on the Soviet Union.
CEMA in general, he added, is experiencing problems in obtaining
needed energy resources, and the GDR, with only lignite, is particularly
vulnerable. This, he said, has created opportunities for Western
sourcing.
8. Noting that it has been nearly impossible to determine whether
particular disturbances in and around Berlin have been undertaken as
a result of Soviet or GDR instigation, Woessner observed nevertheless
that Berlin provided a peculiar, particularly strong bond between the
Soviets and the East Germans. Kaplan agreed, but doubted whether
the Soviets allowed the GDR much independent play on Berlin. The
way to deal with Berlin problems is with Moscow, not the GDR.
9. Greenwald said that, toward the end of internal liberalization, we
should make a greater effort to open up East German society through
exchanges and wider distribution of Western publications. Larrabee
added that there were other reasons for trying to increase the transpar-
ency or porosity of GDR society, not the least of which were to keep
open a Western option for the GDR and to improve our very imperfect
knowledge of the GDR. Neets said that there was already sufficient
knowledge about the GDR, most of it readily available in the FRG.
That, according to Gray, was part of our problem; namely that most
of our knowledge about the GDR came to us filtered through West
German perceptions. Our own direct study of the GDR is limited
because most academic observers of Eastern European Communist
