1486 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement indicated that he has never invited General Cutler to such meetings at his house but it was his intention to make a change for the future. We then discussed briefly the forthcoming Defense budget confer­ ence at Augusta which was to take place on Friday, November 28. The Secretary expressed a desire that, in his behalf, I report at the meeting his feeling that as long as we maintained an adequate deterrent, our greatest threat in the foreseeable future was not of nuclear war but of local aggression and the requirement for such actions as we have taken recently in Lebanon and in the Taiwan Strait. He therefore asked me to say that from the point of view of his responsibilities in the conduct of foreign policy, he hoped that budget decisions would not impair or cripple our capacity to deal with local situations. Gordon Gray Special Assistant to the President 398. Telegram Supnu 121 From Geneva1 Geneva, December 9, 1958, 10 a.m. Supnu 121. Following is verbatim text of basic provisions tabled by SovDel at today’s meeting. Copies being pouched London, Moscow, Paris for USRO. Begin verbatim text. Basic provisions determining the establishment and activities of the control organization for the control over compliance with a treaty on the cessation of nuclear weapons tests 1. A control organization for the control over compliance with a treaty on the cessation of nuclear weapons tests, hereinafter referred to as the Control Organization, shall be established, on the basis of tech­ nical methods recommended by the Geneva Conference of Technical Experts, by the initial parties to the treaty, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America, hereinafter referred to as the founder states of the Control Organization. 2. The Control Organization shall consist of a commission for con­ trol over compliance with a treaty on the cessation of nuclear weapons 1 Source: Basic provisions text tabled by Soviet Delegation. Official Use Only. 12 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/12–958.
