978 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Hamilton Jordan, Chief of Staff Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Robert Hunter, Staff Member National Security Council (David Aaron and Hamilton Jordan joined the meeting while it was in progress; Zbigniew Brzezinski left before it was over.) Ambassador Strauss noted that little progress is likely to be made in the autonomy talks by May. And either Begin and Sadat will be embracing one another by then, or there will be a total breakdown in their relationship. He is totally convinced that there is no chance of Egypt’s and Israel’s moving on the West Bank. Sadat does not even know what is going on; Khalil doesn’t want it; and Begin won’t move. Dr. Brzezinski said that this means the situation is a mess. Secretary Vance said that there is a lot to what was being said. On Lebanon, he said it was never our intention to get out in front, and to beat the drums on a Lebanon initiative. The effort goes back to a Khalil- Strauss conversation,2 when Khalil said that peace in Lebanon would buy added time for the peace process. Lebanon appears ready to do something, and is better able to do so. But how far can it go? He can’t say. Saudi Arabia would like greater stability, and would be of some help. Syria is interested in something happening, if it would increase stability and not be humiliating to it, so that it would be easier for it to wrestle with its internal problems. With Israel, how can it take care of its northern border situation and at the same time cut down on terrorism? With the PLO, indications are that it is becoming more sophisticated. It might see that more stability would advance its cause. The UN and UNIFIL want stability. Therefore, there may be the ingredients for something to move toward stability. For us, everytime Lebanon flares up, we have domestic problems as Israel over-reacts. The problem we must deal with is about dealing with the PLO. The President clearly can’t have this happen now. But the Lebanese and others might try to get the PLO to make some advance on terrorism to satisfy the Israelis. Will it work? He doesn’t know. Much of it is for Israel to decide. In advancing U.S. work, we would not be out front, but would work with others, and push others to advance the interest in getting more stability. Ambassador Strauss said that, looking at the State Department plan3 in a vacuum, there would be no problem. But we really need something else, otherwise we will be blamed for failure. He doesn’t like the paper—though it is crafted well—because it looks duplicitous: it starts us on the course inevitably towards the PLO, without saying so. Second, if we say that we are not dealing with the PLO, the President 2 See footnote 8, Document 290. 3 See Document 299.
