Eastern Europe Region Aside from the “programmatic” dissidents, there are those who seek more modest changes. Thus, the Romanian Goma speaks out for a de-Stalinization patterned after what he calls the “livable life” in Hungary and Poland. Many of the Czechoslovak dissidents want rehabilitation—not necessarily of their political views, but of themselves and their families—and the opportunity to live a more normal life. Then there are the more narrowly focused “one issue” dissidents such as the East German writers, who want more freedom to write what they wish, and the Romanian Baptists, who want more freedom to preach. Finally, there have been some, such as many signatories of Romanian writer Goma’s manifesto, who have taken to dissent as a device to facilitate emigration. (U) Several prominent dissidents—the East Germans Havemann and Biermann, the Hungarian Agnes Heller, and the Czechoslovak Zdenek Mlynar—consider themselves ideological brethren of the Eurocommunists. Others—such as the Poles Kolakowski and Michnik—are skeptical that Eurocommunism will turn out to be different from the Communism practiced in the Warsaw Pact states. Nonetheless, all have welcomed the Eurocommunists’ support in the struggle for more independence from the Soviets. (U) The dissidents frequently differ on ways to bring about change. The East German Bahro, for example, appeals to “men of conscience” within the establishment to work for change. Some Polish dissidents believe popular pressure on the leadership can induce it to initiate reforms. Other Poles do not believe the system can reform itself and have tried to establish a de facto pluralism by founding, without regime approval, publications, groups, and societies that speak to and on behalf of specific interest groups. The Polish dissidents so far claim to be satisfied with these small steps which they feel will slowly erode regime control. They have shunned violence, realizing that this would give the regime cause for repression and would dissipate the limited public support they now enjoy. (U) Some dissidents have formed secret organizations to avoid regime reprisals. A secret Polish group,7 [6 lines not declassified]. In East Germany, the anonymous manifestos that appeared early this year claimed to represent the views of amorphous groups but, more than likely, were the work of a very few individuals. [classification and handling restriction not declassified] Such secret groups can presumably exist for a long time because their members pay little or no personal cost for belonging. They could 7 An unknown hand wrote “STATE MEMCON” in the left-hand margin next to the first two sentences in this paragraph.
