Chapter 7, January–May 1991  971
192.	 Memorandum From Arnold Kanter of the National Security 
Council Staff to Florence Gantt of the National Security 
Council Staff1
Washington, January 22, 1991, 7:24 a.m.
SUBJECT
Meeting with the Soviets on START
Florence:
Please give the following message to Brent and Bob. Thanks.
—Arnie2
Brent:
We met with the Soviets for about four hours yesterday afternoon.3 
The Soviet tone was businesslike, almost conciliatory. The content, how-
ever, was a nothing-­burger or worse.
Obukov and his buddies pretty much took the walk-­back-Houston 
line that the Soviet delegation has been pursuing in Geneva, rather 
than making any moves to put the Houston package back on track. In 
particular, they continued to seek additional constraints to make the 
B–1 “technically incapable” of carrying ALCMs, and sought a “political 
commitment” not to test or equip the B–2 with non-­nuclear (or nuclear) 
ALCMs.
While this is hardly good news, is is difficult to know what to make 
of all this.
— An optimist would say that the recitation of the Soviet hard 
line is SOP for the first day of these “working group” talks, and that 
Obukov had to make a good college try at sustaining the Soviet posi-
tion. (Obukov implied as much in a private conversation with Reg, not-
ing that his Soviet colleagues needed to hear for themselves the flat 
U.S. rejection of the Soviet “clarifications” of the Houston package.) 
The optimist would hope for signs of Soviet seriousness and flexibility, 
beginning in today’s sessions.
— A pessimist would say that Obukov’s talking points were writ-
ten by the General Staff and the Ministry of Medium Machine Building 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01034–007, START—January 1991 
[4]. Secret. Copied to Hall, Uhl, Gordon, Davis, Kuehne, Gompert, and Rice. Scowcroft 
initialed the top of the memorandum.
2 Printed from a copy bearing Kanter’s typed signature.
3 No memorandum of conversation was found.
