Chemical and Biological Weapons 255 been. Dobrynin replied that the Soviet authorities would not take such chances with their own citizens. The episode took place a year ago and now was being used as propaganda against the Soviets. The State Department Spokesman had no answer as to why this subject came up a year late or why we made accusations without proof. He was forced to conclude that a US TV commentator was right when he described it as an instance of the Administration’s “aggressive psychological warfare.” Certainly that is the atmosphere, an atmosphere which is altogether negative, a search warrant atmosphere, and as a result the structure of the past ten years is left standing like a building exposed to an atomic bomb. The Secretary commented that it was not our intent to destroy the structure. He had said that before and stood by it, but he did not minimize the problems. Dobrynin repeated gloomily that the only thing left was the bare framework of the structure and nothing else. The Secretary asked if Dobrynin thought the people in Moscow understood the intensity of the US public reaction to the invasion in Afghanistan. Dobrynin replied yes, they did understand it and, if not, the US reminded them of it daily. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to chemical or biological weapons.] 118. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State1 Washington, March 24, 1980, 1828Z 4735. Subject: US–USSR Chemical Weapons (CW) Negotiations, Round Eleven: Summary of Developments. CW message number 16 1. (Confidential—Entire text). 2. Summary. Round eleven represented continuation of pattern established in second half of round ten. Delegations met frequently. Despite active discussion of verification, Dels did not narrow differences on key issues in this area. Some progress was made on secondary issues and in drafting language for a joint initiative. End summary. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800150–0125. Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Moscow.
