1088  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
this on as an added indication of the lack of any present intention to 
break off. Thus, my carefully laid plans for a week’s vacation have again 
gone astray. Because of the work in Prague and my Nurenberg speech 
my plans for the week of June 11 fell through, and this next week I, of 
course, have the big July 4 show in Prague. Am expecting about 500 this 
year and am giving them a buffet and a dance. Do not misunderstand 
that I am complaining, but just letting you know what I have been try­
ing to do in a personal way.
Thanks for the Drew Pearson item which I have not seen here. 
I certainly agree that it is not very helpful.
Thanks for taking care of Ekvall’s orders. He has now received them 
and is set for another six months. I think Erskine’s office was giving you 
a little line on Paris being the block. Everything I know is to the contrary, 
but in any event it is cleared up.
I think it significant Menon did not raise the Chicoms with ­Sherman 
Adams. I have a general feeling that the Indians have somewhat cooled 
on Peiping and are not tooting their horn as vigorously as they once 
were. I hope this prisoner business assists in the process.
They have just brought in the FBIS on Chou’s June 28 speech 
renewing the offer to negotiate with Taiwan. There was some excite­
ment among the correspondents at the Palais this morning about it but 
they did not have the full text and I have of course refused to make any 
comment. While it is a repetition of what has been the theme for some 
time there is a difference in emphasis and I believe for the first time it 
is couched in formal terms. It is a much more adroit piece of work than 
their previous statements on the subject and undoubtedly sets the tone 
for their future propaganda line. However USIA really ought to be able 
to get in some real licks on the last paragraph.
We have experimented in today’s full report of meeting with put­
ting it into direct discourse. Let us know how you like it compared 
with former indirect discourse form. Neither of them read too well 
after being put into “telegraphese” but we get bawled out by someone 
back there (I believe it was the telegraph people) for using unnecessary 
words so we are complying. However, with something like this it seems 
to me to make very hard reading.
