1402 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement other elements of the package, but testing would remain limited, as far as the U.S. is concerned, to the cut-­off which would become a con­ dition subsequent. Nuclear tests would be suspended for three years beginning as of the effective date of the agreement.2 The suspension would not continue beyond twelve months unless satisfactory progress was being made in the installation of the inspection system. The U.S. would declare at the outset that testing would be resumed if agreement on an adequestly inspected cut-­off of production of fissionable mate­ rials for weapons purposes had not been reached at the end of three years. Conversely, we would announce that the suspension would be extended for an indefinite period if agreement is reached on the instal­ lation of a control system to assure that no further fissionable material is proposed for weapons purposes. The U.S. would announce that, if it became necessary to resume testing, the U.S. would henceforth test only underground. 5. This proposal would, we believe, turn to our advantage each of the factors mentioned in paragraph 3 above which weigh against the AEC proposal. It would be a logical follow-­up to the Geneva talks, deprive the Soviets of the propaganda advantages of the testing issue, enable us to begin arms inspection within the USSR, inhibit fourth country programs, and could freeze our present weapons advantage. It would, by removing the test issue, enable us to place more effec­ tive emphasis in the nuclear cut-­off as the condition subsequent. Most important, it would be evidence of United States willingness to go the “extra mile” to help achieve more meaningful measures of disarma­ ment and thus go far to counter the image which is all too prevalent abroad of an overly militaristic United States. 6. Attached as TAB A is a proposed revision of the paragraph on nuclear tests in present NSC policy which would incorporate the changes recommended above. The other disarmament policy recom­ mendations discussed in the interim report to the Cabinet Committee (TAB B) need not, in our view, be decided until the studies on surprise attack now underway under the leadership of Dr. Killian have been completed. 2 A three-­year period is a minimum for a meaningful inspected agreement since from 18 to 24 months will be required for installing the inspection system. [Footnote is in the original.]
