Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 sian conflict. In effect, first through a proxy (as in Angola) and now more directly (as in Ethiopia) the Soviet Union will be demonstrating that containment has now been fully breached. Finally, in part because of Chinese rigidity,8 and in part because (in my judgment) of excessive sensitivity to the Soviets,9 we have slighted the Chinese connection. Even if normalization has to proceed slowly, and Vance’s trip to Peking bears this out, there is no reason why the consultative relationship—resting quite frankly on a shared concern over Soviet aggressiveness—should not be cultivated.10 This is why I favor your instructing me to visit China sometime in March or April to engage in quiet consultations (not bilateral negotiations—and the Chinese would have to agree to this in advance) regarding global issues, thereby also sending a signal to the Soviets which might prove helpful on such matters as the Horn or SALT.11 (Domestically, it would be viewed as a hardnosed act, and hence useful.) The above paragraphs are primarily designed to help you focus on the larger aspect of the U.S.-Soviet relationship, and to point to some serious dangers on the horizon. In terms of action, I think we need to spend some time reviewing the larger picture, especially in regards to Europe, and hence: 1. I hope the next NSC meeting might provide such an opportunity, even if the specific issues will relate largely to SALT and the African Horn.12 In addition, I am initiating some urgent reviews within NSC of our European position; 2. The SCC will meet this Friday13 and prepare specific recommendations for you regarding the African Horn; 3. I would suggest that you talk to the Vice President and to Harold Brown regarding the political and strategic aspects of a possible trip by me to the Far East, since I expect Cy will be skeptical. I believe that such a trip would be helpful; and a firm decision by you, with the larger strategic picture in mind, is now needed. 4. We should begin elaborating a public and Congressional strategy to protect us against domestic backlash, should these developments (some largely beyond our control) occur. I think one approach would be to have some key senators in to see you for a discussion of what might be done as a way of sharing with them the limited range of 8 The President underlined the phrase “Chinese rigidity” and wrote “yes” in the right-hand margin next to this portion of the sentence. 9 The President underlined the phrase “sensitivity to the Soviets” and wrote “no” in the right-hand margin next to this portion of the sentence.
