Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
327
sian conflict. In effect, first through a proxy (as in Angola) and now
more directly (as in Ethiopia) the Soviet Union will be demonstrating
that containment has now been fully breached.
Finally, in part because of Chinese rigidity,8 and in part because (in
my judgment) of excessive sensitivity to the Soviets,9 we have slighted
the Chinese connection. Even if normalization has to proceed slowly,
and Vance’s trip to Peking bears this out, there is no reason why the
consultative relationship—resting quite frankly on a shared concern
over Soviet aggressiveness—should not be cultivated.10 This is why I
favor your instructing me to visit China sometime in March or April to
engage in quiet consultations (not bilateral negotiations—and the Chi-
nese would have to agree to this in advance) regarding global issues,
thereby also sending a signal to the Soviets which might prove helpful
on such matters as the Horn or SALT.11 (Domestically, it would be
viewed as a hardnosed act, and hence useful.)
The above paragraphs are primarily designed to help you focus on
the larger aspect of the U.S.-Soviet relationship, and to point to some
serious dangers on the horizon.
In terms of action, I think we need to spend some time reviewing
the larger picture, especially in regards to Europe, and hence:
1. I hope the next NSC meeting might provide such an opportu-
nity, even if the specific issues will relate largely to SALT and the Af-
rican Horn.12 In addition, I am initiating some urgent reviews within
NSC of our European position;
2. The SCC will meet this Friday13 and prepare specific recommen-
dations for you regarding the African Horn;
3. I would suggest that you talk to the Vice President and to Harold
Brown regarding the political and strategic aspects of a possible trip by
me to the Far East, since I expect Cy will be skeptical. I believe that such
a trip would be helpful; and a firm decision by you, with the larger stra-
tegic picture in mind, is now needed.
4. We should begin elaborating a public and Congressional strat-
egy to protect us against domestic backlash, should these develop-
ments (some largely beyond our control) occur. I think one approach
would be to have some key senators in to see you for a discussion of
what might be done as a way of sharing with them the limited range of
8 The President underlined the phrase “Chinese rigidity” and wrote “yes” in the
right-hand margin next to this portion of the sentence.
9 The President underlined the phrase “sensitivity to the Soviets” and wrote “no” in
the right-hand margin next to this portion of the sentence.
10 Vance visited China August 20–26, 1977. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
XIII, China, Documents 47–52.
11 See footnote 21, Document 62.
12 Presumable reference to the February 23 NSC meeting. The meeting minutes are
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVII, Part 1, Horn of Africa.
13 February 10. The notes of the SCC meeting are scheduled for publication ibid.
