1978  279
Thus, the CG notes that the ability to inflict “unacceptable” damage 
in retaliation against the Soviet Union is a necessary but not sufficient 
criterion. It directs, therefore, that we maintain essential equivalence10 
(as does PD–18). This policy has a fundamental effect on the design 
of our strategic forces. It is quite different from the so-­called mutual 
assured destruction policy we had in the ’60s, and certainly very differ-
ent from a minimum deterrence policy, as indeed it should be.
The need to maintain essential equivalence leads directly into three 
related issues discussed in the CG: the Cruise Missile Carrier (CMC); 
the SLBM force; and the ICBM force. The CG directs the Air Force to 
program the development of a CMC based on transport aircraft, either 
military or commercial. We are looking at an option to deploy 100 CMCs 
with about 6,000 cruise missiles by FY 87, though we could deploy them 
more rapidly [less than 1 line not declassified]. Thus, the CMC gives us 
one option to match a very considerable increase in future Soviet forces.
The SLBM force faces a more difficult problem. The Trident build-
ing program has run into serious delays. Its costs have risen to the 
point where the Trident program we really need is increasingly diffi-
cult to accommodate within the Navy’s shipbuilding budget without 
displacing other important ships (though I view no other ship as equal 
in importance to a Trident), and our existing Poseidon submarines are 
growing old. If we are limited, either by the budget or by yard capacity, 
to one Trident per year, and if we also find we must retire Poseidon 
boats at age 25, the CG shows that the number of SLBM launch tubes 
will begin to fall after FY87, and be smaller by FY90 than the number 
we have now. (The destructive capability of the force, however, though 
suffering a temporary dip in the early ’90s, would continue to grow.)
These problems with the SLBM force are troubling. Because of the 
tightness of the Navy budget, I have told Secretary Claytor that he can 
consider dropping the current Trident building rate from the current 
1½ per year to one per year if he feels that the budget level leaves him 
no other choice, but that in that case he must also address the problem 
of maintaining SLBM launcher levels in the early ’90s. That means, of 
course, finding a way to assure that the Poseidon SSBNs can be oper-
ated beyond their planned retirement dates.
The ICBM force issue turns on the growing vulnerability of the 
Minuteman force to the increasing number and accuracy of Soviet war-
heads. By FY84, we would expect [less than 1 line not declassified] attri-
tion in the silos if we decided to ride out an attack. Within the next six 
months or a year, we will have to decide what to do, and we are study-
ing the issues and running tests in the field to help us with that deci-
sion. Land-­mobile basing of one sort or another with either Minuteman 
10 Carter underlined the phrase “maintain essential equivalence.”
