900  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
asked if the Supreme Soviet Defense and State Security Committee had 
established a yearly cycle for considering budgetary matters. Detinov 
said no formal schedule had yet been established.
Defenses and Third Countries
8. Courtney referred to the last meeting of the working group 
at which Novosadov had indicated third countries might regard the 
deployment of defenses by the USSR and the U.S. as a conspiracy 
between them. According to Novosadov, this could lead to unpredict-
able consequences and might bring the situation to a brink of world 
war. How, Courtney asked, might this scenario occur?
9. Detinov said such deployment could be regarded by third coun-
tries as an attempt by the superpowers to perpetuate their dominance. 
This, in turn, might stimulate those countries to develop more power-
ful systems, such as ballistic missiles. Kuznetsov added that any action 
taken by the superpowers was always perceived with apprehension by 
the rest of the world. While he could not say that ABM deployments 
would lead the world to a brink of war, responses by other countries 
to actions taken by the superpowers ought to be taken into account. 
Courtney asked again how the deployment of defenses would bring the 
world to the brink of a global war. Detinov responded that neither he nor 
Kuznetsov had ever said anything like this.
Soviet Concerns in DST
10. Kuznetsov expressed concern about the lack of progress in 
DST. Based on summit joint statements both sides had tabled a number 
of proposals. The U.S. side had tried to hold the Soviet side responsi-
ble for the lack of progress, alleging it had hardened its position. The 
Soviet side had, however, proposed to implement the 1987 summit 
instructions by proposing to work out a common understanding on 
the boundary between permitted and prohibited ABM activities. The 
U.S. side had refused to discuss the issue. Similarly, the U.S. side had 
rejected the Soviet proposal concerning a common understanding on 
the basic terms used by the two sides in their respective draft docu-
ments. The obstacle at these negotiations was created by the negative 
attitude of the U.S. side.
11. Kuznetsov said the Soviet side was equally constructive on the 
issue of a free-­standing PM agreement. In its draft of March 13, the Soviet 
side had moved toward the U.S. position, first by agreeing with the U.S. 
approach to voluntary visits to laboratories and, second, by dropping its 
previous provision concerning on-­site inspections. The Soviet side had 
the right to expect reciprocal steps from the U.S. side, which unfortu-
nately had not followed. The U.S. proposal on pilot implementation was 
not sufficient. Pilot implementation would be premature and would not 
facilitate bringing the positions of the sides closer.
