December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
765
mantle some settlements in the Sinai. This is a dramatic change in
attitudes.
Arab stereotypes have often been found offensive in the U.S., but
that is changing radically today. If credit is to be given, Sadat has to be
given credit for this change. The American public now sees a difference
in those most interested in peace.
Therefore, we intend to persist. We intend to complete the treaty
and move on to the next phase. We want to seek through negotiations
to resolve the issues of the West Bank and Gaza. This will certainly be
more difficult than the first phase. But what we have is an opening
wedge to a serious, sustained effort leading to respect for the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians. Our own vital interests are involved. This is
the only way to real security. The only way to stop an inimical process.
We wish that our friends not engage in actions which will make our job
more difficult. We also hope that in quiet ways our friends can help us.
We recognize that our friends have constraints and may possibly have
to act indirectly.
We hope to engage the moderate Palestinians in negotiations re-
garding the West Bank and Gaza. We want to give local government as
much power as possible and ensure that elections are real political exer-
cises. This will not be easy. The Palestinians are suspicious. They live
under a military occupation which challenges their sense of dignity.
We recognize that a treaty could result in a frozen situation. We want to
avoid that. We hope those who consider themselves friends will help,
or at least not obstruct that effort.
King Hussein thanked him and expressed pleasure at this very brief
visit. He asked that Dr. Brzezinski convey to the President his deep ap-
preciation for the kind message, also for the opportunity to talk frankly
about a subject that is important to all of us. It is a problem that [will]
affect our hopes, our dreams, our rights. Perhaps my response will
meet some of the points you raised.
First, for the sake of historical fact, this city and its people during
the years I have had the privilege of being involved, has had the
courage to stand by its convictions and defend them at a time when
forces threatened the dignity of the Arabs. Israeli expansionism is a
long-standing fact. It is the story of twenty years or more. When we
speak to friends from the U.S., we know the limitations of our country,
but our relations are based on mutual respect. The dignity of the people
of this country is most important to me. When we saw a leftist tide al-
most overcome us, we stood, we were vocal, and we paid a price.
Always, we thought we had a just cause and the American people be-
lieve in justice. If the U.S. had different positions from us in the past
and we suffered, we felt it was partly our fault in the way we presented
our cause.
