3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
757
Schmidt next week. The Australians were particularly concerned that
we move on this since public opinion in their country is slipping. (C)
Mr. Cutler had met with Mr. Keller, the Swiss head of the Interna-
tional Sports Federations, to request their support, which will be essen-
tial. Mr. Keller had not said flatly no, but he had not been encouraging
about the likelihood that the federations would back the idea of alterna-
tive games. Mr. Cutler had given him a one-page memo outlining our
position. Keller will take this back with him for a meeting of the Federa-
tion heads in Lausanne in early April. We will probably hear nothing
from them until that meeting is over.3 (U)
Thirdly, Mr. Cutler thought it important that a promotional group
be formed, and he strongly favored asking Messrs. Ueberroth and
Wolper to take on the job as informal consultants looking toward the
eventual formation of an International Committee. We have received
offers of financial support from a number of industry and other
sources, and a tax-exempt non-profit group was being put together to
receive donations. (U)
Mr. Cutler said that we will go after Schmidt early next week and
that would be crucial. The letters were intended to prepare the way for
a group decision when the Steering Committee meets on March 10. We
could hope for a decision at that time if the various national delegations
were instructed in advance. The position of Germany will be critical to
that process. All agreed that it would not be advisable to start with a
letter to the French Foreign Minister. We also want to use the Germans
to approach the French. However, the British were already in discus-
sions with their Olympic Committee, and it was important to get to
them as quickly as possible, by telephone to Ambassador Brewster4 if
necessary. (C)
Mr. Aaron wondered about the advisability of forming committees
at this point when we still do not have commitments from the key
countries. The advice at the last meeting had been that if we cannot get
those commitments, we should not proceed, and an existing infrastruc-
ture could be an embarrassment if that occurs. Mr. Cutler noted that his
proposals to lay the groundwork for an organizing committee and a
non-profit organization to receive donations were merely preparatory.
Messrs. Ueberroth and Wolper would be coming on as consultants ini-
tially. The non-profit organization would be sponsored by a private
law firm and would merely be a recipient of early donations. Neither
would be public and neither would commit us to a course of action. (C)
3 Carter wrote in the left margin adjacent to this paragraph, “a) We will have alter-
native games even if zero, fifty or 100 other nations participate. b) It’s to our advantage to
get maximum participation. c)—a) prevails.
4 Kingman Brewster, U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom.
