490
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
150.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights and OPIC
The Problem
Although the Christopher Committee was created as an inter-
agency group, Christopher has more and more used the Committee in
a purely advisory capacity, making all the decisions himself. I have not
objected to this development since it didn’t seem to me that the group
was likely to do a better job than Christopher has alone, however in this
case, Christopher is leaning towards a decision with which I, and most
of the NSC staff, strongly disagree. The issue is an important one. The
purpose of this memorandum is to acquaint you with it, and to request
your intervention to prevent a bad decision.
A month or so ago, Congress added the basic Harkin language to
OPIC’s authorizing legislation.2 The law now requires OPIC, in consul-
tation with the Secretary of State, to bring human rights considerations
to bear on its programs, and specifically to deny insurance for invest-
ments in countries which engage in a consistent pattern of gross viola-
tions of human rights, unless: (1) the investment will directly benefit
the needy; or, (2) the national security requires OPIC to support the
investment.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 28, Human Rights: 5/77–11/78. No classification marking. Sent for action. Printed
from a copy that bears Inderfurth’s, Bartholomew’s, and Dodson’s initials. Brzezinski
wrote on the memorandum: “W.C. will send me the text of the proposal implementation
with memo (worked out with OPIC). Pl[ea]se review + let me know. ZB.” Tuchman
Mathews attached the following typewritten note to the memorandum: “Zbig: In my
view this is an issue of prime importance to our ability to develop a rational human rights
policy for the long term. Henry Owen agrees—he wanted to write you a note on this but
is out of town for the week. He agrees with the approach suggested here, as do Guy Erb
(who is also on leave) and all NSC regional people who had an interest in the subject.
JTM.” An earlier version of the memorandum, which Tuchman Mathews distributed to
the NSC Staff on June 14, and Armacost’s June 15 response to the memorandum are in the
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Mathews Subject
File, Box 10, Human Rights: Overseas Private Investment Corporation, 4/77–7/78. Chris-
topher’s response is printed as Document 151.
2 See footnote 6, Document 139.
