March 1952–February 1953
227
Iran whose reputations are better than those Khalili and Khazrai. Any
further info present activities these two persons wld be welcome. Wld
appreciate ur repeating all tels this subj to London.
Acheson
71.
Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa
Division, Directorate of Plans (Roosevelt) to the Chief of the
Operations Division, Directorate of Plans, Central
Intelligence Agency ([name not declassified])1
Washington, April 5, 1952.
SUBJECT
Monthly Division Operations Report of NEA Activity for March 1952
[Omitted here are portions of the report unrelated to Iran.]
3. Reports from Iran during March stressed the progressive deteri-
oration of the economic and political situation in view of Prime Min-
ister Mossadeq’s prolonged failure to reach some settlement of the oil
controversy. Four political trends have become apparent: a) Prime Min-
ister Mossadeq, in spite of maneuvers within his National Front and ev-
idence of waning popularity, is considered capable of remaining in
power and control at least during the early session of the new parlia-
ment. b) The prestige of the Shah is weakening because of his indeci-
sion and vacillation. The throne’s principal support, the Army, remains
loyal but has been subject to constant attack by the National Front and
the Tudeh, the latter having been somewhat successful in penetrating
the armed forces. c) In spite of its poor showing in the recent elections,
which were rigged throughout the country, the Tudeh Party has been
gaining strength, primarily by subversion. The majority of Iranians
continue to be blind to the Tudeh’s development and threat; and the
Government, preoccupied with economic and political problems, takes
no positive action against the Tudeh. d) Xenophobia in Iran is now
being directed against the US since Washington’s statement that no sig-
nificant US economic aid would be granted Iran prior to an oil settle-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO–IMS Files, Job 80–01795R, Box 10,
Folder 3, Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) History 01Apr52–15Apr52. Top Secret; Se-
curity Information.
