Arms Control and Disarmament‚ÄÉ 1219
17. A temporary suspension of nuclear tests would establish a cli¬≠
mate conducive to sound successful negotiations on successive steps of 
armaments regulation and control.
18. A temporary nuclear test suspension would: (a) inhibit the 
development of more powerful new types of weapons at a time when 
the United States would have a relative superiority in nuclear weapons; 
(b) deter the spread of the production of nuclear weapons to other less 
responsible countries; (c) break the 12-¬≠year stalemate in the disarma¬≠
ment negotiations and establish a climate conducive to sound success¬≠
ful negotiations on further steps of armaments regulation and control; 
(d) carry with it an inspection system which would begin the opening 
up of the Soviet Union and other Communist areas to international reg¬≠
ular observation and would assist in the evolution of the Soviet system 
toward a more liberal and peaceful form.
Inspection Zones
19. Another consideration resulting from the recent London and 
New York disarmament discussions is that there is reason to believe 
that the Soviet might separate out from its proposals and negotiate a 
reasonable European inspection zone. The USSR would prefer to have a 
de-¬≠nuclearized zone in Central Europe (Bulganin letter of December¬Ý10, 
1957) but would also consider a European inspection zone as a first step.
20. The latest intelligence estimate on Soviet policies states that the 
Soviet leaders are ‚Äúacutely concerned over the potential threat of a revived 
and nationalistic Germany backed by the United States.‚Äù The USSR has 
tended to concentrate on such disarmament proposals as the ban on use 
of nuclear weapons, liquidation of foreign bases, and troop withdrawals 
in Europe. According to the intelligence estimate: ‚ÄúTheir (Soviet) inter¬≠
est in inducing a U.S. troop withdrawal from Europe would probably 
lead them to go even further (than inspection for a test ban) in allowing 
mutual inspection in Europe.‚Äù (NIE 11‚Äì4‚Äì57, November 12, 1957)
21. General Norstad has recommended to the NATO Council 
that it would ‚Äúenhance the security‚Äù of NATO to establish a European 
inspection zone against surprise attack. Norstad said that the ‚Äúmini¬≠
mum area‚Äù he had in mind was Germany, Poland, and Czechoslovakia.
22. The present Western position (August 29, 1957) states that pro¬≠
vided there is agreement by the USSR to either a North America-¬≠Soviet 
Union zone or an Arctic Circle zone that the United States, with the 
concurrence of its allies, would agree to a European inspection zone 
including all of Europe to the Ural Mountains (60 degrees East longi¬≠
tude) and in the south to latitude 40 degrees North. If the Soviet reject 
this zone (which they have), the policy provides that under the same 
proviso as above a more limited zone of inspection in Europe would be 
‚Äúdiscussed‚Äù, but only if a significant part of the Soviet Union, as well as 
the other countries of Eastern Europe, was included.
