Haiti 781 HA–23. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State1  Washington, June 28, 1960. SUBJECT Haitian–United States Relations PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Ernest Bonhomme CMA – Mr. Wieland CMA – Mr. Warner Ambassador Bonhomme called at 4:00 pm by invitation and the ensuing conversation lasted an hour and a half. It was a wide-­ranging exchange of views on this United States assistance program in Haiti, with President Duvalier’s speech at Jacmel last week, as the starting point. Neither Ambassador Bonhomme nor the CMA officers had yet seen the text of President Duvalier’s remarks, but only newspaper articles concerning it. Highlights of the discussion are the following paragraphs. Ambassador Bonhomme was unable to explain why President Duvalier had chosen to express himself on United States assistance in this public way in Haiti. The Ambassador only commented that the occasion was the dedication of a wharf built with the assistance of private United States firms. His implication was that this occasion pointed up the contrast between private and official United States efforts to help Haiti. The Ambassador thought that press efforts to portray President Duvalier as calling for a choice between the United States and Soviet Union had been a misinterpretation of his words. Mr. Wieland asked what were the Ambassador’s views on how to put matters back on the tracks. The Ambassador paused, then replied that he supposed the President was awaiting some results from the “Special mission” he had entrusted to Ambassador Turkel when the latter visited Haiti.2 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.5-MSP/6–2860. Confidential. Drafted by Warner. 2 On June 24, the Embassy at Port-au-Prince reported that the central theme of President Duvalier’s speech of June 21, made on the occasion of dedicating the Jacmel Wharf, was his disappointment with the meagerness of United States aid. In the speech, Duvalier admitted that his efforts to improve the general welfare had not yet succeeded, but blamed the lack of progress not on government efforts but on the inadequacy of United States assistance. The Embassy commented that while public reaction interpreted the speech as anti-American and a strong warning to the United States, the speech was only a public reiteration of views that the Haitian Government had been expressing privately to Embassy officials. (Telegram 312 from Port-­au-Prince; 738.5–MSP/6–2460).
