226
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
There is also the radical action to restrict consumption of oil by
limiting imports and rationing gasoline. You have authority to introduce
gasoline rationing by Executive action, by declaration of national emer-
gency. Certainly, this would restore U.S. credibility about dealing with
our energy problem. Once in place, depending on the stringency of the
program, rationing could save $5 to $10 billion a year.
There was general agreement among us that it is not desirable to take this
step now. It could have an important negative economic impact on
growth; it is doubtful that the American people are ready for it, and the
political consequences could be extreme.
I nevertheless feel it desirable for you to order technical prepara-
tions to be worked out, and to continue to develop the political climate,
so that this step could be taken with minimum delay. Moreover, I
would recommend that we examine other longer-term measures, addi-
tional to those in your present energy package, for reducing our oil im-
pact bill.
2. Non-energy Related Measures
In addition to continuing to press Germany and Japan to stimulate
their economies, we could take the following actions to cut the trade
deficit in 1978 and beyond:
a. Expand Ex-Im Bank operations by about $4 billion (which would
provide additional exports at an increasing rate ranging from about
$0.5 to $1.5 billion per year).
b. Expand CCC Budget by $1.5 billion per year (which would pro-
vide about $0.5 to $0.75 billion in additional exports per year).
c. Moderate expansion of military sales for off-the-shelf items (about
$0.5 billion per year).
d. Sell some of our gold holdings on the private market (up to $0.5 bil-
lion per year).
If we took actions on all of these non-energy related areas, the maximum
potential savings would amount to about $2 to $3 billion each year.
Each of the above actions raises other policy issues. For example,
Ex-Im Bank options lie in areas that would involve easing some restric-
tions on nuclear sales. Similarly, expansion of military sales could
partly conflict with your arms sales policy.6
D. Recommendations:
There is no agreement among your advisers on which steps should be
taken to remedy the situation. For understandable reasons, Jim Schle-
6 The text of Carter’s May 19 announcement of his conventional arms transfer
policy is in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I,
pp. 931–932.
