International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 467 Schmidt: The U.S. Delegation requested the figure be taken out. Do I now understand that the U.S. President has changed the mind of the U.S. Delegation? Carter: About how much is 1%? Schmidt: 13 billion deutsche marks. Giscard: Yesterday Fukuda used the figure of 7% growth. Since others are using figures in their paragraphs, we might remind people in the declaration that the Japanese target is 7%. Fukuda: Others have not mentioned specific growth targets. Therefore it is not appropriate for Japan to give specific figures. The Japanese people may feel that Japan has been singled out. The word “significantly higher” implies 7%. If asked, you can say 7% growth target is what was meant. You can quote me. Trudeau: If it helps in this exercise, I can include for Canada a figure of up to 5%. Giscard: Now that we have a Canadian figure, we need a Japanese figure. Fukuda: But that is not a figure which represents a growth target for the economy. If Japan is the only one to give a growth target, I can’t do it. You can tell people that the Japanese Prime Minister has used the figure of 7%. Carter: Would you be willing to set a percentage of increase that you will set as a goal? Fukuda: Last year our growth was 5.4%. Carter: Would you be willing to indicate a net increase in growth of about 1.5%. Fukuda: The present phrase is all right. If we set a target, we will be the only country to do so. People will add up 5.4% and 1.5% and it would be almost the same thing as setting a target. Schmidt: Canada has indicated its intention to achieve a 5% growth rate in 1978. Germany has said it will take additional measures to increase growth of up to 1% of GNP. Giscard said France will increase its budget deficit by ½% of GNP. Italy has indicated that it will do 1.5% better than in 1978. In light of the foregoing four countries which have made quantitative pledges, it would be useful if Japan were to do likewise. Carter has used the phrase “which is 1.5% higher than the previous year.” This would not single you out. It would be similar to the foregoing four countries. Fukuda: In the case of the U.S., it did not spell out its growth rate. There would be certain criticisms within Japan when we are asked questions of why we said in the declaration 7% growth. Schmidt: Maybe we should look for another kind of language which avoids mentioning the growth rate such as “measures toward the expansion of domestic demand on the order of 1.5% of GNP.
