226 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX was to be openly funded by the U.S. Government, it appeared essential that a presidentially-appointed board of five members, assisted by a small professional staff, assure the Congress and the President that the mission was properly performed; the moneys properly spent; the engineering equipment and technology be equal to the task; and that the RFE/RL broadcasts meet the highest standards of “quality, effectiveness and integrity”. The request that I consider nomination to the BIB as its Chairman,2 led to a short but intensive assessment of the reality which presently prevails, as well as the contribution, in character and magnitude, such a responsibility would entail. The conclusions reflected in this memorandum owe much to considerable detail, candor, and important judgments which I received from able and distinguished people who presently or previously have carried substantial responsibility in the areas this memorandum discusses. My study was partial and too brief but, in my opinion, sufficient for me to form certain judgments about the problems which confront the Radios and particularly the private and public boards, their officers and staffs. Though I suspect there are such instances, I’ve been unable to identify a noteworthy occasion when the BIB adversely affected the operation of the Radios. Nor have I found an occasion when that Board was of any significant assistance to the operation of the Radios. It may be that advocacy needed for the large increase in transmitters or their location in recent years is such an instance. This is only one of a number of many such questions time and propriety did not permit adequate inquiry. On those questions for which I sought answers, my conclusions are as follows. The BIB and its staff are essentially incapable of performing their assigned mission. The factors involved in this negative conclusion include the following: No board of five advisory members, meeting four times a year, or twice that often, can more than casually assess operations of the magnitude performed by RFE/RL. 2 Leo Cherne served under Presidents Nixon and Ford on the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, first as a member and then as chairman. After Carter’s election, PFIAB was disbanded, and Cherne became President of the International Rescue Committee in New York. His name was considered for the chairmanship of the BIB, but Cherne turned down the offer. On May 15, Schultzberg published an article in The New York Times discussing the approach by Henze and Brzezinski to Cherne and Paul Seabury to join the BIB Board as well as the opposition from Senate Foreign Relations Committee members. (A.O. Sulzberger, Jr., “U.S. Overseas Radio Stirs Dispute Again,” The New York Times, May 15, 1980, p. A17).
