1977 175 command and control components.18 Most fixed, primary and alternate command centers could be destroyed [7 lines not declassified]. (TS) Since the Blue Ribbon Panel Report,19 several survivability improvements have been made in US command and control systems. [5 lines not declassified]. In summary, the potential for survivability of the US command and control system today is better than it was in 1970, with recent assessments concluding that it contributes significantly to a credible deterrence.

Tab E

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense20 Washington, undated LIMITED NUCLEAR EMPLOYMENT OPTIONS (LNO/RNO) OBJECTIVES AND ASSUMPTIONS (U) The basic objective of non-SIOP limited nuclear employment options (LNOs and RNOs) is to strengthen deterrence across a broader range of possible conflicts by providing a series of preplanned, measured and discrete nuclear response options more applicable to situations where the deterrent threat of the large-­scale options in the SIOP would be inappropriate or incredible. In the event that deterrence fails, the principal objective of non-SIOP options is to secure early war termination on terms acceptable to the US and its allies at the lowest level of conflict feasible, thereby limiting the level of overall damage. In accordance with this objective, LNOs and RNOs have been developed for a number of contingencies. These options are available for consideration by the NCA during a crisis and for use in conjunction with political and other military measures such as employment of conventional forces. Specific objectives of current LNOs and RNOs are contained in the Appendix. (U) The basic political assumption underlying the development of non-SIOP nuclear options is that escalation control can be achieved. The fundamental assumption of escalation control is that there are limits on the risks or losses the enemy is willing to accept. Militarily, a key assumption is that the controlled, restrained use of nuclear force provides the capability to demonstrate resolve, to reverse locally a 18 Carter underlined “aimed at command and control components” and wrote next to it: “certain target.” 19 See footnote 3, Document 9. 20 Top Secret.
