World Hunger and Food Policy
795
ment for the 1979 FAO Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural De-
velopment.22
3. Research, Training and Technical Cooperation Strategies
Science and technology are essential factors in all aspects of the
food system. U.S. Government expenditures for agricultural research
have been estimated at about $700 million annually, with an additional
$350 million for similar purposes from State governments. Of the $700
million, $120 million is reportedly used for human nutrition research,
although recent Congressional scrutiny of that figure reveals that at
most, $60 million annually in Federal research funds are actually used
for that purpose. Although the private sector spends about as much on
research as does the U.S. Government, most of it is market oriented.
The National Academy of Sciences World Food and Nutrition
Study on Research reviewed this area comprehensively in a report to
the President in June, 1977.23
Among their important findings they reported that less than one
percent of global food research is done in the developing world. Much
of the research and technology originating in high-income countries
has been inappropriate for the social conditions of developing coun-
tries. Most agricultural research has been directed towards temperate
zone agricultural production, and toward cash crops. There has been
insufficient attention to viable nutrition and intervention programs or
to local adaptation of existing technology to food production. It is gen-
erally agreed that in addition to the capacity to adapt and modify so-
phisticated technology to their own needs, developing countries also
need research on specific common problems that are likely to generate
findings which they can usefully share with each other.
Recommendations
• The report to the President of the National Academy of Sciences
World Food and Nutrition Study on Research should be used as the
basis for establishing a new strategy and clear priorities in research that
relate directly to world hunger. Those priorities should include:
—the encouragement of research on tropical rather than temperate
zone agriculture;
—the nurturing of indigenous agricultural research capability in
developing countries;
—the development of culturally and socially appropriate tech-
nology including focus on methods to achieve reduction in post-
22 The FAO World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
(WCARRD) was scheduled to take place in Rome July 12–20, 1979.
23 See Document 212 and footnote 2 thereto.
