339 3 0/
8 S/800 8
XXVIII
Note on U.S. Covert Actions
other agencies frequently were unable to judge the feasibility of partic-
ular projects.7
After the Bay of Pigs failure in April 1961, General Maxwell Taylor
reviewed U.S. paramilitary capabilities at President Kennedy’s request
and submitted a report in June that recommended strengthening
high-level direction of covert operations. As a result of the Taylor Re-
port, the Special Group, chaired by the President’s Special Assistant for
National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy, and including Deputy
Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Secretary of De-
fense Roswell Gilpatric, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles,
and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Lyman Lemnitzer, as-
sumed greater responsibility for planning and reviewing covert opera-
tions. Until 1963 the DCI determined whether a CIA-originated project
was submitted to the Special Group. In 1963 the Special Group devel-
oped general but informal criteria, including risk, possibility of success,
potential for exposure, political sensitivity, and cost (a threshold of
$25,000 was adopted by the CIA), for determining whether covert ac-
tion projects were submitted to the Special Group.8
From November 1961 to October 1962 a Special Group (Aug-
mented), whose membership was the same as the Special Group plus
Attorney General Robert Kennedy and General Taylor (as Chairman),
exercised responsibility for Operation Mongoose, a major covert action
program aimed at overthrowing the Castro regime in Cuba. When
President Kennedy authorized the program in November, he desig-
nated Brigadier General Edward G. Lansdale, Assistant for Special Op-
erations to the Secretary of Defense, to act as chief of operations, and
Lansdale coordinated the Mongoose activities among the CIA and the
Departments of State and Defense. The CIA units in Washington and
Miami had primary responsibility for implementing Mongoose opera-
tions, which included military, sabotage, and political propaganda
programs.9
President Kennedy also established a Special Group (Counter-
Insurgency) on January 18, 1962, when he signed NSAM No. 124.
The Special Group (CI), set up to coordinate counter-insurgency activ-
ities separate from the mechanism for implementing NSC 5412/2, was
to confine itself to establishing broad policies aimed at preventing and
resisting subversive insurgency and other forms of indirect aggression
in friendly countries. In early 1966, in NSAM No. 341, President
Johnson assigned responsibility for the direction and coordination of
counter-insurgency activities overseas to the Secretary of State, who es-
7 Leary, The Central Intelligence Agency: History and Documents, p. 63.
8 Ibid., p. 82.
9 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, volume X, Cuba, 1961–1962, Documents 270 and
278.
