Romania 727 4. At a separate introductory meeting earlier in the day, Counselor Ridgway and Minister Andrei exchanged letters from Presidents Carter and Ceausescu on the occasion of the centennial of US/Romanian relations.3 Andrei opened second meeting by expressing satisfaction with improvement in US/Romanian relations over past 15 years as indicated by large number of exchange visits by officials of the two countries and by progress in several fields, especially trade. He also expressed appreciation for Department’s support for MFN renewal. 5. Bilateral relationship. Ridgway noted growing tradition of exchange visits and regretted President Carter’s inability to stop in Bucharest during his forthcoming trip. Schedule permitted only one stop in Eastern Europe and Romania could appreciate importance of a visit to Yugoslavia at this time.4 After asking Andrei to convey President Carter’s “high esteem” to President Ceausescu, she said the former hoped to make a trip to Bucharest in the future to reciprocate Ceausescu’s April 1978 visit to Washington. She also noted that President Carter’s inability to visit Romania this time in no way should imply a lessening of the importance the US attached to relations with Romania or of Ceausescu’s role in European politics. Andrei made careful notes and said he would directly inform President Ceausescu. 6. Middle East. Drawing on the Secretary’s June 9 speech5 Ridgway reviewed US position on search for peace under Camp David aegis, stressing our continuing faith in success of the process. There had been progress despite difficulty of issues, especially Palestinian autonomy question. US believes any initiative to alter UN Resolution 242 or to undermine Camp David process must be opposed. The so-called “European initiative” can be useful if it meets all of our concerns and falls within the Camp David guidelines. The US is trying to get Israel and Egypt back to the negotiations on the remaining difficult issues with minimum delay to limit prospect of counterproductive outside initiatives. Andrei said Romania was happy to see Camp David process accomplish as much as it had, but that it seems to have exhausted its possibilities since it had not provided for a comprehensive peace 3 In telegram 4475 from Bucharest, June 3, the Embassy reported that the Romanian Foreign Ministry had delivered an unofficial draft of Ceausescu’s message to Carter. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800271–0597) 4 Carter visited Yugoslavia June 24–25. On June 10, Vest sent Ridgway a briefing memorandum indicating that the Romanians would seek assurances that the special relationship between the United States and Romania, and between President Carter and Ceausescu in particular, remained strong, especially in light of Carter’s decision to only travel to Yugoslavia. (National Archives, RG 59, Counselor to the Department, Subject Country Files and 1980 Briefing Books, Box 3, Pol 2—Romania) 5 Muskie delivered the speech, entitled “The Middle East: Outlook for Peace,” at the Washington Press Club on June 9. The speech was published in Department of State Bulletin, July 1980.
