1146
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
eign Policy File, P870058–0397) According to a situation report Na-
tional Security Council Staff member Lincoln Bloomfield sent to Presi-
dent’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbignew Brzezinski the
evening of July 25, the Committee approved the revised Indian amend-
ment 85 to 3 with 21 abstentions; all members of the EC–9 did not par-
ticipate. Bloomfield noted, “Sarah [Weddington] is going to say pub-
licly that the Conference is being subverted from the task at hand and
that U.S. Del will be trying to get things back on the track.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Unfiled
Files, Box 153, Women’s Conference: 7/80) In telegram 5014 from Co-
penhagen, July 26, the Embassy reported that the United States, Israel,
and Canada voted against the revised Indian amendment, adding,
“Second Committee vote breaks a tradition dating back to Mexico City
Conference of proceeding by consensus on Plan of Action. The question
for WEO del is now whether inclusion of the Indian amendment in the
Draft Program will preclude their support of the Draft Program as a
whole.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800359–0383)
The Department further instructed the delegation to vote against
the final draft of the Program of Action following the acceptance of the
Indian/PLO amendment and due to other political considerations.
(Telegram 198258 to Copenhagen, July 26; National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P870058–0382) On July 30, 94 delegations
voted to approve the Program of Action. Delegates also approved 48
additional resolutions. The United States, Canada, Israel, and Australia
voted against adoption of the Program of Action on the basis of three
paragraphs that included references to UN documents questioning the
Camp David Accords; equated Zionism with imperialism, colonialism,
neocolonialism, and racism; and incorporated the Indian/PLO resolu-
tion language. As the U.S. delegation’s final report, which Muskie
transmitted to Carter on January 16, 1981, stated:
“However, the challenge to our foreign policy on the State of Israel
was one that could not be ignored. Any other action by the United
States at the World Conference would have been construed as a major
change in Middle East policy; and that would have been incorrect and
misleading. Our continued commitment to Israel is a long-standing
matter of integrity and principle. It is very unfortunate that our nega-
tive vote has been characterized as an either/or situation, it was not
and is not.” (Report of the United States Delegation to the World Conference
on the UN Decade for Women: Equality, Development, and Peace, page 140;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Un-
filed Files, Box 153, Women: World Conference Report: 1/81)
In summarizing U.S. accomplishments during the July 30 plenary
session, Weddington noted:
