388
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
damaging. Although I know you have mentioned in our earlier conver-
sations the possibility of some small increases through family reunifica-
tion, I do not believe that the reported decision is in the spirit of what
we have discussed and what we are trying to achieve. I have to tell you
with the gravest concern and regret that taking this step at this time will
have the most serious consequences for our relationship. Moreover, I
believe that it may also jeopardize the conclusion of the peace treaty
which we are negotiating.
Given the grave consequences for everything we have worked to-
gether to achieve, I must ask that you avoid any move on matters of this
kind until they can be addressed in the course of the negotiations to es-
tablish the Palestinian self-governing authority for the West Bank and
Gaza.
Sincerely, Jimmy Carter
End text.
Vance
109.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State1
Cairo, October 26, 1978, 2025Z
23648. Subject: Sadat Letter for President Carter. Ref: (A) Cairo
23635,2 (B) Cairo 23479.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat,
1–12/78. Secret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates
the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Carter initialed “C” at the
top of the document, indicating that he saw the telegram. The original signed copy of
Sadat’s letter, forwarded from Tarnoff to Brzezinski under a November 16 covering
memorandum, is ibid.
2 Telegram 23635 from Cairo, October 26, conveyed press reports that indicated that
the Egyptian Government was considering withdrawing its delegation from the peace
treaty talks in the aftermath of the Israelis’ announced plans to expand Gaza and West
Bank settlements. In the telegram, Eilts also reported on an October 26 telephone conver-
sation with Khalil in which the latter criticized this statement and a further Israeli an-
nouncement indicating an intention to move the Prime Minister’s Office and the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs to East Jerusalem, describing the actions as “totally unhelpful to
Egypt” and making “a mockery of Israeli claims to want a just and equitable peace.” (Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780441–0279)
3 In telegram 23479 from Cairo, October 24, Eilts relayed an oral message from
Sadat to Carter, through Khalil, indicating Sadat’s three main reservations with the draft
