604
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Why Are We Doing It This Way?
The current approach features steady, coordinated pressure
through constant consultation involving blunt talk in private and a
minimum of public bluster. This approach reflects the growth of the re-
lationship, and Japan’s increase of relative power within the relation-
ship; the proven long-term nature of the problem; and our heightened
understanding of the way decisions are made in Japan.
Even this steady pressure method has its political costs. Our con-
stant coordinated stress on the economic imbalance has the Japanese
wondering whether we care about anything else, particularly the Mu-
tual Security Treaty, upon which our strategic position in Asia is based.
It has caused some Japanese to question the value of the relationship,
and the fitness of the U.S. as an ally, and to call for a search for alterna-
tives, not only in the economic but the security field as well. Most Japa-
nese officials feel otherwise; they recognize that the economic issues
have to be resolved in order to protect the strategic and political ben-
efits of the connection with the U.S.
On balance, therefore, the steady approach seems the best middle
course between apathy and excessive pressure. We believe it will work.
What Is Next?
The series of consultations beginning with Foreign Minister So-
noda’s visit this week and including Prime Minister Ohira’s visit in
May and President Carter’s visit to Japan in June represent a critical
juncture in our relationship. The way both sides handle the meetings
will determine whether we can cooperate to achieve progress or face a
sour, deteriorating relation. Our best chance of success lies in contin-
uing the steady pressure approach stressing in private the things we
care about, but keeping public rhetoric cool. We want to prove that the
economic issues are vital, that progress is being made, and that several
years will be required to achieve success—while demonstrating the
benefits of the political and strategic relationship. We must give the
Japanese the time of day, spending adequate time to discuss the issues
and avoiding comparisons with the number and length of meetings
with the Chinese, the Soviets, or the Europeans. By the time we are fin-
ished with this round, we will not have accomplished everything we
want, but, as in the past, we will be measurably ahead of where we are
today.
Henry Owen concurs.2
2 Owen initialed his concurrence. At the bottom of the page, Inderfurth wrote: “ZB,
I think the President should see this memo (updated) prior to his May 2 meeting with
Ohira. Rick.”
