Chapter 5, May–June 1990 731 of questions that may be raised in the final press conference and in the media after that. Bartholomew: I take note of your statement. We have an equally strong interest in avoiding factual errors and tendentious criticisms made by the outside world. The question we have is whether a detailed joint statement is the best way to meet this need, whether the best course is not a shorter statement. Let us have Masterkov and Brooks look at your shorter statement, and we have one to look at as well, and then we will have to discuss this further. I will report to Secretary Baker and others what you have to say on this point. Karpov: OK. Our idea is to parallel the short statement with a longer one. (At this point Brooks left with Masterkov, Roslyakov, and Koltunov.) Karpov: A solution to a number of outstanding issues is necessary for the summit. Let us begin with mobile ICBMs, including notifications and a sublimit. The disagreement on notifications concerns how detailed they should be—­every day notifications when a launcher left and returned, or aggregate notifications for one or two weeks without specific details. Let me note we are talking about routine movements that do not involve launchers leaving the deployment area. With regard to instances where launchers leave the deployment area, notification would be required, this is dealt with separately. Col. Koltunov tells me there is agreement on exercise dispersals even within the deployment area. So we have a very clearly defined subject to discuss—­movements of a routine nature. I have three options for your consideration: — 1. Notification once a month on the overall aggregate number of mobile ICBMs outside restricted areas, for each 10-­day period of the preceding month, for all deployment areas in sum. — 2. Notification once a month on the aggregate number of mobile ICBM launchers outside restricted areas, for the entire preceding month, plus notification for one deployment area chosen at the descretion of the verifying side. — 3. Provide notification once a month with regard to the overall number of mobile ICBM launchers on routine movements outside restricted areas, separately for each day in the preceding month, for all deployment areas together. If we could agree on one of these options, we are ready to lower the 1200 level. That is the essense of our approach. Bartholomew: First, technical though it may be, this will be a crucial issue politically here, and affect the view taken of START by the Senate. This issue will bear on us more immediately than on you. My second observation is that is why it was so difficult for Washington to
