3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
231
the Soviets for guidance. Soviet support and encouragement of them to
go to Geneva is important to us.
The President said that Brezhnev has his personal good wishes. The
letters between them were helpful. As he had told Patolichev,6 move-
ment on SALT, CTB, and the Indian Ocean, and possible talks on
anti-satellites, cooperation in the Middle East, and enhancing trade re-
lations, all go hand in hand and we are making good progress. The
President was eager to get Brezhnev’s advice on how we go on from
here. Congress and the American public support this. The President
said that the most immediate concern is the Middle East—a reply from
the Soviet Union on convening the Geneva Conference, support for the
Sadat visit, and help with the PLO and Syrian response.
Dobrynin said that one cannot know the results of the Sadat visit.
Some Arabs welcomed it (Morocco and others); others such as the PLO
and the Syrians had made strong statements. Secretary Vance said this
is why it is important to make it clear that both the US and the Soviet
Union think the Sadat visit is a constructive step toward Geneva. If
others see us talking and agreeing, this has its effect.
Dobrynin agreed and said that that was Soviet policy as Gromyko
had discussed with Secretary Vance and the President and as reflected
in the Joint Statement.7 The Soviet Union had consistently supported
the Joint Statement and had never criticized it. But the Soviets were
uncertain about Sadat’s visit: will it lead to Geneva or away from it. Dr.
Brzezinski said that we want to avoid a polarization of opinion around
the visit that would lead away from Geneva. Dobrynin reiterated that
the question was whether the Sadat visit was a plus or minus for Ge-
neva. Dr. Brzezinski said that we should try to exercise influence on how
it is played.
Secretary Vance said that even if the Sadat visit does not help, it is
still important to go to Geneva. Dobrynin agreed and said that was the
Soviet belief as well.
The President said we have been holding up on steps to Geneva
until we hear from the Soviets. We do not want to act unilaterally.
6 The meeting between Carter and Patolichev took place on November 10, during
which they discussed U.S.-Soviet relations and the Jackson-Vanik amendment. The mem-
orandum of conversation is in the Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Trilateral
Commission File, Box 6.
7 See footnote 2, Document 52.
