711.428/1072
[Document 372]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)
WASHINGTON, March 1, 1927.
SIR: I have the honor to invite your attention to the situation regarding pike
perch fisheries in Lake Champlain which in former years has been a subject
of correspondence between the Department and the British Embassy. In
note No. 393 of June 7, 1926, the Ambassador stated that it was the
Canadian Government’s view that fishing in boundary waters should be
considered as a whole rather than that the fishing in Missisquoi Bay should
be considered separately.
While this Government appreciates the Dominion Government’s position as
set out in the Ambassador’s note, it believes that the interests of the people
on both sides of the international boundary require the discontinuance of
seine fishing in Missisquoi Bay, independent of the solution of questions
relating to fisheries in other boundary waters. This Government understands
that in the Lake Champlain region the interests of the summer angler are of
greater financial importance to the resident people than market fisheries
could be. You will recall that the American-Canadian Fisheries Conference
of 1918 found that the work of the States of New York and Vermont
directed toward the building up of the Lake Champlain region as a summer
resort was being “largely nullified” by seine fishing in the Canadian part of
Missisquoi Bay. The benefits of the fish hatcheries in the American section
of the Lake are likewise impaired by the seine fishing.
This Government appreciates the importance of adequately protecting and
regulating fishing in all the boundary waters through the cooperation of the
governments of the United States and Canada. It is a matter of regret to it
that questions of a local nature have delayed it in undertaking negotiations
in regard to the fisheries in certain waters. However, this Government is
hopeful that in respect of the fisheries in every part of the boundary waters
in relation to which no serious questions have arisen the Dominion
