424 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement not some programs which he had approved. The President indicated that whereas General Goodpaster and Major Eisenhower kept him well informed as to intelligence reports, he had not known until the NSC meeting that the view of the U.S. Government was that of wishing to oppose Fidel Castro in any event. He then said that he felt the situation had been allowed to slip somewhat. He then said, in the light of the Hull Board meeting with him on December 16, and in view of what I had told him with respect to the inadequacies of the 5412 Group and its procedures, he wished to dis­ cuss this matter with Allen Dulles and me as a matter of urgency and that he particularly had in mind an effort to regularize the 5412 proce­ dures. He instructed me to get Allen Dulles at the earliest opportunity (this meeting was set up for Friday morning, December 26 at 9:00 a.m.). 3. I then discussed in general terms with the President further preparations for the Geneva conferences on test suspension and on sur­ prise attack in the light of reports that he had received at the NSC from Ambassador Wadsworth and Mr. William C. Foster. I pointed out to him that some time ago he had instructed me to suggest to the Secretary of State that he have one committee which might deal with both confer­ ences but that no formal action had been taken. I pointed out that the Secretary of State for one reason or another had been out of his office for an extended period of time. I recommended to the President that the continued preparations be lodged in an interdepartmental commit­ tee under the Chairmanship of the Secretary of State and composed additionally of the Secretary of Defense, Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, the Director of Central Intelligence and Dr. Killian. The President approved this suggestion and indicated that he saw no rea­ son now to continue Secretary Anderson as a member of this committee working on this problem. He also said that he wished George Allen brought in to the deliberations whenever his advice would be helpful and his official responsibilities were involved. He instructed me to fol­ low the course of these matters and to continue to “needle” for action where necessary and to report to him when desirable. Gordon Gray
