1980  757
173.	 Memorandum From Victor Utgoff of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National  
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 8, 1980
SUBJECT
M–X Basing Vulnerability
In response to your question as to which is less vulnerable—­the 
racetrack or multiple holes—I think the sheltered road mobile basing 
system is less vulnerable overall, because it can be made as resistant to 
nuclear attacks as the multiple holes system, but is far less vulnerable 
to loss of missile location security.
Making the horizontal shelters of the road mobile system as resis-
tant to nuclear attack as the vertical holes does cost more for several 
reasons.
First, the portions of any shelter that are exposed to the over-­
pressures produced by a nuclear blast must be particularly strong, 
and much more area is exposed to blast overpressure by the horizontal 
shelter.
Second, the suspension system used to isolate the missile from 
the ground motion associated with the blast is more complex for the 
horizontal shelter, and more “rattle space” is required—­resulting in a 
bigger shelter.
The purpose of hardening the MX shelters is to make sure the Sovi-
ets would not find it advantageous to go to warhead placements and 
yields that would allow them to kill more than one shelter with a single 
weapon. Given this purpose, we have the choice of building somewhat 
softer shelters if we space them farther apart. In fact, at this point it 
appears that minimizing the cost of achieving an equally survivable 
MX basing system using horizontal shelters will mean going to some-
what softer but more widely spaced shelters than we would have used 
had we elected to go with the multiple hole system.2
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 43, Missiles: 10/79–3/80. Unclassified. Sent for information. Sent through Welch. A 
stamped notation indicates Brzezinski saw the memorandum.
2 Attached but not printed is a January 28 Evening Report from the NSC Defense 
Policy Coordination Cluster to Brzezinski. Next to the section on the M–X missile, Brzez-
inski wrote: “Which is less vulnerable: the ‘race track’ or the multiple holes?”
