Nicaragua  867
Lainez, to Mr. Rubottom. The Ambassador said these two men were 
representing Nicaragua at the current IMF and IBRD meetings, and that 
Dr. Lugo Marenco had signed last Friday a loan agreement with the 
Eximbank in the amount of $8 million for agricultural diversification 
projects. The Ambassador then expressed his appreciation on behalf of 
his Government for the favorable consideration which had been given 
this loan application.
Mr. Rubottom said he was pleased that the loan agreement had 
been worked out to everybody’s satisfaction. He then pointed out 
that such a loan was to help the people of the country. He said that 
Nicaragua’s economy, like that of many other Latin American countries, 
would be benefitted by some diversification. Mr. Rubottom then made 
reference to the fact that Argentina had recently received a $10 million 
Eximbank loan, (constituting a specific portion of EXIM assistance to 
Argentina) to be utilized through the Banco Industrial for small and 
medium Argentine business loans. He stressed that equal opportunities 
and consideration would be given to all categories of businessmen with 
regard to availability of the money for loan purposes. He said he hoped 
the same would be true with regard to the EXIM funds made available 
for agricultural diversification in Nicaragua. Dr. Lugo Marenco said 
there was no limitation as to whom agricultural loans were available 
and that the “little man” would receive the same consideration as the 
“big man”.
Dr. Delgado then said that Nicaragua was making all out efforts to 
develop a sound agricultural program, and pointed out that the loan 
from the EXIM bank would be put to good use in enabling a switch-­
over to crops other than coffee and cotton. Dr. Lugo Marenco said 
he anticipated that 1960–61 would be a hard year for Nicaragua and 
added, however, he did not think Nicaragua would need a stand-­by 
drawing at the end of this year from the IMF.
Mr. Rubottom asked about President Somoza’s health. He was 
informed that the President was getting along very well. In this respect 
Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa remarked upon how appreciative President 
Somoza was of the recent visit of Dr. Dudley White. He said Dr. White 
had examined him and had recommended that he reduce the number 
of pills he was taking and increase his amount of exercise.
The conversation was concluded with Mr. Rubottom expressing 
pleasure over the Ambassador’s courtesy call.
