3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
157
B–1 issue, he said that what caused the negative Soviet reaction was the
way Secretary Brown treated the cruise missile issue. “Why did he have
to say that the US will proceed to develop the 1500-mile air-launched
cruise missile, SALT or no SALT, when this is not an issue in SALT? I
had difficulty in restraining my military attaches from reporting that
SALT was dead.” On the CSCE monitoring report, he said he had re-
ported that the President and the Secretary had made efforts with the
leadership on the Hill to handle the report quietly, but what created the
difficulty in Moscow were the two personal references to Brezhnev in
the report. (COMMENT: This is puzzling, because the references to
Brezhnev are minor and neutral) and because any document signed by
the President is assumed in Moscow to carry his personal views.
Moscow Atmospherics
“You must understand,” he said, “that the atmosphere in Moscow
at the top is as emotionally wrought up as I have ever known it to be. It
is, however, better than it was a month ago, when Brezhnev was close
to saying, ‘the hell with them, we’ll go our own way without them!’”
He said that there had been a strong debate in Moscow about
whether to send Patolichev on his recent visit to Washington, and that
his own cabled recommendation had swung the decision. “I told them
that there could be no movement on the trade issue right now, but that
the visit could be useful anyway in improving the atmosphere.”
A Quiet Period
In turning to the future, he urged that we try for a month or two of
quiet relations, damping down the public statements and counterstate-
ments (he emphasized that all the Soviet statements had been reactions
to things said in this country) to let the feelings in Moscow subside. He
urged us not to take TASS statements as necessarily representing the
views of the Soviet leadership.
The Summit
He thought the prospects for a summit meeting were good, that
both sides wanted it, and expressed personal conviction that it would
be useful. He reiterated the familiar Soviet position that Brezhnev
would want documents (presumably SALT-related) to sign at a
summit. He hoped that he could have a tete-a-tete with the President
before a summit, to give him a feeling for Brezhnev’s personality and
ensure that the two men bring a reasonably light touch to the discus-
sion of their differences.
Future Moves
I asked what measures he thought the two countries could take
now that would have a useful effect. He tended to dismiss the CTB and
