696
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
If the Soviets make punitive raids against refugee camps or even
occupy territory on the Pakistani side of the border, the Pakistanis fear
they might be forced to choose between a dangerous confrontation
with the USSR and acquiescence in a violation of their country’s sover-
eignty. The Pakistanis believe that the Soviets are already encouraging
leftists as well as separatists, especially in Baluchistan, to oppose Zia
more actively. ([classification marking and codeword not declassified])
Diplomatic Tightrope
Islamabad has taken a strong diplomatic stand against the Soviet
occupation of Afghanistan, but it is trying to avoid giving unnecessary
offense to Moscow. Zia rejected US aid primarily because he believed
that accepting it would increase tension with Moscow but would not
strengthen Pakistan’s security to a corresponding degree. ([2 lines, classi-
fication marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified])
Islamabad’s desire to avoid confrontation with Moscow is further
reflected in its reluctance to back publicly exile groups in Pakistan
and its unwillingness to give extensive help to Afghan insurgents.
Pakistan also has tended to avoid publicity on border incidents,
including Soviet overflights. ([classification marking and handling restric-
tion not declassified])
Zia and his advisers nevertheless are not seeking an accommoda-
tion with Moscow. Pakistan’s closest allies—Saudi Arabia, Iran, and
China—would have serious reservations about any significant move
toward Moscow. At home, many Pakistanis—especially the conserva-
tives supporting Zia—would oppose abandoning fellow Muslims in
Afghanistan or any “sellout” to the USSR. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Pakistani policymakers doubt, moreover, that any agreement with
Moscow would bring more than temporary benefits. There also is
considerable sentiment in the military—on which Zia ultimately
depends—for a continued hardline on Afghanistan. ([classification mark-
ing and handling restriction not declassified])
Pakistani leaders seem to agree on their sense of isolation while
facing the Soviets. This has led them to an unprecedented interest in
trying to improve relations with India despite longstanding deep dis-
trust of India’s intentions and of its relationship with Moscow. The
conflicting advice Zia is getting makes Pakistan’s policy unpredictable.
Some aides—notably Foreign Affairs Adviser Agha Shahi—seem to
favor some agreement with the Soviets but most probably would sup-
port an accommodation only if they see no other good alternative.
([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified])
Domestic Politics
Although foreign developments and the extent of foreign support
will strongly influence Pakistani policy, domestic politics could become
