August 8–September 17, 1978
157
clude arrangements for assuring external security and public order; it
will also include arrangements for withdrawal of Israeli armed forces
from designated areas and will define their duties. Egypt and Israel
propose that, to assist in ensuring security during this period, Jordan
and Egypt would assign officials to share responsibility with the secu-
rity forces of the local authority in the West Bank and Gaza, respec-
tively, and to maintain continuing liaison with the designated Israeli
authority on internal security matters to ensure that no hostile threats
or acts against Israel or its citizens originate from the West Bank or
Gaza. The numbers, equipment and responsibilities of such Egyptian
and Jordanian officials would be defined by mutual agreement among
the negotiating parties. In addition, by mutual agreement, United Na-
tions forces might also be introduced during the transitional period.9
(c) When the Palestinian Arab authority in the West Bank and
Gaza is inaugurated, the transitional period would begin. Within two
years after the beginning of the transitional period, Egypt, Israel,
Jordan and the interim authority in the West Bank and Gaza would un-
dertake negotiations for a peace treaty which would settle the final
status of the West Bank and Gaza and its relationship with its
neighbors on the basis of all of the principles of UN Security Council
Resolution 242, including the mutual obligations of peace, the necessity
for security arrangements for all parties concerned following the transi-
tional period, the withdrawal of Israeli forces, a just settlement of the
refugee problem, and the establishment of secure and recognized
boundaries. The boundaries and security arrangements must satisfy
the aspirations of the Palestinians and meet Israel’s security needs.
They may incorporate agreed modifications in the temporary armistice
lines which existed between 1949 and 1967. The peace treaty will define
the rights of the citizens of each of the parties to do business, to work, to
live, and to carry on other transactions in each other’s territory. The
peace treaty shall provide for an expression of consent to its terms by
the people concerned.
5. During the transitional period in the West Bank and Gaza, the
negotiating parties would constitute a continuing committee to reach
agreements applicable during that period on the following:
(a) issues involving interpretation of the agreement or issues un-
foreseen during the negotiation of the agreement, if not resolvable by
the governing council;
(b) the return of agreed numbers of persons displaced from the
West Bank in 1967 and of Palestinian refugees;
9 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance highlighted the sentence
and wrote “?”
