1976  5
c) Asia—Mr. Vance noted that there was no question that the 
United States must maintain close ties with Japan, but that the U.S. 
commitment to Korea, and the forces necessary to maintain that com-
mitment, were more questionable.
[Omitted here are discussions of the bilateral military relationships 
between the United States and Korea, and the United States and Israel.] 
There was further discussion of relative U.S. and Soviet positions in 
the Middle East, which emphasized relative capabilities to project and 
sustain military power in the region. Mr. Blechman noted that although 
the Soviet Union was located geographically closer to the Middle East, 
the United States had far greater capabilities to project power into the 
region.
Mr. Woolsey noted his view that the links between foreign policy 
and force structure decisions was weaker than that implied by the pre-
vious discussion. He stated that foreign policy has much less an effect 
on the overall size of the defense budget than decisions on the way 
defense resources are utilized.
Mr. Vance disagreed with Mr. Woolsey in this regard emphasiz-
ing that even if the latter’s assessment was correct, the administration 
should still focus on the purpose of the armed forces—­that is, on the 
link between the military and foreign policy, and that the rest was rela-
tively unimportant.
Mr. Brown stated that it was necessary to look at both the pur-
poses of the armed forces and the efficiency with which resources were 
utilized.
Mr. Slocombe returned the discussion to NATO, emphasizing that 
requirements for European wars were the most important factors in 
decisions on the U.S. force structure. There was then a discussion of the 
balance in Europe, and of the European contribution to NATO defense. 
Mr. Blechman indicated that over the past twelve years, the states of 
Western Europe had increased, in real terms, the amount they spent on 
defense by 20 percent, and that they had kept military manpower levels 
roughly constant. There was some disagreement as to how well NATO 
would do in the event of a conventional war in Europe. Generally, Mr. 
Nitze took a more pessimistic view of the situation than did the other 
members of the group.
Mr. Warnke emphasized that an all-­out war in Europe was most 
unlikely, but that more realistic contingencies, such as a Soviet incur-
sion into Yugoslavia following Tito’s death, were more likely and that 
planning should focus on these limited contingencies.
Mr. Vance emphasized that we need a thorough review of NATO 
plans and forces—­that such a review had not been undertaken since 
1967, and that in view of developments in technology and Soviet capa-
bilities, such a comprehensive review was necessary.
