International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 131 1. Growth Targets. At the Summit weaker countries committed themselves to effective stabilization policies, and they seem to be fulfilling this commitment. The US, Japan, and Germany committed themselves to achieve their growth targets for 1977, and to adopt further policies, if needed, to this end and to correct trade imbalances. This meant 5% growth for the US, 4½ to 5% for Germany, and 6.7% for Japan. The US is likely to hit its target, or close to it. German government officials are now talking of 4–4.5% growth in 1977; Treasury estimates that there may be a significantly lower growth rate for 1978 unless additional measures are taken by Germany well before the end of this year. Japanese officials still talk of achieving close to 6.7% growth in 1977. Japan is running a large trade surplus, however, and recent figures on the German trade surplus are also disquieting. At the recent OECD meeting,2 the German and Japanese governments indicated that they took their Summit commitments seriously and were seeking to achieve their targets. We have some influence with both and we should use it to reinforce their willingness to adopt needed policies, which would have an effect in 1978, if not before. It is important that we do this in order to: —Create an economic environment in which worldwide economic growth can proceed and the US trade deficit can be reduced. —Meet concerns of the UK, France, and Italy, which have kept their part of the bargain and are relying on the stronger economies to keep theirs. —Maintain our credibility with the US media, to which the importance of these Summit growth commitments was stressed in high-level London briefings. On the other hand, we do not want to go back to the situation that existed earlier this year, when German officials, from the Chancellor on down, felt that they were being subjected to undue US public pressure on economic policy. A tactful approach might be for you to tell the Chancellor about the measures that the US is taking to ensure fulfillment of the US Summit growth target (5% in 1977), and indicate why you think it is important to achieve this target. This would set the stage for asking what the prospects are for fulfillment of the German target, what additional measures the Chancellor has in mind if German growth seems likely to fall below 4.5% in 1977 or 1978, and how he ex- 2 The OECD Ministerial meeting took place in Paris June 23–24. For remarks made by Vance and Blumenthal at the meeting and at a joint press conference after the meeting, see the Department of State Bulletin, July 25, 1977, pp. 105–117. The final communique´, June 24, and a Declaration on Relations With Developing Countries, June 23, are ibid., pp. 118–120.
