Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1099
deal with, and I hope we’ll finish it soon. Unfortunately, we are both 
leaving Washington—the Secretary’s going to London, and I’m going 
to Moscow. But in several hours, I’ll be also going to London. So we 
shall be in touch on that particular aspect, and I hope we shall be deal-
ing with this in the future days and solve them all. It’s a tremendous 
step forward to finalizing the START treaty. The long journey of 9 years 
is coming really to the end, and I would like to thank the Secretary 
and his fine team that worked with us days and nights and who are a 
little bit exhausted. But everybody’s happy about the amount of the job 
we have accomplished, so thank you very much.” (Department of State 
Dispatch, July 15, 1991, p. 503; brackets are in the original)
232.	 Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear 
and Space Talks in Geneva (Brooks) to the Delegation to the 
Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva1
July 15, 1991
SUBJECT
Washington Decisions
While I was in Washington, I met with the UNGROUP and got a 
number of decisions.
Specific Issues
The UNGROUP made the following decisions:
1. We have authority to culminate the Andersen AFB/Sub Tunnel 
Deal that was offered in Washington. Our preferences, in order, are our 
Agreed Statement, their Agreed Statement, the unilateral statements.
2. We have authority to tell the Soviets that our offer to swap hard 
currency for Khabarovsk remains on the table but that we will defer 
currency issue until after signature and accept Ulan Ude in the interim.
3. We won’t challenge the Soviet decision to call the SS–N–23 a type 
1(b) missile. We won’t make any tracking fixes. We’ll make a statement 
in the final plenary (Furniss to draft) that we consider that the SS–N–23 
1 Source: Department of State, Verification, Compliance and Implementation, 
Lot 06D436, Verification, Compliance and Implementation Subject Files, 1983–2005, 
Washington Ministerial July 10–16, 1991, Result of Ministerials. Secret.
