26 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI or narrow (a notion considered and rejected a year ago). In addition, we need to devote special attention to building consensus with the Hill on SDI, and look again at whether mutual freedom to deploy after 1996 is in our interest. Attachment Information Memorandum From Ambassador-­at-Large Nitze to Secretary of State Baker10 Washington, February 1, 1989 SUBJECT Comprehensive Review of Strategic Forces/Arms Control This memo lays out my views on the Administration’s approach to that portion of its comprehensive review of defense programs and arms control policies that deals with strategic forces. It also highlights the key issues that need to be addressed in that review. Approach Before we can make prudent decisions on arms control positions, we should have settled on the sort of force posture we seek, given budgetary and political constraints and the overriding goal of protecting U.S. and allied security. Accordingly, the review should address first the future U.S. force structure and the modernization programs necessary to attain it, and then formulate arms control positions that are consistent with our modernization plans. This approach cannot, of course, be purely sequential. Our estimate of our ability to reduce the threat through negotiation of acceptable arms control measures will affect our judgment of force structure requirements. Furthermore, we cannot delay resumption of the negotiations indefinitely, and thus we will likely have to proceed in the talks prior to being wholly confident that our modernization plans will reach fruition. (If necessary, we can reserve our position in Geneva on those issues still being addressed.) But we should have a good idea of future deployment plans, and some confidence that those plans can receive sustainable Congressional and public support, before we finalize our arms control positions. 10 Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Stafford; cleared by Timbie and Ross and in PM (information) and EUR/SOV (information).
