Chapter 2, January–June 1989  185
a Deployment Area which contains several Restricted Areas, but the 
only function of this larger area is to constrain exercise dispersals. 
Operational dispersals are not constrained to any area, but the reason 
for the operational dispersal would be notified.
The JCS understand that the U.S. verification proposal is compat-
ible with current Small ICBM basing concepts for both the Minuteman 
basing mode and Southwest basing mode. However, the final basing 
mode for Small ICBM has not been selected and some possible basing 
concepts are not compatible with the U.S. verification proposal. The 
JCS believe that should the U.S. decide to base the Small ICBM in the 
Southwest, the only impact on operations would be the requirement for 
notification of each movement out of the Restricted Areas. Additional 
study is needed to ensure that the percentage of the force which could 
be out of Restricted Areas at any given time is sufficient to accommo-
date projected random movement operations.
Although the existing U.S. concept could support a form of random 
periodic movements, some believe it is better suited to Minuteman bas-
ing. They believe that a primary rationale for Restricted Areas is to aid 
in monitoring the number of deployed missiles and launchers. If the 
number of missiles/launchers permitted outside the Restricted Area at 
any one time is small (10% or less), then the IC believes monitoring is 
improved. Such small numbers may be compatible with training and 
maintenance requirements for Small ICBM Minuteman Basing, but are 
inadequate for Southwest Basing, which may require up to 30% out of 
the Restricted Areas. Moreover, some believe that it is impossible to 
assign a maximum percentage that will protect future operational con-
cepts that may be necessary to ensure survivability. Finally, depending 
on the size and number of Restricted Areas, the area available to each 
missile may not be sufficient for survivability without dash on warning.
Two approaches have been suggested to address these concerns. 
One revised approach would eliminate the Restricted Areas in favor of 
larger Deployment Areas in which road-­mobile missiles could operate 
without restriction. Another approach would eliminate the percentage 
limit on the number of missiles that could be outside the Restricted 
Areas at any one time. (Variants of these approaches would not permit 
missiles outside the larger Deployment Area for operational dispersals.)
Arguments for altering the existing U.S. position include:
— The goal of the Small ICBM program is stability through 
deployment of an ICBM which does not depend on warning for surviv-
ability. Periodic random movement (Southwest Basing) is the best way 
to achieve that goal. An altered U.S. approach would permit random 
unnotified movement within a Deployment Area.
— Since a larger Deployment Area is more consistent with Soviet 
practices, it should be easily negotiable. Thus, changing our position
