Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
713
143.
Address by Vice President Mondale1
Colorado Springs, Colorado, April 12, 1980
U.S. Call for an Olympic Boycott
I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you on behalf of the hon-
orary President of the U.S. Olympic Committee—the President of the
United States. And I am delighted to be in the lovely community of Col-
orado Springs, the home of the U.S. Olympic Committee.
I speak to you as leaders dedicated to amateur sport and as citizens
dedicated to America’s best interests. I know that everyone in this room
loves our country. And I want to express the nation’s gratitude for your
efforts at Lake Placid to persuade the International Olympic Com-
mittee (IOC) to move or postpone the Moscow games.2 I thank your
leaders as well for stating that the committee would be guided by the
President’s decision on the best interests of the nation.3
As we meet today, the lesson of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
still waits to be drawn. History holds its breath; for what is at stake is
no less than the future security of the civilized world. If one nation can
be subjugated by Soviet aggression, is any sovereign nation truly safe
1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, May 1980, pp. 14–15. All brackets are in the
original. Mondale delivered his address before the U.S. Olympic Committee House of
Delegates. Earlier drafts of the address are in the Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale
Papers, Vice Presidential Papers, Special Assistant for Speech Writing, Speech Text Files,
Address to United States Olympic Committee House of Delegates, Colorado Springs,
Colorado, April 12, 1980. Later that day, the United States Olympic Committee voted to
support the President’s call for a boycott of the Moscow games. (Steven R. Weisman,
“U.S. Olympic Group Votes to Boycott the Moscow Games,” The New York Times, April
13, 1980, pp. A–1, A–18) Earlier, the President sent a mailgram to Kane, dated April 5, and
similar mailgrams to the House of Delegates members reiterating his belief that the
USOC should vote not to send the U.S. Olympic team to Moscow: “There are times when
individuals and nations must stand firm on matters of principle. This is such a time. If we
clearly and resolutely show the way, other nations will follow.” (Public Papers: Carter,
1980–81, Book I, p. 616) Documentation on the Olympic boycott is scheduled for publica-
tion in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XXV, United Nations; Law of the Sea.
2 On February 8, Kane addressed the executive board of the International Olympics
Committee, meeting in Lake Placid, New York, prior to the start of the 1980 Winter
Olympics, and requested that the Summer Olympics be relocated from Moscow. (Neil
Amdur, “U.S. Olympic Chief Says Soviet Broke Games Contract,” The New York Times,
February 9, 1980, pp A–1, A–4) Vance, an honorary Vice President of the U.S. Olympic
Committee, spoke before the International Olympics Committee on February 9; for his re-
marks, see Department of State Bulletin, March 1980, p. 50. On February 12, the Interna-
tional Olympics Committee reaffirmed the decision to allow the Olympics to proceed in
Moscow. (Neil Amdur, “World Committee Reaffirms Moscow as Site of Olympics,” The
New York Times, February 13, 1980, pp. A–1, A–12)
3 The White House, on February 20, released the text of a statement indicating that
the President had informed the USOC that the United States should not send an Olympic
team to Moscow. (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–1981, Book I, p. 356)
