1182 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement forces to achieve alert readiness, and for initiation of the implementa­ tion of civil defense, internal security and other non-­military measures. To this end: a. For warning against attack by aircraft and non-­ballistic missiles: (1) An effective early warning radar net, including its seaward extensions, having a capability for very high and very low-­level alti­ tude detection, should continue to be maintained. (2) Weaknesses in aircraft identification techniques and procedures should be remedied as quickly as feasible. b. For warning against attack by ballistic missiles: Improvement of the capability to provide early warning of ballistic missile attack should be continued as a matter of the highest national priority.6 c. For warning of nuclear detonations: Installation of the currently-­ programmed bomb alarm and fallout reporting systems for SAC bases should be completed; a national attack surveillance system should be undertaken. d. For warning against BW and CW attack: Development of a capabil­ ity for rapid detection and identification of BW and CW agents. Military Functions 12. Active Defense. Active elements of the continental defense sys­ tem must contend with a mixed threat consisting of manned bombers, non-­ballistic missiles, intercontinental, submarine-­launched and possi­ bly air-­launched ballistic missiles. To this end: a. Against aircraft and non-­ballistic missiles: The United States should continue to make improvements in and to maintain in a high state of readiness, an integrated air-­defense system providing defense in depth and capable of destroying enemy aircraft and non-­ballistic missiles before they reach vital targets. It is possible that integrated function­ ing of the air defense system may be compromised by ballistic missile attack. To take care of such an eventuality, the capability of the vari­ ous weapons elements of the air defense system to act independently should continue to be improved. In addition to the primary air defense forces, all other forces that have an air defense capability and that can be made temporarily available, should, in the event of attack or the threat of immediate attack, be made immediately available and employed as required within this system. b. Against ballistic missiles: The United States should continue efforts to develop an effective capability against ballistic missiles as a matter of highest national priority7 6 Those specific warning systems assigned this priority are set forth in NSC Actions. [Footnote is in the original.] 7 Those specific weapons systems assigned this priority are set forth in NSC Actions. [Footnote is in the original.]
