Afghanistan 507 179. Annex From the President’s Daily Brief1 Washington, January 23, 1980 USSR: PROBLEMS IN AFGHANISTAN Four weeks after launching its invasion, the USSR has encountered a range of political and military problems in Afghanistan that portend an even deeper and larger Soviet role. [less than 1 line not declassified] Soviet officials in Kabul indicate Moscow is dismayed over the failure of Babrak Karmal’s government thus far to take hold. Babrak has made an effort, at Soviet behest, to try to appear more moderate than his predecessors, but he is so obviously a Soviet puppet that his regime would collapse if Soviet troops were to withdraw. [less than 1 line not declassified] Soviet officials have complained about the factional and personal rivalries within the regime, and one [less than 1 line not declassified] Soviet official in Kabul has even speculated about a successor to Babrak. The disintegration of the Afghan military has speeded up since the Soviet invasion. Rather than welcoming Soviet support against the insurgents, some units have clashed with Soviet troops and the rate of desertions has increased. The Soviets do not appear to have an effective remedy at hand. General Sokolov, the USSR’s First Deputy Minister of Defense and chief commander in Afghanistan, reacted to ineffectiveness in one Afghan unit by recommending that its Soviet advisers be replaced. But Afghan military dissatisfaction will increase as Soviet advisers—under pressure from their superiors to produce results—take an increasingly heavy hand in Afghan military affairs. The Insurgency The introduction of Soviet troops—far from intimidating the insurgents—has probably served to increase popular support for the rebellion. The insurgents have taken advantage of the demoralization of the Afghan Army and bad weather to maintain a steady harassment of isolated Afghan towns and Soviet lines of communication. In particular, the Soviets have had problems keeping open the Termez-Kabul road, which passes through extremely difficult terrain. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, PDBs. Top Secret; For the President Only. The full version of this President’s Daily Brief was not filed with this collection. The annex printed here was found in this form.
