624
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
ards; customs valuation; licensing; trade in civil aircraft; and gov-
ernment procurement;
—renovation of the international trading framework to improve
the rules for resolving international trade disputes and to make the
trading system more responsive to the needs of developing countries;
—a series of agreements designed to improve the international
rules for trade in agricultural products;
—a revamping of our domestic laws and procedures governing
unfair foreign trade practices, particularly subsidies and antidumping,
and new procedures for handling complaints by private parties against
foreign practices which violate code obligations.
In addition, we have agreed with our major trading partners to re-
duce tariffs on industrial products by an average of about 30 percent, to
be phased in over the next eight years, beginning in January, 1980.
As this process has evolved, several important issues have arisen
which deserve your attention:
Material Injury: In the negotiation of the Code on Subsidies and
Countervailing Measures, our trading partners sought, and we agreed
to recommend to the Congress, the inclusion of a “material” injury test
in the U.S. countervailing duty statute. In recent weeks, concern has
been expressed in some foreign capitals that the requirement that “ma-
terial” injury be demonstrated before countervailing duties are im-
posed would not be included in our implementing legislation.2 I am
pleased to report that a “material” injury test which implements our in-
ternational obligations will be included in the legislation.
Limiting Benefits of the Subsidies Code to Countries Accepting Its Obli-
gations: A related issue of far-reaching significance is the conditional
application of the Code on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
Under the subsidy code, signatory governments will assume new obli-
gations with respect to the use of subsidies. At the same time, the
United States will commit itself not to apply countervailing duties
against foreign subsidies, unless it can be shown that a U.S. industry
has been injured or threatened with material injury. Under Trade
Policy Committee guidance, we have recommended to the Congress
that the benefit of an injury test in our countervailing duty law should
be accorded only to countries that accept the obligations of the sub-
sidies code, not to all countries.
2 For example, in the April 17 Evening Report to Carter, Christopher wrote:
“Speaking for the EC President, French Ambassador de Laboulaye, accompanied by EC
Ambassador Spaak, called on me today to stress the importance the EC places on the US
adopting legislation which will faithfully translate the MTN agreements in US domestic
law. He dwelt especially on the standard the US will adopt for determining injury in
countervailing duty and dumping cases. The EC feels strongly that US law should use
precisely the same formulation—‘material injury’—as appears in the MTN agreements
negotiated in Geneva.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Subject File, Box 21, Evening Reports (State): 3/79)
