614 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II claimed that the U.S. placed too much emphasis upon civil and political rights and not enough on economic and social rights. In another case, officials of the host country complained that the Report failed to take into account recent developments in the country. Near East, North Africa, and South Asia The Reports have had little effect on our relations with countries in this area. Most governments in the region have offered little reaction. The Israeli government, however, expressed dissatisfaction with the Report, centering on the question of treatment of Arab prisoners in the occupied territories. Several countries (Tunisia, Afghanistan, Syria, and Iran) suggested the Reports constituted interference in domestic affairs and charged that our own human rights record did not permit us to pass judgment on others. The new Iranian Government in 1979 said that previous Reports on Iran were insufficiently critical of human rights conditions under the Shah. In two countries, Sri Lanka and Nepal, the Reports became a topic of discussion in domestic political debates, and may therefore have marginally increased local awareness of our human rights concerns. 197. Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts1 Washington, January 6, 1980, 0031Z 4020. Inform Consuls. Subject: Annual Human Rights Reports. Ref: 79 State 203431.2 1. Entire text Limited Official Use. 2. The Department is in the process of completing the preparation of the annual human rights reports. The contributions submitted by posts abroad have been, as expected, of high quality and are appreciated. They have helped the Department in developing accurate, bal- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800011–0576. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by Kenneth Rogers; cleared by Tim Dunn (ARA/ PPC), Irons, Calvin Konner (S/S–O), Clapp, Rizik, Vogelgesang, Jennone Walker, Derian, and Sieverts; approved by Christopher. 2 See Document 190.
