1064 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Aguaytía-Pucallpa road project. The IBRD gives the project its highest priority in Peru and is prepared to finance the $4 million foreign currency costs. The Peruvian Government, which is suffering serious economic and financial difficulties, will provide the remaining $900,000 in local currency. The project is considered an excellent one from the standpoint of economic development. It would improve a very inadequate existing road to the head-­waters of navigation of the Amazon-Ucayali Rivers at Pucallpa, thus opening up promising areas for settlement and providing an all-­weather route for transporting products from the trans-Andean area to Lima. The Peruvian application has been discussed by the DLF Board, where it not a cold reception. There has been some opposition to the loan because it is for local currency costs, while Mr. Waugh is understood to oppose any DLF loan to Peru at the present time. Various alternative methods of financing were discussed by the Board, i.e. utilizing the “sterilized” local currency proceeds of the Eximbank’s $40 million line of credit to Peru or inducing the IBRD to finance the local as well as foreign currency costs. I understand that both of these ideas have been abandoned and that prospects are for further inconclusive consideration by the DLF. I believe it is important that the DLF grant this loan promptly. It is a meritorious one from the standpoint of economic development, and there are certain political considerations which make its approval of great importance. 1. Our relations with Peru have been under a strain for some time, to a large degree as a result of commodity problems with that country. Our establishment last September of quotas on lead and zinc, Peru’s second most important export, was the severest blow to U.S.-Peruvian relations in years, but cotton and sugar problems have also contributed their share to the strain. Cotton is Peru’s most important export, and the Peruvian Government has repeatedly expressed grave concern over our upland cotton export program for the 1959–60 marketing year. This program, which will lower by five cents per pound the price of U.S. cotton after August 1, has been characterized by Peru as “dumping” and “economic aggression.” Peru is similarly concerned over the current Tariff Commission investigation to determine whether our long staple cotton import quota should be reduced. I believe that the granting of a DLF loan for the Aguaytía-Pucallpa road would tend to ease some of the present strain and would have a beneficial effect on our overall relations with Peru. 2. The Prado Government is in such financial difficulties that it has been able to undertake almost no economic development projects
