Conference was confined mainly to discussion on the problem of unstable
currencies and established fundamental formulae for stabilization that have
become effective in all but two important countries.
This Conference was followed by the “Expert Committees” set up by the
Reparation Commission and the formulation of the Experts Plan for
payment of reparations and the rehabilitation of the German economy.85
Then followed the Conference at Locarno,86 from which resulted the
treaties which have tended materially to clarify the political situations in
Europe.
It may be assumed to have been in the minds of international political and
economic leaders in every country that the need existed of concerted
discussion of various factors still contributing to the unstable conditions in
Europe. The League of Nations called this International Economic
Conference to discuss and advise upon some of the remaining questions.
From the date of the Brussels Conference to the date of this Economic
Conference, continuous improvement has been in evidence throughout
Europe in practically all social and economic conditions, naturally more
marked in some countries than in others.
The Agenda recommended by the Preparatory Committee, and the
documentation prepared at its request, has portrayed a condition of distress
in Europe which in the view of the Delegation of the United States did not
at the time of the Conference obtain in all lines of endeavour. The Agenda
was based upon the commercial interdependence between nations, more
particularly on the interdependence existing between the different countries
in Europe. The facts developed and discussions had at the Conference
emphasized not only the necessary interdependence of all the countries of
the world, but the interdependence of the several social groups as well.
Within the limits fixed by the Agenda, in the main, discussion and the
resultant recommendations revolved around European problems, though the
general resolutions, for the most part, have world-wide application. No
discussions were had on governmental debts, reparation or movements of
population.
