German Democratic Republic at the present time was really not consistent with what seemed to be possible. He said a regular exchange of views at different levels would enable both sides to resolve problems and at the same time to draw “a balance” in relations. It was their desire to do whatever was possible to give “a constructive impulse” to the expansion of US–GDR relations. 2. Turning to the aide memoire, which he described as a “nonpaper”, Fischer read selectively from it. The GDR was proposing, [Fischer] said, regular political contacts between competent representatives of both countries; for example, it would be possible for the Foreign Minister to hold such consultations in the second half of 1977 in connection with the UNGA in Washington. The May 18 signing of the ENMOD Treaty4 could be another such occasion. Further steps could be taken in arriving at agreements, and Fischer asserted it would not be necessary to elaborate on this point. 3. Another area is trade relations, Fischer said, where the possibilities are much greater than the present levels would indicate. There were also possibilities for expanded commercial and business relations and an exchange of appropriate information. Along the same lines, the GDR still retained its interest in opening a trade office in New York. 4. One should not exclude the expansion also of cultural exchanges. Both sides know what has been done until now, and know more can be done. The GDR, Fischer said, is ready to do more, not only in “purely” cultural exchanges. There could also be exchanges on language training, textbooks, and an agreement between news agencies of both countries. 5. In humanitarian cases, the US knows the principled position and practice of the GDR. Each side of course is free to decide how it wishes to resolve such cases. As far as the GDR is concerned, as Ambassador Sieber had informed Under Secretary Habib,5 there were no open questions in this area. 6. Fischer suggested both sides might also consider easing the procedures for granting visas, and went on to say that activities of 4 The Environmental Modification Convention (ENMOD), formally known as The Convention on Prohibition of Military or any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques, which banned the use of military and hostile techniques for weather modification, opened for signatures in Geneva on May 18, 1977, and entered into force
