536
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
require legislation, can be reached soon. Coordination of our policies
with those of other Western countries is also worth undertaking.
A related issue is that of emigration of Romanian Jews to Israel or
Romanian Germans to the FRG. We are expending more of our limited
leverage on the Jewish emigration question than on any other single
item and the Israelis are understandably perfectly content to let us
continue to carry the ball. We believe that more balance has to be
achieved and our efforts should at most equal those of Israel or any
other third state.
[Omitted here is more specific discussion of U.S. goals and the
likely reactions of the Romanian Government.]
Barnes
179.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
Washington, May 6, 1977, 2321Z
104105. Subject: Human Rights in Romania—Nimetz/Nicolae
Meeting May 5. Ref: Bucharest 3132.2
1. Summary: Counselor Nimetz told Ambassador Nicolae that cur-
rent Romanian crackdown, if continued, would likely become public
irritant in US-Romanian relations. Counselor also said Carter-Ceau-
sescu meeting be most difficult to arrange under present circumstances,
but might be considered at appropriate time. Nicolae presented lengthy
exposition of Romanian viewpoint, implying that US is seen as under-
mining Romanian internal discipline. End summary.
2. Counselor Nimetz called in Ambassador Nicolae alone May 5
to express administration concern at recent Romanian crackdown on
dissidents and anti-US press campaign. Deputy Assistant Secretary
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Office of
Analysis for the Commonwealth and Eastern Europe, Office Subject Files, 1965–1980,
Lot 92D412, Box 2, Romania—CSCE. Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Silins;
cleared by Armitage and in S/S; approved by Nimetz.
2 In telegram 3132 from Bucharest, April 28, the Embassy reported on the increas-
ingly repressive nature of the Romanian regime. Barnes suggested that the ongoing
crackdown and anti-Western media campaign was decided by Ceausescu himself and
that, with regard to Ceausescu’s internal policies, the U.S. ability to influence a positive
outcome was very limited. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D770148–1290)
