948
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
300.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
Washington, February 22, 1978, 2:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
U.S. Debt Policies
PARTICIPANTS
State
Richard Cooper—Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
Robert Hormats—Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Business and Economic
Affairs
AID
Governor John Gilligan
David Bronheim—Special Assistant to the Administrator
Defense
Charles Duncan—Deputy Secretary
Ellen Frost—Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Economic Affairs, ISA
USUN
Ambassador Melissa Wells—Ambassador to UN for Economic Affairs
JCS
Lt. General William Y. Smith
NSC
Guy Erb—Staff Member
CIA
Dr. Robert Bowie—Deputy to the Director for National Intelligence
[name not declassified]—Analyst, Office of Economic Research
White House
David Aaron
OMB
Bowman Cutter—Executive Associate Director for Budget
Randy Jayne—Associate Director for National Security and International
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 68, PRC
053, 2/22/78, International Economics. Confidential. The meeting took place in the White
House Situation Room. Erb sent the Summary of Conclusions to Brzezinski under cover
of a February 27 memorandum in which he noted that it “reflects the discussions after the
PRC meeting between Dick Cooper and Tony Solomon that resulted in a decision to sup-
port, if asked, the section of the Humphrey Bill on retroactive terms adjustment of the
debt of the least developed developing countries.” Erb reported that “[o]ther agencies
have agreed to approve the decision to support the debt section of the Humphrey Bill and
State, Treasury, and AID have approved the summary as it now stands.” (Ibid.) In
a February 27 memorandum to Aaron, Erb commented that “Treasury resisted change
hedgerow-by-hedgerow. State, AID, and NSC were in favor. OMB acquiesced, but with
little enthusiasm. Agriculture supported the decision. Defense was indifferent.” (Carter
Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25, PRM 08 [1 of 3] [1])
