154
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
various working groups. Policy guidelines can be discussed in this set-
ting prior to further consideration of human rights and security assist-
ance issues within the HRCG and the interagency committee.
F. D/HA has cooperated with the Foreign Service Institute in orga-
nizing the first seminar on human rights and will collaborate with the
institute in future efforts to strengthen the understanding of our
human rights policy within the Department and receive the counsel of
on-line foreign service officers as to how best to implement that policy.
4. Economic Assistance
A. AID will be submitting drafts of its “New Initiatives in Human
Rights” program as part of its response to the PRM, with a final report
by mid-June.11
B. D/HA has met with the representatives of several other indus-
trial nations, to discuss ways of cooperating on human rights. The con-
sultation process will be continuing and will be bolstered by the recom-
mendations from appropriate posts on how to accomplish this goal.
C. AID is drawing up a program covering what has been done and
what will be done to promote women’s rights.12
D. With regard to multilateral programs:
(i) a procedure ensuring long lead time notice for IFI loans is near
completion with the previously mentioned ad hoc working committee
as the first source of screening for human rights considerations.
(ii) EB is developing a paper on the implementation of our human
rights policy through the IFI’s. A summary draft will be completed by
June 7 as part of the PRM exercise.
(iii) the implementation of our human rights policy in the IFIs has
gone forward at the same time as we have responded to upcoming
loans in the various IFIs. In two instances (Ethiopia and Benin), we
have abstained on World Bank votes on human rights grounds; in two
other instances (El Salvador and Argentina) we have indicated that
human rights considerations would likely produce a negative vote and
suggested the appropriateness of a delay in considering the loans.13 In
the case of El Salvador, the delay was requested by that government.
Our Embassy reported that the IFI action had engendered the first clear
recognition on the part of the GOES of our seriousness in seeking
11 See Tab A, Document 58.
12 See Tab B, Document 58.
13 The Interagency Group reached agreement on the course of actions for these
countries at its May 19 meeting. (Meeting minutes, May 20; National Archives, RG 59, Of-
fice of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box
17, Human Rights Interagency Group I)
