508 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Western strength and unity provided by Stalin’s postwar policies, they have hoped through a less rigid and hostile posture to dispel the image of aggressive Soviet intentions and thus complicate Western efforts to maintain and develop a position of anti-Communist strength. In this connection the Soviet leaders must consider the extent to which new aggressive moves might compromise this hope. 196. Second, they saw in support of the nationalist movements in Asia and Africa, with their largely anti-Western bias, major oppor­ tunities to weaken and divide the Western powers, and to substitute Communist influence for that of the West. They look upon the upsurge of nationalism in Asia and Africa as a fulfillment of Lenin’s prophecy that these areas would prove to be the Achilles heel of the imperial­ ist Western powers. Moreover, they probably expect that the revolu­ tion of rising popular expectations in all underdeveloped areas will far outrun the possibilities of fulfillment, thus enhancing the attractive­ ness of Communist methods and creating local instability which the Communists can exploit. 197. However, the purge of June 1957 revealed that there had by no means been unanimous Presidium agreement over many aspects of post-Stalin foreign as well as domestic policy. Molotov in particular has been blamed for opposing certain doctrinal innovations, the Austrian peace treaty, the rapprochement with Belgrade, high level goodwill visits abroad, and normalization of relations with Japan. Some latent opposition to present policies undoubtedly remains in the Soviet hier­ archy, and may again come to the fore in event of a crisis, but the June purge seems to confirm the ascendancy of Khrushchev’s policy line. 198. Khrushchev and his colleagues probably regard the present world situation as highly fluid and credit this fluidity largely to their own actions. They are probably pleased with the situation in Asia and the Middle East in particular, and look upon it as ripe to develop fur­ ther in their favor. Though concerned over the risks inherent in a con­ frontation of Western and Soviet interests in such areas, they probably see possibilities of major gains through continuation of their present policies, at minimum cost to themselves. Moreover, Soviet behavior in international affairs, now that the Stalinist isolation of the USSR has ended, has become subject to a momentum of its own—­broadened dip­ lomatic relations, technical and cultural exchanges, and expanded trade and aid programs—­which are not only projecting a different image of the USSR to the outside world but are giving the Soviet people them­ selves a less distorted image of the world at large. These factors will tend to prevent any sudden reversal of Soviet external policy. Under these circumstances we see the Soviet leadership as likely to continue its present policies for some time.
