893.01/223: Telegram
[Document 540]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, August 24, 1926—2 p.m.
171. Your telegram 325, August 14, 2 p.m., and your 326, August 14, 3 p.m.
Your recommendations have received my very careful consideration. As
you are aware, the Department assumed the lead in being insistent that in
pursuance to the Washington Treaty a Customs Conference should be held;
that the scope of the Conference should be broadened so that the whole
subject of tariff relations would be considered; that a Commission on
Extraterritoriality should be appointed with full power to consider the
subject in its entirety and report; and that this was insisted upon by the
Department with the other powers, of whom some were disposed not to go
to the extent we were willing to go, though at last they substantially
acquiesced in our views. The responsibility for the Washington treaties was
largely this Government’s, and we have insisted on various occasions that
we intended to carry out those treaties in absolute good faith and to consider
the whole matter of extraterritoriality and our tariff relations with the
objective of satisfying Chinese aspirations. I realize how weak the
Government is, and I concur fully in your views regarding its impotency.
However, since we have insisted on going ahead, and in view of our
responsibility for the Washington treaties and for their fulfillment, I cannot
believe that it is wise for the United States to take the lead in abandoning
the Conference and in giving public notification to China that she has no
government. Even if we believe that there is no prospect of a central
government sufficiently strong to carry out its treaties, it seems to me that
we should not take the lead. It would bring the hostility of the Chinese
people upon us and give to other nations an opportunity to lay the blame
upon us for the failure of the Conference and furnish them at the same time
with a sought-for excuse for abandoning the Conference. I realize that you
