Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 242. Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the Department of State1 Tehran, April 5, 1980 2. The last cards are being played. B back from Paris just visited me (11:30) before going to see GH. B shared with me the current strategy. 2.1 A “family” meeting is to take place at the Imam’s with BS, a delegation from the Revolutionary Council, and students. The results should be known soon. B has a very interesting theory: the Imam, in his hatred for the Americans, wants to humiliate them ad nauseam. This is not the case with BS. Like a Persian rug merchant, the Imam believes he can pressure the US ad infinitum the more so since he interprets American moderation as weakness. Unlike BS he does not realize the damage caused by the sanctions. Paradoxically the Imam does not seem to oppose the transfer of power, but he wants BS and the leadership to do it by themselves and prove their maturity and their authority by showing that they are directing the country effectively. The Imam would be delighted if BS shows himself to be a real President. (Here there is a paradox because he takes umbrage if (BS) becomes too popular or influential.) What is BS doing? Good will, certainly, but no courage. BS is seized by “the great fear” that if he acts the Imam by a word or a speech of which he is a master will not guarantee or not guarantee entirely the action (transfer) or the release, and in so doing ignite public opinion and cause him to lose the Presidency which he values above all. He therefore fears a stab in the back. 2.2 So what is to be done if the results of the consultation with the Imam is negative or inconclusive. B and V and GH have the following cards in reserve. 2.3 Mgr. Capucci has just arrived with B. He is, perhaps, the best person in all the world, given the context, and has perhaps the greatest capacity to persuade because he is “not involved”. Capucci is religious, Palestinian favorably viewed by the students,2 well viewed by the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
