Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 635 tion with Soviet actions and balances of power.40 This is apparently one of the objects of Henry Kissinger’s testimony.41 If this happens, the contributions of your recent speeches, especially the ones on North/South issues and political change, could be forgotton.42 During the next 18 months, we would urge you to be much more actively involved in speeches and TV appearances and press conferences to articulate the themes you have been developing recently.43 Although you will not be making political speeches as such, you will be speaking authoritatively about the Administration’s view of the world and the success or failures of U.S. policies. Because of the campaign atmosphere in this country, you will have an opportunity not only to define the Administration’s policies but to lay the groundwork for what the President’s second term could achieve in foreign affairs. As one S/P staff member put it in a recent memo: “Some sort of basic national post-Vietnam consensus on foreign policy must inevitably emerge, and I think the Secretary ought to make a major effort to shape it.44 Secretary Vance has stored up a great deal of respect and credibility, both among sophisticates—the press, the bureaucracy, the Congress, and related academia—and, to the extent they have followed foreign policy, among the public. Those assets should be invested. There is probably no one who could have a greater public impact in addressing these issues in a sustained way at the conceptual level.” B. Energy: We are convinced that both the Department and you personally should play a more aggressive role on economic issues.45 This is one area in which we would seriously fault the Department’s performance. Energy is probably the most serious issue the nation faces. It is an international issue, yet the Administration’s handling of 40 Vance wrote “yes” in the left-hand margin next to this sentence. 41 Kissinger testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on July 31. He conditioned his support for the SALT treaty on the President’s willingness to authorize an increase in military spending. The New York Times reported that Kissinger had “urged that the Senate attach to its resolution of ratification a statement of principles warning the Soviet Union that failure by it or by such allies as Cuba to exercise restraint around the world would ‘seriously jeopardize continuation of the SALT process.’” (Charles Mohr, “Kissinger Suggests Senate Link Treaty to More Arms Funds: Proposes Other Conditions,” August 1, 1979, pp. A–1, A–6) 42 Presumable reference to Vance’s addresses before the Northwest Regional Conference on the Emerging International Order (see Document 115) and the American Association of Community and Junior Colleges (see Document 118). 43 Vance underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with “we” and, in the left-hand margin, wrote “ok.” 44 Vance placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence and wrote “I would like to do this.” 45 Vance underlined this sentence. In the left-hand margin next to it, he wrote “yes.”
