Yugoslavia 973 their nervousness could push Iran in the wrong direction and compel it to lean more heavily on the other side. (C) President Mijatovic then stated he wished to say a few words about Afghanistan. There was no need to repeat Yugoslavia’s basic position on Afghanistan, which was well known. Yugoslavia understood the views and approach of the United States but felt both countries should move in the same direction—toward a withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghanistan. Yugoslavia, he stressed, could never accept occupation of Afghanistan. There was no way this could be justified on any grounds. Yugoslavia had a very firm and principled view on this. (C) The reestablishment of a genuine non-aligned and independent Afghanistan was an essential element of Yugoslavia’s approach. This included, however, withdrawal of Soviet troops. In recent months, Yugoslavia had held consultations with the NAM on this question. It felt that the NAM should consider this as well as other crises of instability in the world. The meeting in New Delhi in January would have to condemn all invasions, including Afghanistan. The Soviets knew this, and this is why they were worried. (C) President Carter interjected to ask Yugoslavia’s view on the Muslim delegation and if they had any relations with the freedom fighters in Afghanistan, who were struggling for self-determination. (C) Turning to the second part of the President’s question first, Foreign Minister Vrhovec stated that Yugoslavia did not have contacts with the freedom fighters. Their knowledge was based on reports they received through their Ambassador in Kabul. Based on these reports, their impression was that the Soviets were having, and were likely to have for some time to come, a difficult time in Afghanistan. (S) Concerning the Committee of Three formed at the last Islamic Conference, there was some concern about the size of the Committee and whether or not the Committee should be broadened. It was important that Algeria gave complete support to the second meeting. In this regard, Foreign Minister Vrhovec noted that Yugoslavia had contact with all the Ministers, including Ghotbzadeh, Foreign Minister of Iran. The Yugoslavs believed that the orientation and approach of Pakistan was sounder than Iran’s, and Yugoslavia had suggested that the Pakistanis should persist in their political initiatives. The Yugoslavs believed that their constructive political action contributed to pressure for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. (S) Turning to Iran, Mr. Kolisevski noted that Foreign Minister Vrhovec had been in contact with Ghotbzadeh and that he himself had also talked with Bani-Sadr in Algiers at the time that Dr. Brzezinski had been there. He had gotten the impression at that time that the Iranians wanted to solve the hostage issue but there was a problem of their internal situation. The U.S. had been informed about Foreign Minister
