March 27–December 31, 1979 1059 The President said that he had not yet met Prime Minister Cossiga. He (the President) thinks we will call for a North Atlantic Council meeting this weekend. Minister Weizman said he only had a few words. One thing that has been a pleasant surprise has been public acceptance in Israel of the new restrictions. They have ended subsidies on some foods. He worries that people will forget the peace process, and say that, if there is peace, why does milk cost me so much? It is the same in Egypt. Khalil has talked with him about this. Israel worries about Egypt; they are in the same boat. But with a little bit more, Israel can get over the hump. He will do what he can to cut down the size of the military. He will try keeping Lebanon quiet, unless there is trouble there, which he hopes not. Egypt and Israel are working well together. He will go to Aswan in February. The best Ambassador in Egypt is his wife! Israel will not get 2 or 3% off the course we have talked about. The two sides are happy; and this is needed. It is good for Israel, Egypt, and the US. The President said that he is totally committed to the peace process. It looks now like a time of assimilation, discussion, and implementation. The basic process has a positive trend. A key date will be with the diplomatic exchange. He has intervened personally with Saudi Arabia and Egypt,9 to try to assuage their difficulties, and hold down public condemnation of one another. We have had some interesting messages from Saudi Arabia recently, possibly reflecting a change in attitude on a Middle East peace, and increasing awareness of the benefits of a strong Egypt and Israel and future improved relations between Saudi Arabia and Egypt and Jordan, at least. His current aloofness from the peace process is temporary. He does not want to mislead the Minister: part of this is because of the election year; and part is because Israel and Egypt need to go as far as they can. But he will be there, even in an election year. He is not timid or fearful about being involved. If he is re-elected, then one of his life’s major commitments will be to the completion of the peace process. He will stake his reputation as a leader and as a statesman on its conclusion. Along with that, he will pursue a strong, peaceful Israel, accommodating, in a way suitable to Israel, with its neighbors. He will expend as much time and effort as is needed when it is appropriate, as at Camp David and on his trip to the Middle East. It is not finished yet; progress is needed. It is more than likely that his role will be needed. If it were not, that would please him. But if so, that is all right. He needs the trust of Israeli and Egyptian leaders, and has moderate trust, though it goes up and down. When he weighs in, he thinks he will be successful, and the Minister can depend on that. We will not be able to do anything substantial on aid to Israel. However, as part of 9 See Document 305.
