1044
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
412.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
the Federal Republic of Germany and Brazil1
Washington, April 23, 1977, 2134Z
92297. For Ambs from the Deputy Secretary; London for Nye. Sub-
ject: FRG/GOB Nuclear Agreement—Next Steps.
1. We are considering how best to take advantage of the meeting
between President Carter and Chancellor Schmidt at the London
summit2 to meet our concerns over aspects of the FRG-Brazil nuclear
agreement.
2. The purpose of this cable is to give you our tentative thinking on
the elements of a comprehensive settlement and to seek your views on
the package as well as possible tactics by which to secure its acceptance.
3. It may be possible to proceed as follows.
—Just prior to the President’s meeting with Schmidt, Ambassador
Crimmins would deliver a letter from the President for Geisel. The
letter would contain appropriate preambular language referring to our
mutual energy problems and prospects, the departure from previous
US policy represented by our SALT proposals, comprehensive test ban
policy, adherence to Protocol I of Tlatelolco, and deferral of domestic
reprocessing. The letter would then propose the elements contained in
paragraph four below, suitably phrased.
—The letter would be an attempt to wrench this subject out of dip-
lomatic channels and raise it to the level of high statecraft. It might, or
might not, make a specific proposal with respect to further discussions.
The letter could be delivered through Silveria, possibly with backup
duplicate through SRF/SNI channels.
—In his meetings with Schmidt the President would express dis-
appointment that the Germans had issued initial licenses. He would in-
form Schmidt orally (and via a “Non Paper”) of the proposals he had
just made to Geisel. The President would ask Schmidt whether he con-
sidered the proposals to be reasonable. If, as we hope, Schmidt re-
sponds in the affirmative, then the President would ask Schmidt to
convey that view personally and explicitly to Geisel.
4. Elements of possible compromise settlement:
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840086–0628. Se-
cret; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to London. Drafted by Denis Lamb (D);
cleared by Steven Steiner (S/S); and approved by Christopher.
2 The London Economic Summit, a meeting of the Western industrialized nations,
took place on May 7–8. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy,
Documents 27 and 28.
