584
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
210.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, February 16, 1980, 1001Z
2551. Subj: Ambassador’s Meeting With Pakistani Ambassador
Yaqub Khan. Ref: (A) State 39978.2
1. (S—Entire text)
2. I had a lengthy meeting with Pakistani Ambassador Yaqub Khan
on February 15, following his return from Washington and Islamabad.
After commenting favorably on the discussions between Pakistani Pres-
ident Zia ul-Haq and Brzezinski and Christopher, Khan told me in
confidence that Zia would probably call him back to Pakistan from his
post in Moscow in the next two to three months to assume a post in
the government in Islamabad (strictly protect his confidence).3 The
most important part of Khan’s remarks was his suggestion that the
key to the situation in Afghanistan was to have some influential and
neutral intermediary talk with the Soviets to get them to accept some
idea of an international commission of neutral nations to guarantee
Afghanistan’s border, which step should enable the Soviets to with-
draw their troops from Afghanistan. The main points of our conversa-
tion follow:
3. In reference to the Afghan refugee presence in Pakistan, Khan
said that this “sanctuary” was basically limited to providing shelter
for the refugees and that the refugees were receiving modest amounts
of money to sustain themselves. There is no organized military effort
and no training. If Pakistan did more than this there would be major
consequences. The Soviets, he said, know what we and the U.S. are
doing in this respect, but we do [not?] “connive.” The Soviets claim
that the mainstay of the insurgency in Afghanistan comes from the
“sanctuary” and that Pakistan is the focal point of this activity and not
merely a subsidiary to the rebellion. In fact, however, only 20 percent
of the insurgents in Afghanistan could ever reach the “sanctuary” in
Pakistan. Eighty percent of the Afghanistan insurgency is internal and
it can not be effectively helped by the “sanctuary.” If the Soviets actually
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East,
Subject File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1–3/80. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Printed from a copy
that was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 In telegram 39978 to Moscow, February 14, the Department, noting that Pakistani
Ambassador Yaqub participated in the discussions in Islamabad with Christopher and
Brzezinski, directed the Embassy to approach Yaqub informally to get his views on those
discussions. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800079–0135)
3 Khan stayed on as Pakistani Ambassador to the Soviet Union through September
1980, after which he was assigned as Ambassador to France.
