National Security PolicyŌĆā 469
for military production and for the industrial base. As a consequence, 
the USSRŌĆÖs achievements in areas of critical military and industrial 
significance are comparable to, and in some cases exceed, those of the 
United States. Research in areas to which the Soviets assign low priori┬Ł
ties tends to progress at a much slower rate.
73. Highest priority will continue to be accorded to military-┬Ł
industrial research and development, but the rapid expansion of Soviet 
scientific resources will now permit greater flexibility. Greater indi┬Ł
vidual initiative will probably be encouraged within assigned tasks of 
research, basic research in new fields undertaken, and somewhat more 
scientific and technical effort allocated to the consumer sector of the 
economy. Better direction of agricultural research is likely. As part of 
the current reorganization of the Soviet economy, efforts are apparently 
being made to improve coordination of the Soviet scientific and tech┬Ł
nical effort, and industrial research and development will probably be 
brought into better balance with production requirements at the local 
as well as national levels. At the same time, ideological obstacles to sci┬Ł
entific research and development (never of much consequence in major 
industrial or war-┬Łsupporting fields) will probably continue to diminish 
in the fields previously affected. These factors, together with continued 
emphasis on increasing scientific resources, will contribute to further 
substantial gains in Soviet science and technology over the next five 
years.
Scientific Manpower, Training, and Facilities
74. The reservoir of scientifically and technically trained man┬Ł
power available to the Soviet Union has increased tremendously in 
the postwar period. Of the estimated mid-1957 total of 1,810,000 liv┬Ł
ing graduates of university-┬Łlevel scientific and technical curricula, over 
1,060,000 have graduated since the end of World War II. The total num┬Ł
ber of graduates actually employed in all scientific and technical fields 
in the USSR now exceeds those so employed in the US (see Chart on 
following page). We estimate that the high graduation rates of recent 
years will continue during the period of this estimate. By 1962 the USSR 
will probably have about 40 percent more graduates engaged in scien┬Ł
tific and technical work than the US. In the particular fields of physical 
sciences and engineering, the number of Soviet scientists engaged in 
research and teaching is substantially smaller than in the US. However, 
Soviet emphasis on research in military and basic industrial fields prob┬Ł
ably results in a near numerical equality between the two countries in 
scientific manpower devoted to these critical activities.
75. In the postwar period the quality of Soviet scientific training 
has approached, and in some cases surpassed, US levels. Engineering 
training in the USSR, while not as broad as that given an engineer in 
the West, is good within the particular field of specialization. Some
