876  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
reaction time. Nuclear delivery units in the United States capable of 
augmenting forces overseas include one medium missile command 
(HONEST JOHN and CORPORAL), one air transportable missile com­
mand (HONEST JOHN) and one REDSTONE missile group. By end 
FY 1960, eight of the newly developed air transportable LACROSSE 
missile battalions will be available for U.S. Army forces deployed in 
CONUS, Europe and Pacific. The planned transition from the liquid-­
fueled REDSTONE and CORPORAL missiles to solid propellant and 
all-­inertial guidance system for the PERSHING and SERGEANT sys­
tems will greatly improve mobility and reaction time. One SERGEANT 
missile battalion will also be activated during FY 1960. Current devel­
opmental progress of the PERSHING missile indicates that it will have 
an operational capability in FY 1963.
In opposing U.S. retaliatory forces, the Soviet Bloc air defense system 
has the following general capabilities:
1. Capabilities are greatest against penetration conducted during 
daylight and in clear weather, at altitudes between 5,000 feet and about 
45,000 feet.
2. At altitudes above about 45,000 feet enemy air defense capabil­
ities decrease progressively as altitude is increased, except in the areas 
equipped with surface-­to-­air missiles where capabilities are unim­
paired to at least 60,000 feet.
3. At altitudes below about 5,000 feet, enemy capabilities decrease 
progressively as altitude decreases and are probably seriously reduced 
at altitudes below about 1,500 feet.
4. Against penetrations conducted at night and under conditions of 
poor visibility, the capabilities of the enemy system are greatly reduced 
because of the limited availability of all-­weather fighters and surface-­
to-­air missiles.
5. Against varied penetration tactics utilizing altitude stacking, 
diversionary maneuvers, decoys, and electronic countermeasures, the 
capabilities of the enemy system are diminished through disruption 
and saturation.
The degree of advantage accruing to the United States and its 
allies as a result of retaliatory attacks would depend on a number of 
strategic and operational considerations, to include exercise of initia­
tive, the amount of warning of Soviet attack, the degree of protection, 
and the mobility or concealment afforded military forces and instal­
lations, particularly those from which our retaliatory effort would be 
launched. It is estimated that enemy losses sustained as a result of a 
U.S. retaliatory attack would provide a margin of advantage to the 
United States and its allies which, if exploited in conjunction with 
other military operations, would assure eventual victory.
