Chapter 4, February–April 1990 643 noted this morning that you have your own concerns about ratification with the Supreme Soviet. I’m happy to agree to some procedure, some process for expediting our discussions and trying to resolve these issues before I come to Moscow. Because, I can tell you that if we are still hung up the way we are right now, there’s really very little chance of our getting a START agreement initialed by the time of the Summit. And if that’s the case, we ought to let our publics know that now. Shevardnadze: Well, let’s not set ourselves the task of signing the agreement then. Baker: Well I am not setting us that task. But our two leaders set out the task of solving all the major substantive issues in START by the Summit. Shevardnadze: Well, we both need to be able to do that. Baker: Give us a proposal. Akhromeyev: Mr. Secretary, the US on SLCMs has in effect changed 100% the position that you had in December of 1987. At that time the US President pledged to find a way to solve the verification problem. Baker: Well, let’s look at the text. I wasn’t here, but I thought we said we would seek to find a mutually acceptable way to verify. We’ve sought to find such a way and we just don’t think there is one. And I’m not sure you do either. Shevardnadze: No, we believe we could. We think you can inspect ships, inspect planes, inspect plants. What we hear from you is that plants can be inspected, but not ships. I think that is an indefensible position. You spoke about preparing public opinion; well unfortunately that’s going to lead us down the pathway of laying out our arguments about who’s right and who’s wrong. That’s not real productive. On verification, we want an honest agreement. You weren’t in the talks in 1987 and we had a different position and Akhromeyev objected at that time to the whole issue of verification, saying that the Soviet Union could go along with. Now, we’ve turned around on the issue of verification—­we don’t have the position that was being pushed by Akhromeyev before. And, what we’re saying is why are you making an exception of naval forces? Baker: When I said prepare public opinion, I did not mean to cast blame but rather to be careful in our statements that we don’t build up expectations that we cannot fulfill at the Summit. In fact, what I will tell our press conference after our meeting here is that I am disappointed that we didn’t solve ALCMs or SLCMs, but we’re working hard and as is always the case when you try to translate agreements into text, technical issues crop up. I am not going to suggest that this should be a blame-­casting exercise, I’m going to avoid that.
