666
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
convince them later. Now let me come to the first paragraph in your
draft. I need to study it more. I would like to ask for an adjournment.
There is some difficulty here.
Secretary Vance: Let me explain.
Prime Minister Begin: As far as saying that there is no separate
peace, that is a first step, we have already done this in the preamble.
This still implies that Egypt’s ruler could one day say that the Camp
David Agreements foresaw comprehensive peace. If there is no such
peace, then they could abrogate the treaty. We need more study at this
period. I’ll consult today with my colleagues.
Secretary Vance: This says that the treaty will not be construed as
being in contradiction to the Camp David accords. It is a truism.
Mr. Rosenne: There is a problem here. The Vienna Convention4 in
Article 30, paragraph 2, says that where a treaty is referred to in rela-
tionship to previous treaties, the previous treaties should be under-
stood to prevail. Could this be put in a letter concerning the autonomy
rather than as part of Article 6? It would make it easier.
President Carter: You want us to put this elsewhere?
Mr. Rosenne: We don’t want it attached to Article 6.
Secretary Vance: We would have to think about that. This says
nothing in the treaty that purports to contradict Camp David.
Mr. Rosenne: But there are six references in the preamble to the
Camp David frameworks. Article 6 refers to the independence of this
treaty. If there is a problem of interpretation, you could say that the
treaty depends for its interpretation on language in the preamble which
refers to Camp David. For example, if Israel were to withdraw and
Egypt were to say that the framework agreements had not been carried
out. They might say that they do not have to normalize relations, but
Article 6 says that the treaty is independent of any other instrument.
Prime Minister Begin: We are among friends. There is a possibility
that we could leave these three lines as you suggested them, but we
would like to add lines from the middle of the second paragraph. In
other words, we would like to say that this first sentence does not dero-
gate from the language of Article 6, paragraph 2, which we would then
want to quote in total. This is not a final proposal.
Secretary Vance: Let’s leave this.
Prime Minister Begin: This would add symmetry. We could use the
same language “does not derogate from”.
4 Article 30, paragraph 2 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
states: “When a treaty specifies that it is subject to, or that it is not to be considered as in-
compatible with, an earlier or later treaty, the provisions of that other treaty prevail.” For
the citation to the complete treaty text, see footnote 28, Document 190.
