1978 485 no way in which this force can be realistically pretargeted prior to a nuclear engagement. For the short run, we recommend that the composition of the Secure Reserve Force be based heavily on the probability of survival and endurance in its components. Given this concept, the principal objective of the Secure Reserve Force should be to achieve enduring survivability. What it is targeted against is less important than its ability to survive and endure. However, during the period when we lack an enduring intelligence and retargeting capability, the Secure Reserve Force should continue to have tentative targets likely to have high continuing value even after an initial attack, e.g., bomber bases. This would permit, under worst circumstances, follow-­up strikes to be executed “in the blind” against targets likely to have continuing value to the Soviet Union. (See Issue #7)9 8. In addition to developing more discrete SIOP options, the process for the planning and use of non-SIOP options should be improved. The only way to develop realistic political/military contingency plans is through a continuing interactive process between the planner and the policy/ decision maker. It is in the nature of limited nuclear options that there will be a high political input into any consideration of the use of such options. And, if they are to achieve their stated objectives, the other associated military and political measures must be closely integrated with the use of limited and regional nuclear options. We, therefore, recommend that the current planning process be modified to include regular interaction between the JCS and OSD, including selective representatives from the State Department, the NSC staff and the Intelligence Community. Planning should include periodic exercises to test both the feasibility of implementing the plan and to expose policy/ decision makers to the plans and give them an opportunity to evaluate them under as realistic conditions as possible. While DoD cannot organize the crisis management machinery of the US Government unilaterally, the SecDef should recommend to the President’s National Security Advisor the development of a national crisis management mechanism based on the planning procedures described above. (See Issue #8)10 9. Closer coordination of nuclear planning between US and NATO planning staffs should be undertaken. In particular, USCINCEUR and CINCLANT should be encouraged to develop additional US employment options in support of SEPs. Closer integration of nuclear planning between US and NATO planning staffs is needed, particularly in the development of target plans which integrate theater and strategic 9 Issue #7 in the report is titled “The Strategic Reserve Force.” 10 Issue #8 in the report is titled “Planning in Support of Escalation Control.”
