March 27–December 31, 1979
907
242 only heightened these fears. Coming all at once, these perceptions
of sharp turns in U.S. policy generate growing doubts about U.S. will-
ingness to honor its commitments to Israel—as defined by the GOI.
Emotion is rising to a crescendo, and only a U.S. pledge to veto the Pal-
estinian resolution in the SC will calm the Israelis.
4. Of all their many concerns, Israelis are perhaps most obsessed
by the prospect of an international consensus on a solution to the Pales-
tinian problem sharply diverging from Israeli requirements. Thus,
failure of the U.S. to block the passage of a Palestinian rights resolution
would result in an Israeli reaction that could have profound conse-
quences for U.S.-Israeli ties and the Middle East peace process. We rec-
ognize that a broad range of U.S. interests will be weighed and consid-
ered by Washington in its deliberations on this resolution and we are
not recommending a vote for or against, acknowledging the limitation
imposed on our judgment by our special vantage point. This message is
only intended to alert the Department to the impact of the various op-
tions we may select on this society and our relations with it.
5. Cabinet dynamics. As we have seen over the past few weeks,
Begin’s hospitalization has not inhibited—and perhaps has even con-
tributed to—the clashes we have had with the Israelis on a number of
issues. The GOI’s normal combativeness has been enhanced by the in-
ternal maneuvering of various Ministers who have been exploiting
Begin’s absence in order to expand their influence in key foreign
policy/security issues. Unfortunately, the best way to win popularity
points in this Cabinet and to a certain extent with the Israeli public is
through rigid adherence to “principle” and uncompromising tough-
ness in response to perceived “violations” of commitments. Thus,
while any Israeli Government would go all-out to keep the U.S. from
embracing a Palestinian rights resolution, many Ministers of this Cab-
inet are waiting—in some cases eagerly—for confrontations which can
be turned to their personal political advantage.
6. The GOI and U.S. commitments on Resolution 242. As long as
we do not give the GOI assurances that we will veto a Palestinian rights
resolution, as Israelis insist we are committed to doing, the GOI will ac-
cuse us of being prepared to violate our solemn commitments as it be-
comes, in an ironic and cynical exchange of roles, the defender of the
sanctity of Resolution 242. Indeed, the press reports Begin’s personal
advisor, Yehiel Kadishai, as saying that U.S. credibility has already
been shattered by its failure to adhere to its commitments. We will be
accused specifically of violating our commitment under the 1975 mem-
orandum of understanding7 to oppose any attempt in the UNSC to
7 See footnote 5, Document 97.
