National Security Policy 375 November 26 that were he present in the meeting he would make the following comment. Without wishing to pose as an expert on Defense budget matters, he nevertheless would like to point out that from the point of view of the conduct of foreign relations, the capabilities which we had recently exercised in Lebanon and the Taiwan Strait had been significant and vital. Mr. Dulles’ view is that as long as we retain our deterrent capability, the major threat in years ahead is not one of general war but of local aggression. He therefore wishes to express the hope that budget decisions not be made which would cripple our capa­ bility in this area. Mr. Gray did not go so far as to specify whether this view indicated the necessity of the building of a new atomic carrier. In justification for a sizeable carrier fleet, Mr. McElroy pointed out that the attack carriers had been extremely useful in Lebanon and Taiwan and that we had employed four in the Lebanon situation and five in the Taiwan situation. As regards this item, the President has several reservations. First of all, he does not visualize a battle for the surface of the sea. Further, he desires to point out that our defense depends on our fiscal system. It is not a question of either defense or fiscal solvency. You do not have defense without fiscal soundness. He stated that he did not see build­ ing a new carrier at the moment but desires to defer decision temporar­ ily. (This matter was brought up again later, at which time the President stated that he would defer this for a year.) Block Obsolescence—Mr. McElroy then stated that we are currently facing block obsolescence of our naval vessels. He indicated that Defense had engaged the services of people outside the government to go over the Navy problem of block obsolescence and specifically referred to the President of the Newport News Shipbuilding Company as a partici­ pant. They had felt that a “refurbishing” program was indicated and the Navy’s best judgment is that the report is sound. It involves three stages: (a) When a ship has gone beyond repair it should be dropped off or replaced. (b) Above that, there is proposed $2–$2.5 million per ship for pip­ ing and wiring which would extend the ship’s life for five years. (c) With respect to ships that are still in better condition, a pro­ gram of real modernization is contemplated involving $7–$10 million per ship which would extend the ship’s life eight to ten years. This total program involves $200–$250 million. Mr. McElroy stated that the alternate to such a program is to post­ pone modernization but this would require an even larger program later. Mr. McElroy also stated that the Navy is reducing the number of its ships and aircraft.
