893.74/522: Telegram
[Document 739]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, February 5, 1925—9 p.m.
[Received 10:54 p.m.]
61. Your telegram of January 28, No. 16.
(1) Your information prompts me to propose for the difficulty a second best
solution.
(2) The financial consortium suffers unpopularity in this country and so far
has to its credit no positive accomplishment. For a long time I have believed
that the one hope of the Consortium’s success rests upon the inclusion of a
native group of bankers. The term “radio consortium” would in itself arouse
the Chinese to oppose bitterly any combination for developing radio similar
to a consortium. Therefore the initial step to be taken in adjusting the
wireless dispute is necessarily to constitute China, instead of a helpless
subject of the discussion, a party coequal with the others.
(3) I invited attention, in the Legation’s telegram of January 23, No. 39, to
certain of the obstacles with which the execution of the Japanese proposal
would be confronted, and also to the fact that it would be necessary to secure
the approval of the Chinese Government to any proposed alteration of the
method of carrying out the Federal agreement. Obviously, the exact nature of
the plan which the Japanese Government suggests would be determined by
the details, which so far still remain vague, of its execution. However, there
has been formally stated one definite principle, viz., that the Chinese
Government shall have exclusive control of the existing and proposed radio
facilities. Inasmuch as this is accepted as a guiding principle by the Japanese
Government, I make the suggestion that, whether or not the principle in
question is practicable, a conference be convoked in this city in which are
represented all the companies with which the Chinese Government has radio
(and perhaps those having cable) agreements or which reliably evidence that
they will be willing investors of capital in enterprises of that kind, the
representatives of these companies to consult with Chinese Government
representatives and among themselves how best to coordinate the contracts
which they respectively possess in order to obtain the most desirable results
