224 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI can get ratified. Our current approach to verification, which puts a premium on detecting cheating per se rather than militarily significant cheating, tends to foster such a coalition. It is unlikely we can do much about the anti-­arms controllers outside of hard-­nosed political persuasion. We may, however, be able to gain some ground with the verification maximizers and minimizers if we successfully shift our approach to verification so that it takes greater account of military risks rather than focusing on cheating per se, and if we can bring them along as the negotiations unfold, perhaps through the arms control observers group in the Senate. Strategic Defense Initiative The priority we give to SDI stems in part from the view that it plays to our technological advantages and helps compensate for growing domestic opposition to strategic force modernization. SDI also complements our goals in START in three ways. First, SDI would provide a way to mitigate the risks that the Soviets would cheat or breakout of limits they agreed to in START. Second, the limits that START imposes on ballistic missile warheads would enhance the effectiveness of any SDI system we were to deploy. Finally, SDI would help strengthen deterrence by helping to directly defeat any missile attack that the Soviets (or a third country) might launch. As noted above, in our approach to the Defense and Space talks, we are trying to have our cake and eat it too: preserving maximum flexibility to pursue SDI while constraining Soviet ABM deployments. The Soviets have rejected our approach and have insisted that failure of the two sides to reach a Defense and Space agreement will prevent agreement on a START Treaty. Some people worry that even if our position prevails, we may regret it. They are concerned that we may start down this path but not have the political support to see it through, opening the possibility that the Soviets may be in a position to deploy a system, perhaps less robust or sophisticated, while we are left with nothing. POLICY ISSUES You will need to make a number of specific decisions about our negotiating position in the START and Defense and Space talks before our negotiators return to Geneva on June 19. I will be sending you a separate decision package for that purpose. This section highlights the major policy questions that the NSC should address as a means of providing its advice to you about how to proceed in Geneva and should help inform your decisions on specific details.
