Human Rights
153
B. This process of defining conditions, obligations, and recommen-
dations in accordance with the directives enunciated in your Law Day
speech and the President’s Notre Dame speech6 appears the best way to
avoid the concept of a country “hit” list since it will provide positive in-
dividual human rights strategies for each country rather than a pariah
list.
3. Coordination of Policy
A. The State Department continues to maintain overall direction of
the human rights policy coordination within the executive branch. The
Interagency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance,
which the Deputy Secretary chairs, met several times with full repre-
sentation from other agencies to consider issues involving human
rights and the International Financial Institutions.7
B. A special coordinating committee, which the Deputy Secretary
is chairing, has been designated by the NSC to complete a policy re-
view memorandum (PRM 28) on human rights and foreign policy.8 The
Department is taking the lead in developing a response to the PRM
with initial drafts due June 7, committee review by June 15 and final re-
view by June 22.9
C. Internally the HRCG, which you previously established and
which the Deputy Secretary chairs,10 has met to review action on
human rights and IFIs prior to their consideration by the Interagency
Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance.
D. An ad hoc working committee which D/HA and EB co-chair
has been formed to provide initial recommendations to the HRCG and
ultimately to the interagency committee, on bilateral and multilateral
assistance issues relating to our human rights policy. In addition to
co-chairing this group, D/HA also provides staff support to the HRCG
and the inter-agency committee and acts as secretariat for those
entities.
E. In the area of security assistance policy, D/HA has been named
a full member of the proposed Arms Export Control Board and its
6 See footnote 2, Document 51.
7 See Document 41. A 4-year listing of Christopher Committee meetings and coun-
tries discussed, prepared in 1980, indicates that the Committee met on May 6, 18, and 19.
(Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1980 Human
Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D180, IAGHRFA—History & Organization)
8 See Document 46.
9 The Department of State’s outline for the response to PRM/NSC–28 is printed as
Document 54.
10 See Document 14.
