344
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
2. Produce a year-end summary of human rights successes, and
possibly a modest set of goals for the next year.
3. Hold one meeting with Assistant Secretaries and their Deputies
where you and the Secretary, working in tandem, make it clear that we
not only intend to continue our efforts on this difficult policy but be-
lieve it is working. An even better alternative would be a State dining
room session with the President.
4. Hold a series of human rights colloquia for Department officers
who must administer the human rights policy. The target groups might
include desk officers or Deputy Assistant Secretaries in regional bu-
reaus—whoever is most likely to make or break the human rights
policy in its day-to-day application.
5. Review our intra-Departmental procedures in the human rights
areas to ensure that they are not generating needless friction.
6. Undertake a public relations effort to ensure that the right things
are said in the year-end news wrap-ups, the State of the Union Mes-
sage, etc.
102.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, January 5, 1978
SUBJECT
Assessment of Human Rights Accomplishments
Improvements probably attributable to US policy:
—Significant changes in Iranian security and judicial system:
opening of security trials to public, improvements in prison conditions,
access to ICRC, right to counsel and to appeal broadened, etc.
—Indonesia: release of 10,000 political prisoners.
—Nicaragua: lifting of the state of seige.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1978. Confidential. Tuchman did
not initial the memorandum. Printed from a copy that bears Bartholomew’s initials. An
unknown hand drew an arrow to Tuchman’s name. Another copy is in the Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Office File, Staff Material, North–South
Pastor File, Subject File, Box 55, Human Rights: 1–5/78.
