24
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
no previous Israeli Government has been prepared to return all of Sinai
or has been as willing as this one to discuss as thoroughly the core
issues of the conflict—those surrounding the Palestinian dilemma.
It would be helpful to express sympathy with Sadat’s belief that he
should not be asked to discuss the Sinai further when Israel still has not
made basic decisions on the West Bank. However, it is a Sinai agree-
ment that the Israelis want most badly, and that desire provides Sadat
leverage with regard to the West Bank. Although we do not expect ne-
gotiations on the details of a Sinai settlement during the Summit, it is
our view that a commitment on Sadat’s part to resume Sinai negotia-
tions would be the most effective instrument available in bringing Is-
rael to confront the need to reconsider its West Bank position.
We could also explain to Sadat the value we see in agreements that
can be implemented over a period of several years, both on the West
Bank and in the Sinai, describing how we see the initialling-signing-
ratification-implementation stages of a Sinai agreement being phased
in relation to specific stages of agreements on the other fronts in such
a way that Egypt could retain a degree of leverage over the overall
process throughout.
Finally, it may be necessary at some point to note that Israel’s re-
sistance to explicit withdrawal language in the context of general prin-
ciples relates not only to the West Bank/Gaza, but to the Golan Heights
where Israel will only be brought to contemplate withdrawal if Syria
makes a much more convincing offer of peace than it has so far.
8.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel1
Washington, August 14, 1978, 1355Z
204867. For Ambassadors Lewis and Eilts from Saunders. Subject:
Message to Begin on Israeli Settlements. Ref: Cairo 18867.2
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840140–2296. Se-
cret; Flash; Nodis. Drafted by Saunders; cleared by Stanislaus R.P. Valerga (S/S–O); ap-
proved by Saunders. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo.
2 In telegram 18867 from Cairo, August 14, the Embassy reported on a conversation
between Eilts and Egyptian Ministry of Information Under Secretary Mursi Saad El-Din
in which the latter responded to Eilts’ request to “lower” the public media rhetoric
vis-a`-vis the Israeli Government in advance of the Camp David Summit. Saad El-Din
pointed out that an Israeli Cabinet announcement of August 13—which stated that Israel
intended to establish five new West Bank settlements—caused “embarrassment for
