64
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1. Withdrawal/Security on the West Bank/Gaza
Sadat should agree to an Israeli security presence during the five-
year interim period and for an indefinite time beyond; he should agree
to defer decisions on the precise location of borders and on sovereignty
until the end of the transitional period. In return, he should be able to
claim credit for ending the military occupation of the West Bank and
Gaza, and for establishing that the principle of withdrawal will be ap-
plied in the final peace settlement dealing with these areas.
Begin should agree that the principle of withdrawal does apply on
all fronts, including the West Bank and Gaza, provided that its applica-
tion takes into account Israel’s long-term security needs in the area;
sovereignty will remain in abeyance until a final peace agreement is
reached at the end of the five-year period. This will allow Begin to take
credit for protecting Israel’s fundamental security interests, while not
requiring that he explicitly abandon Israel’s claim to sovereignty over
these areas.
2. Settlements
There should be a moratorium on organized settlement activities, but
both parties should agree that provisions should be made for indi-
vidual Israelis and Palestinians to do business and to live in Israel and
the West Bank/Gaza in the spirit of open borders, free movement of
peoples, and normal peaceful relations.
3. Negotiations
Both parties should commit themselves to continuing negotiations
on both the Sinai and the West Bank/Gaza issues.
4. Resolution 242
Both parties should reiterate their commitment to all of the prin-
ciples of Resolution 242 as the basis for peace treaties on all fronts. In
addition, they should agree on the Aswan language5 on Palestinian
rights, and should commit themselves to the concept of full peace and
normal relations. Sadat should repeat his commitment to “no more
war” and agree to the renewal of UNEF6 in October.
Attached at Tab A is a memorandum7 of Ambassador Eilts’ last
conversation with President Sadat. It is well worth reading. Sadat
seems to be preparing more surprises.
5 See footnote 5, Document 3.
6 Reference is likely to the United Nations Emergency Force, known as UNEF II, de-
ployed in the aftermath of the October 1973 Arab-Israeli war. Its mandate was due for re-
newal in October 1978.
7 Not found attached. Reference is to Eilts’s August 26 meeting with Sadat. The
memorandum of conversation for the meeting is printed as Document 16.
