186 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII such an intervention does not occur and, alternatively, if it does. (See Tab A.)2 DIA is skeptical [less than 1 line not declassified] that there is a battalion of Soviet airborne already in Kabul, with a full division getting ready to follow. [1 line not declassified] made the point that in the first instance our concern should be with SALT. Thus, while we might want to deplore Soviet presence in Afghanistan, we do not want to create expectations of actions on our part or concessions on the Soviet part if neither was likely to materialize. This could contribute to the defeat of SALT in the Senate. The other argument [less than 1 line not declassified] was that, notwithstanding the importance and difficulty of our discussions with the Soviets on removal of the Soviet brigade from Cuba, we should not pass up the opportunity to tell them that intervention in Afghanistan could doom the treaty just as surely as continued problems on the brigade in Cuba. Thornton and others did not accept that we should add the Afghanistan item to our talks with the Soviets tomorrow (I knew nothing about them) but said the item would be taken up by Vance with Gromyko in New York on the 27th.3 On the other point, however, a consensus emerged on demarches to regional and other capitals which would avoid overstating our interest, our need to react, and our demands on the Soviets in a way that would box us in with SALT critics here. The demarches are to focus on the— —Soviet-South Asia relationship, not the Soviet-U.S. relationship. —Possibilities of further expansion of the Soviet role in a civil war in Afghanistan. —In this way we could get the publicity we sought for Soviet action—perhaps inspiring a wide and adverse public and diplomatic 2 Tab A, a paper dated September 20, is attached but not printed. The paper, organized in two parts, outlined actions the United States could take before and after a Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and called such an action a “watermark event of global import.” The paper emphasized that the United States could not be perceived to be responsible for Afghanistan’s security and that Afghanistan must not be understood as a Soviet-U.S. bilateral problem. Prior to a Soviet intervention, the paper argued that the United States should remain in strong consultation with its regional and strategic allies and must raise public consciousness to foster global condemnation of any Soviet moves into Afghanistan. The paper also argued against military assistance to rebel forces in Afghanistan or military moves in the region. Following Soviet intervention, the United States should consider closing down the Embassy in Kabul, complaining to the Soviet leadership that the intervention posed a danger to the U.S.-Soviet relationship, and giving “open assistance to the rebels.” 3 Vance and Gromyko met during the UN General Assembly meeting on September 24 and 27. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Documents 226 and 227. They did not discuss Afghanistan.
