Tariff Conference, and that he would remain here until he had exhausted his
efforts to effectuate the purpose of his mission.
The same day a message was received from the Japanese Delegation,
stating that instructions had been received from Tokyo and that the Japanese
Delegates would like to confer with the American Delegates. A meeting was
accordingly held at the American Legation on the afternoon of June 18.
At this meeting Mr. Hioki77 stated that his Government would prefer not to
implement the Washington surtaxes apart from the negotiation of the larger
treaty which the Conference had had under consideration heretofore and
that, in view of the difficulties in the way of concluding this task at the
present juncture, the Japanese Government, while not proposing, would be
willing to see the Conference take a recess for the summer, with the definite
understanding that the Conference should reconvene on September 30. If,
however, it was desired to proceed with the implementing of the
Washington surtaxes at the present time, the Japanese Government would
be prepared to agree to this course if the first two sections were deleted
from the draft Protocol adopted by the Delegates ad referendum on May 15.
Mr. Hioki did not produce the text of his instructions either with regard to
the Washington Treaty surtaxes or with regard to the recess. Mr. Strawn
stated the reason for the insertion of the first two sections in the Protocol,
explaining that they had been put there largely to satisfy the desire of the
British Delegation that a definite beginning should be made with respect to
the abolition of likin and that the omission of any step in this direction was
regarded by the British as contrary, at least, to the spirit of the Washington
Treaty. Mr. MacMurray made a lengthy statement with regard to the
position of the American Delegation to the effect that the foreign
Delegations ought to make no move which would give the Chinese
opportunity, whether fairly or unfairly, to say that the foreign Powers had
not performed their pledges and were not acting in good faith. It would be
better to avoid any adjournment or recess by formal action. Mr. MacMurray
then said that he was not in a position to say off-hand what might be the
view of the American Delegates with regard to the Japanese proposals; but,
since the British Delegation had been more primarily interested in the
sections which it was proposed to delete, it might be advisable if the
