1468 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. Quarles said he preferred the position mentioned in the staff paper but in his previous comments stated his preference on the basis of the Secretary’s proposal as outlined by Mr. Herter. At this point Mr. Herter was called to another meeting. Mr. Farley said that the Secretary’s position was simply that he did not want to go into the negotiations appearing to add to the two con­ ditions in the President’s statement of August 22 a third condition as to the size of explosions which would be suspended. This question could better be handled at a later stage of the negotiations on the basis of the extent of inspection the Soviets were willing to accept. Mr. Farley raised the question of whether an authoritative study had been made on the military value of tests in the various ranges below 5 kt. Mr. Quarles said he had heard no disagreement on technical grounds to the position that if one side tests below 5 kt and the other side doesn’t, a significant military advantage would be lost. He said he believed the first proposition of the U.S. position should be that we should not agree to stop tests we can’t monitor, that we would agree to stop those above the threshold of reliable detection. As a second prop­ osition we should say that if the Soviets would stop tests below the threshold on a unilateral basis, we would do likewise. Mr. Farley said he believed this position was reconcilable with the one he had expressed. We should try to define capabilities of any sys­ tem under discussion and thus we might find a common interest with the Soviets in eliminating smaller tests than the system could cover within practical limits. Mr. McCone said we may find that the system can be improved with experience and that the testing limit could then be progressively lowered as the threshold of reliable detection was lowered. Ambassador Wadsworth said he understood it would be the consen­ sus that we would not go into the negotiations with the threshold as a prominent feature of our position and that we would not have to put a hard and fast threshold into the treaty itself. Mr. Quarles said we say, depending upon circumstances, want to put the threshold in the treaty. Ambassador Wadsworth asked how you would write it in since, as Mr. McCone stated, the system might evolve in capabilities. Mr. Quarles said one might define the stations and locations and define the capabil­ ity of the system described, for example, as 90% above 5 kt. Dr. Killian asked what would then be written in as to tests below 5 kt. Mr. Quarles said this might be handled by unilateral statements and kept out of the agreement.
