National Security Policy  317
General Trudeau, but merely because of its timeliness and its relation­
ship to Item 2 on today’s Council agenda.
Mr. Gray then went on to Item 2 and asked Mr. J. Patrick Coyne, 
the NSC Representative on Internal Security, to provide the Council 
with an oral summary of the highlights of the Annual Report submit­
ted jointly by the Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference and the 
Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security.
The NSC Representative on Internal Security then provided an oral 
briefing of the Status Report (a copy of his presentation is filed in the 
Minutes of this Meeting and another is attached to this Memorandum).
Following the oral presentation, Mr. Gray singled out for discussion 
the problem of clandestine introduction of nuclear weapons, noting that 
it was a very serious one and that it involved a type of attack against 
which it was most difficult to defend adequately. He said that he had 
the impression that the Status Report was a little more gloomy concern­
ing the resolution of this problem than were the experts who discussed 
it with the Planning Board. Nonetheless, the Planning Board did feel 
that additional steps might be taken with respect to that aspect of the 
clandestine entry problem which involved the development and use of 
devices for the detection of radioactive material. Accordingly, he said, 
the Planning Board recommended unanimously that the Council adopt 
and the President approve an action calling for accelerated activity to 
develop, procure, and utilize devices designed to detect attempted intro­
duction into the United States of materials which were or may be char­
acteristic of fissionable material or other nuclear weapons components.
Mr. Gray referred to the fact that new and better detection devices 
would soon be available, adding that on this score there was some feel­
ing in the Planning Board that a Council action along the lines sug­
gested would give further stimulus to the program and might thereby 
expedite to some extent the development, procurement, and use of 
such devices.
The Acting Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Scribner, observed that 
the largest expense in connection with the device program involved 
operations and personnel, as distinguished from the cost of the devices 
themselves. He said that he had received a recent indication from the 
Bureau of the Budget that the Department of the Treasury should 
reduce rather than increase the number of its personnel, and he won­
dered how the direction of the Bureau of the Budget fitted in with the 
recommendation of the Planning Board for accelerated efforts in the 
detection devices area.
Mr. Gray agreed that the indication received from the Budget Bureau 
was a commendable one and consistent with recently expressed views 
of the President, but he added that it was not his understanding that 
the President had said that there must be a personnel cut in connection
