Eastern Europe Region ations of the holding of diplomatic hostages as a violation of international law. After initially reacting to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan with some restraint, the Hungarians have joined the chorus of those supporting it. Depending upon the evolution of the Hungarian position, we should consider the following steps: —If and when the Hungarians are able to do so, reschedule the visit of the Hungarian Parliamentary delegation headed by Parliament President Apro. —Utilize reprogrammed funds from exchanges with the USSR to expand exchanges modestly with particular emphasis on academic and cultural exchanges. —Go ahead with the CSCE Consultations slated for this spring. —Propose a visit to Hungary and another Eastern European country of a National Defense University group. —Signal our continued receptivity to high-level visits (below Kadar) and consider sending a senior official(s) to Hungary. —Propose a visit to Hungary and another Eastern European country by the White House Fellows, whose trip to the USSR has just been cancelled. —Send a VIP to open the “American Now” exhibit provided that the Hungarian position on Iran/Afghanistan does not get worse. —Assure State and Commerce participation at the Assistant Secretary level in the second annual governmental U.S.-Hungarian Joint Economic Committee meeting in Washington this spring. BULGARIA The Bulgarians were among the least forthcoming of the Eastern Europeans on the question of the hostages in Tehran and the treatment of the issue in the media has been slanted and objectionable. The Bulgarian Government and media jumped on the Soviet Afghan bandwagon early and have faithfully defended the Soviet actions. At the same time, the Bulgarians have continued to stress their interest in improving bilateral relations. With Bulgaria, we should —Consider supporting initiatives by Bulgaria to join the GATT. CZECHOSLOVAKIA The Czechoslovak UN representative made some positive statements in voting for the initial Security Council resolution on Iran. Otherwise, the media treatment has been slanted and unsympathetic. The statements of the Czechoslovak Government and media treatment
