Eastern Europe Region
125
ations of the holding of diplomatic hostages as a violation of interna-
tional law.
After initially reacting to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan
with some restraint, the Hungarians have joined the chorus of those
supporting it.
Depending upon the evolution of the Hungarian position, we
should consider the following steps:
—If and when the Hungarians are able to do so, reschedule the
visit of the Hungarian Parliamentary delegation headed by Parliament
President Apro.
—Utilize reprogrammed funds from exchanges with the USSR to
expand exchanges modestly with particular emphasis on academic and
cultural exchanges.
—Go ahead with the CSCE Consultations slated for this spring.
—Propose a visit to Hungary and another Eastern European coun-
try of a National Defense University group.
—Signal our continued receptivity to high-level visits (below Kadar)
and consider sending a senior official(s) to Hungary.
—Propose a visit to Hungary and another Eastern European coun-
try by the White House Fellows, whose trip to the USSR has just been
cancelled.
—Send a VIP to open the “American Now” exhibit provided that
the Hungarian position on Iran/Afghanistan does not get worse.
—Assure State and Commerce participation at the Assistant Secre-
tary level in the second annual governmental U.S.-Hungarian Joint Eco-
nomic Committee meeting in Washington this spring.
BULGARIA
The Bulgarians were among the least forthcoming of the Eastern
Europeans on the question of the hostages in Tehran and the treatment
of the issue in the media has been slanted and objectionable. The
Bulgarian Government and media jumped on the Soviet Afghan band-
wagon early and have faithfully defended the Soviet actions. At the
same time, the Bulgarians have continued to stress their interest in
improving bilateral relations.
With Bulgaria, we should
—Consider supporting initiatives by Bulgaria to join the GATT.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
The Czechoslovak UN representative made some positive state-
ments in voting for the initial Security Council resolution on Iran.
Otherwise, the media treatment has been slanted and unsympathetic.
The statements of the Czechoslovak Government and media treatment
