12
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
8.
Record of a National Security Council Meeting1
Washington, November 6, 1979, 4:30–6:15 p.m.
NSC MEETING CHAIRED BY THE PRESIDENT
IN THE CABINET ROOM
ATTENDEES ARE
The President
Vice President
Secretary Vance
Secretary Brown
General Jones, Chairman of the JCS
Hamilton Jordan
Jody Powell
Gary Sick
The President opened the meeting by noting that the Iranian prob-
lem was one of the most difficult problems we have faced since he has
been in the White House. American people have been captured, there
was no government to work with and there appears to be no desire
to negotiate. We face the prospect of the hostages being killed one at
a time or perhaps all of them. The integrity of our nation demands
some form of punitive action if this occurs. However, first it is important
to do everything possible to save lives. If we succeed in getting everyone
out of Tehran then it would be his intention to break relations with
Iran. First we must consider how to get people out. Secondly, we need
to consider what to do if a punitive action is required. The President
thought seriously about this issue and was inclined not to take any
action which would get us bogged down or a situation where extrica-
tion was difficult and any pullback would be viewed as a defeat.
Dr. Brzezinski suggested an agenda for the meeting. First of all a
review of the negotiating situation with Iran and the international
actions which are available to us. Secondly, the military options which
fall into three categories. First of all a possible rescue operation for the
hostages; second of all a retaliatory or punitive action as required; and,
thirdly what might be required in the event of a fragmentation or
breakdown internally within Iran. He noted that he had talked to
Ambassador Sam Lewis during the day and was told that the Israelis
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 97, Meetings File, 11/6/79: NSC re Iran. No classification marking. Brzezinski was
also in attendance.
