336 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement each with 3 squadrons, 5 bases each with 2 squadrons, and 8 bases each with one squadron. b. Medium Bomber Dispersal. At present there are 28 wings on 18 bases. Two heavy bomber bases are presently accommodating one medium wing each. At end FY 1959, medium bomber wings are programmed to be located on 17 bases; 11 bases each with 2 wings, and 6 bases each with one wing. Dispersal for heavy bomber squad­ rons, plus a required location of medium bombers on optimum strike bases, causes this temporarily reduced dispersal of medium bomber wings during FY 1959. (See SAC Base Dispersal Map, Section VIII, Installations). c. Alert. As of 30 June 1958, 156 bombers with associated tankers are on continuous 15-­minute alert. In December 1957, 20 bombers were on 15-­minute alert. By end FY 1959, about 350 SAC bombers with asso­ ciated tankers are expected to be on continuous 15-­minute alert. Under emergency conditions, the present alert force can be readily increased by curtailing training operations, but the increased alert capability can only be sustained for short periods, possibly 30 days. In addition to the increase in the status of alert forces, new con­ cepts for meeting the threat were implemented in the Strategic Air Command. Two of the most significant are as follows: “Positive Control”. This allows CINCSAC to launch his alert force under conditions of little or no warning and buy “precious time” for a national decision. This concept, it is hoped, will save the force while the threat is being evaluated. “Reflex Action”. This concept replaced the old plan for rotation of bomber units to overseas bases. It gives SAC an improved overseas alert posture with reduced vulnerability, i.e., the only strategic bomber aircraft in the forward area are “cocked” and ready to go on emergency war plan missions. In addition to the above, SAC is presently testing a plan for air­ borne alert in which a significant portion of the alert force remains air­ borne continuously. Supplementing SAC retaliatory capabilities are the USAF tactical nuclear strike forces. In the Pacific, tactical forces consist of 3-2/3 wings (2-1/3 nuclear capable) of fighter bombers and day fighters, decreas­ ing to 3 wings (all nuclear capable) of tactical fighters by end FY 1959; one wing of tactical bombers which remains through FY 1959; and one detachment of MATADOR tactical missiles, increasing to 2 groups by end FY 1959. Based in the United Kingdom and Europe, tactical strike forces consist of 6-2/3 fighter bomber and fighter day wings (in addi­ tion, one fighter day and 3 fighter bomber squadrons are maintained on rotation to Europe from continental U.S. based wings). Of these wings, 6-3/4 are nuclear capable. These tactical fighters remain through FY
