Chapter 6, June–December 1990  887
7. The Preamble to the START Treaty will include a reference to 
Article XI of the ABM Treaty, Article VI of the Non-Proliferation Treaty 
and the Washington Summit Joint Statement of June 1, 1990, with 
respect to the undertaking in those documents to continue active nego-
tiations on strategic offensive arms.
8. The START Treaty will not include any Agreed Statements refer-
ring to the ABM Treaty.
162.	 Letter From Secretary of State Baker to Soviet Foreign 
Minister Eduard Shevardnadze1
October 3, 1990
Dear Eduard,
Our arms control experts have been discussing the subject of long-­
range air-­launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) with multiple warheads. 
As you recall, we agreed in May to ban long-­range nuclear ALCMs 
with multiple weapons. I understand from my experts that the Soviet 
side believes such a ban must be extended to include long-­range non-­
nuclear ALCMs as well.
As I have told you in the past, we cannot permit START to limit 
our conventional capabilities. In our view, the recent events in the Gulf 
underscore the importance of preserving non-­nuclear options. At the 
same time, I would like to address your concerns over the possible cir-
cumvention of a ban on long-­range nuclear ALCMs with multiple weap-
ons. Thus, let me make the following points:
First, the United States, under the START Treaty, will not produce, 
test, or deploy long-­range nuclear ALCMs with multiple weapons. We 
will strictly comply with our Treaty obligations in this as in every other 
regard.
Second, I can state categorically that, under these Treaty obliga-
tions, the United States will not produce, test, or deploy long-­range 
non-­nuclear ALCMs with multiple weapons for the purpose of acquir-
ing the future capability to deploy long-­range nuclear ALCMs with 
multiple weapons. Nor would the United States convert any long-­range 
non-­nuclear ALCMs with multiple weapons into long-­range nuclear 
1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross 
Files, New York October 5, 1990. No classification marking. Baker gave the letter to 
Shevardnadze on October 3.
