3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
692
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
5. You should underscore as you do so the redundant and com-
plete nature of our well-established confirmation and control mecha-
nisms which were proven to be quickly and appropriately responsive
to the situation as it developed. Emphasize that no strategic nuclear
forces were activated. Also emphasize that the system was again
shown to be responsive, to have safeguards against hasty action, and to
have a design which assures that human judgment can override inad-
vertent malfunctions. Finally, you should also emphasize the fact that
the Soviets seem to be taking advantage of any situation to dilute alli-
ance support for a December decision to modernize and deploy
NATO’s LRTNF. Therefore, as we move toward and through the minis-
terials, it is even more important to present a unified, strong image to
the East.
6. The November 9 false alert: You should use the following infor-
mation to brief the allies on the NORAD incident. (FYI: the gist of the
information in the first tic below was passed by DOD to Netherlands
Attache on 14 Nov in response to urgent request from Netherlands De-
fense Ministry who expected query in Parliament on 15 Nov. End FYI)
—A portion of a recorded test scenario was erroneously trans-
mitted outside NORAD headquarters to a number of other commands
and agencies. The entire system has a number of built-in checks and re-
dundancies. Because of these, the test data was almost immediately rec-
ognized as spurious. All command levels demonstrated entirely proper
responsibility in handling the data. No strategic nuclear units took any
steps toward advanced alert. All commands had unambiguously and
correctly identified and confirmed the data as false in less than six
minutes. Because of an alert prior to that time, a small number of air de-
fense aircraft took off from their bases to assume an alert posture. These
were recalled in a few minutes—none carried any nuclear weapons.
—The procedures used to evaluate the missile launch indication
proved to be effective, fast and correct.
7. Soviet message: Draw on following:
—On November 13 Ambassador Dobrynin delivered an oral mes-
sage from Brezhnev to President Carter expressing Soviet concern over
the incident. We are considering a response to Brezhnev’s message.
—We consider it possible that the Soviets may return to this inci-
dent publicly as December 12 approaches in a further effort to derail
TNF deployment.
—We wanted to share the facts of the event with you in advance of
any such possibility.
8. For Copenhagen: This responds to reftel.
Vance
