1302
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Minister Burg said that his color looked better.
The President said that Genscher has cut his weight back.
Deputy Secretary Christopher said that Genscher’s colleagues had
urged him not to go to Japan (for the Ohira funeral).4
The President joked that maybe he should have said “see you in
Japan!” His (the President’s) hope is that without further delay we can
restart the autonomy negotiations. He asked Minister Ali to relate this
to President Sadat. They should start without preconditions, with a
firm commitment of both parties to negotiate under the Camp David
Accords. It is his belief that any act by either side to disturb the talks
would be. . . . (Secretary Muskie entered at this point).
Secretary Muskie said that Minister Burg has the world’s best collec-
tion of stories.
Minister Burg said that it is one of his minor prides!
The President continued that his hope is that there will be no pre-
conditions in restarting the negotiations. What concerns there are about
future interruptions in the talks would be lessened by the fact of the
talks itself. If Israel and Egypt are in talks, they would be less likely to
take particular acts, and there would be more confidence. His hope is
that the talks will restart with no further delay. If in the next few weeks,
or perhaps in September, there are developments that cause one side or
the other to withdraw, that problem can be faced then. He believes we
can make progress. The history has been surprisingly good through the
peace treaty. Both nations have concerns, but the talks can be suc-
cessful. He has asked Minister Ali to convey this to President Sadat.
Ambassador Linowitz said that they had had a very fruitful three
hours today, mostly clearing the air. The talks5 had been frank. Minister
Ali had raised three issues: Jerusalem and the Knesset committee ac-
tion; settlements; and confidence building measures on the West Bank,
which are a cause of agitation. Minister Burg’s concerns had included
articles in the Egyptian press making unwelcome statements about
Begin, plus Sadat’s suspending the talks without conferring. The talks
this morning were very helpful and beneficial. Afterwards, he thought
that we could get the talks resumed. Minister Ali needs to consult with
Cairo; Minister Burg is ready to start. After Minister Ali conveys his
views to Cairo, he (Ambassador Linowitz) hopes that we can meet to-
morrow morning and indicate that the talks will resume.
Minister Burg said he was prepared to say this.
Minister Ali said he was not.
4 Prime Minister Ohira died from a heart attack on June 12, 1980.
5 See Document 388.
