1956 799 53. Wang said I had indicated I accepted principle that declaration should be one which acceptable both sides. How could I expect them to accept clause in declaration which only in one-­sided interests of U.S.? Did this continued insistence on unreasonable clause mean that U.S. unwilling put out this declaration at all? 54. Wang said if in fact I had such a willingness make such declaration giving expression to desire for peaceful settlement and giving expression determination of two sides seek practical and feasible means for solution tension in Taiwan area, (and by this last paragraph of draft they had in mind holding of Foreign Ministers’ conference)—if I had this willingness, did it mean also I had same willingness with regard to practical and feasi­ ble means specified in draft, as they understood it? 55. I replied I thought we again getting ahead selves. If he by his question meant did I agree here and now before declaration issued that only practical and feasible means for settlement disputes by peaceful means was through Foreign Ministers meeting, my answer would have to be no. When I said practical and feasible means I was not excluding any means, nor was I agreeing that there only one means. 56. I said it seemed me at present stage question is fundamentally different. Question was whether we really, honestly and uncondition­ ally in this declaration say we will use only peaceful means in settling disputes and that we will not resort threat or use force and in that atmo­ sphere seek, as declaration says, practical feasible means realize that desire. I had to confess I still not clear as to whether or not he really did unconditionally renounce threat or use force in seeking this settlement. 57. I said as far as prejudicing his position concerned, he would recall that back in my draft of November 10 it was my suggestion we make specific and categorical statement to effect we not prejudicing our positions. If this still genuinely his concern, I did not see why he rejected that draft. 58. I said as I had said I still could only interpret his position as demanding my government not only prejudice but in fact renounce its position with respect our dispute. That still my interpretation. 59. Wang said my remarks did not seem to have given reply his question. I had stated that he had asked me to agree before declaration issued that only practical and feasible means was Foreign Ministers conference, and I had said I would answer no. But he had not asked me to say so before declaration issued. He was talking about what should happen after declaration. 60. Wang asked if by replying no I meant that I was not agreeing that holding of Foreign Ministers conference is practical and feasible means. 61. Wang said his next point was that I had asked whether in making declaration it meant we would only use peaceful means settle
