3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
439
to respond to certain parts of that article, to which he took exception,
because he believed that this would merely continue a strident dia-
logue between us. He thought that we should be judged by our actions,
for it was actions that reflected the direction in which we were moving.
Gromyko said he had carefully listened to what the Secretary had
said now and at the outset of their current talks. He would not repeat
what he had said in briefly setting forth his assessment of U.S. policy
and in explaining the basis for Soviet policy. There was only one aspect
that he would mention, since the Secretary had raised it. He had al-
ready said a few words on that subject in their previous private talk.
The Soviet Union would not allow anyone to interfere in its internal af-
fairs. Here he could only repeat what he had said yesterday. In this re-
spect the Soviets would stand firm as a rock. The trials in question dealt
with observance of the internal laws of the Soviet Union, and were en-
tirely within the scope of the Soviet Union’s competence. He would ask
the Secretary to explain this to President Carter and to others in the U.S.
Administration to the extent he could.
Gromyko concluded by saying that it would be good if the rela-
tions between our two countries could be kept on a realistic track. That
was the policy of the Soviet Union, and if U.S. policy was like that, too,
both our nations could look forward to the future with optimism.
Gromyko asked the Secretary to convey his best wishes to Presi-
dent Carter.
The Secretary assured him he would do so and asked him to
convey his best wishes to President Brezhnev.
138.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
Washington, August 11, 1978, 2121Z
203927. For the Ambassador. Subject: Message to Gromyko.
1. Please deliver the following message to the Foreign Minister.
2. Quote
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
State Department Out, Box 112, 8/1–11/78. Secret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Printed
from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
Drafted by Tarnoff; approved by Vance. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P840140–2243)
