1977 25 strengths and weaknesses of the United States and its principal allies and opponents in that region. It will include analysis of the political, diplomatic, economic, and military trends which will affect the relations between the United States and its principal allies and opponents in that region. For each region, the net assessment will deal with: —National objectives and strategies; —Military strategies and capabilities (including allied forces and the ability to project force into the region; —Alliance cohesiveness and diplomatic support; —Political influence and covert action capabilities; and —Economic presence and influence. As appropriate, the regional net assessment will draw upon the analyses prepared for the military force posture review of the ability of the United States and its principal allies and opponents to apply military force in the contingencies specified in Part II, paragraph B–2 of this memo. Regional net assessments (to be chaired by either State or NSC) will include the following regions: a. Europe b. Middle East c. Africa d. South Asia e. East Asia f. Western Hemisphere 3. Topical Net Assessments. Net assessment will be undertaken to provide answers to the general questions specified above in Part B–1 for each of the topics listed below. These net assessments may encompass, as appropriate, comparisons of the United States and the Soviet Union, NATO, and Warsaw Pact countries, or other selected groups of countries. The topical net assessment may also draw on regional net assessments in putting together the global assessment. The topical net assessments will include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following topics: a. Strategic nuclear policy and forces (DOD chaired, to draw on material developed in the military force posture study); b. Technology including both military-­relevant technology and general technological capability (NSC chaired); c. Economic strategy and capabilities (NSC chaired); d. Intelligence capabilities (DCI chaired): and e. Political institutions, leaderships, and national psychology (NSC chaired). C. Organization. An SCC Net Assessment Group will be created, chaired by the NSC. An SCC Working Group for Net Assessment will be also created. Its chairman will be appointed by the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, and it will have members from
