580 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement achieved in developing surface-­to-­air missiles. While available evi­ dence is not sufficient to indicate comparable emphasis and success in other Soviet missile programs, we believe the USSR now has a variety of missile systems available for operational use. It is capable of devel­ oping advanced systems in all categories during the period of this esti­ mate, and the experience it has already acquired in missile production, troop training, logistics, and deployment procedures will facilitate the expansion of its operational capabilities.14 124. On the basis of considerable evidence concerning the research and development program, we believe that for several years the USSR has had available for operational use surface-­to-­surface ballistic mis­ siles with maximum ranges of about 100 n.m., 200 n.m., 350 n.m., and 700 n.m. It has also been developing and probably now has available for operational use a ballistic missile of 1,100 n.m. maximum range. In addition, a very short range antitank missile is probably now operational. 125. Intercontinental ballistic missile. Since the completion of NIE 11–5–58, we have conducted an intensive re-­examination of the Soviet ICBM test firing program and its implications. On the basis of sufficient intelligence coverage to establish with a high degree of confidence the number of Soviet ICBM test firings, it is clear that over the past year this number has not been as great as we had anticipated. Nevertheless, considering the Soviets’ progress in the whole field of missiles and the capabilities demonstrated in their ICBM, earth satellite, and other bal­ listic missile launchings, we continue to estimate that the USSR will probably achieve a first operational capability with 10 prototype ICBMs at some time during the year 1959. While it is possible that a limited capability with comparatively unproven ICBMs might have been estab­ lished in 1958, we believe this to be unlikely.15 126. When it first becomes operational, the Soviet ICBM system will probably be capable of delivering a nuclear payload to a maxi­ mum range of about 5,500 n.m., with an accuracy (CEP) of about 5 n.m. 14 For an extended discussion of the USSR’s guided missile development program, and of factors likely to affect its acquisition of substantial operational capabilities, see NIE 11–5–58, “Soviet Capabilities in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles,” 19 August 1958 (TOP SECRET). [Footnote is in the original.] 15 NOTE: Some statements by high Soviet officials during the past year have indicated that the USSR already possessed, or at least wished us to think it possessed, a considerable operational ICBM capability. Such a capability cannot be ruled out as impossible if the Soviets have had a test philosophy involving fewer long-­range tests and more reliance upon component tests at Kapustin Yar than we think likely. Such a philosophy would run greater risks of failure and provide less assurance of accuracy and reliability but also (if all went well) much more rapid achievement of operational capability. The Soviets may have believed the political and psychological value of ICBMs is so great as to justify extreme measures to attain a substantial and early deployment. [Footnote is in the original.]
