66 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI often enthusiasts for particular programs and he cited an entirely different example wherein he had successfully coped with some Colonel who was pushing a pet but dubious idea involving balloons. The only technical details about their program that he mentioned were in negative terms. He said that at very high altitudes, “where the communications satellites are,” it was too difficult to make an attack. He also said that attacks must be co-orbital for two reasons, first, because it is too difficult and takes too much propellant to make a turn in space, and second because orbits which intersect at large angles mean that one must control both the time and place of intersection very exactly, and that in turn is much more difficult than the ICBM accuracy problem where only the place is important. I noted to myself that these were all accurate statements about the limitation of their current system, but I did not mention that fact to him. He then asked me “what about direct attacks from the ground?” I asked whether he meant ABMs or lasers, and he replied “yes, lasers.” I commented that we both had a wide variety of laser development programs now under way and that lasers would be harder to verify. He said he agreed. He said, and I agreed, that both SALT and CTB were more urgent, but in reply to a direct question he stated he personally believed ASATs should be banned. Also in direct response, he indicated that he was acquainted with Khlestov but that he did not know Mayorskiy and (though I am not sure of this) he seemed not even aware of him. 31. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 6, 1978 SUBJECT US/Soviet Meeting on Anti-Satellite Matters The SCC met on June 1, 1978, to discuss final preparations for the US/Soviet preliminary meeting on ASAT matters at Helsinki, June 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 95, SCC 082, Space Policy, ASAT Hostile Acts and Tests, 6/1/78. Top Secret; Codeword. Sent for urgent action. Carter initialed the memorandum.
