2 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV discussed criteria which would affect evaluations of possible follow-­ ons to Minuteman ICBMs. Mr. Blechman spoke next. He emphasized the difficulty of comparing U.S. and Soviet military forces, and in particular strategic forces. Mr. Warnke stressed that the present situation is not too bad from the United States’ perspective; that the question was how to avoid a deterioration in the present strategic balance. Warnke emphasized, however, that avoiding a deterioration meant reaching further SALT agreements, not responding to Soviet strategic programs with step-­ups in U.S. strategic programs. He noted that in the absence of strategic arms limitation agreements, differences in relative U.S. and Soviet strategic capabilities would lead to political pressures for step-­ups—­both domestically and from allies, even though they would not mean anything in military terms. Consequently, if further SALT agreements were not reached, the United States would be forced to compete. Lynn Davis spoke next and emphasized that one needed to look at the full range of strategic forces and compare aggregate capabilities, rather than focusing on one specific component of the strategic forces. She also emphasized that the statements of U.S. decision-­makers had perhaps the major effect on perceptions of the strategic balance in the Soviet Union, in third nations, and in the United States. Walter Slocombe spoke next emphasizing that it was very difficult to understand what the Soviets were doing; that is, what their strategic objectives were. The characteristics, or the numbers of weapons, or the rate of weapon deployments simply do not lead to clear indications of strategic policy. He strengthened this point by illustrating what one might make of U.S. strategic policy if one just viewed actual U.S. weapon deployments. Mr. Nitze spoke next. He noted his disagreement with much of what had been said so far. In particular, he emphasized that he was more pessimistic than most of the other people in the room, that he thought that the existing trends were extremely negative. More specifically, he stated that if the trends were not reversed quickly, that within ten years the ratios of U.S. and U.S.S.R. strategic capabilities that would survive a counter-­force exchange would be most unfavorable from the U.S. perspective. He cited a recent study2 in which calculations showed that following a Soviet counterforce attack on the United States in the mid-1980s, surviving U.S. retaliatory forces would be able to kill only 4.5 percent of the Soviet population. On the other hand, the study concluded, Soviet forces surviving a U.S. counterforce attack, under present plans, would be able to destroy a much larger proportion of 2 Not further identified.
