Human Rights 345 —Significant improvements—less torture, fewer disappearances, etc., in Chile. —General improvements in Bolivia, Ecuador and others. —Tightening of rules regarding torture in Philippines, increased attention to human rights at the highest level, other changes likely.2 —Freedom House, in its just released annual survey, reports movement toward greater freedom in 26 countries during this year, reversing a four year negative trend.3 Freedom House attributes a great deal of this improvement to US policy—its conclusions on this issue are attached.4 I would repeat the comments made in my earlier year-end assessment, that without question, the major accomplishment (one that deserves to be ranked as a very significant achievement in any listing) has been to raise this issue to the forefront of world consciousness. Virtually all world leaders are now concerned with human rights. They know that now their human rights image is a significant factor in their standing in the international community—as well as in their relations to the US. In many countries where bad problems exist, human rights policy is being intensely debated within the responsible government. Reporters and editorialists write on the subject regularly. The international human rights committees and commissions have begun to be rescued from a slow death by paralysis. Just as Earth Day added new words and concepts to the language—environmental protection, ecology, etc.—so, it can be argued, has Carter’s human rights policy, just as dramatically, added a new aspect to international diplomacy. 2 Tuchman, in the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s December 5, 1977, evening report, noted that Newsom had met with Marcos and “really laid out our human rights concerns. Marcos apparently feels ‘frustrated’ by the continuing charges of torture etc., but emphasized that he must keep good relations with the military, which limits his ability to interfere in particular cases. Newsom concludes that ‘the problem obviously troubles Marcos and he is looking for a way out, but is not yet ready to take steps which are necessary if regime is to be seen in different light in Washington’.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 1–3/78) 3 See Farnsworth Fowle, “Freedom House Reports Gains for Liberty This Year,” The New York Times, December 25, 1977, p. 11. 4 Attached but not printed is an undated statement, which reads, in part: “It is also true that very few gains have been attributed to U.S. government pressure by the political persons directly responsible for them. We could hardly expect such attribution—it would generally be neither in America’s interest, nor that of the leaders involved. Nevertheless, as we examine the reasons why favorable changes have occurred in many countries, the change of attitude of the U.S. government toward freedom has again and again been cited as one among a number of contributing factors—Iran, Thailand, and China (Taiwan) particularly come to mind, and there may even have been some moral assistance in India or Sri Lanka.”
