Czechoslovakia 341 —A 100 [percent] cash settlement of the remaining principal value of the claims ($66.5 million); —Simultaneous delivery of the gold (now worth $420 million) —Full cash settlement of the surplus property debt ($8 million). (If a concession became necessary during the course of the negotiations to obtain a high settlement for private claimants, we would be willing to consider accepting some or all of this government debt in crowns.) 3. In the changed conditions of 1980, raising the ante to this level may not be unreasonable. We believe there is at least a slight chance the GOC would agree to negotiate on such a proposal. We considered Deputy Foreign Minister Jablonsky’s reaction to the Ambassador’s suggestion (ref A)3 a positive sign in this direction. A further indication of possible GOC flexibility was reported by Paul Lyet of Sperry Rand. Lyet said that at a February 12 dinner with Ambassador Johanes and other Embassy officers, Johanes informed Lyet that several American lawyers had asked him why Czechoslovakia refused to settle the claims. Johanes said that he told them responsibility for making a proposal lay with the State Department. He asked Lyet rhetorically what the American claims were—$75 million? Then, with appropriately expansive gestures, he said, “we’ll settle for 100 cents on the dollar.” Even in the much more likely event they refuse, we would have at least attempted to carry out our responsibilities to the claimants and our mandate from Congress. 4. We believe the following factors argue for going ahead now: —(1) The astronomical price of gold has unquestionably improved our bargaining position. Proposing a 100 [percent] cash settlement of the claims and having some reasonable expectation of achieving it is no longer unrealistic; —(2) The prospect of having $385–500 million in ready hard currency should be very appealing to the GOC with its troubled economy and the imminent prospect of increased hard currency energy expenditures; 3 Ambassador Meehan met with Jablonsky on January 30 to discuss the state of U.S.-Czechoslovak relations. The Department cabled the Embassy with some informal suggestions as to how the Ambassador might probe Czechoslovak willingness to settle the claims/gold matter in light of the growing value of the Czechoslovak gold. (Telegram 25629 to Prague, January 29; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800052–0743) Ambassador Meehan reported his conversation in telegram 400 from Prague, January 31. Jablonsky, Meehan reported, did not immediately reject the suggestion that Czechoslovakia might need to pay $64 million representing the full amount of claims, but rather he asked if MFN would be part of that package. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800059–0498)
