796  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
these employment options. We also believe the system would have 
good capabilities for sustained battle management following an initial 
nuclear strike, but would be severely degraded if national-­level com-
mand bunkers and communication centers were destroyed.
Counterforce Capabilities
33. If the Soviets were to launch a strike on the United States, their 
objective of highest priority would be to reduce the retaliatory capabil-
ity of opposing offensive forces. The Soviets would target US bomber 
and SSBN bases, of which there are only a few, as well as US ICBM silos, 
of which there are about 1,000. In addition, the Soviets will be faced 
with a large number of MX shelters in the late 1980s.
34. Judging by present trends in the number and capabilities of 
Soviet ICBM RVs, we believe that from now on the Soviet ICBM force 
will be capable of destroying most US ICBM silos and still have many 
warheads remaining for other purposes. An MPS system, however, 
would tax Soviet counterforce capabilities in the late 1980s. The Soviet 
choice of which new ICBM to deploy under SALT limitations would 
influence the number of ICBM RVs available to attack MX shelters, 
but the more important factor affecting the number is whether or not 
SALT limitations were in effect. The table below shows our alternative 
projections of total online Soviet ICBM RVs in 1989, those with hard- 
­target capabilities, and the number on ready missiles in excess of those 
required to attack silos. While all such excess RVs would theoretically 
be available to attack MX shelters, it should be noted that the Soviets 
would also have requirements to attack other kinds of targets and to 
withhold ICBMs for other purposes. These requirements would reduce 
the number of ICBM RVs actually available for attacking MX shelters.
35. There is a divergent view that, because of the other Soviet tar-
geting and withhold requirements for ICBM RVs, the number of Soviet 
hard-­target ICBM RVs available for use against the planned US MX/
MPS system would be far fewer than the “excess” shown in the table. 
As a result, the holders of this view believe the table and figure 2 over-
state the threat to the planned US MX/MPS system.8
8 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior 
Intelligence Officers of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]
