3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
866
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
—Instead, we should begin trying to formulate a strategy that
maximizes our influence on Soviet behavior, attainment of our own se-
curity objectives, and maintenance of allied unity.
8. Our strategy should be based on our objectives of deterrence,
punishment and minimizing the regional and global consequences of
the Soviet action by achieving the fullest possible Soviet withdrawal
and the greatest possible autonomy for Afghanistan. It must also take
account of the reality that truly effective deterrence is possible only in
circumstances where Western military power can be brought effec-
tively to bear.
9. In concrete terms, this means:
A. Using all possible means to urge solidarity and patience on our
allies and friends in maintaining trade and other sanctions. We can
argue that any future deterrent effect of our sanctions depends heavily
on their duration. We can argue that total withdrawal is still a possi-
bility if we remain firm, and that the way to get withdrawal is to allow
even slight relaxation of sanctions only in exchange for movement
toward total withdrawal. We can underline the importance to Moscow
of acceptance by the rest of the world as an equal in all fields—in-
cluding cultural as well as political and economic relations—and the
usefulness therefore of raising Afghanistan as an obstacle to contacts of
all kinds.
B. An important element of a strategy to maintain solidarity is to
continue expressing our readiness to explore a political settlement
(while trying to develop a clearer idea of what that might entail). We
are struck by Embassy Kabul’s idea (ref B) for proposing the sort of
peacekeeping scheme which would be needed to assure stability, even
if we know there is little or no chance the Soviets would accept any
such scheme. Not letting the propaganda initiative slip away is essen-
tial. Soviet rejection of a plan would help keep the pressure on. And the
Soviets might be constrained to make counter-offers which could pro-
vide the starting point for compromises eventually leading to a reduc-
tion in direct Soviet involvement in Afghanistan sufficient to meet our
purposes for restoring a broad dialogue with the Soviets.
C. In order to succeed in keeping our allies and friends on a course
of firm opposition to the occupation but flexibility in negotiating with-
drawal, the U.S. must be careful not to appear to be prematurely re-
laxing its own sanctions:
—The grain embargo is crucial not only in terms of showing our
allies that we will stand firm even if it hurts us, but also in terms of
showing strong national will toward the Soviet Union. The embargo
has had a significant though not crippling effect on the Soviet effort to
use consumption as a tool to achieve [garble] economic efficiency
[garble]. Its real force, however, is in its potential effect in the future if a
