1955  589
list Americans given us by CHICOMS, proportionately small number 
of Chinese in U.S. who have “returned” compared with proportion 
Americans who have returned from China, INS “intimidation” Chinese 
to apply for Taiwan entry permits, etc.
5. I have no suggestions concerning public reply except to reiterate 
as appropriate positions that have been taken in meetings while avoid­
ing specific reference to contents of meetings. With respect numbers 
who have returned, suggest use one line in opening statement today, 
that is, in 6 weeks between August 1 and September 10 thirty-three of 
52 previously detained given permission depart and in 14 weeks since 
September 10 only 5. Thus results of agreed announcement largely neg­
ative with respect Americans and certainly not “expeditious” either in 
absolute numbers or proportion.
6. In considering any statement we make in reply, I desire reiterate 
my conviction that whatever points we may be able score in propa­
ganda battle this subject will not be reflected, at least at any time soon, 
in increased releases of imprisoned Americans. To accomplish this 
objective our efforts should be directed to maximum extent consistent 
with our public position to restoring former basis of negotiation.
7. Going Prague Friday evening returning Tuesday if there is meet­
ing December 22.
Gowen
417.	 Telegram 1289 from Geneva1
Geneva, December 15, 1955, 11 p.m.
1289. From Johnson. 
1. I opened 30th meeting today with prepared statement on imple­
mentation as follows:
A. At our last meeting, I think we were in agreement in expressing 
our common desire avoid what you have termed entangling question 
of return of civilians to their respective countries with other questions 
before us. I have pointed out that only sure way of avoiding such 
entanglement was promptly and faithfully carry out terms of agreed 
announcement September 10. I have all along maintained that two of us 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/12–1555. Confidential; Priority; 
Limited Distribution.
