330 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII now feel very exposed to Soviet pressures and will urge America and China to give it political and military support, lest it be obliged to kowtow to the Soviet Union. India will also be negative, but its policy reaction will depend on how the repercussions play themselves out around Pakistan. China will denounce the USSR once again and be ready for closer cooperation with the U.S. The Arab states of the Persian Gulf will show great anxiety at what they interpret as further evidence of a Soviet expansionist plan that envisages Moscow’s eventual control over them. Iraq’s strong opposition to the Soviet action will lead it to try to bring about greater mutual security coordination among the Gulf Arab states, but without reliance on Washington. END SUMMARY [Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.] 118. Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 [cable number not declassified] Washington, December 30, 1979, 1345Z COUNTRY Afghanistan/Pakistan SUBJECT Reaction of the Hezbe-i-Islami Afghanistan to the Soviet-Backed Government of Babrak Karmal [1 line not declassified] SOURCE [2 lines not declassified] 1. 29 December 1979, the leader of the Hezbe-i-Islami Afghanistan (HI) Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, was making every effort to make known the HI’s opposition to the Soviet-backed government of Babrak Karmal and to emphasize that there are no changes in their policy of armed opposition to the new regime in Kabul. (Source comment: Other Peshawar based Afghan exile groups also appear to be following suit and the general feeling among exile leaders is that “Babrak is more cruel than Amin.”) To reinforce their determination, the HI clandestine radio station operated the entire day of 29 December broadcasting in 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 12/31/79. Secret; Immediate; Sensitive; [additional handling restriction not declassified]. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
