Options Identified what we want. If we can convince them that they are in a net with no way out, pressure will build rapidly to change the situation. However, the negotiating strategy is unlikely to be successful in itself. They can potentially live with economic chaos for a prolonged period of time. Khomeini’s support is the “rabble” which has been disadvantaged historically and which can survive at a level which the intelligentsia would find intolerable. If he can keep them minimally fed and full of glorious dreams, they will stay with him. He is their man. Change is not likely to be evolutionary. Pressures are building for a new explosion which will come from dissaffected elements: the army, a disillusioned faction around Khomeini, a loose tribal coalition, a new strongman . . . perhaps all of the above. It could also come from the left, which is gaining strength but still far short of the kind of support needed for a direct challenge. Our objective should be to encourage forces which we see as desirable alternatives to Khomeini and help them to be ready to step in when the explosion occurs. We cannot directly change the course of events, but we can nudge them in the direction we want them to go. Our nudges are likely to be ineffective, however, unless we are acting in an agreed policy context with clear objectives and a degree of commitment which will lend consistency and purpose to our efforts. Otherwise, we are going to find ourselves in the same position as last year when different sides of the policy house were speaking with different voices and fighting their battles in the press. We are edging toward that situation. An Activist Policy I outlined my ideas on this yesterday4 and will not repeat them here beyond a schematic: —Policy Decision: We cannot work with Khomeini. A gradualist approach is futile in a revolutionary situation and only encourages the left. —Covert Action. Must be a major effort. We need to build (or rebuild) a cadre of imaginative, effective talent. —Coalition Building. Potential allies are everywhere. Our support, even if private and qualified, will speed them to do their own thing. —Military. Our presence in the region is vital and effective. We must know when and how we will be prepared to use it in order to 4 In a December 2 memorandum to Brezezinski, Sick provided an assessment of the internal power situation within Iran. He argued that Iran faced a potential civil war that “offers almost no latitude for classic diplomacy” which was particularly “useless in trying to move Khomeini and the students.” He thought Khomeini’s position was also deteriorating. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File,
