Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II plementation and enhanced dialogue before the Madrid meeting.6 If he merely expresses a few generalities privately to Brezhnev, it would seem apologetic and may be worse than not mentioning these subjects at all. As far as the talking points themselves are concerned, I would favor an effort to explain our approach simply and in an intellectually honest way. I think the points included in the background paper on CSCE, if combined with elements in the background paper on human rights, would be appropriate.7 In any event, I believe strongly that you should delete the peculiar statement that human rights are “internal matters” which is contained in the summary talking points. It is our official position that matters involving implementation of international agreements like UN Covenants and the Helsinki Final Act are legitimate for discussion between states. Concerning human rights, I think the reference to the four freedoms and jointly fighting fascism is good and I would suggest retaining it.8 I would also find a way to use the following contingency points, which I have altered somewhat: —U.S. human rights policy is based on our commitment to international standards, including the joint pledges our two countries have made in the Helsinki Final Act. It is necessary and proper for one signatory of that politically and morally binding document to raise with another signatory its concern about the implementation of all elements of that agreement. —In so doing, we are not seeking unilateral advantage from our human rights policy. There is great domestic U.S. interest in human rights throughout the world, including our own country. This attitude is based on real concern and on our belief that, to be lasting, de´tente must involve improvements in the spiritual and material lives, as well as the security, of ordinary people. Within the spirit of the Helsinki Final Act, progress on human rights clearly strengthens de´tente. Post Script: There is a section on Working Conditions for U.S. Journalists which appears too positive about Soviet behavior.9 I believe in 6 The CSCE Review Conference was scheduled to take place in Madrid in November 1980. 7 The June 1979 briefing papers on CSCE and human rights are in the National Ar-
