Chapter 2, January–June 1989 35 Committee to review current U.S. arms control positions and policies both to reflect the results of the defense strategy review and to resolve outstanding issues requiring resolution before resumption of negotiations. The arms control review is to proceed in parallel so that preliminary decisions on negotiating positions can be reached by late April. This National Security Review sets forth guidance for the arms control review. (C) Nuclear and Space Talks. Not later than May 1, 1989, the Arms Control PCC should forward a recommended date for the resumption of the Nuclear and Space Talks. This recommendation should reaffirm or suggest modifications to (a) the existing negotiating organizational structure, (b) the existing U.S. position on the linkage between conclusion of a START treaty and resolution of existing Defense and Space Treaty issues, and (c) the existing U.S. position that no new treaties in this area can be concluded without the resolution of Soviet violations of the ABM Treaty, especially the large phased-­array radar at Krasnoyarsk. (S) Defense and Space. Not later than May 3, 1989, the Arms Control PCC should complete a review of the existing U.S. position on Defense and Space negotiations. The review should take account of decisions reached as a result of the defense strategy review and should result in (a) options for modifying the U.S. negotiating position; (b) a review of the relationship of the Defense and Space Talks to U.S. plans, as ­determined by the defense strategy review, for defensive systems research, development, testing and deployment; and (c) a review of whether the United States should seek negotiations restricting anti-­ satellite weapons, either in the Defense and Space Talks or elsewhere. Where relevant, the review should make explicit the assumptions used concerning interpretation of and adherence to the ABM Treaty. Draft instructions for resumption of negotiations should be submitted on or before June 1, 1989, following my decisions on options developed during the review. (C) START. The review of the U.S. START position should encompass the following elements: (1) Review of elements of the existing START position to ensure that (a) there is U.S. consensus on the strategic rationale underlying those elements, (b) that consensus reflects and complements U.S. defense policy and strategy, and (c) any options for altering the existing position are presented for presidential review in a timely fashion. (2) Comprehensive technical review of the Joint Draft Text to clarify textual ambiguities and to ensure consistency with START policy decisions. (3) Review of those areas in which the U.S. position is incomplete (a) to determine which, if any, must be completed prior to resumption of negotiations, (b) to identify options for completing these areas, and (c) to establish a schedule for completing remaining elements of the U.S. position. (S)
