1026  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
approval of the U.S. request, but had been unable to do so. The prob-
lem was money. It would be more costly for the Soviets to transport an 
inspection team from Khabarovsk than from Ulan Ude. Brooks noted 
that the problem for the U.S. side was both fiscal and logistic. With a 
consulate scheduled to open in Khabarovsk and with commercial air 
service scheduled there, it would be far more equitable for the point 
of entry to be shifted. Nonetheless, Brooks said, he would report the 
Soviet response.
16. Nazarkin said that he realized that the U.S. delegation was not 
in a position to discuss data denial. However, the Soviet side contin-
ued to believe that Article X should be drastically simplified, and that 
the sides should “find another place” outside the treaty for the techni-
cal details. Colonel Koltunov was prepared to present the Soviet view, 
which had some new elements. Brooks said that he was more than 
willing to have his delegation meet with Koltunov, listen to the Soviet 
views, and ask questions. The Soviet side should understand, however, 
that, while the subject remained under review in Washington, Brooks 
was not prepared to engage in any substantive negotiations.
17. Nazarkin proposed that he and Brooks be in contact daily, 
but noted that it might not be possible to resume their former practice 
of daily coffees. “Because of the VIP people present in my mission,” 
Nazarkin said, “internal meetings are often scheduled on short notice”. 
The two agreed to consult at 10 a.m. each day to decide on a day-­by-­day 
basis whether to meet in person or speak by phone.
18. Nazarkin said that he proposed the two delegations generate 
and compare a comprehensive list of issues. This list might include those 
overarching issues, such as PPCM, which affect many treaty documents, 
but should also include specific issues remaining in each treaty docu-
ment. Brooks noted that U.S. side had already begun the effort to gener-
ate such a list. The two agreed to attempt to be in a position to review the 
issues by the end of the week with the aim of agreeing on both what level 
the issue should be worked and which side had the lead.
19. Nazarkin said that Ambassador Lem Masterkov, who had 
remained in Moscow because of the illness of his mother, would prob-
ably arrive in Geneva on Saturday, April 27th. Nazarkin also said that 
many of the wives of Soviet delegation members, including his own, 
had remained in Geneva during the break. This was necessary since 
transportation for wives was paid for by delegation members them-
selves and Aeroflot had massively increased prices in recent weeks.
20. Nazarkin referred to the discussions between Brooks and 
Obukhov earlier that day, in which Obukhov had proposed new 
approaches to the issue of the new types definition and the forty 
percent rule on warhead attribution. Nazarkin said that it would be 
important to get responses to these as rapidly as possible, in order to
