September 18–December 16, 1978
227
—Finally, the framework does apply to all of the confrontation
states and we believe provided the desired framework of the compre-
hensive settlement.
—In addition to the gains I have just mentioned from the Arab
point of view, the Camp David agreements also offer important stra-
tegic advantages. They provide in our judgment a basis around which
moderate forces in the area, with the support of the United States and
our friends, can rally. They can help strengthen the moderates in the
area and insulate them from radical pressures.
—Precisely for those reasons, it is inevitable that the Camp David
agreements will be attacked by a number of countries and radical ele-
ments, and that they will create a certain amount of dissention (in the
area) in the short run. Over the longer run, however, they hold out a
better prospect for stability and moderation than any alternative we
can envisage.
—We are very mindful of the pressures which will be brought to
bear on Jordan, should it join the negotiating process. We have always
believed, however, that Jordan has a leadership role to play in the
search for peace. Your Majesty has played that role at key moments in
the past; we believe we are again at one of those historic moments.
—We recognize these agreements do not bind Jordan but if there is
a just solution, that Jordan must play a major role to bring that about.
—We can understand that Your Majesty will want to consult with
your friends in the area, in particular the Saudis, as well as your in-
ternal advisors, before making a final decision. Before you make that
decision, President Carter wants you to know that he remains fully
committed to the role of a full partner. He does not intend to see the
substantial achievements of Camp David, which have been recognized
as such by most of the world, fail to lead ultimately to a comprehensive
and just peace in this area. We will be involved in very practical ways in
the on-going negotiations. The results of Camp David demonstrate
what we have long maintained—that real movement can only emerge
from the dynamics of on-going negotiations. We believe those dy-
namics can continue to produce movement in the direction that Your
Majesty considers essential and important.
—Our own view of the ultimate outcome of the process remains
unchanged. We continue to prefer and will support an outcome which
links the West Bank and Gaza with Jordan. We have made this clear to
the Israelis, and President Sadat has also indicated that he supports
such an outcome should that be the desire of inhabitants of the West
Bank and Gaza.
—If Jordan decides to join the negotiations on the basis of the
Camp David framework, we are convinced that there will be broad
support in our Congress to provide the help that you may need under
