Bolivia 167 Admitting that some of the causes of the Stabilization Program’s present plight had been internal, Guevara said that it was nevertheless a fact that the program had failed and that the people would take the suspension of dollar sales as evidence of this failure. He predicted a reaction of profound concern. The Ambassador, pointing out that all of Bolivia’s neighbors had suffered depreciation of their currencies in the past year, and several to a greater degree than Bolivia, admitted to the gravity of the present situation but said he thought it was more a matter of losing a battle, and not the war, on the stabilization front. He saw no reason why it would not be possible to look on the coming operation merely as a retreat to a more defensible position. This observation met an enthusiastic response, with Guevara agreeing heartily and Siles observing that the continuation of the struggle with hope is imperative. At this point the President received a message that had originated in London bringing news that the International Tin Council (ITC) had just abandoned supporting the price of tin, while maintaining export quotas, and that the London price already had dropped heavily. Recovering from the gloom induced by this news, President Siles observed that it could be announced as the basis of the GOB’s action of suspending dollar sales by the Central Bank. Guevara, anticipating that the break in the tin market, coming on top of the suspension of dollar sales, would cause panic and possibly worse if unaccompanied by some compensating cause for hope, asked if the Ambassador would concur in a release by the Foreign Minister of a statement summarizing for the public the information he had just given the President on the new level of U.S. aid. (While this proposal was under discussion, the President received a telephone call from the Ministry of Finance saying that the Central Bank had in fact stopped dollar sales at 11 o’clock.) The Ambassador agreed with the timeliness and potential value of the proposed release and it was decided that he, accompanied by the Acting Director of USOM, would call shortly after midday at Guevara’s office in the Foreign Ministry to see the proposed wording.6 (The ensuing communique, as reported in Embtel 155,7 appeared in the evening’s Ultima Hora and Saturday’s morning papers.) Referring to the GOB–IMF discussions on reworking the Stabilization Program, Siles commented that some 70 percent of the nation’s workers had received an increase in compensation since stabilization and he had hoped, by finding a formula whereby future increase would be granted only to the remaining 30 percent, that it would be possible to restrict the depreciation of the Boliviano. 6 The draft press release, also sent under cover of despatch 231, is not printed. 7 The reference telegram from La Paz, September 18, 1958, is not printed. (824.10/9–1858)
