National Security Policy  1139
the selection of targets and the assessment of damage required. Since 
that study, in turn, followed rather closely the earlier War Plans of SAC, 
so-called ALPHA and BRAVO, the emerging SIOP is in these respects a 
refinement, a combination and expansion of earlier SAC plans, rather 
than a brand new approach.
Much of the briefing emphasized the objective character of the plan 
of procedure and the extensive use of machine calculations. Actually, 
however, we found so many consecutive steps involving judgment that 
this so-called point system of military worth of targets and the machine 
calculations based on it appear to be of very secondary importance. In 
fact, some of the machine uses may be unsound. So long as the plan 
is designed for the entire alert force, this has no grave consequences 
because of the large number of weapons assumed to be available and, 
therefore, of exceedingly high expected damage to the Sino-Soviet 
Bloc. However when, subsequently, operational plans based on smaller 
forces (assumed to survive surprise attack) will be developed, it will 
be most important to review the entire procedure and introduce more 
effective use of mathematical procedures, as otherwise the assignment 
of forces to targets may be inefficient, and less than optimum effect may 
be calculated for the retaliatory force still available to us; thus “evi­
dence” may be obtained that we have inadequate forces and the attack, 
if carried out, will not be optimized.
The steps which are involved in the preparation of SIOP are as 
follows:
[text not declassified]
In a number of cases the urban and military targets are close enough 
together that they can be thought of as co-located and, as explained 
below, ground zeros (DGZ) are so selected as to maximize damage on 
the complex of targets by quasi-objective machine operations.
[text not declassified]
The next step involves the assignment of available forces against 
the strategic DGZ (target) list. [text not declassified] The assignment is 
done by a complex procedure, the logic of which is not wholly clear. It is 
first assumed that every weapon that will be used [text not declassified].
Thus, two very important aspects of the plan, although they are 
worked out on the machines, are then redone on the basis of judg­
ment, so that the machine calculations are in effect not used. [text not 
declassified]
