822
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
although we would cancel it domestically so as to provide a strong “ed-
ucational” signal.
Brown argued that this position raised the question of “who would
co-opt whom”. He felt that State’s position amounted to saying “we
won’t reprocess, but you can” whereas we could be saying “we won’t,
and we don’t believe you should because it’s dangerous and perhaps
suicidal”. Brown doubts that State’s position is a correct tactic: “If we
are unable to head off the French, the Germans, and the Japanese then
we are simply indulging in a self-denial”. He stated that even Option b
as presented in the PRM isn’t strong enough: “the tone of the paper
doesn’t satisfy me” and that the only tactic which holds some chance of
success would be to take a very tough position against reprocessing. He
acknowledged that this is a risky approach and we have no way of
knowing whether it will work.
Schlesinger agreed that we will have to spend “considerable diplo-
matic capital” and added “the only way to head off the French is to deal
with the breeder, just playing around with safeguards isn’t going to do
it”. However, he is even less optimistic than Brown that our efforts will
be successful. On being asked to sum up his position, Brown said that
the FCEP should focus “exclusively on alternative fuel cycles not re-
quiring separation of plutonium”. When asked by others how he
would prevent other nations from going ahead with reprocessing he re-
plied: “we will let them go ahead to the extent we can’t help it”.
Warnke agreed with Brown. Schlesinger did not disagree but was
highly skeptical of its chances of success. Nye continued to argue that
some reprocessing was required “as the bait on the hook” and to an-
swer “technical and institutional” questions.
International Plutonium Storage
The group reached quick agreement that we not continue to
pursue the concept of an IAEA plutonium storage regime as proposed
in the October 28th statement4 (Recommendation 5, p. 18, Option b).
Full Scope Safeguards
All agencies firmly agreed that we should adopt full scope safe-
guards as a “goal”, the discussion concerned whether we should adopt
them unilaterally. ACDA took the lead in strongly arguing that we do
(Option a, Recommendation 13, p. 34) while State argued for a modi-
fied version (Option b) under which a nation would not have to place
existing sensitive material under safeguard and could acquire an un-
safeguarded sensitive facility by simply terminating—but not techni-
4 See footnote 2, Document 317.
