First Responses
145
class and the military in Iran fear that opposition to Khomeini would
lead to a civil war where the leftists would be the final victors.
Bakhtiar, with small offices in Paris and London, appears to be
the only exile leader with an established organization. Some Iranian
businessmen have recently attempted to organize wealthy exiles to
support Bakhtiar. An unconfirmed report of the establishment in Sep-
tember of a Paris Coordinating Group is the first sign of a coalition
effort among exile groups. [portion marking not declassified]
[Omitted
here
is
detailed
material
on
Bakhtiar,
Jam,
and
Nahavandi.]
Paris Coordinating Group of Iranian Oppositionists
There are reports that an organization composed of four different
groups—the Iranian National Front, the National Democratic Front,
the Mujahadin and the Fedayeen E-Khalq—has been formed in Paris,
although a coalition of these four groups seems unlikely. The group
calls itself Ittihad-e-Melli (National Union) and Bakhtiar is the nominal
head. [portion marking not declassified]
The agreement of the four groups to form an organization is appar-
ently still subject to ratification by each group. The groups will still
have separate command structures and operate independently. The
group claims it has received messages of encouragement from Shariat-
Madari, Hosein Montazari, Mohammad Golpayegani and Sadeq al-
Tuhani as well as having the support of some monarchists and bazaaris.
They have no contact with the Arab minority in Khuzistan. [portion
marking not declassified]
They see the principal obstacle to their success as being Khomeini’s
grip on the lower levels of the clergy and through them on the large
number of undereducated and unemployed youth of Iran. [portion
marking not declassified]
The organization supports PLO self determination even though it
has no contacts with the PLO. It favors autonomy status for Iranian
minority nationalities and has sent financial aid to the Kurds. It has
been unsuccessful in getting Tudeh party support. [portion marking not
declassified]
Shadow Government
[less than 1 line not declassified] Iranian expatriates in Paris are
attempting to form a shadow government and have chosen candidates
for top government positions.2 There is no information on whether
these individuals have been contacted. The group claims high level
2 See Document 20.
