accomplished may be watched, and the experience thereby gained applied
to the continuation of the electrification project.
In whatever findings these studies may result, the necessity and principal
purpose of the new loan, a general overhauling, repairing and
modernization of the country’s whole communication system during the
next five years is so outstanding that it fairly overshadows all other
considerations of minor consequence.
The most valuable asset of the very few left to Austria by the Peace Treaty
is undoubtedly her geographical and consequently commercial position.
Austria is compelled to make the utmost use thereof, if she intends to assure
her future. There is no other way of accomplishing this task if not by
keeping her railways, roads and other means of communication up to date.
Who could dispute the fact that lagging in this respect would mean a
gradual elimination of my country from the main system of European
traffic, a slow but sure death.
The War left the Austrian railways, roads, telegraphs and telephones in a
deplorable condition. Immediate even though insufficient repairs were
urgently needed, requiring sums which to a small portion only could be
spared from the proceeds of the League of Nations loan. The rest had to be
born by appropriations provided for in the ordinary budget, i. e. by
overburdening the present generation with a task which would yield its fruit
to a more remote posterity. If the contemplated loan should fail, the
Austrian people would face the following alternatives: or [either] to adhere
to the present method and ruin business and the whole economic outlook by
an excessive tax burden, or to drop the entire project for which the loan is
sought and equally meet their doom.
There is an other point to be seriously considered from a general standpoint,
i. e. that no constructive, systematic and economic plan could be adopted
without having in advance secured the funds necessary for the execution of
the whole.
The aforementioned facts alone seem to have sufficient weight in
supporting an opinion generally shared by our creditor nations, that an
investment loan is most essential to Austria’s reconstruction, regardless
