60
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
considerable risk if we seem to be preaching to the rest of the world
when our domestic human rights situation is not that great.
22.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, February 28, 1977, 4 p.m.
SUBJECT
Human Rights PRM Meeting, 28 February, 4:00 PM
The following issues were discussed:
1. Procedure—Ms. Tuchman stated that she is committed to pro-
viding Brzezinski with a PRM draft on Friday, 4 March, and that the
PRM would be distributed in final form next week to member agencies.
She will attempt to get her final draft to us by 2 March but hopes to
avoid further changes.
2. NSC Draft vs State Department Draft—The two State Representa-
tives, Derian and Vogelgesang, attempted to persuade Ms. Tuchman to
substitute the State draft (see attachment) for the NSC version.2 They
took the position that we should avoid trying to define human rights,
but rather outline a general approach and an action program. Tuchman
took the position that some definition of the basic human rights in-
volved was necessary and she made it clear that she was not prepared
to accept the State draft, but would make changes in the NSC draft
based on the discussion at this meeting.
3. Third World Reaction—Baker of State and Birnbaum of AID em-
phasized that third world countries are more concerned with economic
rights than they are with civil rights and that our approach would have
to take their point of view into account. Birnbaum went on to stress that
cutting off economic aid was not necessarily the best way of improving
1 Source:
Central
Intelligence
Agency,
National
Intelligence
Council,
Job
91M00696R: Subject Policy Files, Box 5, Folder 12: Human Rights. Confidential. Drafted
by Meyer on March 1. Attached but not printed are a list of attendees and agenda items, a
routing slip, and a copy of Knoche’s February 15 memorandum to Brzezinski (see Docu-
ment 7 and footnote 1 thereto).
2 The State Department draft is attached but not printed. The undated draft lists five
discussion items: objectives of U.S. policy on human rights; general guidelines for U.S.
policy; specific factors to consider in individual cases/countries; tactics and initiatives;
and questions and proposals requiring further study. Also attached are Defense and
USIA responses in the form of memoranda to Tuchman, both February 28, to the draft
PRM. The NSC draft was not found.
