1174 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Camp David. Camp David provided for no legislative council and no judiciary. The President will bear him out. Secretary Vance will bear out that there is to be “a” withdrawal of forces. The President accepted it. “A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will take place and there will be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into specified security locations.” We weighed all the words at Camp David. If it (the SGA) had legislative, executive, and judicial functions, that is a sovereign state. Israel doesn’t want that. Therefore, it must not be that in fact or in name. On numbers, Egypt wants 80–100. Ambassador Linowitz says 40, and Ambassador Lewis, too. These are arbitrary numbers. It is casual—why not 30? Or 50? Why 40? Israel is trying to draw the number from reality. How can it be done? Therefore Israel suggests that the number equal practical functions of the proposed Israeli model, with powers and responsibilities. He will not take time on this now, or Minister Kubersky can make a presentation. The President asked if this model describes the powers and responsibilities of the central government. Prime Minister Begin said that it says there are 11 functions. If there are 30, that is all right. If there are 15, that is all right. The number of members depends on the number needed to administer, not to be a debating society which one day will take us by surprise and declare itself independent. There is no wisdom for Israel in using force to oppose such a step. This would lead to world pressure on Israel. Israel does not want that. If in the self-governing authority, the members only administer, then Israel will not interfere. He hopes it will not be double the number of the U.S. cabinet, or of Israel’s 17. Does the U.S. have about 11 or 12? Dr. Brzezinski asked if he could ask a question? Prime Minister Begin said that he has one or two sentences more. Therefore, Israel will not stand on the number, that is not important. But the number of members must result, in the Administrative Council, in corresponding to the number of functions. If that is 15, all right. If it is an administrative council, that is proper, but not if it is a quasiparliament. If all it does is carry out its duties, then Israel will not interfere. Dr. Brzezinski referred to Prime Minister Begin’s reasoning. Is the question that he (Prime Minister Begin) is concerned that the number of members correspond to the number of functions, because he fears a precedent in a larger number? Prime Minister Begin agreed. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that maybe it would be better to have a larger number, since this would provide more political support and therefore make the agreement more acceptable—which is in Israel’s interest. Why does one function have to equal one person? Why not have
