802
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—The President commented on the preparation of the FY 1982
budget. He said it would be restrained while at the same time honoring
commitments of the Democratic Party. He praised the Congress for its
recent approval of the Alaska Lands Bill, and the creation of a “super-
fund” to clean up toxic wastes. The President asked if any Cabinet
members wanted to make any comment.
2. The Vice President began his remarks by stating that history
would deal more kindly with the Carter Administration than had the
voters.
—He mentioned especially the record established in behalf of
human rights, saying that the U.S. had asserted fundamental American
values.
—He said that the U.S. had been at peace during the Carter years,
and noted the absence of any major scandal touching the presidency.
Finally, the Vice President praised Mrs. Carter for her graceful tenure
as First Lady.
[Omitted here are comments by McIntyre, Miller, the President,
Schultze, and Muskie.]
8. The President commented on some of the difficulties in pro-
viding leadership to the Western Alliance.
—The President also reviewed the difficulties involved in
achieving the release of the American hostages in Iran, while noting
that over 50,000 Americans had been safely removed from that country.
—He reported that the last U.S. response to Iran’s conditions for
the hostages’ release preserved American honor and integrity.
—The President also expressed his appreciation for Ambassador
Linowitz’s work on the Egyptian/Israeli negotiations. He said he en-
couraged President-elect Reagan to maintain the Camp David process
and stated that both President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin want it
to continue.
—Finally, the President expressed the hope that the new adminis-
tration would state publicly that the new provisions of SALT II would
govern American policy until either the Treaty was ratified or new
agreements were achieved. The President observed that the SALT II
Treaty effectively protects U.S. interests.
9. Secretary Brown noted that a dramatic change had occurred in
the American public’s attitudes toward defense in the last four years.
He said he believed a consensus had emerged in support of a respon-
sible growth in military power. Mr. Brown pointed out that there were
greater moral restraints on our use of power than the Soviets. He con-
cluded with a statement of personal respect for the President.
10. The President responded by saying he thought relationships
between the State Department, Defense Department and NSC had been
