August 8–September 17, 1978
25
1. For Lewis. Secretary has asked me to send you the following text
of a message from him to Prime Minister Begin.3 Begin text:
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
We have just heard of the rumored plan to establish five new set-
tlements on the West Bank. As you will remember after the historic
steps of last fall, a principal reason the peace negotiations very soon ran
into trouble was the action taken with respect to settlements. I am
deeply concerned, and urge you not to take any step which would under-
mine the Camp David meetings or subsequent peace negotiations.
Please inform me directly what your plans are so that I can help to
ease the concern being expressed here and in Egypt. End text.
2. In passing this on, you may relate it to the Secretary’s conversa-
tions with Begin and Sadat4 on cooling the rhetoric before the Camp
David meetings. The text of the message gives you a peg on which to
hand [hang?] this point.
3. For Eilts. We are providing you with the text of the Secretary’s
message to Begin only for your background so you will have the flavor
of it. However, the Secretary has asked that you get word to Kamel
that, as we understand it, no Israeli Cabinet action has been taken on
new settlements, but we have been in touch urgently with the Israeli
Government and are awaiting their response. We will say this publicly
and will also state that our position on settlements remains unchanged.
Secretary, as of this moment, plans to make this statement himself
when he faces the microphones following his closed session with the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee this morning (Monday).
Vance
Sadat.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850067–2078) Details of
the decision to establish five nahal settlements in the Jordan River valley, made in secret
by the Israeli Ministerial Committee on Security Affairs in June, are in telegram 10343
from Tel Aviv, August 13. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780331–0595)
3 In telegram 10411 from Tel Aviv, August 15, Lewis stated that Vance’s message
was delivered to Evron on August 14 for delivery to Begin. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P840137–1595)
4 See footnote 4, Document 5.
