Peruvian labor and these rest upon ex parte affidavits. This is too unsubstantial a
foundation upon which to establish such a charge. While the evidence leaves in the
mind of the Arbitrator a question whether there has not been more discrimination
against Peruvian labor than the record establishes there is nothing to indicate that this
discrimination has attained such proportions as to make it possible to consider it as
affording any ground for a decision against a plebiscite.
Conscription. Peru charges that Chile is applying her conscription laws to Peruvian
citizens in Tacna and Arica as a means of driving them out of the provinces and thereby
eliminating their votes in case a plebiscite is had. To this charge Chile interposes a
three-fold defense to the effect first, that conscription is not an effective way to
Chilenize a Peruvian recruit; second, that children of Peruvian parents born in Tacna
and Arica and claiming Peruvian nationality are not in fact conscripted; and third, that
Peru has not put in evidence the requirements of Chilean law with respect to the
military service of Peruvians. The first defense misses the point of the charge. Peru
does not charge that the conscription laws are being used to win votes for Chile through
the Chilenization of the conscripts, but that they are being used to eliminate Peruvian
votes because young Peruvians on being called on to register or enlist prefer to
emigrate to Peru. The second defense is on the merits; it rests largely on the circular of
the Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs of February 12, 1920, in which, after asserting
that under the Constitution of Chile, Chilean conscription laws rightfully apply to all
persons in Tacna and Arica, including Peruvians, the Minister proceeds: “Nevertheless,
by special administrative disposition, all youths born in Tacna and Arica who because
of their Peruvian parentage, may have indicated their preference to adhere to Peru, have
been eliminated from the military service in those provinces.” As this defense asserts
the applicability of the Chilean conscription laws and rests upon administrative
leniency in their enforcement, it is unnecessary to consider the third defense. The claim
of leniency in enforcement raises an issue of fact and requires an examination of some
two hundred affidavits introduced by Peru in which the affiants claim to have been
forced to leave Tacna and Arica to avoid military service or to have been expelled from
Tacna and Arica because of their failure or refusal to discharge their military duty under
the Chilean conscription laws. The great majority of these affidavits appear in the
Peruvian Counter Case and Chile has therefore had no opportunity to meet them with
evidence in rebuttal. Making due allowance for this, however, and taking into account
the other evidence in the record, the Arbitrator is unable to conclude that the policy of
administrative leniency proclaimed by the Chilean Government with respect to
conscripts born in Tacna and Arica of Peruvian parentage who themselves claim to be
Peruvians, has been consistently pursued by the administrative officers on the ground.
While the affidavits indicate that the enforcement of the law has been intermittent as to
time and sporadic as to places and persons, and that many young Peruvians have not
been molested even in places and at times when the law was being enforced against
other Peruvians, they also indicate that in a considerable number of cases, particularly
in the year 1923, the Chilean conscription laws have been used not so much for the
