National Security Policy 97 (3) That measures taken must rely primarily upon private and local Governmental initiative, stimulated by Federal leadership, including Federal example. (4) That effective Federal leadership will require a skillful and expanded program of public education with emphasis upon weapons’ effects and ways in which citizens can protect themselves. (5) That measures adopted must not be inconsistent with the pos­ sibility that the Government may wish at some future time to initiate a program of the type recommended by the Security Resources Panel, possibly upon a compressed time schedule. However, measures under­ taken at this time should not be based upon the assumption that there will be a nationwide Federal construction program; rather the effort should be designed to preclude the necessity of such direct measures if possible. Proposed Measures2 The Committee recommends adoption of the following measures: 1. Research and Development, including prototype construction (exploit­ ing multiple-­use principle to the maximum)  $ Millions a. Research  $6.5 (annual rate) Although sufficient knowledge of weapons’ effects and of shelter design now exists to permit proceeding with a complete and effec­ tive fallout shelter program if this were deemed desirable, expanded research is necessary to refine our knowledge, particularly of blast shelter, and develop more economical and efficient shelter models. In a program of this magnitude, well considered research should save many times its initial cost. The following program of research is already identified and can be undertaken as rapidly as funds are made available. (1) The field testing, with nuclear weapons, of shelters, other struc­ tures, and shelter equipment; provision for development and execu­ tion of radiological defense measures; exposure of animals to weapons’ effects; and the instrumentation necessary to evaluate results obtained. ----- $2.0 Millions 2 Note on Costing: The Committee has accepted without critical review the cost factors proposed by FCDA with the understanding that these cost factors are consistent with those used in the Report to the Council by the Special Committee on Shelter Programs and the Report of the Security Resources Panel, both prepared pursuant to NSC No. 1691–­b. [Footnote is in the original.]
