Afghanistan 629 233. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, March 14, 1980 SUBJECT Likely Soviet Reaction to Use of SA–7s by Afghan Insurgency [classification marking and handling restriction not declassified] 1. The Soviet reaction to the initiation of attacks against their aircraft in Afghanistan by SA–7s will depend on (1) their estimate of the level of military threat that they could anticipate from such attacks (if not terminated); (2) their estimate of the likelihood that the threat could be eliminated (or managed) by in-country military measures; (3) their estimate of the efficacy of threats or retaliatory military actions against Pakistan for terminating the activity; (4) their estimate of the consequences that such retaliatory actions against Pakistan might produce for US/Pakistan relations (e.g. driving Pakistan closer to US). [classification marking and handling restriction not declassified] 2. We assume that the availability of portable surface-to-air weapons to insurgent forces in Afghanistan will make itself known to the Soviets initially by random and intermittent attacks against its aircraft. We also assume that the Soviets will believe, or will proceed on the assumption that, those weapons were being fed into Afghanistan through Pakistan.2 We believe they will proceed on this assumption even in the absence of hard evidence unless they believe they have hard evidence to the contrary (e.g. that the weapons were being introduced through another country). [classification marking and handling restriction not declassified] 3. A crucial consideration governing the initial Soviet response will be their estimate of the scope of the new threat posed to them. If they 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Daily CIA Brief File, Box 26, 3/13/80–3/20/80. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed is a March 17 covering memorandum from Turner to Brzezinski. Turner wrote that the CIA memorandum, per his conversation with Brzezinski the previous Friday, March 7 (see Document 229), examined “the most likely Soviet reactions to the use of SA–7s against their forces in Afghanistan. Clearly the existing pressures on Zia can be expected to increase significantly; however it should be noted that he is in control of when these weapons are introduced.” Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner of Turner’s memorandum. 2 An article in the President’s Daily Brief, March 28, reported: “Soviet SA–7 antiaircraft missiles have reportedly fallen into insurgent hands. An Afghan commando battalion defected on Saturday and took along 24 of its Soviet-made missiles, [1 line not declassified]. The shoulder-fired SA–7 would be particularly effective against helicopters.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—March 1980, PDBs)
