1102  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
for Limited Military Operations to 1 July 1962,” prepared in accor­
dance with the agreements reached between our respective offices. 
This paper is the product of a special study group composed of rep­
resentatives from the Department of State, the Department of Defense 
and the Central Intelligence Agency. While it has not been given formal 
Departmental or Agency clearance, it has been presented before the 
Armed Forces Policy Council and discussed by the undersigned.
This work differs from the limited war study of 1958 in several 
important respects. It takes into account new developments and capa­
bilities to 1 July 1962 and revises certain assumptions made in 1958, 
particularly with respect to the use or non-­use of nuclear weapons by 
the opposing sides in limited military operations. Also, greater atten­
tion is given to logistic capabilities and implications, and thus its scope 
is considerably broadened.
The study examines the capabilities for the next two years of U.S. 
and Allied forces to conduct limited military operations in certain 
hypothetical situations, employing only those weapons systems now 
in the armed forces inventory or rapidly approaching that status.
Since the situations considered have not been wargamed and are 
admittedly based on hypothetical but possible circumstances, the con­
clusions should not be considered as definitive or restrictive either 
with respect to future policy actions or in determining the size and 
nature of United States forces required for limited military operations. 
Nevertheless, the conclusions are important because they indicate cer­
tain strengths and weaknesses in U.S. and Allied capabilities and high­
light certain issues of a policy nature which affect those capabilities.
In this context it is a useful and meaningful document.
/s/ Livingston T. Merchant
For The Secretary of State
/s/ Thomas S. Gates
Secretary of Defense
/s/ Allen Dulles
Director of Central Intelligence
