International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
193
people, where the issue is inadequate skills. They have specific pro-
grams to help them get more skills and qualifications. But this will re-
main a problem for France and for all other industrial economies for
years to come.
A quick reduction of unemployment is very difficult to achieve,
and it will be necessary to have social measures to offset the social and
political consequences of unemployment for years to come. There are
some conditions to be fulfilled. First, there needs to be better coordina-
tion of economic policies, with freedom of maneuver, and there needs
to be an improvement of the basic economic situation. He hopes the
Summit follow-up, with the seven nations, will help. Second, there
needs to be stability at a realistic level of exchange rates, to avoid world
monetary uncertainties. The soundness of the dollar would make a de-
cisive contribution to an improved international monetary situation.
Third, there is the need for the orderly development of international
trade. We must fight protectionism. Our countries are so much in-
volved in trade that if they back down, it would be damaging to all.
Fourth, there is a need to adopt (mainly in the U.S.) vigorous energy
policies to stabilize the international oil market, and to avoid pressure
on oil prices. If the oil-importing countries face in the future regular
and large price increases, how can they cope? We have adjusted—but
this has not been fully implemented. We benefit from credits. We need
to realize (Note: complete) the process of adjustment. Therefore, the
stabilizing of international oil markets is fundamental. Thus, in France,
they are reducing in all ways their dependence on oil imports.
On trade, Giscard told the heads of state and government in
London that France favors the “organized freedom of trade.” Some say
that this means France is moving to protectionism. This is absolutely ri-
diculous. For more than a year, as Minister of Finance, he has fought
strongly against protectionism in France, against vigorous assaults in
Parliament from some of France’s most distinguished leaders. He has
succeeded in avoiding protectionism: why? It is not because of a theo-
retical position—like being for free trade. It is rather because of the
growth of French trade in the last 10 years, so that it is now the number-
four exporter in the world. It would be foolish for France to isolate it-
self, or reduce systematically its imports. This would lead only to retali-
ation, to rising unemployment, and falling exports. France depends on
freedom of trade. It only asks for an orderly growth of trade.
In textiles, for example, they have signed the multifiber agreement,
and will respect all their commitments. In the first half of 1977, for some
textile products, the rise in French imports had been from 60 to 100%.
This is destroying some medium-sized and little firms, in relatively
non-industrialized parts of France. This creates big unemployment—
maybe only a thousand people, but in regions that cannot sustain it.
