Options Identified CIA Admiral Stansfield Turner Frank Carlucci Energy Secretary Charles Duncan* (Justice not represented) *Domestic issues only SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Domestic Issues: 1. Hostages. We are confident that our list of the hostages is accurate within one or two names. Fifty hostages is the best estimate, although it is conceivable that there might be another private individual who happened to be in the embassy at the time of the takeover whose name has not yet surfaced, or even that someone escaped and is in hiding. The clergymen visiting the embassy on Christmas had a number of different lists of numbers of hostages actually seen, but it is certain that they saw no more than 43 hostages, perhaps fewer.2 We will be able to tie this down more firmly once they have been debriefed. A student at the embassy last night on the telephone referred to 50 hostages. State will prepare a chart showing the most recent evidence we have about each of the hostages since the takeover occurred. It would not be advisable to base a public initiative too heavily on the clergymen’s visit until we have a better understanding of what they did and who they saw. We also wish to insure that the private nature of the clergy visit is understood. These men were chosen by the Iranians, they had no official status, and we have no control over what they may say on their return. Secretary Vance will talk to the clergymen as soon as they return. (S) 2. Economic Steps. Treasury will prepare an updated matrix for the President showing what each of the allies has agreed to and what steps are actually being implemented. We have full agreement on all items of the package except government guidance to private banks about Iranian defaults. Full implementation will begin on December 27, although the French say they will not complete their guidance to their banks until January 2. On the issue of public disclosure, the allies agreed that if and when leaks occur, the government would officially confirm that “measures of cooperation” had been implemented, without being specific. In some ways, a non-specific statement is preferable since the actions are primarily technical and would not have major public impact. France has insisted that it wants to say only that allied 2 See Document 117.
