Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII a major shift in its orientation. Most such persons are either in exile or leading insurgent bands. ([classification marking not declassified]) The Marxists’ broad social goals are themselves a major cause of discontent, especially among the Muslim tribesmen and peasants who comprise almost all of the population. They regard programs designed partly to win popular support—such as increased education and land reform—as threats to their traditional way of life. ([classification marking not declassified]) Alternatives to Babrak One figure whom the Soviets are said to be considering as a possible replacement for Babrak is Commerce Minister Jalalar, a non-Marxist who also served in the cabinets of former King Zahir and former President Daoud. He has no independent political following, however, and is one of those whose willingness to participate in Babrak’s cabinet has only convinced most Afghans he has always been a Soviet stooge. There is some evidence that he has been a Soviet intelligence source. ([classification marking not declassified]) Major General Qader, who was jailed by Taraki in August 1978, is another possible candidate. Now a member of the Revolutionary Council, he reportedly made a secret trip to the USSR in mid-January. ([classification marking not declassified]) As a former Defense Minister, Qader might be attractive to the Soviets because he evidently still has some following in the Afghan military and—if given more authority—might be able to stem its decline. Qader’s prospects probably have dimmed, however, in light of the anti-Soviet demonstrations in Herat last weekend set off by his public appearances there. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) No alternative leader would be any more effective than Babrak in attracting domestic support so long as his power is maintained with Soviet troops. The establishment of a government that is both responsive to Soviet security concerns and capable of winning even grudging tolerance from the Afghan people is a process that will take years and require extensive Soviet involvement and support. ([classification marking not declassified])
