202  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
POSEIDON, has the least counterforce capability of any U.S. ballistic 
missile. Moreover, highly fractionated missiles do not represent lucra-
tive targets if they are survivably based. [2½ lines not declassified] Finally, 
SLBMs never will have alert rates and, some believe, reliable communi-
cations comparable to ICBMs.
Two alternatives have been suggested:
Alternative 1—MIRV sublimit. This alternative would place a direct 
limit the number of warheads on MIRVed ballistic missiles. The limit 
would be set initially so that the difference between it and 4900 was less 
than or equal to the number of single-­warhead missiles (Minuteman IIs, 
Small ICBM, Minuteman IVs, etc.) we need to protect (e.g. 4200 if we 
decide to deploy 250 or more Small ICBM missiles and 450 Minuteman 
IIs/IVs). NIE 11-3/8-88 projects a Soviet START force in 1998 that 
includes 4374 MIRVed ballistic missile warheads.
However, uncertainties in the future forces on both sides may dis-
advantage the U.S. under this alternative:
— The Soviets could deploy more SS-25s than the 360 projected in 
the NIE, perhaps 500–700. [2 lines not declassified]
— The U.S. Small ICBM, if funded on the present schedule, will 
not be fully deployed until well after the START reductions period. 
Moreover, at present there is no Minuteman IV program. If a Minuteman 
IV is funded, a program of more than 450 would require a START pro-
vision to permit downloading, which would increase Soviet breakout 
potential. There are no plans for a U.S. single-­warhead SLBM.
These considerations mean that the Soviets could be in a position 
to press for a MIRV warhead limit lower, possibly several hundred war-
heads lower, than the U.S. realistically can take advantage of at the end 
of the reduction period. If, for example, we accept a limit lower than 
4450, we will either have to permit downloading in START or deploy 
fewer than 4900 ballistic missile warheads until the Small ICBM is fully 
deployed, now planned for the mid-2000s.
An additional disadvantage of this alternative is that it does not 
reward reductions in fractionation short of converting to single-RV 
missiles (this could be mitigated by exempting less fractionated mis-
siles, e.g. those with 2 or 3 RVs, from the sublimit).
Alternative 2—Warhead-­to-Missile Ratio for Ballistic Missiles. In this 
alternative we would introduce a new unit of account into START: 
warhead-­to-­missile ratio for ballistic missiles. While such a new unit of 
account might be more difficult to negotiate than Alternative 1, it would 
have the advantage of rewarding any lowering of missile fractionation 
and not just the replacement of MIRVed with single-RV missiles.
With the new projections for SS–25 deployments of perhaps 500–
700, the Soviet START force would have about 4.3 warheads per bal-
listic missile, while a U.S. force of 50 Peacekeeper, 300 Small ICBM, 21 
Trident (with 3 subs in overhaul) has about 4.1 warheads per ballistic
