Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tries which deal with Egypt, that would affect us. We were very clear about the limits of what we would accept: they are very narrow. There are things that you and we could do to mobilize the moderate Arabs. Urge the moderates to speak up. I have thought that Morocco, Tunisia, Oman, and others would be willing to speak up. President Sadat, referring to his critics, waved his hand and dismissed them as “all those scarecrows.” At best, they are protectorates. Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had promised to do something about Japan. My Deputy, Henry Owen, is going to Japan with instructions to stress the importance we attach to Japanese assistance to Egypt. I also talked to David Rockefeller to organize a meeting of lots of U.S. business leaders during President Sadat’s visit to the U.S. (President Sadat interjected “Marvelous.”) Private enterprise is much more important than government in our country. Ambassador Eilts said he had received an invitation for President Sadat to consider speaking at the New York Economic Club and wondered if he wished to consider it. President Sadat responded “Right.” He continued that, with regard to the Saudis, our main effort should be to persuade them not to come to the point of involving other nations, such as Japan. I will drop them a line. In the end they would have only you and us as friends. With respect to Hussein, he was visiting an aide in London and announced that he was ready to come to Camp David. I called and asked what is your program. This came during a bad period at Camp David when things were not going well. King Hussein cannot miss any show. I could not ask him there when I was fighting Begin. He always tries for show, not for substance. I told him that when we decide anything, I will let you know. We can discuss it. Later on TV I was watching Barbara Walters.11 Hussein said that he had been contacted by me and I had asked to meet him in Morocco, but he had no time and was proceeding back to Jordan. After we reached our agreement, I met Barbara Walters and I told her that I was going to choke her, since she misled everybody. She said “But the King told me that.” That man is a showy one. He thinks himself the most clever politician in this area, so this tactic. He wants me and President Carter to come and beg him to save the situation. There are three main influences on him. First, the Saudi; second, the U.S.; third, the Syrians, whom he fears. He does not heed the Palestinians, despite what he says, and he does not protect Palestinian rights. If President Carter and I give him the West Bank, he will be shouting 11 U.S. television journalist.
