1170  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
(c) deploy an ICBM or SLBM with a number of reentry vehicles 
greater than the number of warheads attributed to it;
(d) increase the number of warheads attributed to an ICBM or 
SLBM of an existing or new type.
13. Each Party undertakes not to flight-test or deploy an ICBM or 
SLBM with a number of reentry vehicles greater than the number of 
warheads attributed to it.
14. Each Party undertakes not to flight-test from space launch facil-
ities ICBMs or SLBMs equipped with reentry vehicles.
15. Each Party undertakes not to use ICBMs or SLBMs for deliver-
ing objects into the upper atmosphere or space for purposes inconsis-
tent with existing international obligations undertaken by the Parties.
16. Each Party undertakes not to produce, test, or deploy systems 
for rapid reload and not to conduct rapid reload.
17. Each Party undertakes not to install SLBM launchers on subma-
rines that were not originally constructed as ballistic missile submarines.
18. Each Party undertakes not to produce, test, or deploy:
(a) ballistic missiles with a range in excess of 600 kilometers, or 
launchers of such missiles, for installation on waterborne vehicles, 
including free-floating launchers, other than submarines. This obliga-
tion shall not require changes in current ballistic missile storage, trans-
port, loading, or unloading practices;
(b) launchers of ballistic or cruise missiles for emplacement on 
or for tethering to the ocean floor, the seabed, or the beds of internal 
waters and inland waters, or for emplacement in or for tethering to the 
subsoil thereof, or mobile launchers of such missiles that move only in 
contact with the ocean floor, the seabed, or the beds of internal waters 
and inland waters, or missiles for such launchers. This obligation shall 
apply to all areas of the ocean floor and the seabed, including the sea-
bed zone referred to in Articles I and II of the Treaty on the Prohibition 
of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass 
Destruction on the Seabed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil 
Thereof of February 11, 1971;
(c) systems, including missiles, for placing nuclear weapons or any 
other kinds of weapons of mass destruction into Earth orbit or a frac-
tion of an Earth orbit;
(d) air-to-surface ballistic missiles (ASBMs);
(e) long-range nuclear ALCMs armed with two or more nuclear 
weapons.
19. Each Party undertakes not to:
(a) flight-test with nuclear armaments an aircraft that is not an air-
plane, but that has a range of 8000 kilometers or more; equip such an
