Colombia 327 unpleasant decision; the second is that it is apprehensive that the general reopening of Protestant churches and schools would produce very unfortunate public disturbances. The third is that, if they can stall long enough, they probably hope to get out of office before they are forced to reach a decision. I have reason to suppose that a fourth, and perhaps the most important, reason of all from the Government’s viewpoint is that at some time in March the position of the Catholic Church in this matter hardened. It seems quite possible on the basis of various bits of evidence which reach the Embassy that at some time in the month of March the Colombian Government, anxious to make real progress in the matter of financial assistance to Colombia in the crisis it then confronted, was prepared, as a result of Mr. Rubottom’s and my representations, to make substantial concessions to us. It is clear that at the beginning of the month the Foreign Minister seemed receptive to such a move. When he talked to me on the eve of his departure for Washington, it being clear at that time that only American good will (rather than strictly economic considerations) would induce us to bail Colombia out financially, the Foreign Minister should have been most anxious to humor us in matters of interest to us, yet in point of fact something had happened which forced him stubbornly to defend the present situation. I can think of no force which would have the power to do this except the Catholic Church. It is also interesting to note the chronology of attacks in the Catholic review America on this Embassy. The first major blast appeared in the March 8th issue. Rather obviously, it did not just happen, and as a further point the writer of the article showed no interest in getting the Protestant side of the question. It is at least plausible that the Colombian Catholic hierarchy, aware of our pressure to reopen Protestant churches and schools, decided to mount a counter-­offensive in the United States to stir up the many millions of our Catholic citizens to protest that the Embassy was acting in the interests of the Protestant sects rather than the nation. I think we can tentatively conclude that the present Government will stall for the remaining month that it stays in power. The present government is perhaps not quite so inclined to maintain discrimination against Protestants as would appear from its failure to take remedial action. (As the Department is aware, the only remedial action taken to date with regard to closed churches and schools has been to permit one church in Mission Territory and five chapels outside of Mission Territory to reopen, while scores of churches, chapels and schools both within and outside of Mission Territory remain closed.) The Foreign Office indicated to us informally that it would have no objection if any closed churches and chapels in Mission Territory were able to reopen quietly with local permission pending an over-­all resolution of the matter, and
