1957 1417 Government made statement under great pressure permitting a certain number of newsmen visit China. In same breath press statement, in utterly unreasonable terms, refused accord reciprocal visas Chinese newsmen. Subsequent statements have not altered this. This press statement shows my government ignorance international practice and is an insult to China. That my government has an ulterior motive in sending newspapermen to China is all too clear. In its August 22 state­ ment my ­government absurdly tried to specify the tasks of newsmen and instructed them to report on prisoners in China. This is virtually an undisguised attempt to interfere in Chinese internal affairs in telling US newsmen to serve American policy. 5. Wang went on. This move of the US Government, which it ­nominally passes for consent, in its true light it is a maneuver to dupe public opinion because no person of average intellect would conceive that China could accept such a move disregarding reciprocity and equality. His side absolutely cannot agree to unilateral decision of the US because it runs counter to desire of peoples for better relations and mutual understanding. They believe, however, that exchange of visits US newspaper correspondents is practical and concrete step capable of improving Sino-American relations. Based on their consistent policy will and in line with their proposal of 22 September 1956 he proposed that we discuss and adopt the following agreed announcement. (Text sent separately). 6. Wang continued. Adoption of above agreed announcement meets demands of peoples of both sides and meets desire of news cor­ respondents for news coverage. Perusal of text of agreed announce­ ment above will enable me to see that it promotes privilege of equality and reciprocity of both sides. He would like to hear any views I had. 7. I replied I would address myself first to statement he had made regarding the travel of correspondents. I said let me say I found it utterly astounding that he had entirely reversed position he took last year in this regard. I well recall that at time we discussed this last year he stressed to me that this invitation to American correspondents was not conditional reciprocal action by the US. I recalled that he made statement to me here and if I recollected rightly it was also made in public statement by his Government or press. Next point I wanted to make was that under our laws the US is not in any position to assure or guarantee full reciprocity. Therefore, in light of these two facts and in order that there can be no misunderstanding, the August 22 statement of Department of State made this fact clear. 8. I continued I found it incomprehensible and astounding that he now reversed his position and said that because reciprocity cannot be granted, he did not intend to permit the entry of American corre­ spondents. I also found it astounding that he now characterized the
