September 18–December 16, 1978 539 refuse. Therefore, you may have to deliver the messages suggested here directly to both leaders. This argues for a summit. (TS) You have credibility with Sadat. Begin would have to be told that decisions would have to be made on the spot if he came to Washington. He should not be allowed the excuse of referring back to his cabinet. If we pursue this course, the risks of failure will be substantial, and we will have to posture ourselves carefully to preserve our ties to Sadat and the integrity of the Camp David Framework.11 (S) 11 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK.” 153. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, December 7, 1978, 11–11:25 a.m. SUBJECT Summary of President’s Meeting with Ambassador Dinitz, December 7, 1978, 11:00–11:25 a.m., Oval Office (U) Ambassador Dinitz commented on the two substantive problems in the negotiations: Article VI and the timetable. On Article VI he emphasized the importance of keeping the text of the treaty intact. Any reopening of the text would encourage some members of the Israeli Cabinet to ask for review of other articles, including the preamble. Dinitz warned against an interpretive side letter to the effect that Egypt would be able to exercise the right of collective self-defense. Since any Arab war with Israel is defined by the Arabs as a defensible war, this interpretation would dilute the meaning of Article VI. (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 37, Memcons: President, 12/78–1/79. Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. At the top of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “OK. J.” According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Dinitz from 11 a.m. to 11:32 a.m.; the only other attendee at the meeting was Quandt, who attended from 11 a.m. to 11:25 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) Quandt sent Brzezinski a draft of the memorandum under a December 7 covering memorandum. A notation in an unknown hand on the covering memorandum indicates that the original of the memorandum of conversation was to be hand-carried to Clough. Brzezinski wrote an additional notation directing Inderfurth to deliver the memorandum of conversation to Clough for delivery to Carter. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 22, Israel: 11/78–2/79)
