North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
1067
how we should approach Congress in an effort to minimize statutory
constraints in this area. Everyone involved, including Henry Owen,
agrees that the issues must be thoroughly reviewed within the Execu-
tive Branch before we broach any proposals for wide-ranging reform
with the Congress. As this study proceeds, we will continue our efforts
to eliminate specific existing constraints and resist the imposition of
new ones.
For the immediate future, any constraints which stand in the way
of initiatives we may contemplate taking to counter specific threat-
ening acts of the Soviets and/or Cubans should, I believe, be addressed
on a case by case basis. We should consider making maximum use of
the broad waiver authority you already have with regard to many pro-
hibitions and be prepared to take our case to the Congress on specific
non-waivable prohibitions where we believe a good possibility exists
for sympathetic Congressional action.
Tom and I will provide you with periodic reports on the progress
of the IDCA-led study and ensure that it proceeds on a priority basis.
tions to the multilateral development banks (MDBs) and UN organizations.” Vance’s Oc-
tober 18 letter to Ehrlich and Ehrlich’s October 29 reply are in the National Archives, RG
59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P Director Anthony Lake,
1977–January 1981, Lot 82D298, Box 5, S/P-Lake Papers—10/16–31/79.
337.
Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Clift) to Vice President Mondale1
Washington, December 17, 1979
SUBJECT
Preliminary Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on World Hunger
The following is forwarded in response to your request for a brief
review of the preliminary recommendations of the Presidential Com-
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National
Security Issues, Box 87, National Security Issues—World Food [6/30/1977–12/17/1979].
No classification marking. Sent for information.
