and a considerable number of citizens of the United States come to Canada each working day. The Canadian authorities have always treated, and continue to treat, citizens of the United States entering Canada in this way as non-immigrants domiciled in the United States. The Government of the United States has until lately similarly regarded Canadians crossing daily to the United States, and has made regulations to facilitate their crossing the boundary by the issue of identification cards to these persons, whom they describe as “aliens who habitually cross and recross the boundary upon legitimate pursuits.” In the Windsor area, however, particularly during the last few months, the status of Canadians so situated has become increasingly uncertain, especially the status of those who are not of Canadian birth. Many either have been definitely turned back at the border, or have been required to pay head tax and to secure immigration visas. The publication of General Order Number 86 has suddenly ended this growing uncertainty by providing that hereafter all who are employed in the United States while living in Canada are to be considered as immigrants to the United States. His Majesty’s Canadian Government does not question, of course, the right of the Government of the United States to determine what persons may be admitted to the United States. They wish, however, to express their view that the ending, without notice or negotiation, of this long-standing arrangement, under which economic interests have developed and communities have grown up in Canada dependent in part on employment in the United States, is a legitimate ground for concern. Ten years have elapsed since the passage by the Congress of the United States of the Immigration Act of 1917, and three years since the passage of the supplementary Act of 1924; no new legislation has been enacted since 1924 which affects the status of those who cross the border in this way, and the practice has been permitted to continue until the present time. The Order now applies for the first time to those who cross the border daily the provisions of the Act of 1924, three years after its passage. As regards the general principle of the Order, the definition as an “immigrant” of one who is permanently domiciled in Canada and who enters the United States for a period of only eight or ten hours each working
