1955  147
factors: (1) nature of cases involved, which included conduct of persons 
themselves; and (2) the state of relations between our two countries. In 
amplifying latter, he said these talks represented improvement. Also 
their release of “guilty” airmen done in effort improve relations. Later 
he added agreement on third party representation would also constitute 
improvement relations.
9. I stated it takes two to improve relations and that I knew of no sin­
gle thing which from our standpoint would do more to improve relations 
than reaching solution on question return our nationals. Added that if 
he could state specific period time required to review cases Americans 
and permit them return, this would be of great help in improvement 
relations. Wang replied impossible and unrealistic predict time required 
such review, but if agreement reached on representation and relations 
between our countries improved things would move easier than in the 
past. He commented he could not expect me to say when Chinese stu­
dents would be able leave US. I replied immediately that I could and 
repeated my categorical assurance when he endeavored qualify it.
10. At this point he began reading long prepared statement review­
ing all points he brought up at last meeting. These included: their alleged 
willingness agree our text; their assurance they had made greatest effort 
reach agreement and responsibility for failure not theirs; claim that 
Americans at no time were prevented from leaving China and more had 
left proportionately than Chinese had left US; statement all cases were 
being reviewed and civil cases could leave upon reasonable settlement 
while criminal cases would receive lenient treatment; and their objection 
that our insistence release all Americans held constituted interference 
their law and juridical processes which they could never accept.
11. Statement concluded alleging difficulties Chinese students 
departing US due harassment by immigration officials, delays due 
loss their files by authorities, inconvenience due confiscation of funds 
sent for their travel and intimidation students go to Taiwan or apply 
for refugee status in US. He said some recently returned Chinese 
received official obstruction even after they had left US and obstruction 
extended even to Hong Kong. He said these criticisms concerned only 
ordinary Chinese in US and I could not tell him offhand how many 
more Chinese were detained and jailed under federal and state laws 
due to unfinished civil and criminal cases. He requested our side inves­
tigate such cases and added third party would also look into matter. He 
concluded on theme which he emphasized often before to effect that 
demands amounting to infringement on their sovereignty and juridical 
process could not be tolerated.
12. I said in reply only that I knew of no Chinese who desired return 
involved in what he termed unfinished civil and criminal cases and fur­
thermore that if he would provide me with names I would immediately
