776 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement It is considered that the furnishing of the proposed assistance and the use of funds available there for under the Act are in furtherance of the purposes of the Act and are important to the security of the United States. IT IS, ACCORDINGLY, RECOMMENDED that you sign the enclosed memorandum which contains the determinations required by the Act in order to carry out the proposed military assistance program to Haiti.4 The Secretary of Defense and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget concur in this recommendation. Douglas Dillon [Enclosure] Military Assistance Program for Haiti Requiring Determinations, Under the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended. The assistance proposed for Haiti includes initial equipment and related services for one under-­strength infantry battalion at an estimated cost of $300,000; a small amount of excess equipment may be included. This equipment would include infantry weapons, ammunition, light vehicles and communications equipment, as well as a limited amount of air transport equipment. There will be a continuing modest annual requirement for training materials, maintenance, and spares. This continuing requirement is expected to be financed as grant military assistance and would be dependent upon Presidential determination to provide such assistance in future fiscal years. In August 1959 a small invasion force (31 men) landed in Haiti from Cuba. Although this attack was defeated, the material deficiencies of the Haitian army became apparent during this action. All of the invaders except two (an Algerian Frenchman and an Argentine newsman) were Cubans and some were Cuban army personnel. Earlier in 1959 armed expeditions had departed from Cuba against Panama, the Dominican Republic and Nicaragua. Prior to the August attack, the Haitian Government had requested the recall of the five Cuban military attachés in Port-­au-Prince on grounds that they were implicated in terrorist bombings and other subversive activities. The attachés were also charged with suspicious travel to the Haitian-Dominican frontier regions. Subsequent to the August invasion, the Cuban Ambassador 4 On June 14, Eisenhower signed the memorandum containing the Presidential determination. The United States and Haitian Governments entered into an agreement relating to the transfer of military equipment, materials and services to Haiti, through an exchange of notes at Port-­au-Prince on September 1, 1960. For the text of the agreement, see 11 UST 2097.
