1300 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX it does not support the Camp David process, and have included a draft paragraph (Tab C) that might be inserted to correct that deficiency. (S) I want to underline one other point: the vote we cast on this resolution will have some impact on the autonomy talks, and especially on the Burg-Ali-Linowitz meetings on Wednesday5 and Thursday. As Chris notes, a veto would cause problems for Ali; but an abstention would have problems for Burg—and could (if followed by unilateral Israeli acts) also spill over onto Egyptian attitudes. Equally important, we have been predicating many of our recent acts—bridging beyond May 26; softening the European statement; and taking a firm line on UN resolutions—on our commitment to Camp David. That position wears progressively thin as the talks do not restart, and as there is a widespread assumption that we will not make any serious effort to get a significant agreement before our elections. Thus the position Linowitz takes with Burg and Ali this week—and the position you take with them on Wednesday6—will largely set the tone for months to come: whether we will take an aggressive or relatively relaxed stance towards the pace and intensity of the negotiations. (S) To help clarify the issues involved, we will convene a Senior Level Meeting7 on Monday afternoon, to present a strategy for the Burg-Ali meetings to you for your approval. (S) RECOMMENDATION That you meet with the Vice President, Muskie, and me on Monday morning to decide on our UN vote:8 5 July 2. 6 See Document 387. 7 No record of a Senior Level Meeting on June 30 has been found. Under a July 2 covering memorandum, Brzezinski forwarded to Carter a July 1 briefing paper from Muskie for the Burg-Ali meeting. Copies of both documents are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 86, Sensitive XX: 7/80. 8 Carter approved the recommendation to meet at the White House and approved including McHenry in the discussion. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Mondale, Muskie, Christopher, Linowitz, Brzezinski, Saunders, and Hunter in the Cabinet Room from 9:18 a.m. to 10:36 a.m. on June 30. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) On June 30, the United States abstained in the vote on Security Council Resolution 476 (1980). The resolution passed 14–0. (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, p. 402)
