1957  1411
any way, and legal opinion in the Department is that such action has no 
bearing on the matter of recognition. Once the necessary showing has 
been made as to the availability of witnesses and the substance of their 
testimony, the Judge will have to decide whether he would be justified 
in dismissing the case should the Department continue to refuse the 
defense counsel a passport for travel to Communist China.
We have been assured by Major Hoffman in the Attache Branch 
in the Department of Defense that Bob Ekvall will be permitted to stay 
in Paris until mid-January next year. We will have Dexter in Geneva 
before that time.
In regard to Hu Teh-­yuin, the deportee Wang alleged “nearly lost 
his life” because a serious stomach complaint was not properly cared 
for during his detention, Immigration and Naturalization Service has 
informed us there is no record of Hu’s having complained of any illness 
during his detention prior to deportation. He surrendered himself in 
New York for deportation on March 12, and was held in the immigra­
tion detention center there for two days before being transferred to Los 
Angeles. The records of the center have been examined, and there is no 
record of his having reported any complaint. Between March 14 and 
March 16, when he boarded the President Cleveland in Los Angeles, 
Hu was confined at the Chula Vista camp. The records of that camp 
also show that Hu was in good health and registered no complaints. 
Medical service was freely available in both the New York camp and 
at Chula Vista. It is of course possible that Hu may have suffered from 
indigestion aboard ship, as this has been known to happen aboard the 
President line ships. However, if he did, he would have had the same 
medical attention that any other passenger would have received.
We have been considering the possibility of having Hammarskjold 
take up the cases of Downey and Fecteau in a letter to Chou En-­lai, 
in line with your conversation with the Secretary General. This would 
involve, so far as we have tentatively thought it through here, making 
the following points: (1) Downey and Fecteau were under the juris­
diction and authority of the United Nations Command at the time of 
capture; (2) they were, accordingly, entitled to repatriation under the 
Korean Armistice Agreement, even though civilians; (3) however, their 
existence was concealed by the Chinese Communists until after the 
negotiations on repatriation at Panmunjom had been concluded; (4) 
by the time their existence was disclosed, we had already established 
a contact at Geneva which was considered an appropriate forum for 
arranging the return of the two men; (5) the two men were covered 
by our Agreed Announcement of September 10, and it was anticipated 
they would be released in accordance with that agreement, hence no 
separate representation was made on their behalf under the Armistice 
Agreement; (6) in view of the long lapse of time since the Agreed 
Announcement and the continued failure to release the men, we desire 
to remind the Communists of their responsibility to repatriate them
