Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
13
may, in fact, even be able to make a contribution to reducing some of
the causes of human conflict.
Finally, if we are to define a new direction for American foreign
policy, we must have a more balanced appreciation of the real sources
of American power and influence in the world. With military power
second to none, we were unable to alter the course of history in Viet-
nam. With the ability to destroy the world we could not prevent the
oil-producing countries from bringing truly agonizing hardship to mil-
lions upon millions of Americans in the form of inflation and the
deepest depression since the 1930’s. And all the military might in the
world does not enable us to command the respect we once had in the
international arena.
Military power is increasingly irrelevant to the host of economic,
social and political issues confronting this country. This is not to say
that we do not have a fundamental military interest in a stable strategic
relationship with the Soviet Union or with a secure Europe, Japan and
Israel. But the oil cartel, the threat of other commodity cartels, the
problem of world hunger, worldwide recession and inflation—none of
these issues, which immediately affect the security of every American,
can be resolved by military force.
Moreover, I am convinced that the basic source of American power
to deal with these issues lies in the ability of the American people and
their government to solve this nation’s problems. Our ability to manage
a growing and vibrant economy, to be first in the world in techno-
logical innovation; to lead the world in efforts to bring equality to all of
our citizens; to provide social justice, good housing, jobs, schools; to
take care of our old; to insure equal opportunity to our young—these
are the things that once were the hallmark of America. We were re-
spected for these things. Nations sought our advice and our counsel,
because they had confidence in our leadership, in our sense of prior-
ities, and in our humanity.
Now, after decades in which considerations of national security
have taken priority over all others in this country, we have squandered
$150 billion worth of investment in the quagmire of Vietnam. We have
spent over $1 trillion in arms. We have sent our best and brightest into
the defense industries, into the military services, into the secret intelli-
gence agencies. We have kept our military machine polished, but have
let our cities decay, our transportation systems collapse, our national
unity dissolve. We have pursued American ideals in the jungles of
Southeast Asia and have ignored them in the jungles of our cities.
If there is anything that must underline a new foreign policy for
the United States, it should be the recognition that the source of
America’s strength and influence in the world is our ability to meet our
