562  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
provide an increase of about one-­third in per capita living space over 
the next seven years.
70. The post-Stalin leadership has sought to make the most out of 
increases in consumption by selectively raising the money incomes of 
particular groups in the population while holding retail prices relatively 
stable. Although both rural and urban workers have received increases 
of approximately 18 percent, in total real income during the period 1953–
1957, rural workers gained relative to urban workers during the earlier 
part of the period and urban workers received the greater share of their 
increase during the latter part of the period. In industry, wages and sal­
aries have been adjusted with the aim of relating incomes more closely 
to productivity in different occupations and in different industries. 
Continuation of this policy during the period of this estimate should 
bring considerable improvement to the Soviet wage structure.
Foreign Trade
71. Soviet foreign trade policy will continue to subordinate short-­
run economic gains to the furtherance of national political objectives. 
Trade will continue to be utilized in an effort to strengthen Satellite 
ties with the Soviet Union, to provide capital goods for Chinese 
Communist industrialization, and to promote Soviet relationships 
with underdeveloped non-Bloc countries. Trade with the industrial­
ized countries of the non-Bloc world will probably grow somewhat, 
and economic considerations will be the governing factor affecting 
such trade.
72. The maintenance of the Soviet empire in Eastern Europe and 
the alliance with Communist China, as well as trade policy toward 
the underdeveloped areas, will require exports of raw materials and 
capital equipment which otherwise would be used by the USSR to 
further its own economic growth, but the burden imposed upon 
the domestic economy by this policy will not affect significantly the 
planned rate of Soviet internal economic growth. On the other hand, 
internal forces affecting domestic growth will provide incentive for 
an increase of Soviet trade with the West, although such trade will 
continue to account for only about one-­fourth of total Soviet foreign 
trade. The aggregate impact of Soviet foreign trade upon the domestic 
economy is slight because exports and imports together amount to 
only approximately eight billion dollars or less than five percent of 
Soviet GNP. However, the export of scarce resources or the import 
of advanced design machinery and equipment for use as prototypes 
can be of greater significance to the economy than the total value of 
foreign trade would suggest.
73. Future developments in Soviet-Satellite trade will be influ­
enced by the outcome of recent attempts to increase intra-Bloc
