February 1951–February 1952
141
which, while still far from satisfactory, the Department felt provided
hope that a basis could be found to renew the talks. The Shah himself
believed it highly desirable that the British not reject this overture. Indi-
cations were given that the Iranians might send plenipotentiaries to
London if the British agreed to resume negotiations.
Department officers discussed this new approach with the British
Ambassador in Washington on September 21 and handed him an in-
formal paper urging that the British give favorable consideration to the
Iranian move. They emphasized the desirability of the British re-
maining in a negotiating posture, and expressed the fear that an en-
tirely negative reaction might make a settlement impossible for a long
time to come.
While the British Cabinet was considering the Department’s repre-
sentations, word was received from the British Ambassador in Tehran
to the effect that the Shah was convinced of the need for getting rid of
Dr. Mosadeq and was only concerned as to how this could best be
done.4 On this basis the decision was taken to reject flatly the proposal
and to offer Dr. Mosadeq no encouragement that the British were pre-
pared to resume negotiations. It was felt by the British that these tactics
would weaken Dr. Mosadeq and strengthen his opposition in the
Majlis. The British Ambassador was instructed to encourage the Shah
in every way to replace Dr. Mosadeq with a government amenable to a
reasonable settlement.
The Department’s disappointment at this action was shared by the
Shah and Minister of Court Ala. The Court has made it clear that it
would be a mistake for either the Shah or any foreign power to try to
effect Dr. Mosadeq’s removal at this time, and our analysis of the situa-
tion confirms that the Shah’s own position would be seriously endan-
gered if he should endeavor to bring this about until the widespread
support in Iran for Dr. Mosadeq has considerably diminished. The
Shah has, however, been made aware of the fact that we would en-
courage him to move if he should feel his position sufficiently strong to
do so.
Dr. Mosadeq reacted sharply to the British reply and on September
24 the Iranian Government announced that the British oil technicians
would be compelled to leave by October 4. Ambassador Henderson
was instructed immediately to see the Prime Minister and the Shah and
to express our grave concern over the expulsion order, urging that it be
not implemented. He undertook in every appropriate way to have the
order canceled and to persuade Prime Minister Mosadeq to show some
reason in this critical situation, but his advice was not heeded. The
4 Document 46.
