unanimity was required or not. Personally, he believed that the votes of all members were required. The Serbian representative pointed out that all decisions in the League were taken by unanimity, but that questions of procedure were settled by majority vote. He did not believe that the Conference was competent to settle the question, and thought that it should refer it to the Assembly and Council. The President brought the first meeting to a close with the suggestion that the discussions should be resumed on the following morning with regard to the fifth reservation. He considered the first part of this reservation already met by Court rules. The second part contained a point which touched most closely on the constitutional law of the League of Nations. The reservation he believed was undoubtedly inspired by the desire to place the United States on an equal footing with other nations. He deplored the absence of an American representative who might clarify the situation. The four remaining meetings of the Conference were devoted entirely to a discussion of the second part of the fifth reservation. Its general discussion evoked a prolonged analysis. The Swedish representative went so far as to suggest that the American reservations should be met by counter-reservation on the part of the Court signatories. The delegates of Great Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Uruguay and Poland showed a most conciliatory spirit and favored the granting of every possible concession to meet America’s views.

The importance of Sweden’s attitude must not be under-estimated, especially in view of the character of the man who represented her at the Conference. Unden’s28 uncompromising attitude, both in the Mosul affair,29 and in the blocking of Spain and Brazil’s claims for permanent seats on the Council, are only too well known to the League. … Sir John Foster (Canada) was of the opinion that while America demanded something, it was not as much as had been expected. He believed, however, that great attention should be given when a country outside of the League
