Mr. Jennings. The British Embassy at Washington under date of January 30, 1918, informed the Department that His Majesty’s Government understood that Swain’s Island was American territory and, accordingly, transmitted to the Department for consideration a copy of the evidence presented in support of the charges. The evidence was referred to the Secretary of the Navy, who caused an investigation to be made respecting the conditions obtaining on the island. Such investigation disclosed that the complaints were not justified and the Department so advised the British Embassy under date of January 20, 1919.48 Eli Hutchinson Jennings died at Swain’s Island in October, 1920. By his last will and testament, all his property, including Swain’s Island, was left to his daughter, Anne Eliza Carruthers, wife of Irving Hetherington Carruthers, a British subject, and to his son, Alexander Jennings, as tenants in common. Irving Hetherington Carruthers, who was named sole executor and trustee, in 1921 endeavored to probate the will of his father-in-law but no court could be found which would exercise jurisdiction. Two prior wills of members of the Jennings family purporting to devise Swain’s Island, were probated in the American Consular Court at Apia, Samoa. However, the exterritorial jurisdiction formerly exercised by the American Consular Court at Apia came to an end upon the conclusion on December 2, 1899, of the Convention to Adjust the Question between the United States, Germany and Great Britain in respect to the Samoan Islands,49 and the American Consul at Apia since he now exercises no judicial powers is without authority to probate the will or to grant letters testamentary. Mrs. Carruthers died intestate in August, 1921, and letters of administration were granted by the British High Court of Western Samoa to Mr. Carruthers, who was appointed guardian of the five minor children and administrator of the estate of his deceased wife. It is understood, however, that the letters of administration granted by the British Court affect only such property of the estate as is situated in Western Samoa and do not cover Swain’s Island, over which that Court has declined to exercise jurisdiction. Both Mr. Carruthers and Mr. Jennings, who apparently is not satisfied with Mr. Carruthers’ management of the property, are desirous of having the jurisdiction of the administrative and judicial authorities of the Government established in American Samoa by the Navy Department extended to Swain’s Island. The matter was brought to the attention of the Navy Department and that Department under date of March 30, 1921, expressed doubt whether the judicial authorities of the Government established in American Samoa were vested with requisite jurisdiction under existing circumstances of undeclared American sovereignty over Swain’s Island to probate the will of Eli Hutchinson Jennings.50 The status of Swain’s Island so far as the jurisdiction of the United States is concerned cannot accurately be defined. The island, under the name Quiros, appears on the list of guano islands appertaining to the United States, which have been bonded under the Act of Congress approved August 18, 1856.51 That Act, the provisions of which are
