September 18–December 16, 1978 347 there is a deadlock, they will select a fifth member on the Arbitration Commission.” Turning to the question of diplomatic relations in the Annex, the President responded to Dayan’s question by saying that he favored the exchange of ambassadors within a month or so of the interim withdrawal. This could be spelled out in an Annex or in an exchange of letters. He preferred the Annex. Barak said that this was vital to Israel and that it should be in the text, but that Israel could accept its being in the Annex, but it should not be in an exchange of letters. Dayan said that he also raised the question of the American involvement as a guarantor, as a party to the agreement with a special responsibility for guaranteeing that the parties will honor the agreement. He said that the President’s reaction had been generally positive. The President said that Sadat will want this also. He will want us as a full partner. Dayan said that he would like to discuss this again. After the agreement is reached, there should be some American responsibility for assuring its implementation. The President said that this should not relate to the costs of implementation of the agreement. If the Israelis could suggest some language, he would consider it. Rosenne suggested language, but the President felt that it was too sweeping and that he could not accept it. The President cannot force compliance with the treaty, but he can agree to use his good offices and to consult with the parties. 97. Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the Department of State and the Embassy in Israel1 Jerusalem, October 21, 1978, 1008Z 2886. From Saunders. Subj: October 20 Meeting With Prime Minister Begin. 1. I saw Prime Minister Begin for two hours afternoon October 20. Ambassador Lewis, DCM Viets, Pol Counselor Blackwill and Howell accompanied me. On Israeli side, MFA Director General Ciechanover and Begin’s aide Avner were also present. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850033–0186. Secret; Niact Immediate; Exdis Handle as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Amman, Cairo, Damascus, and Jidda.
