World Hunger and Food Policy
787
—Agricultural research overemphasizes temperate zone and cash
crop agriculture, rather than food cropping needs in tropical zones.
Also there appear to be no dramatic technical breakthroughs on the ho-
rizon to create another “green revolution”.14
—At least 15 percent of all food produced is lost post-harvest, due
to poor storage and vermin.
—Optimistic projections that the seas would become an important
new source of protein worldwide have been replaced by fear that we
may be reaching the maximal sustainable limits, and overfishing is al-
ready starting to occur.
Solving the Problem
The problem can be solved. Reduced to a highly oversimplified
form it involves the following elements:
—Although 49 countries are defined as food deficient, the majority
of malnourished people in the world are in four countries (Indonesia,
India, Pakistan and Bangladesh). Solutions aimed at these countries
will therefore have the greatest impact on the total problem. With the
exception of certain parts of Indonesia, where the population may al-
ready be expanding beyond the limits the land can support, these coun-
tries have the potential to substantially increase production of existing
land under cultivation, and to solve their own problem by establishing
a stable balance between food production and adequate consumption.
An annual increase of 3–4 percent in agricultural production, a compa-
rable 3–4 percent annual increase in the GNP, and most importantly, a
stabilization of population growth can help achieve the goal by the end
of the century. The critical element is establishing the commitment at
the highest level in the governments of these countries. The key to the
solution lies in their ability to mobilize the prestige and status of the po-
litical, ethnic and tribal power systems down to the lowest level around
this issue, placing it ahead of all other priorities. In many countries this
will require difficult decisions to redistribute assets.
—While it has received considerable publicity, the Sahel involves a
relatively small part of the total problem. Unlike Asia, the primary food
source is livestock products from grazing herds that have been devas-
tated by cyclical severe droughts which dried up the grazing land. This
has been compounded by a steady destruction of the forests for fire-
wood, leading to the spread of the desert; and the use of animal dung
(which should fertilize grazing land) in place of scarce firewood.
Starving nomads are migrating to urban centers that are already unable
to feed their populations. The solution here, unlike Asia, cannot be ar-
14 The Green Revolution relied on the use of chemical fertilizers, pesticides, and im-
proved seed hybrids to produce higher crop yields during the late 1960s and early 1970s.
