Human Rights
27
ments from the Carter Administration without constraining later
choices. Among items for your priority consideration are the following:
a. Expedited announcement of well-known and well-qualified coordinator
for the human rights office (D/HA). The authority of that person and his/
her access to you would be a useful signal to the Congress and else-
where and a needed channel for in-house decision-making.
b. Authorization for the Deputy Secretary to establish an ad hoc Human
Rights Coordinating Group, administered by D/HA and to include, as
appropriate, representatives from P, T, L, H, S/P, IO, PM, EB, and the
regional bureaus—initially at the Deputy/Assistant Secretary level.
Such a mechanism could help assure Department-wide consensus and
coordination on cross-cutting issues in the human rights area. Among
matters for immediate attention: the security assistance package due
for Presidential decision next week, votes this month in the Inter-
American Development Bank, agreement on general guidelines for
press inquiries, and reference to human rights in PRM’s and other in-
teragency exercises.
c. Recommendation that the President declare US intention to sign UN
human rights covenants. Since the President is already on record in be-
half of ratifying the genocide convention, the convention against racial
discrimination, and the two covenants on political and economic
rights,3 and since the next session of the UN Human Rights Commis-
sion convenes February 7, the time may be ripe for the State Depart-
ment to support a Presidential push for ratification of all four. Al-
though L’s study on this subject is not finished, preliminary findings
suggest that we could defuse Congressional opposition by indicating
that we would accompany signature and ratification with appropriate
reservations and statements of understanding on points where there is
incompatibility between these instruments and the Constitution and
relevant US legislation and court decisions.
d. Action on bilateral issues. The Department will be under increased
pressure from the Congress (most predictably, in upcoming hearings
before the Humphrey Subcommittee)4 to explain how we factored
human rights into our positions on security assistance. Given the immi-
nence of a Presidential decision on the security assistance package next
week, we should urgently consider our public position on the human
rights aspects of the package and how decisions on individual coun-
tries could be best communicated, perhaps by the Deputy Secretary, to
the countries concerned and to the Congress. There will also be several
Harkin Amendment votes this month in the Inter-American Develop-
3 See footnotes 7 and 8, Document 4.
4 Reference is to the Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance of the Senate Foreign Re-
lations Committee, chaired by Humphrey.
