1978 477 a few minutes may be inconsequential. On the other hand, given the many uncertainties noted above, a quick hard target capability might well improve the outcome of a nuclear exchange from our standpoint or complicate Soviet calculations of the outcome and thereby help to strengthen deterrence. We have also found that with current plans, attacks against Soviet non-­ nuclear military forces are likely to be ineffective in many scenarios. The current set of targets attacked in the other military targets category, includes only fixed installations. Our knowledge of Soviet war plans suggests that with plausible amounts of warning, both forces and stocks would be dispersed rapidly away from these fixed installations. Thus, much of this attack, unless the US achieves total surprise, is likely to go on empty or partially empty kasernes and other bases, and the Soviets would be left with substantial military power to coerce other nations, to seize valuable industrial resources in Western Europe and the Middle East and to assist them in post-­war bargaining with the United States. On the other hand, there are clearly a number of fixed military installations that will remain valuable in supporting the Soviet war effort, regardless of warning. For example, secondary airfields, transportation centers, etc. Current planning does not give these targets high priority in relation to facilities that are likely to be evacuated with warning. We believe future planning should take this into account. For the longer run, priority should be given to capabilities to attack dispersed military forces. Trans-­attack reconnaissance and responsive targeting are needed to do this. With regard to the strategic reserve force we find that the force and its supporting command, control, communications and intelligence (C3I) may need to survive for weeks or even months after an initial nuclear attack. These elements lack sufficient endurance today to meet such an objective. If the SRF is to meet its stated objectives, the principal criteria for composition and sizing should be its endurance and its relative capabilities in relationship to Soviet plans for secure reserve forces. Indeed, many of our requirements for more flexible and discrete targeting at lower levels also imply larger reserve forces. The force mix in the Secure Reserve Force also needs reexamination to assure that it has maximum endurance. C3I supporting the reserved forces also needs greater endurance. Furthermore, the current provisional target sets for the Secure Reserve Force (primarily low-­priority economic targets) do not contribute significantly to the objective of post-­war coercion. In relation to NATO our deterrence and escalation control objectives require an effective NATO employment policy. Allied concerns about our ability to deter aggression against NATO have grown as Soviet capabilities have grown. More effective plans for targeting the Warsaw Pact threat to NATO with strategic weapons and closer coordination of US
