1955 175 cases in which they may be involved. Also hard to reconcile with fact that my government had without condition taken all action necessary in response his request to permit prompt departure from US any Chinese who desires return to his country. I wanted make very clear no Chi­ nese being held my country pending our agreement here. It was entirely impossible for me or my government to see why our failure thus far to reach agreement on public announcement has prevented departure any Americans whose cases favorably reviewed. If we were to deal here on basis equality and reciprocity at least these Americans should be able to return immediately. I could not help avoid conclusion that fact these Americans not able return appeared due other than purely legal or juridical reasons. Also hard avoid conclusion that as far as return of remaining Americans concerned that also would be based on other than purely legal or juridical reasons. This attitude on part Chinese made it all more essential that a clear understanding be reached on period of time during which it would be possible complete release and return to US of all Americans now being prevented from leaving. 21. I continued saying I expected and hoped when I came that it would be possible for us reach agreement on basis each our govern­ ments adopting measures permitting all those desiring return in fact do so. My government took necessary steps so we could make such announcement this regard. I next thought it would be possible agree they could be released simultaneously with our announcement. Now, however, I had gone another step and accepted his position that some Americans will be released later, although I do not see any reason for delay. All I asked him now was that he give me definite statement regarding reasonable time in which steps will be taken by his govern­ ment in order remainder cases may be completed. This seems very rea­ sonable position and I did not see how it was possible go any further. We came to discuss return our nationals and settle that question. I did not see how simply vague statement that some will be able to return in unknown time in the future and only under certain conditions, one of which has no relation to juridical and legal processes involved, settles matter of return of citizens. 22. Wang replied he could not agree to discuss things which gov­ ernments both sides unable to accomplish. He said Chinese in US had not committed crimes and so it was not reasonable for US Government to impose restrictions. Furthermore if we had reached agreement two weeks ago Americans whose cases had been reviewed would already have returned to US. Responsibility for their failure to return was not Chinese. 23. He continued that legal and juridical aspects of the cases of Americans were closely linked with agreement on proposed announcement. If agreement reached, that would mean not only that PRC willing improve relations and settle questions but also that
