670 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement be included in their own budget. See also Sheet 5 of Annual Introduction to the 1960 Program Submission.6 D. U.S. Posture and Attitude. We are making a serious error in our approach to the use of aid as an instrument to further the foreign policy of the United States—­which is supposed to be its object. The uselessness of much of our expenditures is perhaps not so serious as are the lost opportunities, the loss of face, the contempt earned and the wounded pride of the recipients. This grows out of the assumption that persons of other cultures, other backgrounds, other faiths and other political beliefs hold the same attitudes that we do. They don’t. Most Americans would agree in principle that we should utilize aid abroad in such manner as to best fit the local scene. This we find almost impossible because to do so goes against the very warp and woof of our beliefs. Beginning with Congress, and especially there, is a whole chain of justification finally down to the sincere technician in the field who goes abroad because it is a “good” thing. Much of our ICA program appears motivated by a kind of do-­gooding charity to help our distant brothers. This is wonderful for us at home. It is a magnificent way to feed our individual and collective egos—­ often at the expense of wounding the pride of the recipient—­but it wins low battles abroad. This broad American legacy of New England Protestantism I can question because I was born in Maine of a long line of hard-­shelled Baptists. While our struggle with the forces of Communism may be very important 25 or even 20 years away and when the increased productivity, the better education and well-­being of these countries might through our help be better able to withstand subversive forces, it is to be recalled that the danger is not 25 years away. It is now. I imagine that at every budget hearing before Congress the items must be justified as to whether or not they are worthwhile, whether they will do good, etc., etc. Whenever there is a Congressional visit abroad, either by member of the House of Representatives or the Senate, a first consideration is not whether we are getting any mileage in our struggle against Communism, but rather whether the program is proof against any criticism that it is not doing good, that it isn’t of benefit, etc. This same motivation appears to exist in the Executive Branch of Government. It exists to a lesser degree, but still strongly in the field. 6 Not found in Department of State files.
