3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
145
On leaving, I assured him that I would summarize his views as
best I can to both the President and the Secretary, and I expressed the
hope that Ambassador Toon will be in a position to hold a similar con-
versation soon with top Soviet leaders. He explained to me that he was
surprised that Toon delayed so long his request to deliver the letter to
Brezhnev and that under the circumstances the Soviet side had no
choice but to decline the request since Brezhnev was about to leave for
Paris. He agreed that it would be useful for Toon to meet with
Chairman Brezhnev, although he also noted that Brezhnev tends to be
somewhat more volatile than the President and that there might be
some risks in a discussion at this stage of the relationship.
An incidental footnote: He told me that the Soviets are from now
on officially translating Brezhnev’s title not as Chairman of the Pre-
sidium of the Supreme Soviet (the traditional way of translation), but as
the President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. In brief,
Brezhnev is also Mr. President.
32.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 24, 1977
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #18
1. Opinions
The opinion piece this week is written by William Hyland of the
NSC Staff. Hyland, as you know, went with Vance to both Moscow and
Geneva and is probably this government’s top Soviet expert. He argues
that we should be sensitive to the permanent problems confronting the
Soviet Union and that we should not overestimate the significance of
the temporary coolness in US-Soviet relations. It thus presents a some-
what different perspective than the one developed by Shulman2 and
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 41, Weekly
Reports (to the President), 16–30: (6/77–9/77). Top Secret; Sensitive. Carter wrote,
“Good. C” in the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 Reference is presumably to Shulman’s June 16 memorandum to Vice President
Mondale, which outlines current trends in U.S.-Soviet bilateral relations. (Department of
State, Office of Soviet Union Affairs, Dissidents and Political Prisoner Subject Files,
1974–1988, Lot 91D273, Box 9, Shcharanskiy, Anatoliy 1977)
