3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
105
of Non-First-Use. The other negotiations dealt with tangible matters,
proposals at the table, and they should be brought to fruition.
Gromyko wondered why the Secretary would call that proposal ab-
struse. After all, we were negotiating on specific types of arms, such as
chemical weapons, bacteriological weapons, environmental modifica-
tion for military purposes. Just yesterday, he and the Secretary had
talked about banning weapons of mass destruction. If we did not at
least try to look at these things, what would diplomats be doing?
Would some just drink coffee, some others tea, and all of them eat
caviar, if any remained; was that all? These were not very strong argu-
ments. He said he would conclude from the Secretary’s words that he
stood on the same position as his predecessor. He was saying this with
sadness and regret. The problem remained, and we might perhaps be
forced to return to it some day. He would like to hope that this was not
the Secretary’s final word on this subject.
The Secretary said he would only note that there were already obli-
gations under the UN Charter not to use force. Why, then, should these
obligations be brought into question by a new document limited to
CSCE participants? However, he would reflect on it.
Gromyko wanted to refer to conclusion of an international treaty on
non-first use. A majority in the United Nations favored conclusion of
such a treaty, and this was not fortuitous. It was an expression of a gen-
eral yearning of people for a true and lasting peace. He would ask the
Secretary if that proposal would not be in accord with the interests of
peace, with the interests of those governments that wanted peace? This
was a proposal not to use force under any circumstances. In other
words, it would provide for an obligation of states in treaty form to re-
solve disputes by peaceful means only. The Secretary might say that
the UN Charter already contained such obligations. There was a great
deal in the UN Charter, but all of it in general terms only. The only
thing missing from the Charter was a mention of God, and Gromyko
recalled a fervent plea in favor of such mention by one of the repre-
sentatives. After all, treaties existed in order to make more specific the
obligations arising out of the Charter, and to translate Charter provi-
sions into specific undertakings by states. Would it not have been
useful to have experts examine the question? Would the United States
be poorer if it had sent some people to Moscow, Geneva or Washington
to discuss the proposal? As things stood now, the whole world agrees,
but the government of the United States says no. There are other coun-
tries that follow US lead. The Secretary was a member of a new gov-
ernment. Would he not agree that there was something here to think
about, to take a look at? He called upon the Secretary to do so.
The Secretary said he would be happy to give new thought to this
matter, because he preferred to negotiate rather than reject. He would
see if further discussions could be productive.
