Venezuela  1219
movement. At the recent national convention of the reorganized 
Federation of Petroleum Workers relative party strength is estimated to 
have been as follows: AD, 60 percent; PCV, 27 percent; URD, 7 percent; 
COPEI, 6 percent.
31. Student and Youth Groups. Through active participation in the 
overthrow of Pérez Jiménez, youth and student groups have gained a 
significant voice in national politics and have thereby been greatly stim-
ulated and emboldened. The four leftist parties have long-­established 
youth movements, but the more effective organizations are those 
of university and high school students, which cut across party lines. 
Acción Democrática has apparently developed the strongest influence 
among the 7,000 students at the Central University in Caracas, with 
the PCV second and COPEI third. However, the executive council of 
the University’s student federation is composed of five Communists, 
three AD adherents, and one COPEI member. Outside of Caracas, the 
COPEI youth are the most active. In general, youth groups tend to be 
more extreme than the parties to which they adhere and little subject to 
party control.
32. The Catholic Church. The Church has risen in popular esteem 
through its recent emphasis on social action to improve the lot of the 
working people and through the role of the Archbishop in events, 
preceding the overthrow of Pérez Jiménez. In general, however, 
Venezuelans are indifferent to religion and highly sensitive to clerical-
ism in politics, a charge which COPEI seeks to avoid. The Church’s 
direct influence is therefore limited, but it is at present the most outspo-
ken anti-Communist voice in Venezuela.
THE ARMED FORCES
33. The Venezuelan armed forces consist of the Army (14,500 men, 
mostly conscripts); the National Guard, a professional constabulary 
(6,000 men); the Navy (4,100) and the Air Force (2,000). The Navy has 
three destroyers and six coastal destroyers operational; the Air Force, 
125 aircraft in operational units.
34. Leading military officers have shown increasing concern 
regarding the upsurge of Communist activity following the fall of 
Pérez Jiménez and the soft attitude of the Junta toward Communism 
(in consonance with the principle of “national unity”). Although this 
Communist activity is serious enough, it is likely that the military are 
actually more concerned about the resurgence of Acción Democrática. 
Despite the fundamental antagonism between AD and the PCV, the dis-
tinction is probably dim in the eyes of the military, who are most imme-
diately concerned to avoid the subordination which Acción Democrática 
attempted to impose on them in 1948.
