620  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
In discussing the possibility of significant funding increases, there 
seemed to be general agreement that the 5 percent real increase rate 
that would be needed to meet the requirements of PD–18 by 1990 was 
not politically feasible. In support of this point, OMB noted that the 
recession we may face in 1981 may result in a $13–$15B deficit that 
year. OMB noted that in 1981, the federal tax burden will reach levels 
in excess of 20 percent of the GNP—­which is unprecedented in peace-
time. This burden will lead to increased political pressures for a tax 
reduction. OMB also noted that we are going to have to increase the 
estimated inflation rates for the next few years that DOD is using in 
planning its budget. Finally, considerable support was voiced for meet-
ing the 3 percent real increase in 1981. (S)
It was also noted that while there is a general consensus that mili-
tary spending should grow—­such support had its limits. The Congress 
has cut out a number of defense programs the Administration has pro-
posed, and most domestic programs have not been allowed to grow in 
real terms in the last several years. Thus, the political costs of getting 
additional defense funds may be high. DOD noted that this suggests 
that we should pay more attention to the fact that some defense pro-
grams can win Congressional support more easily than others. (S)
In view of the continuing problems in maintaining an adequate 
overall military balance, and the likely constraints on increased DOD 
funding, a suggestion was made that we take a particularly hard look 
at issues such as the balance between combat and combat support, the 
land-­based vs. sea-­based tactical airpower trade-­off, the need to main-
tain significant amounts of shipping dedicated to support of opposed 
amphibious landings, the feasibility of increasing Allied ammunition 
stocks, and the potential utility of some MAP programs in important 
areas such as the Persian Gulf. (S)
Finally, it was generally agreed that some parts of our military 
strategy are more important than others, and that priorities need to be 
established. An NSC meeting will be held in the near future to discuss 
the material DOD presented in this meeting, some closely related mate-
rial in the comprehensive Net Assessment, and the M–X basing deci-
sion. On the basis of the President’s reactions to that meeting, and a 
future NSC meeting to discuss strategic targeting and C3I issues, PD–18 
may be updated to establish more clearly the relative priorities of the 
various elements of our overall military strategy. (S)
