1084  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
 The key to getting START done so it can be signed this month—
less than 3 weeks away—is to use tape exchange on a routine basis. This 
would greatly simplify and accelerate the negotiations.
 Amb. Obukhov asked for, and Amb. Bartholomew provided, a 
radical simplification of the US proposal showing how much of the 
complexity would fall away if we can agree to use tape exchange on a 
routine basis.
 There is no way we can sign START without the data denial pro-
visions. The one way we see to complete the treaty on the time scale our 
presidents want is for us to set aside our complex proposal, and for you 
to set aside your complex proposal, and for both of us to rapidly agree 
on a simplified approach based on routine exchange of telemetry tapes.
 This is the breakthrough we need to put us on the track we want to 
be on. You have had an opportunity to review the simplified approach 
in Moscow. Hope you can tell me we can proceed on this basis.
Data denial exemptions
Both sides want some relief from the data denial provisions to 
encrypt or encapsulate (i.e. record) telemetry from RVs and other pay-
loads (but not telemetry from the missile boosters). [less than 1 line not 
declassified] The Soviets want it to record RV data during portions of 
their flight where broadcasting telemetry is difficult.
Soviet position:
— 9 exempted flights per year, including all deployed, retired, and 
former ICBMs and SLBMs.
— Subquota of no more than 3 flights per type of missile per year.
New US position presented in Geneva:
— 11 exempted flights per year, including all deployed, retired, 
and former ICBMs and SLBMs. This would include the Polaris A-3 and 
Minuteman-II.
— The STARS missile would not be considered a Polaris A-3, since 
it has a different number of stages. STARS would be treated as an R&D 
booster under the INF treaty.
— For any ICBM or SLBM ever tested with a self-contained dis-
pensing mechanism, a subquota of 4 flights per type per year.
— For existing and future missiles, only encapsulation is allowed. 
For retired and former missiles only encryption is allowed.
Points to make:
 The Soviet side has said it needs certain exemptions for encapsu-
lation of telemetry data on reentry vehicles.
 We need certain exemptions for encryption of payloads.
 Neither of us proposes any exemption for denial of data from 
boosters.
