September 1953–December 1954
821
evitably trying to frustrate and discredit the man who overthrew their
leader; and the elements who oppose in principle any Government
headed by a military man.2
Dr. Baqai commented in passing that in normal times he would op-
pose the selection of a military man as premier. In view of the present
crisis, however, and in view of the fact that he himself had no desire to
assume the reins of Government and could see at present no alternative
to Zahedi, he had supported the General in his bid for power. Now,
however, he found himself in a very embarrassing situation, as he
could neither support, oppose, nor remain indifferent to the Zahedi re-
gime. He could not grant it support because it was acting contrary to
his expressed principles, was returning to power long-discredited poli-
ticians and was committing all over again the mistakes of the Mosadeq
Government. He could not oppose it, because he had helped bring it to
power and could only turn against it at the cost of admitting he had
made a mistake in preferring Zahedi to Mosadeq; furthermore, opposi-
tion to Zahedi would merely play into Communist hands. Finally, he
could not remain silent and profess indifference to the Zahedi Govern-
ment because his followers would ask him why he failed to criticize the
new Government when it repeated the mistakes of the old.
Dr. Baqai went on to say that Iranian and United States policies
coincided most closely in the matter of their identical opposition to
Communism and Communistic infiltration. Unfortunately, in this re-
gard as in others, the Zahedi Government’s performance has been
worse than poor. Of the 4,000 persons imprisoned as suspected Com-
munists, some 30 per cent are entirely innocent. Furthermore, the re-
mainder who are either Tudeh party members or Communist sympa-
thizers include only rank and file members and insignificant minor
functionaries; not a single member of the Central Committee of the
Party,3 not a single important Communist writer or pamphleteer, not a
single leading party organizer has been imprisoned. Instead of weak-
ening the Communist party in Iran, the Government’s inept perform-
ance is actually strengthening it; so long as the leaders remain free they
can always attract new dupes and sympathizers to replace those whom
the Government imprisons, while many of the innocent men arrested
on one pretext or another by the security forces become embittered by
the injustice of their treatment and turn to Communism for revenge.
Baqai emphasized that Communism, being an ideology, could not
be overcome by force alone, and pointed out that the Government was
even using force, its only weapon, incorrectly. While innocent men are
2 Richards highlighted this sentence.
3 Richards underlined the phrase “not a single member of the Central Committee of
the Party.”
