Afghanistan —Soviet and East European diplomats are coming to us to underline that we’re making a mistake by thinking the Soviets don’t really want to talk seriously about a political settlement. —Embassy Moscow has picked up a story that Brezhnev overruled Gromyko on the withdrawal question.5 All of these indications are consistent with the interpretation that the Soviet withdrawal is strictly a propaganda move which Moscow hopes to exploit to further divide the US and the West. This interpretation is strongly buttressed by the nature of the Soviet withdrawal and the way they let the French in on the news first. At the same time, there are a few straws in the wind which suggest that there may be more to this than a purely propaganda move. —Brezhnev appears to be preparing the way for declaring a victory in the style suggested by Senator Aiken for Vietnam. Brezhnev’s statement that the situation in Afghanistan is returning to normal came at a time when the Soviet security situation in Afghanistan appears worse than ever.6 Whatever his intention, his statement creates the assumption within the USSR that Soviet involvement is winding down. —Even the kind of phantom withdrawal the Soviets have announced would seem to indicate that they have abandoned one of the options open to them—doubling or tripling of their force in Afghanistan, coupled with a major effort to defeat the Afghan Nationalists throughout the country. —Insignificant though the withdrawal might be, it does create the presumption of a lower overall ceiling and possible further withdrawals. Thus, their action creates new constraints for the future. —It is unlike the Soviets to reverse themselves like this on the withdrawal question. Gromyko told us and the Germans privately that we were wasting our time in talking about withdrawals before there had been recognition of the Babrak government and an end to the Nationalist resistence. He made the same point publicly at a lunch for the Indian Foreign Minister earlier this month. —The fact that the withdrawal announcement was not made a couple of days before the Venice Summit when it might have had more effect on deliberations there would seem to indicate that it was a subject of internal debate and that the opposition was significant. Such a debate
