Afghanistan
779
—Soviet and East European diplomats are coming to us to under-
line that we’re making a mistake by thinking the Soviets don’t really
want to talk seriously about a political settlement.
—Embassy Moscow has picked up a story that Brezhnev overruled
Gromyko on the withdrawal question.5
All of these indications are consistent with the interpretation that
the Soviet withdrawal is strictly a propaganda move which Moscow
hopes to exploit to further divide the US and the West. This interpreta-
tion is strongly buttressed by the nature of the Soviet withdrawal and
the way they let the French in on the news first.
At the same time, there are a few straws in the wind which suggest
that there may be more to this than a purely propaganda move.
—Brezhnev appears to be preparing the way for declaring a victory
in the style suggested by Senator Aiken for Vietnam. Brezhnev’s state-
ment that the situation in Afghanistan is returning to normal came at
a time when the Soviet security situation in Afghanistan appears worse
than ever.6 Whatever his intention, his statement creates the assumption
within the USSR that Soviet involvement is winding down.
—Even the kind of phantom withdrawal the Soviets have
announced would seem to indicate that they have abandoned one
of the options open to them—doubling or tripling of their force in
Afghanistan, coupled with a major effort to defeat the Afghan National-
ists throughout the country.
—Insignificant though the withdrawal might be, it does create the
presumption of a lower overall ceiling and possible further withdraw-
als. Thus, their action creates new constraints for the future.
—It is unlike the Soviets to reverse themselves like this on the
withdrawal question. Gromyko told us and the Germans privately that
we were wasting our time in talking about withdrawals before there
had been recognition of the Babrak government and an end to the
Nationalist resistence. He made the same point publicly at a lunch for
the Indian Foreign Minister earlier this month.
—The fact that the withdrawal announcement was not made a
couple of days before the Venice Summit when it might have had more
effect on deliberations there would seem to indicate that it was a subject
of internal debate and that the opposition was significant. Such a debate
5 The Embassy reported this information in telegram 10147 from Moscow, June 24.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
6 Speaking at a June 23 meeting of the Central Committee, Brezhnev declared: “Life
in Afghanistan is now gradually coming back to normal.” A resolution passed by the
Central Committee approved the December 1979 intervention in Afghanistan. (Craig R.
Whitney, “Brezhnev Says His Side Won Afghan War,” New York Times, p. A6)
