134  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
which called for programs of research and of public education, but that 
the Chiefs had certain reservations with respect to proposals to con­
struct shelter in military facilities.
General Cutler thereafter requested the Secretary of State to pre­
sent his views to the Council. Secretary Dulles stated that he wished 
to commend the authors of NSC 5807 just as Secretary Anderson had a 
while ago, for bringing the subject of shelter out of the ether and down 
to earth where we could observe and understand it. Beyond this com­
mendation, he added, he had a few observations to make.
In the first place, it seemed to Secretary Dulles to be a seri­
ous question whether the emphasis in the program set forth by the 
Interdepartmental Committee in NSC 5807 was actually in the right 
place. In the United States today there are millions and millions of 
basements which could provide a shelter which would reduce the 
hazard of radioactive fallout to as much as one-­tenth. On the other 
hand, we have no basements which would actually enable people who 
sought refuge in them to survive over a considerable period. There 
seemed to Secretary Dulles no sense whatever in providing basements 
where people merely died of radiation sickness more slowly than they 
did outside. Accordingly, the obvious first thing to do was to improve 
existing basement facilities to a point where people seeking shelter 
in them could have a real hope of surviving. This would include pro­
vision for what comes after the nuclear exchange—­the provision of 
food, water, heat, medical supplies, and the like—­in these improved 
basement shelters. The kind of program that he was suggesting, said 
Secretary Dulles, made use of widespread existing house shelters 
all over the nation. To achieve such a shelter program wouldn’t cost 
the Government anything significant, and would add greatly to the 
chance of national survival in a nuclear war. In short, the measures he 
was advocating would provide the population with a high degree of 
protection while at the same time avoiding the problems and dangers 
which so worried Secretary Anderson.
Continuing, Secretary Dulles stated his firm opposition to the 
construction of massive shelter in the basements of public buildings. 
A measure like this must be approached gingerly. Programs calling for 
the addition of massive basements in new Federal construction would 
certainly involve very large costs to the Government and might not 
add significantly to our survival capacity. On the other hand, Secretary 
Dulles thought it would seem desirable to carry out the public educa­
tion program recommended by the Interdepartmental Committee and 
programs which would convert existing facilities into shelters rather 
than into living tombs. Accordingly, he was inclined to cut the pro­
gram of the Interdepartmental Committee further.
Secretary Dulles also said he assumed that the Interdepartmental 
Committee had given careful thought to the experience of the European
