554 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX annual renewal. If discussion were normal, on the substance of U.S.- Romanian economic relations, this would be fine, but what is actually discussed is neither to Romania’s advantage nor to that of the U.S. Romania is not afraid to confront serious issues but needs to know what it is doing so far. On Transylvania, quote, we know whom we should discuss it with, end quote, and have all sorts of arguments at our disposal, but the U.S. Congress is not the place to talk about rights or non-rights in Transylvania. Both the U.S. and Romania can live without such discussion and, after all, we entered into the trade agreement from other motives.6 6. Counselor responded that U.S. citizens are free to raise any topic which interests them in such congressional hearings, but that what Macovescu had called the Transylvanian problem is not a problem for us; it is a Romanian domestic affair. Like Mexican-Americans and other Americans of foreign descent, Americans of Hungarian descent sometimes like to consider the cultural affairs of their country of origin their own, but we do not consider that this has political significance. During the last renewal period there were not many questions on the topic in the Congress. From time to time members of Congress are given papers and speeches to read, but these should not be overrated; at times we have the impression that only the GOR reads them. Cultural diversity in the sense defined by the Helsinki Final Act is a valid topic of discourse, but this is a very general proposition. Using the example of putting Spanish on the ballot and in the schools of New York City, Counselor noted that Americans are used to discussing these issues and expressed view that Hungarian-American thinking should not be considered at any other level. 7. Macovescu concluded discussion by noting that Romania has a public opinion, too, and while it may not be as “tough” as ours, GOR officials can still be asked uncomfortable questions—such as what possible link there is between Transylvania and a trade agreement—in Parliament. Transylvania is not a problem for Romania, but it may be a problem in bilateral relations; it would be wrong to ignore issues which seem small today but which may be important tomorrow, “in both directions.” 8. Counselor indicated in his conversations that these issues would continue to be studied in Washington, and GOR interlocutors expressed 6 In his September 29 meeting with Vance in New York at the UNGA, reported to Bucharest in telegram 238769, October 4, Macovescu had made a similar pitch. The Romanian Foreign Minister pressed for de-coupling issues such as human rights and emigration from the review of “a trade agreement.” Vance suggested that multi-year review could be discussed, but that too would require legislation. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770362–1086)
