1114 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI would be to keep that open, because given the very few days we have been allowed for endgame, an extra day or two could be crucial. The Future 7. Roslyakov has repeatedly asked me whether the USG is ready for the “consultations” about future talks to which we are committed promptly after signature. Our most recent (one-sided) discussion of this subject was on June 10 (Geneva 7770, NST/START XV-M-366).3 Lint called attention to this in his expedited guidance request No. 1 to the ungroup yesterday.4 I am not sure of Washington’s state of thinking on future negotiations, although I do know that Bob Einhorn has been thinking about this for some time and has written a paper or two on the subject. I will venture a few tentative thoughts and predictions on the subject together with the strong recommendation that we must be prepared to engage at least in a general sense at the summit on the subject. 8. I believe that Gorbachev and the Foreign Ministry will push for a relatively rapid plunge into START II. They, of course, will have a broader agenda of arms control topics, including naval arms control, further constraints on nuclear testing and possibly SNF. I believe that we should go slow on the question of START II, especially until ratification has been completed. We do not want to appear to be negotiating on further reductions until the Senate has exercised its prerogatives. At a minimum, we should not plunge into new negotiations until we have established reasonably clear U.S. goals for next steps. Preferably, such negotiations would not begin until these goals have been generally agreed with the Soviets. I understand that some thought has been given to the so-called “stability talks,” a new venture which has been agreed in principle with the Soviets. Such talks could begin after ratification and could lead to an agreed mandate for further strategic arms negotiations, with the mandate being blessed by the foreign ministers. The 1985 Shultz/Gromyko meeting provides a useful precedent. One thing is clear—no reasonable person on either side should want another 10-year negotiation which results in another 1000-page treaty. 9. The defense and space negotiations are a delicate subject which requires some special considerations. In as much as there is no state representative for these negotiations here, I will venture a few thoughts on this subject also. I assume that senior people in the Department are aware that the defense and space talks have for a long time been a hopeless enterprise and the subject of ridicule by both sides here. I want to stress that this is not the fault of the U.S. negotiators, who continue 3 Reference is to telegram 7700 from NST Geneva, July 15 (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D910671–0674) 4 Not found.
