Czechoslovakia
345
forward with the proposal at that time because of the trial of six dissi-
dents in Prague in October.
With the rise in the price of gold to its present level (at $500
per ounce the Czechoslovak gold is worth about $300 million), our
negotiating leverage has increased substantially as has the pressure on
us from the claimants for a good and rapid settlement. It now should
be within the realm of possibility to obtain a claims settlement which
will be acceptable to the claimants and to Congress and to reach a
satisfactory resolution of the other issues involving USG financial inter-
ests. Such an outcome would move our bilateral relations with Czecho-
slovakia out of their long stagnation and increase our policy options
in dealing with that country.
Our Proposal
We intend to propose to the Czechoslovak Government that we
renegotiate the provisions of the 1974 ad referendum agreement relating
to the amount to be paid by Czechoslovakia in settlement of U.S. claims
and that we leave the other provisions as agreed in 1974. We would
initially propose that the Czechoslovak Government make a lump sum
claims payment of $105.1 million (100 percent of the outstanding princi-
pal and interest awarded by the Foreign Claims Settlement Commis-
sion). The central elements of the proposal are described in the
attachment at Tab 2.3
Our initial proposal of $105 million will be much higher than
our opening position in the negotiations which led to the failed 1974
agreement ($26 million), although commensurate with the increase in
the value of the Czechoslovak gold. It also exceeds the settlement levels
with other Eastern European countries. There are several reasons for
a high opening position. Initially, it seems clear that Congress will not
approve a settlement which is not much more favorable to American
claimants than the failed 1974 agreement, particularly in light of the
greatly increased value of the gold. Our proposal will give us negotia-
ting room to reach an eventual settlement acceptable to Congress.
Moreover, this proposal responds to Congressional suggestions that
we should seek interest on the value of U.S. citizens’ claims.4
3 Tab 2 is attached but not printed.
4 The Department of the Treasury suggested using the demand for interest as a
means to improve the U.S. negotiating position and ensure that Congress would have
its concerns about interest addressed when the agreement went to the Hill for approval.
The Treasury position was reported in telegram 72571 to Prague, March 19. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D8000140–0224) In telegram 1037 from
Prague, March 24, Ambassador Meehan responded that such a position “verges on the
unreal” and “could throw the previous basis of negotiation out the window.” “We
think” Meehan wrote, Czechoslovakia “would receive the 105 million figure as a naively
exaggerated bargaining tactic or else as a signal we are not serious about negotiating.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800170–0605)
