Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  411
to originate with the Soviet military, but I cannot judge whether they 
are personal or institutional. In a private discussion late in the round, 
Nazarkin told me he had some “troublemakers” on his delegation.
Accomplishments
5. Despite the intense pace, our progress was primarily confined 
to details and to verification and stability. Thanks to good work both 
here and in Washington, we reached agreement on two trial verification 
measures, exchanging letters on heavy bomber inspections and almost 
completing agreement on trial RV OSI. We made some progress on 
other measures as well, as I indicate in a separate cable on the subject.
6. On the basic START Treaty itself, while no major START issue 
was resolved, we did gain a better understanding of some (e.g. non-­
circumvention and Treaty duration). Among the accomplishments:
A. We came close to implementing the Wyoming formula for unit 
of account.
B. We made changes in over 90 treaty provisions, generally nar-
rowing or eliminating differences with the Soviets on details.
C. We reorganized the mobiles joint working paper, made a pre-
sentation on U.S. mobile ICBM basing concepts, and implemented the 
mobile verification agreements from Wyoming. Late in the round we 
told the Soviets we would merge the mobile joint working paper into 
the Treaty itself at the start of the next round.
D. Large sections of the conversion or elimination protocol are now 
agreed. We reached agreement that actions, not notifications change 
accountability, worked on simplifying notification provisions, and nar-
rowed differences on several other issues.
E. We made similar progress on the inspection protocol, reaching 
total agreement on the text for an early exchange of lists of inspectors, 
solving the long-­standing issue of monitoring support personnel, and, 
we hope, paving the way to solve the equally long-­standing issue of 
defining an inspection site.
F. On throw-­weight, the Soviets tabled a new protocol, patterned 
on the U.S. draft. The new protocol moves in our direction in several 
ways, but the Soviets still reject our idea of capturing the full throw-­
weight potential of future systems.
G. We restructured three annexes in the memorandum of under-
standing, those dealing with ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers. We 
continue to be hampered by the large number of outstanding issues in 
this area.
7. None of this is spectacular, but it represents good progress. We 
are now in good position to move quickly as major decisions are made.
