282  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
and requested President Eisenhower to put the weight of U.S. influence 
behind the disarmament conference which Chile has called for and to 
help make the conference a success.2
President Alessandri said he thought that the possibilities for hold-
ing a general disarmament conference were good, but he believed it 
better to have a preliminary meeting which would include all South 
American countries except Bolivia and Paraguay and with the addition 
of Mexico and the United States to prepare the way for a larger confer-
ence. He said that several countries had already accepted the invita-
tion but that Peru, Venezuela and Colombia had not yet replied to the 
Chilean initiative. He said that he would like to have U.S. assistance in 
assuring the success of the conference.
Aggression
President Alessandri said he believed it would be most helpful 
if the United States would make a public promise to come to the aid 
of a victim of aggression without waiting for action on the part of the 
OAS. He said this would help a great deal to halt the armaments race. 
President Alessandri also suggested that an agreement be worked out 
among the American States (but not others) for recognition of the com-
pulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in accordance 
with Article 36 of the Court’s statute. This too, he thought, would be a 
useful step forward in the direction of the limitation of armaments.
Rearmament
Turning to a new subject, President Alessandri said that he hoped 
the United States would find it possible to provide credit for the recon-
ditioning of one additional destroyer and one additional submarine 
for Chile. He confessed that this might appear to be inconsistent with 
his previous statements regarding disarmament but the reason for 
the request was that Chile had larger responsibilities for hemisphere 
defense due to its geographic situation than certain other countries. 
He said the Chilean forces were small in size and that both Peru and 
Argentina had been buying more naval vessels. He suggested that the 
United States military aid program be coordinated so that we would 
not give assistance to countries which squandered their resources on 
the purchase of foreign equipment. In other words, he explained, those 
who don’t waste money on unnecessary purchases should get more 
aid. He felt that these principles were consistent with United States 
principles and would work to the advantages of all.
President Eisenhower said that he was interested in President 
Alessandri’s remarks and would like to ask two questions. The first was, 
2 [illegible in the original]
