Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1149
English and Soviet “alternat”. Brown, gaining some support from 
Sokov, responded that the U.S. side had assumed an obligation not to 
disclose this information to the public, and that it was up to the U.S. to 
determine how such information would be safeguarded. Sviridov, not 
persuaded, again requested that the U.S. side classify this document, to 
guarantee that it would not be inadvertently released once it reached 
Washington, and to comply with the terms of the agreement. Brown 
finally agreed to stamp the front page of the agreement “confidential”, 
and to permit the Soviet side to type “confidential,” in Russian, on the 
Russian “alternat.”
23. Sokov told Brown that he and Polyakov had gotten together 
earlier in the day to go through the signed inspection protocol, and 
their quick review had resulted in the proposed changes to references 
that had been provided by Sokov to U.S. embassy officials in the early 
afternoon. Brown noted that the U.S. side would be going through a 
similar process, and that it was likely that some additional conforming 
changes would have to be introduced. Sviridov, who was listening to 
this conversation, agreed that this was likely and acknowledged that 
this should not present any problems for either side, since it was in the 
interests of both to have a clean text.
24. As he was escorting Brown and Herr out of the MFA offices, 
Sokov (protect) took Brown aside, saying that he had something to say 
personally to Brown. He then made the following comments: Obukhov 
would be taking Karpov’s position in the MFA, but this should not nec-
essarily be viewed as a positive factor by the U.S. side, since Karpov 
was willing to stand up to the Soviet military, while Obukhov clearly 
would not stand up to the military. Sokov also alluded to his desire to 
leave the department, probably related to Karpov’s departure.
25. Documents Exchanged:
By Brooks and Nazarkin: Letters on: phased reduction of heavy 
ICBMs, Bear D, B–1, silo launch control centers, launch canisters, engi-
neering site surveys, and providing photographs; the photographs 
themselves); U.S. letter of December 1990 on ALCMs with multiple 
warheads.
By foreign ministers: SLCM declarations; backfire declaration 
(Soviet only); letters on the legality of the heavy phasing agreement 
(Soviet only); letters on third country basing.
By Brown and Zharkov in Geneva: corrected English “alternat” of 
the geographic coordinates agreement.
Brooks
