650 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement overcoming the effects of malaria in his country and elsewhere in the world. Despite progress made against yellow fever, he said he understood that the disease was creeping up through the Americas again, primarily due to the infection of monkeys in the Brazilian jungle. The Secretary and Dr. García Bauer, the prospective Foreign Minister in the new government, engaged briefly in conversation regarding the Law of the Sea Conference scheduled in Geneva. (Mr. Rubottom had discussed the subject with Dr. García Bauer and the President-Elect on the previous afternoon.)2 Dr. García Bauer stated that Guatemala was interested in trying to cut down on Mexican encroachment on Guatemalan fishing beds. The Secretary referred to fishing problems which we had had with Mexico. The President and the Secretary, as well as the Secretary of Defense, referred briefly to the program taking place in Washington today to inform the public regarding the Mutual Security Program. The Secretary indicated that he was speaking on this subject this morning at 9:15, and the Secretary of Defense added that he would be speaking later this morning. The President mentioned that “mutual security” was a proper term with respect to the military aid portion of the program, but that “economic aid”, which speaks for itself, should not be referred to as part of “mutual security”. While engaged in this subject, the President gave general assurances to General Ydígoras regarding the desire of the United States to assist Guatemala where possible. Dr. García Bauer told the President that they were looking forward to the planned visit of Dr. Milton Eisenhower and Mr. Rubottom to Guatemala later this year. The President acknowledged that this trip was in prospect and requested his brother to obtain first-­hand 2 No memorandum of President Ydígoras’ conversation with Assistant Secretary Rubottom on February 24 was found in Department of State files. At the Secretary of State’s staff meeting on February 25, the following note was taken: “Mr. Snow reported on a two-­hour meeting yesterday with the Guatemalan President-­elect during which Ydígoras stressed: 1) the need for additional electric power in his underdeveloped country; 2) his belief that Communists should be allowed to return to Guatemala where they could be kept under surveillance; 3) his desire for naval craft to prevent poaching by Mexican shrimp boats; and 4) his fear that Mexico might revive its territorial claim against British Honduras. Mr. Snow said that $10 million in grant aid for Guatemala from FY 56 is still in the pipeline, that an additional $10 million is now being programmed, and that Ydígoras seemed satisfied with this level of assistance.” (Secretary’s Staff Meetings, Lot 63 D 75, SM N–613, February 25, 1958) In his description of the meeting with Rubottom, Ydígoras wrote that he raised certain subjects but got no positive response. The subjects included the possibility of U.S. import quotas for coffee; a request for Guatemalan purchase of two frigates; establishment of a Central American defense organization with U.S. membership to defend the Caribbean; and a suggestion for U.S. support of the Guatemalan claim to Belize. See Ydígoras, (Englewood Cliffs, n.[illegible in the original], 1963) My War with Communism, pp. 61–63. A memorandum on British Honduras handed to Assistant Secretary Rubottom by President-­elect Ydígoras on February 24 is in ARA/ OAP Files, Lot 60 D 647, “British Honduras (Belize).”
