Afghanistan
471
—Enhancing our base structure; pushing ahead for bases in one or
more of the following countries: Kenya, Oman, Somalia, Egypt, Israel.
—Providing a meaningful military and economic assistance pack-
age to Pakistan (the current package is entirely inadequate).
—Boycotting, partially boycotting, or moving the venue of the
Olympics (no single action by the US would have greater impact on
the Soviet people).
—Renouncing the 1972 US-USSR Joint Declaration of Principles,
since Soviet actions in Afghanistan are in direct violation of its letter
and spirit. (The Declaration never received much attention in the United
States—it was a crumb Kissinger and Nixon threw the Soviets—but it
has language supporting our position in this instance, and is very
important to the Soviets. They cite it frequently and have used it inter-
nally to convince the Soviet public that relations with the US are
under control.)4
—In line with the above, suspending the various exchange agree-
ments initiated in the full flush of the inauguration of detente from
1972–74.
—Suspending the Maritime Agreement (as indicated elsewhere, I
think we should do this in response to a Soviet veto of sanctions
against Iran).
—Suspending Aeroflot landing rights entirely.
—Reducing Embassy staffing.
—Expelling fifty or more of the top KGB operatives in the United
States, just as the British expelled the top 105 in the UK in 1971.5 (S)
In any case, I think it is the right tactic to let the Soviets know,
and our bureaucracy as well, that we have other actions up our sleeves
which we will use should the Soviets engage in further unacceptable
behavior. By doing so there is at least a hope that we would inhibit
the Soviets from acting recklessly. (S)
4 No renunciation of the Declaration of Principles occurred.
5 The British expulsion, part of Operation Foot, occurred following the defection
of the KGB official Oleg Adolfovich Lyalin, who notified British intelligence officers of
the scope of Soviet espionage activities in the United Kingdom. According to Lyalin,
Soviet agents were plotting to mount terrorist attacks in London, the United States,
France, the FRG, and Italy. See “Operation Foot (1972),” in R.S.C. Trahair, ed., Encyclopedia
of Cold War Espionage, p. 220.
