1957 1431 d. An even more serious distortion of the Agreed Announcement has been the argument which you have put forward during the last two meetings, as well as on previous occasions, that the announce­ ment applies only to so-called ordinary Americans residing in China and not to those who are alleged to have committed offenses. Neither the words of the Announcement itself, nor the record of the negotia­ tions leading up to it, support this argument. The clear intention of the Agreed Announcement was to bring about the expeditious release of all Americans who were against their will prevented from leaving your country, including most obviously those who were imprisoned. By their failure to implement this clear intention, your authorities deliberately sought to deprecate the value of agreements between us. Your authori­ ties have thus been careful to maintain what they full well know is one of the principal obstacles to the improvement of relations between us and to progress in these talks. No amount of words can change these facts or obscure the full responsibility of your side. e. In all frankness, Mr. Ambassador, I must also make the same indictment of your side on the question of the renunciation of the use of force. Again it has been the intransigeant attitude adopted by your authorities which has prevented us from making progress on this vital matter. We dealt at considerable length at our meeting in August with this extremely important question and I do not propose to review today the various arguments which I put forward then. I do wish to stress, however, that in the view of my government the reciprocal renuncia­ tion of force with respect to the Taiwan area is a step which is fully as essential today as it was when these talks began more than two years ago. I earnestly wish to point out once again, Mr. Ambassador, that the refusal of the authorities of your country to renounce force and to ter­ minate their military threat in the Taiwan area remains a fundamental obstacle to the attainment of lasting peace. The removal of this obsta­ cle certainly merits our full attention for whatever time is necessary to achieve results. Introduction of subsidiary issues by no means serves the interests of our two countries nor of the world.” 2. Wang replied. He had repeatedly pointed out during the course of the talks that in order to improve relations between our two coun­ tries, it is necessary that obstacles lying in their path must be removed. I had this morning referred to the record of our talks of the past two years. He might say that this record does not give any indication that the U.S. is making efforts to remove such obstacles in our relations. From this record of our talks it can be clearly seen that their complaints against us have been based on facts. They consider that relations between two countries must be based on equality, mutual benefits and reciprocity. The U.S., however, has consistently denied this basis. The principle of equality and reciprocity has been generally accepted as one of the bases
