1132 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI correct version of the Joint Statement on Weapons Storage Areas. The Ambassadors agreed that the Joint Statement on Weapons Storage Areas would be exchanged later and appended to the negotiating record. (Comment: The U.S. side had inadvertently included an obsolete text. The correct statement was exchanged later that day and is included below. Subsequent to the plenary Ambassador Nazarkin delivered a unilateral statement on subtunnels. See Reftel. End comment.) Following the interlude, Ambassador Nazarkin presented the Soviet side’s joint and reciprocal statements and Ambassador Brooks responded with the same statements. Ambassador Brooks then presented the U.S. side’s unilateral statements. The following are the joint statements: (Begin text of joint statements) A. Joint statements Joint Statement on New Missile Production Technology Processes The parties agree that: (a) Procedures for elimination of ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs specified in the protocol on procedures governing the conversion or elimination of the systems subject to the treaty on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms have been agreed upon taking into account the fact that, in manufacturing stages for such missiles, both parties currently use the technology of casting the solid propellant directly in the case of the solid rocket motor so that the cured propellant cannot be removed non-destructively. (b) If in the future either party begins to produce stages of ICBMs for mobile launchers of ICBMs, employing so-called “insertable cartridges” or any other technology that allows non-destructive removal of solid propellant from motor cases, that party shall inform the other party thereof at the next session of the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission. The parties shall decide within the framework of the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission what, if any, additional verification and elimination procedures are necessary, taking into account the new technology for manufacturing missiles. Joint Statement Regarding Data Updates with Respect to Categories of Data Contained in the Memorandum of Understanding The parties agree that, for any facility or item not listed in the memorandum of understanding under paragraph 1 of Article VIII of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, a notification, in accordance with paragraph 1, 2, or 3 of Section I of the notifications protocol relating to this treaty, shall be provided according to the complete list of the appropriate categories of data set
