Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  315
— Range: the range level at which a nuclear air-­to-­surface missile 
becomes a nuclear ALCM subject to START limits.
— Other related issues: a package resolution should protect conven-
tional ALCMs, and allow for a limited number of conventional bombers 
outside the START limits. A handful of less central questions must also 
be resolved eventually, but do not have to be addressed in the package.
The Counting Issue
U.S. position. Seeking to maximize the number of ALCMs and 
ALCM-­carrying bombers we could deploy under START limits, while 
minimizing the task of verifying ALCM limits, we have favored an 
“attribution” approach under which all ALCM carriers would be cred-
ited with an agreed number of ALCMs regardless of the number actu-
ally carried. Negotiated “attribution” rules are for bookkeeping and 
do not pretend to reflect (or even limit) deployments; thus, they avoid 
any requirement to verify numbers carried. The only verification task 
is to determine whether a bomber is an ALCM-­carrier. Such carriers are 
credited with an agreed number regardless of how many it is equipped 
to carry or actually carries. We would make clear to the Senate that such 
rules were counting tools, that both sides could legally deploy more 
than the attributed numbers, and that we considered this to be advan-
tageous to us because of our greater reliance on ALCMs and the larger 
ALCM capacities of our bombers.
We originally proposed attributing all U.S. and Soviet ALCM car-
riers with 6 ALCMs, but later moved to 10. Thus, under our approach, 
our 871 available ALCM units could be used by deploying 87 ALCM-­
carrying B–52 Hs, each counted as having 10 ALCMs but each actually 
carrying 20 (total of 1740 actual missiles, 870 of them “unaccounted”). 
We have justified our attribution approach, including its discounting 
of ALCMs, on the grounds that ALCMs are slow, air-­breathing systems 
that are not well suited for a surprise first strike, and must fly through 
heavy Soviet air defenses; and that attribution significantly eases the 
verification task.
During 1988, we told the Soviets we could attribute different num-
bers of warheads to different types of bombers, in response to a Soviet 
argument that assigning all bombers the same number would unfairly 
treat Soviet bombers, which carried fewer ALCMs. (In general, we’ve 
placed a higher priority on discounting U.S. ALCMs than minimizing 
discounting of Soviet ALCMs). We had provisional authority (never 
used) to attribute the Soviet Bear H and Blackjack bombers with 6 and 
8 ALCMs, respectively, while continuing to assign 10 to U.S. bombers.
Soviet position. Seeking tighter limits in an area of U.S. advantage 
(and perhaps regretting their assent at Reykjavik to a non-ALCM count-
ing rule generous to U.S. bomber forces), the Soviets have opposed our
