196
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Next Several Weeks: Negotiations
—Security Council Resolution
—World Court meets December 10
—Syria, Arafat, papal envoy, and perhaps other mediation efforts
now in train. Several personal missions (lawyers, doctors) going on.
—Secretary General may become more actively engaged in direct
negotiations once the Security Council has acted.
—Chapter Seven economic sanctions could be sought as a follow-
up to the Security Council action. This might be one way to bring our
allies into the sanctions.
—Ghotbzadeh has suggested a Carter statement.3 Although his
ideas are not acceptable, we might drop some acceptable language on
his themes into speeches, statements and the like which could then be
put together into a “package” and presented to Ghotbzadeh. This is
essentially what we did with the first PLO effort. (This is Hal Saunders’
idea as a next step on the negotiating track—please protect.)
—Shah may leave, thus changing the situation further.
—The espionage campaign is bound to increase, and the students
may go to trials—over the objections of Ghotbzadeh and others. This
will force us to ratchet up our overt opposition. If we react with limited
military action, that will derail or divert the diplomatic track.
—I heard today that the constitutional referendum will be put
before some kind of Islamic Council on December 10. That may turn
out to be an important date, but we have little information thus far.
The objective of the negotiating strategy should be to build as much
pressure as possible on Khomeini and his cohorts as we can. They perceive
the economic steps we have taken as quite significant, and any short-
ages of goods, unemployment, credit breakdowns, and simple eco-
nomic foulups will probably be attributed to our efforts. That is just
3 Richard Cottam met with Bazargan and Ghotbzadeh on December 1. Ghotbzadeh
suggested an eight-point statement for Carter, designed to give Ghotbzadeh “ammuni-
tion” for dealing with Khomeini. He would not, however, guarantee that the statement
would lead to the release of the hostages. The eight points were: (1) U.S. recognition
that the Shah’s entry into the United States had angered Iranians; (2) clarification that
the United States had intended to admit the Shah for reasons of medical treatment; (3)
reiteration of U.S. respect for Iranian sovereignty; (4) restatement that the United States
would not interfere in Iran’s internal affairs with specific mention of the Mossadegh
years; (5) reestablishment of cordial relations but with reduced U.S. Embassy staff in
Tehran; (6) U.S. recognition of the Iranian right to recover property in accordance with
U.S. legal procedures; (7) U.S. welcome of Iranian representatives to explain their position
to the U.S. public; and (8) the absence of U.S. opposition to an international tribunal
established to examine the Shah’s regime. (Memorandum from Sick to Brzezinski, Decem-
ber 2; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 31,
Subject File, Iran 12/1/79–12/7/79)
