300  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
since it is a more powerful weapon than we now have for our ballis­
tic missiles. Defense would not press the matter, however, since it is an 
improvement not too high in priority or importance. Mr. McElroy also 
indicated Defense could give way on this. The President asked Mr. 
McCone to have work go forward constructing the weapon, and placing 
it in stockpile without making it the critical item in the stockpile. He did 
not think it was a good moment to conduct a large test in the Pacific. Mr. 
McElroy suggested building a modest number of weapons of this type.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
90.	
Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, August 28, 1958
MEMORANDUM OF CONFERENCE WITH THE PRESIDENT 
August 28, 1958—following Cabinet Meeting
OTHERS PRESENT
Secretary McElroy, Secretary Quarles, General Twining, General Goodpaster
Mr. McElroy said the group had come in to take up with the 
President certain proposed steps in the Defense Reorganization pro­
gram. These relate to eliminating the executive agent system. General 
Twining said that the establishment would be phasing over to the new 
system, and that it would be completely in effect by January first, with 
USEUCOM making the first transfer—­on 15 September. The J-Staff 
system has been initiated, and should also be completely in effect by 
that time. Necessary changes in the command plan are being made, to 
strengthen the command authority of the unified commanders, to fix 
their force structure, and to eliminate the designation of departments 
as executive agents. He then outlined the main features of the change.
The President heartily welcomed this report. He hoped the Joint 
Staff would be made a true staff, getting away from the team system. 
He said he would be interested to see whether the Joint Staffs recog­
nize the need for streamlining service staffs, and having plans originate 
with the central organization. He thought there should be savings in 
1 Source: Defense reorganization and discipline on intelligence matters. Secret. 2 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on August 30.
