742
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Mr. Wisner: Was that the fellow who was mentioned in the
telegram?
Mr. Helms: One telegram said he had to kill so and so.
Mr. Wilber: Yes.
Mr. Roosevelt: Did they say that we had to kill him?
Mr. Wisner: They said, “Unfortunately so and so (Mumtaz) had to
be killed.”
Mr. Roosevelt: Well, Mumtaz, we had nothing desperately against
him. He didn’t do very well by us.
Mr. Waller: Was he supposed to be in on it?
Mr. Roosevelt: No, he was not anyone we counted on, but we
hoped at the last minute he would come on our side, but he apparently
directed the defense of Mossadeq’s house and then fled at the appro-
priate moment, but the story was he had been shot and then committed
suicide in front of Mossadeq’s house, but two days later he turned up
without a scratch on him under arrest.
I think really when you come right down to it there were about
three casualties among the military which is, considering all the
shooting that went on, a remarkable thing, and probably somewhere
between 50 and 100 civilian casualties.
Mr. Waller: What about the Qashqais?
Mr. Roosevelt: Well, the Qashqais had gone to Shiraz now without
the mother who was in Teheran. The Qashqais left as far as we can
make out Tuesday because they could smell that things weren’t going
too well, and they beat it down to Shiraz, [9 lines not declassified].
There was one moment when the Tribesmen started to disarm the
gendarme´rie, and troops were sent down from Isfahan, and the whole
thing collapsed, and the Qashqai were being very quiet, so nothing
much came of them at all.
Now that covers the gap that wasn’t reported to Washington.
Mr. Helms: You may be interested to know as an aside that the
FBIS started picking up Radio Teheran play by play, and it was blasting
in here at a hell of a rate, so we were practically abreast of it the way
you were in Teheran.
Mr. Roosevelt: Except Radio Teheran was an extremely unreliable
source.
Mr. Helms: I mean it reported its unreliability. It would be off one
minute, and on the next, and crazy the next, etc., so we were all sitting
here sort of getting the pattern of this thing, wondering whether we
were in, out, up, or down.
Mr. Roosevelt: By the time we had Radio Teheran we were in. It
was just a question of getting them safely out on the streets, and, well,
that was . . .
