640  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
—While the gross resources available to, and the military efforts 
being made by the US and its allies were larger than those of the Soviet 
Union and its allies, they can’t really be added together since our 
objectives are not always the same. Further, our column includes the 
resources and efforts of countries like the People’s Republic of China 
and Iran.
—The military investment imbalance in favor of the Soviets may 
be far more significant for the future than we realize. By 1985 the Sovi-
ets will have greater strength than the US in almost every military cat-
egory, no matter what we do. We are going to have to be prepared to 
live with this. (TS)
Secretary Brown also noted that there are some bright spots work-
ing for us, particularly in the area of technology, and he mentioned the 
space shuttle in particular. However, given the Soviets’ large efforts in 
the technology area, they might produce something revolutionary in 
the way of military capabilities. (TS)
Finally, Secretary Brown commented that we must be careful that 
we don’t let spending for strategic forces improvements absorb too 
much of the resources that we devote to defense. (TS)
George Seignious commented that perceptions of Soviet superior-
ity will have to be handled carefully in order to make sure that they do 
not have major adverse effects on our arms control efforts. (TS)
The President then said that much of this perception of Soviet 
superiority is created by this group. He noted that he had just convened 
a group of experts to discuss the problem of public perceptions and atti-
tudes, and their discussion had convinced him that maintaining a bal-
anced view of our actual situation is a serious problem. He noted how 
the newspapers tend to distort the testimony given about military mat-
ters by high-­level DOD officials. He commented that the eleven mem-
bers of the House of Representatives he had recently met with at Camp 
David had expressed concerns about the problem of perceptions. He 
commented that it seemed strange that we would hear so much about 
emerging military problems, given the fact that we have been increas-
ing DOD funding. He remarked that we should do what we can to let 
people know that we have a strong, powerful, permanent government 
and that we are not crawling abjectly before the Soviets. He pointed out 
that we have military advantages over them such as the fact that the 
Soviets have multiple enemies, where we do not. (TS)
Stan Turner commented that he generally agrees with Harold 
Brown’s assessment of Zbig’s conclusions about the overall balance. 
[4 lines not declassified]
General Jones remarked that the Chiefs have muted their concerns 
about the evolving military balance and cited as an example of their 
care to contain their concerns that it took three months for their memo
