Yugoslavia its land forces were aimed at the Soviet Union. China had made an incursion into Vietnam, an action which the United States had opposed and condemned. The United States shared the concern of many of the nations regarding Vietnam’s occupation of Kampuchea. From Ankara,4 Secretary Muskie would go on to Kuala Lumpur to meet with the ASEAN leaders to discuss the prospects for stability in Asia.5 This was in line with the basic desire of the United States to see stability in Asia and other areas strengthened. (C) Turning to the Arab-Israeli dispute, the President said that the Palestinian question and the question of Jerusalem had not yet been resolved, and he could not predict when success would come. However, the United States saw no alternative to the Camp David process which would be acceptable to both parties involved. The United States would continue to assist Egypt and Israel as long as they believed progress could be achieved. If, however, this proved unfeasible, the United States would be willing to join with other countries to look at other alternatives. (C) President Mijatovic thanked President Carter for his presentation. He said that he could fairly say that the Yugoslav leadership was satisfied with the viewpoints that President Carter had outlined and with his constructive efforts in the international area. Stating that he wished to elaborate on some of the points which President Carter had mentioned, he noted that the schedule would have to be expedited somewhat in order to leave time for a discussion of bilateral relations. (C) Turning first to the Middle East, he said that according to their information, neither the efforts of the United States nor the efforts of others had succeeded in solving the main problem of the Arab-Israeli dispute: the Palestinian problem. President Tito had reiterated that Yugoslavia supports any action which leads to progress toward resolving the Middle East crisis. Yugoslavia feared that the present stagnation reduced any prospect for resolving the crisis. (C) President Carter interjected that the United States would appreciate any assistance which Yugoslavia could give in resolving the present problems in the Middle East. (C) President Mijatovic replied that in May 1948 in the United Nations Yugoslavia had proposed the formation of a Palestinian state. If this had been done, it was conceivable that there would be no Palestinian problem today. Yugoslavia did not say that it was almighty or that the NAM could solve everything. However, there was utility in working jointly to try to resolve the problem and to look for solutions that
