1208 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 3. One of the two Chinese convicts at the U.S. Health Service Hospital at Lexington, Kentucky, who opted for return to the China Mainland has now informed the parole officer that he has changed his mind. He claims that since he was formerly in the Nationalist Army he will be persecuted by the Communists should he go back. We are asking that commutation of sentence proceedings in his case be halted. Fortunately we had not told the Indians or the Chinese Communists of the results of our survey so that if this development can be kept confi­ dential no harm will have been done. 4. Missing U.S. Military Personnel We have thought a good deal about how we should renew our pressure on the Communists to account for our missing military per­ sonnel. This is a subject which the relatives of the missing persons keep very much alive here and numerous letters are written each month by the Department of State, the Department of Defense and USUN in New York in response to pleas from these relatives. Our official replies contain the assurance that the United States Government is leaving no stone unturned to try to obtain the facts from the Communists. We feel very keenly the need to take some action. However, we share the views expressed both by you and by General Guard, the Senior U.S. repre­ sentative on UNCMAC, that we are unlikely to obtain any satisfactory accounting from the Communists either in Panmunjom or Geneva. After weighing the pros and cons, we wonder if it would not be preferable for you to reopen the subject at Geneva. Enclosure A contains a summary of our reasons. These were originally prepared for inclusion in a memorandum recommending reintroduction of this subject at Geneva, but we wanted first to get your reaction. A further reason for selecting the Geneva forum, which, for obvious reasons, is mentioned neither in the enclosure nor in Col. Monroe’s memorandum on his talks with the U.S. element of the MAC, is Col. Monroe’s feeling that the personnel pres­ ently assigned to UNCMAC or those who might be assigned there in the future, have neither the experience nor the specialized skill required to negotiate effectively on this subject with the Communists. Our tentative thinking is that you might introduce this item again, using as your springboard the statement by the Communist spokes­ man in the MAC that they had no responsibility for individuals held outside Korea. You could then proceed on a case by case basis to seek information from Wang. Presumably he would, at least in the begin­ ning, refuse to discuss this issue and try to shift the responsibility back to the MAC. This would not be so easy for him to accomplish this time, in view of the statement made by the Communist spokesman in that body. Even if we fail to obtain any information from the Communists, we might at least succeed in throwing them off balance for a time, particularly if we should decide to exploit the issue publicly.
