816 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII This, to use your own words, is the key to everything. Attempts to reduce the whole matter to any one single question, to tie to such a question the prospects of our relations as the whole, are not only wrong but also non-productive. You are aware of our assessment of the causes that led to the present state of Soviet-U.S. relations. This was also the subject of detailed discussions at our meeting in Vienna.4 Therefore, I will not restate this assessment. Now with regard to Afghanistan. We note the recognition in your letter of the legitimate interest of the Soviet Union in ensuring the security of its borders and in friendly relations with Afghanistan as well as of our concern about an outside interference in Afghanistan. This would seem to be a realistic premise. However, this premise is directly contradicted by your persistent notion about the government, which exists in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, being unacceptable to the U.S. and by raising in this connection the question of “transition” to some other government. Here a complete clarity is in order: We do not intend to and will not engage even in discussions on posing the question in such a way. I may as well note here that no useful purpose either can be served by the attempts to put in doubt the fact of the recent withdrawal of some Soviet units from Afghanistan. Why are you doing this? After all, you know—as, by the way, the whole world knows,—that such doubts are groundless. As to your question what assurances of non-interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan would be considered by us as satisfactory, the answer thereto is contained in the known proposals of the DRA Government of last May 14.5 An adequately full discussion was devoted to it also in our previous exchanges of views. The guarantees of non-interference must be an integral part of the general political settlement, the path to which goes through direct negotiations of Pakistan and Iran with the Government of Afghanistan with the aim of normalizing relations between them with simultaneous cessation of armed incursions into the territory of Afghanistan as well as of all forms of interference in the internal affairs of that country in general. It is Pakistan and Iran who, by continuing to refuse to conduct negotiations, are bringing the task of the political settlement to an impasse. This is why, if the United States is genuinely interested in such a settlement, it could, as we have already pointed out, exert appropriate influence on the Pakistan leaders and induce them to hold negotiations with the Government of Afghanistan. 4 See Document 272. 5 See Document 270.
