463.00 R 29/164: Telegram [Document 134] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State PARIS, January 27, 1925—4 p.m. [Received 5:43 p.m.3 ] 83. L–336. Your 52, January 22 to American Embassy Paris. 1. Problem presented indirectly raises question of method of our participation in reparation payments made by or on behalf of Austria and Hungary. Consider it desirable that we take a definite stand on subject and for that reason following considerations are offered. 2. Informally understand that there will be a mixed claims commission to adjudicate American [claims] against Austria and Hungary.4 Whatever be the amount of awards it shall be seen that to collect them we shall have to reach an agreement with the Allies as in the case of Germany5 unless we employ sequestrated Austrian and Hungarian property. This latter method probably difficult in view of likelihood of the return of German property. It would seem that our treaty right[s] with respect to Austria and Hungary are identical with our treaty rights vis-à-vis Germany and that the arguments employed in the recent exchange of notes with England relative to Germany, apply with equal force to Austria and Hungary. Granting then that we have claims against Austria and Hungary and enforceable right[s], the question of the method of exercising them arises. 3. As Department is aware Allied Powers in granting priority to Austrian reconstruction loan postponed their reparation claims for 20 years and we postponed maturity of our relief bonds.6 In the case of Hungary, Allies while granting a priority to its reconstruction loan, nevertheless insisted on certain considerable annual payments as reported in my L–96, February 22nd, and my letter of February 25th, 1924.7 [Paraphrase] In consequence of the foregoing it now seems improbable that Austria will make direct payments for a long period and that, unless new arrangements prove to be possible, Hungary will not pay anything in addition to sums already allocated to Allies. There
