350  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Nazarkin said he did not see such a solution—­or they could toss a coin. 
Burt replied that he had just said the same thing to Brooks; he sug-
gested facetiously that Joseph and Koltunov be asked to toss a coin. 
Burt offered another mock solution: since both delegations had very 
creative people, Koltunov and Joseph should be locked in a room with 
no windows and given no food or water until they found an answer. 
Nazarkin said the sides should try this approach; Koltunov warned 
that he had had a good breakfast that morning.
Short-Time-Of-Flight (STOF)
22. Turning to another issue, Burt raised the draft short-time-of-
flight (STOF) declaration the U.S. side had handed over the previous 
day, and the Soviet suggestion that it be broadened. He said the U.S. 
had concluded that in order to balance effective limits on the acquisi-
tion of STOF capabilities with minimum interference on testing unre-
lated to STOF, it would be desirable to proceed in the following way: 
both sides would, in parallel, declare their intention not to conduct 
from land or sea any flight of less than fifteen minutes in duration, 
from time of launch to time of impact, of any SLBM of a type that had 
demonstrated a range of more than 500 km.
23. Burt then made some specific comments concerning the U.S. 
approach. First, he noted that in response to Soviet questions during 
Round XI the text defined what is meant by STOF: 15 minutes or less 
from the time of impact of the first RV or final boost stage of the SLBM. 
The essential feature is that a short time of flight implies reduced warn-
ing time. This is what creates greater instability. Second, Burt said, the 
declaration would apply only to SLBMs which had demonstrated a 
range in excess of 500 km. This provision is intended to distinguish 
between strategic missiles and current tactical sea-­based missiles on 
both sides, which should not be included. Burt recalled that in May 
Foreign Minister Shevardnadze had told Secretary Baker that the Soviet 
side was ready to discuss the problem of Depressed-Trajectory (DT) 
SLBMs. The U.S. had viewed this as a very positive sign, Burt said. In 
examining the DT problem, the U.S. side had recognized that the aim 
was to reduce the possibility of short-­warning attack by SLBMs. One 
way for SLBMs to undertake a short-­warning attack was by means of a 
DT launch. But U.S. experts had concluded that there were other ways 
a short-­warning attack could be conducted by SLBMs. They had also 
concluded that it would be enormously difficult to define the specific 
parameters of a DT attack. This was why the U.S. had come up with an 
approach designed to achieve the same objective—­incorporating DT 
along with other forms of short-­warning attack, Burt said.
24. Noting that the sides had established an honest and straight-
forward relationship, Burt assured Nazarkin that the U.S. side had no 
hidden agenda in this case. This was not an attempt to limit a capability
