234
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
technological breakthrough. We are trying, in a word, for genuine
accommodation.
But none of these proposals that I’ve outlined to you involves a
sacrifice of security. All of them are meant to increase the security of
both sides. Our view is that a SALT agreement which just reflects the
lowest common denominator that can be agreed upon easily will only
create an illusion of progress and, eventually, a backlash against the en-
tire arms control process. Our view is that genuine progress in SALT
will not merely stabilize competition in weapons but can also provide a
basis for improvement in political relations as well.
When I say that these efforts are intended to relax tensions, I’m not
speaking only of military security. I mean as well the concern among
our own individual citizens, Soviet and American, that comes from the
knowledge which all of you have that the leaders of our two countries
have the capacity to destroy human society through misunder-
standings or mistakes. If we can relax this tension by reducing the nu-
clear threat, not only will we make the world a safer place but we’ll also
free ourselves to concentrate on constructive action to give the world a
better life.
We’ve made some progress toward our goals, but to be frank, we
also hear some negative comments from the Soviet side about SALT
and about our more general relations. If these comments are based on a
misconception about our motives, then we will redouble our efforts to
make our motives clear; but if the Soviets are merely making comments
designed as propaganda to put pressure on us, let no one doubt that we
will persevere.
What matters ultimately is whether we can create a relationship of
cooperation that will be rooted in the national interests of both sides.
We shape our own policies to accommodate a constantly changing
world, and we hope the Soviets will do the same. Together we can give
this change a positive direction.
Increased trade between the United States and the Soviet Union
would help us both. The American-Soviet Joint Commercial Commis-
sion has resumed its meetings after a long interlude.10 I hope that con-
ditions can be created that will make possible steps toward expanded
trade.
In southern Africa we have pressed for Soviet and Cuban restraint.
Throughout the nonaligned world, our goal is not to encourage dissen-
10 American and Soviet officials signed a joint agreement for the establishment of a
Joint Commercial Commission during the May 1972 Moscow summit meeting. The com-
mission would negotiate a bilateral trade agreement, work on commercial and trade
issues, and monitor the U.S.-Soviet trade relationship. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976,
vol. XIV, Soviet Union, October 1971–May 1972, Document 227.
