858 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement with the steps taken by the Secretary of Defense to clarify responsibil­ ities and assignments in the field of military space applications within the Department of Defense. The Secretary of Defense and the Administrator have agreed upon and recommend to the President the following actions: A. The assignment to NASA of sole responsibility for the devel­ opment of new space booster vehicle systems of very high thrust. Both the DOD and NASA will continue with a coordinated program for the development of space vehicles based on the current ICBM and IRBM missiles and growth versions of those missiles. B. The transfer from the Department of the Army to NASA of the Development Operations Division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency, including its personnel and such facilities and equipment which are presently assigned and required for the future use of NASA at the transferred activity, and such other personnel, facilities and equipment for administrative and technical support of the transferred activity as may be agreed upon. C. The provision by the Army to NASA of such administrative serv­ices as may be agreed upon to effect a smooth transition of man­ agement and funding responsibility of the transferred activity. The Secretary of Defense and the Administrator of NASA are in agreement on the following: 1. The nation requires and must build at least one super booster and responsibility for this activity should be vested in one agency. There is, at present, no clear military requirement for super boosters, although there is a real possibility that the future will bring military weapons systems requirements. However, there is a definite need for super boosters for civilian space exploration purposes, both manned and unmanned. Accordingly, it is agreed that the responsibility for the super booster program should be vested in NASA. It is agreed that the recommendations to center this function in NASA and to transfer the Development Operations Division of ABMA to NASA are independent of any decisions on whether either or both of the super booster systems currently under development are continued in their presently conceived form. 2. The transfer of the Development Operations Division of ABMA shall include transfer of responsibility for Saturn, together with 1960 funds allocated for the project, and transfer to the NASA 1961 bud­ get of such amounts as may be approved for this project in the 1961 Department of Defense budget. 3. In carrying out its responsibilities, NASA will keep the Department of Defense thoroughly and completely informed on its booster program and will be fully responsive to specific requirements of the Department of Defense for the development of super boosters for future military missions as requested by the Secretary of Defense. 4. It is NASA’s intent to center at the transferred activity the bulk of its space booster vehicle systems work, including an appropriate research and development effort, and ultimately, substantial responsi­ bility for NASA launch operations.
