1957 1457 at my level at least for some time to come. While I claim no special com­ petence in reading Chinese tea leaves, I thought I should communicate my preliminary reaction to your telegram as soon as possible. I think it virtually inconceivable that Wang will agree to negoti­ ate personally with me and unlikely that he will agree at the meeting to designate another representative. While I concur in your judgment that the Chinese Communists are unlikely to break off the talks, I think they may be willing to see them suspended indefinitely on the issue of the level at which they are to be conducted. They may argue that just because the talks have bogged down is no reason to put them on a lower level. Progress is less likely at a lower level (their line may run) than at the Ambassadorial level, while if we are really sincere in our desire to settle differences, we should agree to talks on the Foreign Minister level. Thus the Chinese Communists may well take the occasion of Alex’s departure to renew their propaganda for Foreign Minister level meet­ ing, though indicating willingness to continue at the Ambassadorial level. My guess is that they may hold to this position for some time, making clear that they are not breaking off the talks but simply waiting until we have seen fit to appoint another Ambassador to carry them on. My feeling that the Chinese Communists are likely to hold out for Ambassadorial talks is based on the fact that I can see no great pressure on Peiping to agree to talks at a lower level, which would be a move in precisely the opposite direction to that advocated by them. While Chou En-lai told the Mission Chiefs in Peiping recently that his regime would be willing to carry on the talks for ten or twenty years, he did this, I think, in the context of his discussion of the so-called two-China pol­ icy. He was indicating on the one hand, that the Chinese Communists would not agree to such a policy even though negotiations at Geneva were to go on for ten or twenty years, and, on the other hand, that the Chinese Communists were very patient and would not be the ones to break off negotiations. I recall, too, that he referred specifically to the “Ambassadorial” talks and I can’t see that there was anything in his remarks which indicated eagerness to carry these talks on at a lower level. To say that I doubt that the Chinese Communists will accept lower level talks (at least for some time to come) is not to say that we should not make the pitch outlined in the telegram under reference. Looking back over the talks, I think it fair to say that they were quite produc­ tive for the first five months but not since them. While certainly some purpose has been served even during the period since December, 1955 (e.g. in connection with the stabilization of the situation in the Formosa Straits), its importance has probably diminished with time. In any event, after two years without appreciable progress it would seem appropriate to indicate our dissatisfaction in terms stronger than the
