United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 15 (c) Try to make countries which engage or contemplate engaging in trade with the Sino-Soviet Bloc aware of political and economic pitfalls associated with certain aspects of such trade with the Soviet Bloc, with particular attention on risks of dependence and political penetration. If, nevertheless, trade is expanded significantly, or in sensitive items, such as oil well supplies, we shall have to review the problem and consider countermeasures. In the absence of a concrete case, it would be dangerous to attempt specific guidance at this time. Tab C Petroleum Development Policy13 Washington, March 20, 1958. 1. Basic Considerations Underlying the Proposed Change in Policy. (a) Maximum development of petroleum resources in friendly foreign countries will strengthen their economies, reduce the burden of their foreign exchange earnings, and contribute to the mutual defense strength of the allied and friendly nations. (b) In certain countries, national policy and legislation limit the extent of foreign private capital participation in the petroleum industry, and reserve certain areas of the industry (e.g., exploration and development) to official petroleum entities. Failure of these official entities to obtain capital in the amount required to carry out operations on a desirable scale has: (1) Given strength to the propaganda arguments advanced by their nationalistic elements in these countries, although without foundation, that the United States Government and foreign oil companies desire the liquidation of these government petroleum entities, and this has served to mobilize national support to their monopoly position in the industry. (2) It has, moreover, resulted in national acquiescence to the actions of such petroleum monopolies prejudicial to the operations of the private foreign oil companies in the marketing and distribution phases of the industry to which they have been limited. This has reduced thereby the profitability of the private foreign oil company operations, threatened their capital investment, limited their expansion, and consequently retarded the country’s economic development. (c) It is believed that maximum development of the petroleum industry in any country can only be attained by encouragement of the competitive force of private capital. Therefore, effort should be made to 13 Drafted by Nestor C. Ortiz of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs on March 20.
