632 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I could be competently handled by others—at least on a day to day basis—and that your time could be better spent elsewhere. A. Indochina and Refugees: Dick Clark will handle refugees well although he will require some guidance and attention from you and Chris.19 Dick Holbrooke should continue to pursue ideas on how to get at the Kampuchea problem and further our excellent ties to ASEAN nations.20 But prospects on Kampuchea are unpromising in the mediumterm. B. Non-Proliferation: We are approaching crucial decisions in this area with respect to South Africa and India/Pakistan. In addition, the NPT review/renegotiation conference will soon be on us.21 Given the cross-cutting political-scientific-strategic nature of the issues involved, we suggest that Chris be given oversight of the issue, including management of the various individual components—both geographic and functional.22 C. Northern Africa (Western Sahara): This area needs more effort by the Department. Dave Newsom and NEA should give greater priority to thinking through how we can do more for Hassan while encouraging him towards flexibility on the Saharan dispute.23 Without the latter, the former is a prescription for growing longer-term difficulties in our relations with interested Arab and African nations (c.f., OAU resolution).24 David should also oversee a review of our relations with Algeria.25 19 Vance placed two parallel, vertical lines in the left-hand margin next to this and the subsequent sentence and wrote “OK.” Reference is to Christopher. In a statement on July 31 before the Subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees, and International Law of the House Judiciary Committee, Vance provided background on the Indochinese refugee crisis and noted that the Carter administration had agreed to increase the admission of Indochinese refugees into the United States from 7,000 to 14,000 per month. The conflict between China and Vietnam, the Vietnamese invasion and occupation of Kampuchea, and human rights abuses all contributed to the refugee crisis. (Department of State Bulletin, October 1979, pp. 4–6) 20 Vance underlined this sentence, placed a vertical line in the right-hand margin next to it, and wrote “yes.” 21 Scheduled for the spring of 1980. 22 Vance underlined the portion of this sentence beginning with “suggest” and ending with “issue.” In the right-hand margin next to it, he wrote “yes.” 23 Vance underlined this sentence. Reference is to the disputed territory of the Western Sahara. In the mid-1970s, Spain ceded control of the Western Sahara to both Morocco and Mauritania. The Frente Polisario opposed the claims of both states to the territory. 24 At the July 17–20 Organization of African Unity summit in Monroeville, Liberia, delegates approved a resolution calling for a referendum in the Western Sahara. (Leon Dash, “African Leaders Adopt Compromise On Mideast Pact,” The Washington Post, July 22, 1979, p. A–13) 25 Vance underlined this sentence. He also placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this paragraph and wrote “ok” in the margin.
