584  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Secretary Brown expressed doubts on the basis that the Soviets 
could possibly reload their silos faster than cruise missiles could arrive. 
He argued that the Soviets might be able to reload their silos in as little 
as 12 hours.
Mr. Stoertz disputed this point by observing that it would take a 
couple of days for the Soviets to reload silos during a conflict.
Mr. Aaron disagreed with Harold’s opinion that the stability 
aspects of US hard target capability had become moot. He observed 
that the respective vulnerabilities of the two sides’ forces would be a 
much more important variable in determining whether a crisis led to 
war than the other aspects of employment policy so far debated. He 
called for a much better paper that treated the stability issues, the need 
for quick as opposed to slow hard target capability and the merits of 
SLBMs vs ICBMs as potential hard target weapons.
Dr. Brzezinski asked that the next SCC on targeting return to the 
question of hard target capability and that in the meantime a care-
ful paper be written on this issue. This paper should be organized in 
terms of the 3 questions he had originally posed and should consider 
the impact of the changing strategic balance. The next SCC would also 
take up the remaining agenda items as well as the questions of target-
ing moving general purpose forces and the size and role of the secure 
reserve force.
Deputy Secretary Christopher endorsed David Aaron’s observations 
on the importance of the hard target issue and recommended that 
DOD’s paper be done on an interagency basis.
Director Seignious questioned whether the President should be 
obliged to deal personally with the hard target stability issue at all 
before SALT II is ratified.
Secretary Brown commented that the President must make a deci-
sion on M–X and therefore its implications for hard target capability 
cannot be avoided.
Director Seignious repeated the fact that Presidential decisions on 
this specific issue of hard target capability prior to SALT II ratification 
would be dangerous.
Mr. Aaron repeated his call for a thorough examination of the stra-
tegic risks and advantages of improved hard target capability.
Dr. Brzezinski called for DOD to lead in the preparation of the 
appropriate paper and to have an interagency group review the paper 
to insure that all the important points of view are considered. At this 
point, the meeting was adjourned.
