common sense, favorably distinguishing them even from other
nations. As for American diplomacy it is so afraid and has such a
hatred of the Soviet Union that in an official document presented
to the Soviet representative it cannot refrain from discourteous
formula[e].
It would be an ungrateful task to teach good manners and
politeness to the representatives of the present American
Government, it being, however, not so much a question of
politeness or courtesy as one of bitter hatred which some of the
elements now ruling in America feel towards the Soviet
Government. No wonder that in China the American diplomacy is
particularly sensitive with regard to the Soviet Union, for it is
here in China that America has more strongly and acutely than
other powers felt the blow which was dealt to her policy by the
sincere and straightforward policy of the Soviet Government.
Indeed the hypocrisy and Christian bigotry in which the
Americans enveloped their policy in China have now been fully
exposed in the eyes of the Chinese people. Much lustre has been
taken off from good words about the respect for and the rights of
the Chinese people since the Lincheng note, the threatening
speeches of the American Minister at Harbin and the appearance
and arbitrary actions of American warships in Chinese home
waters.
Of course the Americans who have made Mr. Yoshizawa write the
note which was returned today could be told: You do not wish to
recognize the regime existing in the Soviet Union? Well you
know that at any future time the Soviet Government does not at
all intend compelling you to do it. And they could also be told
that the American people will force them to recognize the
Government of the Union without any reservations. Then the
present rulers of America could also be told that the day relations
will be restored between America and the Union it will not in any
way mean that the Government of the Union will have to
recognize the regime which presently [at present] holds sway in
America—if of course this regime will still be existing at the
