948 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI involving two types, five warheads per missile, 1250 aggregate warheads and base-by-base downloading. I told him that I thought we had made progress on downloading, but the Baker letter clearly indicated we would resolve the issue in Geneva. He said that changing this [garble] agreement, especially two types, five warheads per type and 1250 warheads altogether, would create a “real problem.” 8. On the question of whether the Soviets would go ahead with a JCIC role for relocating heavy ICBM silos, Nazarkin drew a blank. He said he was aware this had been discussed between Baker and Shevardnadze but he had no idea what the Soviet response would be. He did assume, however, that it would be included in the formal Soviet response to the Baker letter. 9. I asked Nazarkin why the Soviets seamed to be reopening some of the Houston issues and thus why their response had been delayed. His answer was uncharacteristically bitter: “A lot of people in Moscow do not want to see this treaty signed.” Nazarkin seems very frustrated by what he sees as Moscow’s indecisiveness on the Houston package. 10. Nazarkin expects to finally receive the formal Soviet response later today and promised to contact me—­if it came in—­prior to my departure tomorrow for a four-­day vacation. Burt 183. Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze to Secretary of State Baker1 Moscow, December 30, 1990 Dear James, I have read very carefully your letter dated December 142 and can note with satisfaction that the “Houston package” that was designed by us to achieve mutually acceptable solutions to the principal issues relating to the START Treaty has, by and large, worked out good. This 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01034–005, START—January 1991 [2]. No classification marking. A typed notation on another copy of the letter indicates that a Soviet Embassy official delivered the letter to Bartholomew on December 31. (Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross Files, US Soviet Relations 1991) 2 See Document 179.
