Chapter 6, June–December 1990  939
180.	 Telegram From the Department of State to the Delegation to 
the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva1
Washington, December 19, 1990, 0638Z
426809. Subject: NST/START XIV Guidance 124: Post Ministerial 
Instructions
1. Secret—Entire Text.
2. This cable sets forth instructions based on agreements reached 
and decisions made during ministerial-­level meetings held in 
Washington and Houston December 7–12, 1990. Negotiating group 
should implement these agreements, drafting treaty text, where neces-
sary. Negotiating group should note the Presidents announcement of a 
summit during the period February 11–13, 1990, at which START will 
be signed.
3. During the ministerial, Secretary Baker and Foreign Minister 
Shevardnadze discussed a package approach to PPCM, several heavy 
bomber issues, heavy ICBM silos, data denial, and throwweight. 
Additional guidance in these areas has been sent Septel. Pending addi-
tional guidance, negotiating group should not engage the Soviets on 
the subject of heavy ICBM silos. Negotiating group should continue to 
press U.S. positions on ALCM/heavy bomber issues. Including new 
B1B guidance set forth below, and should press the Soviets to accept the 
new U.S. data denial position.
Throwweight Package
4. Negotiating group may renew the offer, made during the minis-
terial, to settle outstanding throwweight and related issues by modify-
ing the recent ad referendum agreement as follows:
A. Aggregate throw-­weight will be limited to 54 percent of the 
Soviet aggregate at the time of signature.
B. Ballistic missile shrouds will be excluded from accountable 
throw-­weight.
C. U.S. new types definition.
D. Warhead attribution for future will be based on the largest num-
ber of re-­entry releases and simulated releases tested but will be no less 
than 40 percent of accountable throw-­weight divided by the weight of 
the lightest re-­entry vehicle tested with the quotient rounded down. 
Provisions will be included in the treaty providing that, in the case of 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D901188–0565. Secret. Sent Immediate. Drafted by Riveles; cleared by Timbie, Hadley, 
Graves, MacEachin, Valessi, Lehman, and Hill, and in S/S and S/S-O; approved by Koch.
