924 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 287. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 20, 1979 SUBJECT Middle East Trip: the Way Forward (U) As you will have seen from Bob Strauss’ reporting cables to the President,2 the trip produced even more negative reactions to our UN Resolution plan than we expected in calculating the price to be paid. The Israeli reaction went about as far as thought; but all of us were unprepared for the vehemence with which Sadat flatly opposed the idea of a U.S.-introduced resolution—or indeed any resolution at this time. Strauss had an Ambassador with him at all times who later prepared the cables for his signature. (S) Sadat’s reasoning was as follows: —any resolution which scares the Israelis is a mistake—and the U.S. resolution would do so; —there is a good chance for progress in the autonomy talks, and in the Egyptian-Israeli relationship which needs to underpin anything else, provided they are left alone and the process is not disrupted by our (unnecessary) actions; and —even if a resolution were accepted by the PLO, this would not be desirable, since it would lead to the entry of disruptive elements into the talks themselves before they are well-established; in fact, Sadat said, this (acceptance of the resolution) might be the worst outcome of all. (S) To be sure, Israel and Egypt have different interests from us in this process (and in major respects from each other). But to be opposed publicly and forcefully by both Camp David parties increases the dangers of the Resolution course (while, ironically, making it somewhat easier to get off this course—if that were desired—since this is in fact, if not in perception, no longer just an “Israel vs. U.S.” issue). (S) Conversations with our local Ambassadors (Atherton, Lewis, West, and Veliotis) also helped to cast doubt on 1) the likelihood of PLO 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 51, Middle East: 8–12/79. Secret; Sensitive; Outside the System. Sent for information. In an undated handwritten note, Brzezinski set out a list of short points under the headings of “substance” and “process.” (Ibid.) 2 See Documents 283, 285, and 286.
