146  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
116.	 Telegram 566 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 20, 1955, 6 p.m.
566. From Johnson.
1. At 9th meeting today I opened by reading prepared statement. 
I said our two governments agreed first purpose discussions was to set­
tle matter return civilians who desire to do so. I had told Wang exactly 
and precisely what we have done and are prepared to do regarding Chi­
nese in US and of arrangements we willing make for their assistance by 
Indian Embassy. I repeated I was still waiting hear settlement proposed 
regarding American nationals desiring return and, while not attempting 
dictate action to be taken by Chinese, emphasized purpose our talks was 
to discuss all civilians desiring return. I concluded futile to discuss form 
of words used in public announcement until both clear in our minds sub­
stance of what we were announcing. Therefore difficult for me see how 
we could make further progress until this was done.
2. Wang reverted to his line argument last meeting accusing us rais­
ing same old points and introducing nothing new. Stated if we agreed to 
text announcement then he would tell procedures his government will­
ing take and results cases of Americans which have been reviewed.
3. I then asked series simple, direct questions in attempt further 
clarify his exact position.
4. I asked if his government was reviewing all civil and criminal 
cases involving Americans. He replied he had answered this question 
in affirmative many times.
5. I asked whether as soon as governments agreed arrange third 
party assistance for civilians who wished return he would inform us 
results cases Americans reviewed. He agreed.
6. I asked whether reviews cases all Americans completed. He 
hedged. I stated implication was that all not completed. He returned 
to standard formula that they would advise on results when reviews 
completed. Later he stated very clearly reviews had been completed on 
some but not the others.
7. I then asked whether completion review meant that persons con­
cerned would be able return promptly to US. He replied clearly that 
they could depart China promptly.
8. I asked whether possible give estimate time required complete 
reviews remaining cases in accordance laws and procedures his govern­
ment. He replied time required complete reviews depended upon two 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–2055. Confidential.
