1978  391
Commander-­in-Chief and that an early resolution, difficult as it may 
be, is much more likely to be successful than a delayed effort to patch 
things up.
The problem of Minuteman vulnerability is unpleasantly real. 
That is not the preferred conclusion of many of my friends in the arms 
control community, but the evidence from the Defense Department 
seems to me persuasive. The combination of throw-­weight, MIRVs, and 
increasing accuracy on the Soviet side is producing a real vulnerability. 
The Nitze scenarios are highly implausible,3 but the increasing expo-
sure of the Minuteman system is simply not what was aimed at when it 
was built. It is not about to become worthless, but in less than five years 
it will no longer be the secure second-­strike system it was designed to 
be. Nothing has happened since 1960 to change the belief that such a 
secure second-­strike capability is a highly desirable element in each of 
our strategic systems taken alone, on the obvious ground that surviv-
able weapons are much better than those which are open to effective 
preemption.
Minuteman belongs to the Air Force, and its habitat is the conti-
nental United States. It follows that by natural bureaucratic inertia the 
effort to replace it has focused on land-­based missile systems of one 
sort or another. The bad news is that none of these systems is attrac-
tive on basic technical and economic grounds, leaving aside the politics 
of large-­scale ground-­based deployments. The currently favored MAP 
system has the additional disadvantage of severely complicating SALT. 
Ironically, it is a system that no one would have designed if it were 
not for the counting rules of SALT. MAP is a bad plan, and a Soviet 
MAP would be a nightmare even for moderates, because of the prob-
lem of verification. The more this system is studied, the worse its con-
sequences seem to be, and the nuttier the requirements associated with 
the shell game which is its theoretical raison d’etre. MAP is the only 
weapons system I have heard of that makes the old MLF look smart.
Harold Brown and Frank Press are certainly two of the ten best 
men in the country, on the problems that lie at the intersection between 
weapons systems and science. Both of them know how hard this par-
ticular issue is, and both have had important studies underway for a 
long time. Until this summer, no one had any attractive ideas about 
alternatives to the mobile land-­based missile. Now the Jason Summer 
Study Group, with such stars as Gell-Mann, Garwin, and Drell among 
its members, has found at least one interesting alternative—­a relatively 
simple in-­shore system of conventionally powered submersibles. The 
in-­shore element is critical, (1) to the kind of command and control 
that is an attractive feature of Minuteman, (2) to the cost-­effectiveness 
3 See Document 1.
