82
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
between the Florida crews and Delta personnel can take place prior to
departure for Europe; the entire force will not be assembled until arrival
at Aswan.
—From standpoint of moving people and aircraft, insertion could
be made in about four to five days from the decision to go, with
assault about one day later. However, there are still many loose ends,
particularly as to in-country arrangements. It is difficult to tell how
soon those arrangements can be brought to a minimum satisfactory
level. To shorten the movement time appreciably it will be necessary
to alert MC–130 units and link up elements with Delta personnel in
forward areas, with attendant obvious security risks. Proceeding from
where we are to D-day would then still depend upon receiving defini-
tive intelligence and solving support problems in Iran.
Required Decisions:
Authority already given:
—Isolate, train, rehearse, and prepare Delta personnel.
—[1 line not declassified]
Authority required:
—Establish [less than 1 line not declassified] contacts for required
assistance for insertion of the force, for aid in assault and extraction
or, if necessary, movement to safe havens.
Authority required, but no action recommended until in-country
elements are in place and preparations underway:
—Alert MC–130 crews and have them begin required preparations
(some of this may be feasible to begin covertly without informing crews
of the nature of their mission).
—Move MC–130s from Okinawa to Diego Garcia.
—Provide tanker support as required throughout operation.
—Move US-based MC–130s to Europe.
—Move Delta from isolated training area to Europe to join MC–
130s.
—Direct movement of all elements to Aswan.
—Launch aircraft and insert Delta.
—Execute Delta assault and extraction following night (MC–130
aircraft launched for extraction timed to rendezvous with Delta and
hostages on designated pick-up assault landing strip).
Actions to Improve Probability of Success:
Continue to:
—Assemble intelligence on actions within and in vicinity of com-
pound. This intelligence will be fed to Washington planning cell, to
Delta, and to MC–130 planners.
