510 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI force in the last nineties. We would end up—­if you were to cut that kind of deal—­where the Soviets would give up their SS–24 on rail and presumably they would keep those in silos and we would keep ours in silos, and the Soviets would have several hundred SS–25s. 81. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, February 23, 1990, 10:45–11:15 a.m. SUBJECT Meeting with Senators Nunn and Warner The President: Did you meet the Norwegian Prime Minister? He has a good message about maintaining defense budgets and paying attention to the issues of the NATO tanks. Sam, I did my homework; I read your paper.2 Let’s take up where we left off. Senator Warner: I have a paper, too.3 It’s an overlay on Nunn. The President: Where were we? Senator Nunn: The whole strategic program is going to be under severe pressure on the Hill, mainly because of the budget but also because of changes in the world. Personally, I think we definitely have to continue modernization, but we will have to package it if we hope to sell it on the Hill. I have long thought we should eliminate MIRV’s. The Scowcroft Commission laid the basis for deMIRVing. The M-X would have been gone by 1985 except for the Scowcroft report. It is interesting that the Soviets seem to have taken the report and the concept seriously. DOD gave the report lip service but then wandered off in its own direction. Gov Sununu: Is the small missile inherently non-MIRVed? Senator Nunn: The small missile is currently non-MIRV, but it could have two warheads if that were considered essential. A big problem with the M-X is that ten warheads are an inherently attractive target. The Rail Garrison deployment is survivable when flushed but more vulnerable than in silos when garrisoned. In my opinion, the main case 1 Source: Department of State, Economic and Agricultural Affairs, Lot 96D484, Robert B. Zoellick, Under Secretary for Economic and Agricultural Affairs, Gates Group NODIS. Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. 2 See Document 80. 3 See Document 82.
