2.
Special National Intelligence Estimate Prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, August 8, 1978
LEBANON: PROSPECTS FOR EXPANDED CONFLICT

3.
Telegram From the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to the
Department of State
5841. For the Secretary from Atherton. Subj: Meeting With Prince
Saud.
1. Ambassador West and I had a very good two hour meeting with
Prince Saud in Taif evening August 9 in which Saud expressed full sup-
port for the President’s invitation to Sadat and Begin and said he was
considering recommending that SAG issue a public statement of sup-
port. In this cable I want to give you the highlights of the meeting. A
full account2 will follow shortly.
2. I began the meeting with a broad review of the situation as we
see it and went through in detail with Saud the talking points that you
approved. I stressed that the President felt the moment was critical and
that a U.S. initiative and all-out effort to break the impasse was neces-
sary. I explained in some detail why direct negotiations between the
parties are necessary. In this regard Saud said flatly that he felt Saudi
Arabia’s position on negotiations had been misrepresented. Saudis had
not sought to put an end to negotiations, and Fahd’s trip to Cairo had
not had that purpose; Fahd had in fact arrived in Egypt after Sadat had
made his decision not to go to follow-on talks to Leeds.
3. I stressed President’s seriousness of purpose in inviting Sadat
and Begin to Camp David, and I pointed out that in doing so the Presi-
dent had engaged his prestige. It is an act of courage which deserves
the broadest possible support and we are confident it will find support
from Saudi Arabia. Saud replied with considerable feeling that “we
want Camp David to succeed” because its success would be the success
of “our closest friends, Egypt and the U.S.” He said “we will do every-
thing we can to help” and added that Saudi Arabia will make its sup-
port known.
4. In response to a question by Saud as to the likely outcome of the
Camp David meeting, I said that while I could make no specific forecast
I could assure Saud that we do not regard the meeting as a pro-forma
exercise; we envisage a serious discussion at highest level about how to
cret; Immediate; Exdis Distribute as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Tel Aviv
and Cairo. Printed from a corrected copy.
Policy File, P850033–0044)
umentation on the conference, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dis-

overcome present differences on key issues. Saud spoke at length of his
concern that Sadat, having already made concessions on peace and se-
curity, would be asked for further compromises. He stressed that what-
ever comes out of Camp David must be broadly acceptable in the Arab
world. Saud repeatedly returned to this concern, that at Camp David
we would press Sadat to agree to compromises on withdrawal and Pal-
estinian issue that would be unacceptable to the Arabs. I repeated that I
could obviously not say what would emerge from Camp David, but
said Saudis can be assured that ideas we put forward on all of the major
issues—peace, withdrawal, security, and the Palestinians—will be con-
sistent with our positions on Resolution 2424 which Secretary and Pres-
ident have explained to Saudi leaders over past year. I explained also
that at Camp David we would be seeking agreement on the broad prin-
ciples that must guide a comprehensive settlement rather than the de-
tails. I could not predict whether there would be agreement or if so
what the details would look like and could not discuss specific formu-
lations which would have to emerge from the negotiations, but I did
think that at least at the end our ideas would be clear. All this seemed to
reassure Saud. He reiterated his support for the Camp David meeting,
but added that Saudi Arabia feels toward it like the mother of the bride;
it waits with both hope and apprehension.
5. After we had gone through this at length, I raised question of
Soviet involvement in the peace process, pointing out that we have
always felt the Soviets will have to be involved at some point but think
their involvement at the outset would complicate the task impossibly.
In this regard I said the Secretary had asked me to mention that he had
been surprised to hear the Soviets quoting the Saudis as saying they
(the Saudis) want the Soviets brought in. Saud reacted very quickly to
this, saying Saudi Arabia saw a Soviet role only because of Soviet influ-
ence with the Palestinians and to a lesser degree with the Syrians, and
because the U.S. had not taken a position that would attract broad Arab
support. He remarked quite pointedly that if there were a change in the
American position toward the Palestinians, and the U.S. were to “build
bridges” to the Palestinians, there would be no need for a Soviet role. In
the absence of that, the Soviets would probably be needed to bring the
Palestinians along. Having made this point, Saud went on to say, with
considerable emphasis on his words, that as a general principle Saudi
Arabia would like there to be no Soviet involvement either in the peace
process or in any other way in the Middle East: “we don’t want them
here, and we don’t think they have a role to play”.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
6. Final point Saud had to make regarding the Camp David
meeting was that he hoped what emerges therefrom will include the
Palestinians and the principle of self-determination for the Palestinians.
He stressed that this would be very important on gaining support in
the Arab world. I said I could understand this concern but cautioned
that what we want is a workable set of principles not a ringing declara-
tion that will not advance the cause of peace in practical ways. On the
Palestinian question, we believed the Aswan formulation5 was a prac-
tical one.
7. We then turned to discussion of Lebanon. I stressed our concern
over the situation there and told Saud of the time and effort you had
put in on the Lebanese problem during your trip. Saud said he had read
our press briefing6 on Lebanon and considered it very good. He re-
counted the talks Fahd and he had had recently in Damascus, saying
that the Syrians are very suspicious of the U.S. Syrians misunderstood
the U.S. effort to call a security council meeting on Lebanon, saw the
hand of Israel—and therefore the U.S.—behind the agressiveness of the
Christian militias, and were suspicious of the contacts of the American
Ambassador in Beirut with the Christian leaders. I said none of this is
true. As regards the last point, I explained that Ambassador Parker’s
contacts were undertaken on instructions from Washington and in the
cause of restraining the Christian extremists and strengthening Presi-
dent Sarkis. Saud said he and Fahd had told the Syrians that their sus-
picions of the U.S. are unfounded. Saud said he considered most im-
portant thing U.S. could do now would be to give as much attention as
possible to its contacts with the Syrians. I told Saud we had been and
still were active in Damascus, and especially in Israel, in seeking to
keep the lid on in Lebanon.

8. In accordance with State 2008667 I did not use talking points on
Lebanon in State 200854. I told Saud we do not have anything to sug-
gest at the moment but will want to stay in close touch with the SAG on
Lebanon.
9. At end of group meeting, I asked for private talk with Saud and
made the points you had asked me to convey, adding a few of my own
about the way the “non-paper” (i.e. my talking points) which I left with
him July 239 had been distorted and misused. Main point I made was
that we felt Saudis had encouraged Egyptians to have no further direct
contacts with Israelis and had generally appeared to be working at
cross purposes with us during critical period following Leeds talks. I
said you were quite unhappy about all this and that we hoped Saudis
would consult with us in first instance when they disagreed with us,
rather than going to others. Saud protested that we had misunderstood
their actions and motives, but he seemed to me evasive about specifics
and sequence of events. Without arguing details, I expressed concern
about perceptions all this had created in U.S. with respect to U.S.-Saudi
relations. At the end, Saud said he would recommend Prince Fahd
issue statement of support for President Carter’s proposal for Camp
David meeting. I told him this would be important for Presidents
Carter and Sadat and also for U.S.-Saudi relations. We will have to wait
and see whether such a statement is in fact forthcoming and what it
says but in any event I believe this exchange was essential to clear the
air and will hopefully have some salutary effect on Saud. At end of
meeting, Saud said he would arrange meeting with Crown Prince
Fahd, about which up to then he and other Saudis had been vague
from Amman, July 24. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

4.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union
203927. For the Ambassador. Subject: Message to Gromyko.
1. Please deliver the following message to the Foreign Minister.
2. Quote.
Dear Mr. Minister:
Having just completed my trip to Israel and Egypt, I wanted to say
a few words to you about the reasons for President Carter’s invitation
to President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin to meet with him at Camp
David.
As you know, we believe it is essential to continue efforts to build
on the breakthrough that resulted from President Sadat’s visit to Israel
last year. Serious work has been done in the discussions since then.
While progress has been made, it has become clear that discussions
must now take place at the highest political level. Agreements must be
reached on the key issues of withdrawal, security, and the determina-
tion of the Palestinians’ future before negotiations can succeed at the
cret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Tarnoff; approved by Vance.

5.
Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of
State
6532. For the Secretary from Atherton. Subj: Meeting With King
Hussein August 12.
1. Summary: In my talks in Amman with King Hussein late after-
noon August 12 and earlier in the day with Abdul Hamid Sharaf and
Acting Foreign Minister Abu Odeh, I did my best to dispel concern
over their perception that there has been erosion in the U.S. position on
a Middle East peace settlement. All three voiced this concern, and Hus-
sein spoke more frankly than I have ever heard him of his apprehen-
sion that the U.S. appeared to be pulling back from its position on
meaning of Resolution 242 conveyed to him over the years since 1967.
He said at one point that these past months have been “the most dis-
tressing of my life.” I assured them that our positions have not changed
and that the positions we will take at Camp David in September will be
consistent with those the President and the Secretary have conveyed to
Hussein. His demeanor implied that he will believe it when he sees it.
What he said, however, was that he welcomes the Camp David
meeting, adding that even if it brings no progress it will be useful as
long as it produces a U.S. position compatible with Resolution 242. I
emphasized the importance of our friends in the Arab world expres-
cret; Niact Immediate; Exdis Distribute as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to
Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jidda.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
sing publicly their support for the President’s initiative. I said we were
very pleased over Fahd’s statement, which had been helpful as well in
making the Saudi position clear in the U.S., and I hoped Hussein would
give consideration to finding a way for Jordan, too, to show its support.
(I had earlier said to Sharaf that Jordan’s reaction will be closely
watched in the U.S.) Hussein reiterated that he hoped for the success of
the Camp David meeting and, turning to Sharaf said “we will see what
we can do”. Hussein, hence, did not tip his hand on question of Jorda-
nian public support. He may wish to consult his cabinet on issue, and
we will just have to wait and see how this matter develops. In all these
meetings I was accompanied by Suddarth and Korn. End summary.
2. Question of Jordanian perception of an erosion of U.S. position
came up and was discussed at length in my morning meeting with
Sharaf, who expressed concern that U.S. position on the West Bank and
Gaza was very [garble] to the Begin plan. I told Sharaf I thought there
had been misunderstanding in both Jordan and Saudi Arabia of what I
had said in my previous visit in July. My purpose had been to set out
our thoughts coming out of the Leeds talks3 on the Egyptian and Israeli
West Bank/Gaza proposals; in doing this it was in no way my intention
to imply that West Bank/Gaza arrangements should be made without
prior agreement on a broad framework of principles covering all the
major issues, withdrawal, peace, security and the Palestinian problem.
I assured both Sharaf and Abu Odeh that this is our goal and that our
positions remain as the President and the Secretary had earlier stated
them in talks with King Hussein. With both Abu Odeh and Sharaf I
made a strong pitch for some public expression of support from Jordan
for the President’s Camp David initiative. I said this was not only im-
portant for President Carter and Sadat, but for U.S.-Jordanian relations.
3. In the meeting with Hussein, which lasted about 40 minutes, I
covered all the points in the talking points you approved for my stops
in Saudi Arabia and Jordan. I emphasized in particular that the Presi-
dent felt we are at a critical juncture in the Middle East (Hussein
agreed), that an effort was needed to break the impasse and the U.S.
was the only one that could do so. I explained at length why direct ne-
gotiations are necessary. I said that our objective at Camp David will be

to get agreement on a broad framework of principles. We cannot
promise success but at least by the time the Camp David meeting ends
U.S. position will be clear. I explained that the President intends to
make an all-out effort and is ready to continue the talks at Camp David
as long as necessary. I also assured Hussein that the Camp David
meeting was our own idea and that we had not discussed it with
anyone else. Begin and Sadat first learned of it when the Secretary ar-
rived in Jerusalem and Alexandria4 (Suddarth had told me the King
might be sensitive about the absence of any advance consultation.)
4. I said I realized that the impression existed in the Arab world
that there had been an erosion in our position. The Secretary wanted
me to assure His Majesty that is not the case. We continue to believe
that a framework of broad principles has to be the starting point, and
the ideas and suggestions that we will put forward at Camp David will
be consistent with those the Secretary and the President have discussed
with Hussein. I pointed out that the Camp David initiative was an act
of great courage on the part of the President, just as was Sadat’s ac-
ceptance of the invitation, and the President deserves the broadest pos-
sible support. I said I hoped Jordan would consider ways it could show
its support.
5. Hussein thanked me for coming and said that, speaking as a
friend of the U.S. and in spirit of our relations, he had to say that the re-
cent period had been a very confusing one. Hussein said what he had
heard not only after the Leeds conference but before that time had
caused him to have doubts about the steadfastness of the U.S. In 1967
the U.S. spoke of Israeli withdrawal with minor border modifications.
Now we hear of a 5 year period “that would lead to we don’t know
what” and the possibility of Israeli forces staying on the West Bank
with Jordan providing a “cover” for their activities. Hussein said U.S.
ideas did not appear to bring in the Palestinians sufficiently, and he
stressed the importance of involving the Palestinians fully in the settle-
ment effort. Hussein said in the post 1967 period the U.S. and Jordan
had differences on only two issues, Jerusalem and the need for minor
border modifications to be on a reciprocal basis. In recent years, how-
ever, differences seemed to have multiplied.
6. In sum, Hussein said, he felt there had been a “very serious ero-
sion in the U.S. position” and that it had damaged the U.S. image in the
Middle East. At one point he said the past few months had been “the
most distressing of my life.” (Comment: Hussein never alluded to his
dria where he presented both leaders with invitations to meet with President Carter at
Camp David. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
desire to visit the U.S., but I suspect this also was implied in this re-
mark.) However, Hussein said he was glad to have our assurances that
U.S. positions remain unchanged and welcomed the President’s Camp
David initiative. Even if Camp David does not bring progress, Hussein
said, it will be important and helpful if it produces a U.S. position com-
patible with Resolution 242. “We look forward to hearing the best pos-
sible news from Camp David” Hussein added. I said I had had a good
talk with Prince Fahd5 and we had been very much heartened and
pleased by Fahd’s statement6 of support for the President’s Camp
David initiative. I noted that Fahd’s statement had also helped a great
deal in the U.S. in dispelling doubts about Saudi Arabia’s position.
Turning to Sharaf, Hussein said “we will see what we can do.”
7. At end of this part of conversation, I reminded Hussein that
during my previous visit I had said it would be helpful to know more
precisely what Jordan needs in a statement of principles to be able to
join negotiations. It would be particularly helpful to have his thoughts
on this before September 5. I subsequently underlined this point with
Sharaf. Both were non-committal.
8. With this the conversation on Middle East peace efforts ended.
There followed a brief discussion of Lebanon, which is being reported
separately.
9. As regards the question of a Jordanian statement of support for
the President’s Camp David initiative, Hussein did not tip his hand in
any way. Later in the evening Abu Odeh remarked that he did not
think we should expect anything “yet”. Suddarth’s guess is that Hus-
sein will wait to consult his cabinet before formally deciding anything,
at least for appearances sake.
Suddarth

6.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
PLANNING FOR CAMP DAVID
General Considerations
Our problem in the area is confidence; it is acute in Jordan but se-
rious also in Saudi Arabia and in Egypt. Hussein quite frankly tells us
he sees an erosion in our position, not only since Leeds2 but since 1967.
The Saudis and the Egyptians are a little less openly skeptical, but they
too think that we have moved off of our position or fear that we will
once the Israelis and their friends in Congress begin to put on the heat.
To a large extent, the erosion of Arab confidence has been brought
about by our search for ways to get around Israel’s refusal to commit
itself to turn the West Bank and Gaza back to full Arab control at the
end of five years. There are two problems here:
a) —The various schemes that we have thought up, while admit-
tedly imaginative, have been too complex. At times we have not been
clear even in our own minds about exactly what we meant. No wonder
the Arabs were confused.
b) —The above notwithstanding, it is true that the moderate Arabs
will buy, albeit reluctantly, things like a five year transition period and
Israeli security arrangements on the West Bank and Gaza. But not
without the assurance, in advance, that the West Bank and Gaza will be
turned back to Arab sovereignty. Some ambiguity on this point might
be allowable, but Sadat would at least have to be able to claim that he
had gotten a commitment from the Israelis to withdrawal. If he accepts
anything less (he probably won’t) he will be repudiated.
In short the Arabs want us to stop trying to find schemes for get-
ting around Israel’s refusal to make the commitment to withdraw—
schemes that in their minds leave too much uncertainty—and start
trying to find ways to get the Israelis to change their position. We are
now at the point where we are going to have to do that if we want to
keep Sadat and the Saudis with us, and if we are to have any chance of
ever getting Hussein to join the negotiations. Further devising formulas
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
for circumventing the Israelis now will lose us what little confidence
we still enjoy. (And furthermore won’t work with the Israelis. Begin
understands quite well what we are aiming at. He won’t go along and
is probably encouraged in his resistance by the knowledge that we are
looking for expedients rather than taking him on directly.)
Kamel and Saud, and many other Arabs who regard themselves as
our friends and feel they have a stake in Sadat’s future, fear that at
Camp David we will strike a middle ground between the Egyptian and
Israeli position and will try to persuade Sadat to agree to “compro-
mise”. They obviously think we might succeed in doing so. What they
in fact mean is that they fear we will try to persuade Sadat to accept
something that is less than a firm Israeli commitment to withdraw after
five years.
The Camp David Meetings
Broadly speaking, there are two things that we have to decide:
a) —what we want to end up with; and
b) —how we can best go about getting where we want.
What do we want to end up with?
Ideally we would like to close the Camp David meeting with
agreement between Sadat and Begin on a broad framework of prin-
ciples for a settlement, covering all the main elements—peace, with-
drawal, security and the Palestinians—which serve as a basis for a
series of continuing negotiations to hammer out the details in each of
these areas.
We know in advance, however, that it is not going to be possible to
get such agreement. We also know several other things; they might be
called the ground rules of the game:
—We cannot allow Camp David to be seen as a failure. The blow to
the President’s prestige and authority and the consequences for sta-
bility in the area would be too serious.
—Since it cannot succeed in achieving its ideal goal, we must have
an acceptable fallback.
—Somebody is going to go home disappointed, probably mad,
from Camp David. There will be no way to please both sides at this
point (but the temptation to try will be strong and should be guarded
against). Any effort to do so is likely to please the Israelis but alienate
the Arabs.
—The Arabs do not really expect that at Camp David Begin will
make the concessions that will be needed to achieve a Declaration on
terms minimally acceptable to Sadat. They will, however, be satisfied
and consider the meeting a success if it ends with the US taking a posi-
tion on the issues minimally acceptable to Sadat.
If we do this, the Israelis will be unhappy and the Administration
will be attacked by Israel’s supporters in Congress and various Jewish

organizations. A certain level of displeasure on the part of the Israelis
and their supporters is inevitable; it will be the price of keeping Sadat
and the moderate Arabs with us. What we will need to do is find ways
to minimize the repercussions.
The first step we need to take in our preparations for Camp David
is to arm ourselves with texts that the President could use with Sadat.
We should have a series of texts, running from the most acceptable to
Sadat to one or two that we judge to be on the borderline of what Sadat
can accept. Responsibility for the preparation of these texts should be
put in Atherton’s hands since he has much more direct experience in
negotiating the principles than any other member of the group. Ar-
rangement should also be made for Atherton to have a serious session
with the President before Camp David to brief the President on the fine
points of the positions and the sensitivities of the two sides as regards
the language of the Declaration.
Our other main project will be to figure out how to get with the
least possible damage from here to the statement of our position accept-
able to Sadat at the end of the conference.
Getting To Where We Want
We start from the given that we cannot simply lay our proposal on
the table at the outset. As much as possible, our ideas must seem to
emerge from a genuine process of negotiation. We should recognize
however that this is an ideal which is probably attainable only in part at
best.
—We can expect Sadat and Begin to meet and talk with one an-
other, but it would be unrealistic to think that they will negotiate in the
technical sense of the word.
—If we try to force them into a negotiating situation we risk
heading the talks into an impasse and a breakdown. Hearing the Israeli
position in all its starkness could cause Sadat to react as he did after
Leeds.
—Begin knows our tactic and will be armed to meet it. No matter
how long we get Sadat to sit down and talk with him he will always say
that not enough time was allowed for negotiation. Begin’s fuse will be
long and slow. Sadat’s short.
In brief, very early in the Camp David talks we risk coming up
against a contradiction between our need to have our positions emerge
from the course of the talks and the need to get them out in such a way
that they will have the desired impact on the Arab side. We will be
faced then with the choice between:
—dropping the fig leaf of negotiations; and
—stringing out presentation of our proposals or so watering them
down that we are seen by Sadat as failing to fulfill our commitments.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Planning a strategy to avoid being caught on the horns of this di-
lemma, or if unavoidable to minimize the dangers therefrom, is another
(with the drafting of texts) urgent task. This will involve the develop-
ment of a detailed scenario for the Camp David meetings and for the
presentation of our proposals. Saunders should be given responsibility
for this.
A third task will be to draft a speech for the President to give at the
close of the Camp David meeting. Responsibility for this could be given
to Quandt.
There would thus be three task forces, headed by Atherton,
Saunders and Quandt respectively, who would be assisted by various
other members of the Middle East working group to do the following:
—prepare our position on the Declaration
—prepare a detailed scenario for the Camp David talks
—prepare a draft of a speech by the President.
After Camp David
Assuming that Camp David ends with a US statement of positions
minimally acceptable to Sadat, we can expect to find ourselves at odds
with Israel and the negotiations therefore deadlocked because the Is-
raelis refuse to continue them on the basis of our position. We will need
to pursue the study (already begun) of ways to bring the Israelis to re-
consider their positions.
7.
Briefing Paper Prepared in the Department of State and the
National Security Council
Washington, undated
THE PIVOTAL ISSUE: THE SINAI/WEST BANK RELATIONSHIP
The Issue
The pivotal issue at Camp David will be the relationship that exists
in the minds of both Begin and Sadat between the resumption of Sinai
negotiations and progress on the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian com-
plex of questions including the fundamental territorial issue. This rela-
tionship will underlie all of the discussions, although you may find
only Begin and the Israeli team interested in getting it out in the open
and pinned down.
Stated very briefly, the two fronts are linked in each man’s mind in
the following manner: Israel has placed top priority since last No-
vember on reaching a separate agreement with Egypt on the Sinai.
Having now realized that that is not in the cards, Begin will be trying to
acquire Sadat’s commitment to conclude a final Sinai agreement, or
failing that a “partial” Sinai agreement, in return for the minimum
change in the present Israeli position on the West Bank/Gaza. Sadat
also seeks a Sinai agreement that will bring about Israeli withdrawal
from Egyptian territory, but cannot politically afford to pursue such an
agreement in the absence of a clear change in the Israeli position re-
garding military withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza, the settle-
ment of Israeli citizens there, and Palestinian involvement in the ulti-
mate disposition of the territory.
Background
The two committees established after the Ismailia Summit2—mili-
tary and political—rather quickly established a division of labor dif-
ferent from what their names might imply. The Military Committee,
meeting in Egypt under Gamasy and Weizman, became the venue for
discussing a Sinai agreement. The Political Committee, which met for-
mally for only two days in Jerusalem at the Foreign Minister level but
whose work continued through U.S. mediation, addressed the task of
developing the framework for a comprehensive settlement and came to
focus increasingly on the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian complex of
problems.
The Military Committee made substantial progress in defining the
essentials of a Sinai agreement, including an Israeli offer to return all of
pre-1967 Sinai to Egyptian sovereignty. The Defense Ministers were
able to agree in principle on the outline of a timetable for Israeli with-
drawal and on at least the rudiments of such arrangements as the estab-
lishment of buffer zones and limited armaments areas. Such potentially
contentious issues as the status of Sharm el-Sheikh, which controls the
Straits of Tiran, together with the land bridge to it from Israel—both of
which Israeli Labor governments had insisted on retaining under Is-
raeli authority—were agreed upon in principle.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Substantive discussions on the Sinai became stuck on two issues.
One was the disposition of two airfields which Israel has constructed in
the eastern Sinai—one in the north not far from the Gaza Strip and one
in the south near Eilat. The other was the status of Israeli settlements
which have been established in the northeastern Sinai between the
Gaza Strip and el-Arish. The former is essentially a military question;
the latter, while given a security coloration by some Israeli leaders, is
primarily an issue with domestic political ramifications in Israel.
Israel has privately suggested to Egypt that these two issues be re-
solved through an exchange of territory. Sadat has resolutely main-
tained that there will be no tampering with the pre-existing interna-
tional boundary. It seems clear that, were Sadat politically able to
conclude a separate Sinai agreement, a deal could be struck by relying
on time-phasing and other compromise solutions for resolving both the
airfield and settlement issues. It is virtually certain, however, that Sadat
will refuse to entertain further negotiations over outstanding Sinai
issues in the absence of significant movement by Israel on the West
Bank/Gaza/Palestinian question.
Efforts to pursue the goal of the Political Committee—achieving a
Declaration of Principles which would provide the framework for a
comprehensive agreement—have made less progress. The major bar-
riers to agreement continue to be (a) whether and if so how the prin-
ciple of Palestinian self-determination shall be applied and (b) the re-
lated issues of Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza and
who shall exercise sovereignty over these two areas. The U.S. has re-
mained actively involved in these efforts, and with our assistance, the
parties have been discussing for the first time questions which lie at the
very heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict—namely, the ultimate partition
of Palestine between Jewish and Arab political entities. Neither side de-
scribes the issue in these terms today, but this is what is basically at
stake for both and accounts, on the one hand, for Israel’s desire to keep
the territorial boundary question open and, on the other, for the Arab
desire to foreclose (except for minor modifications) what they perceive
as further Israeli expansion through settlements and territorial acquisi-
tion beyond the 1949–67 Armistice Lines. In the Arab perception, ac-
ceptance of those lines as Israel’s boundaries already involves
conceding two-thirds of pre-1947 Palestinian territory.
On the question of Palestinian self-determination, Egypt publicly
espouses the maximum in free choice for all Palestinians wherever they
reside (although privately hoping to stave off the creation of an inde-
pendent state under radical leadership) while Israel would prefer that
only residents of the West Bank and Gaza participate at all in the
process and then only in negotiations in which Israel could exercise a

veto. The formulation3 you used at Aswan last January holds the poten-
tial for a compromise on this issue. Language clearly derived from your
statement, elaborated to provide that Palestinian representatives be a
party to the negotiations, should ultimately be acceptable to both
parties.
The more difficult stand-off exists on the questions of Israeli with-
drawal and sovereignty. The Egyptian position on withdrawal is
grounded in the legal principle (embodied in the preamble of Resolu-
tion 242) of “the inadmissability of the acquisition of territory by war,”
although Sadat has accepted (including publicly) the need for “minor
rectifications” in the pre-1967 border between Israel and the West Bank.
He also recognizes that withdrawal poses security problems for Israel,
and has been increasingly forthcoming in his support for time-phased
withdrawal and special arrangements to solve those problems. On sov-
ereignty, Egypt holds that it resides in and should be exercised by the
Palestinians themselves. (It is useful to recall that neither Egypt nor any
other Arab state ever recognized Jordanian sovereignty over the West
Bank prior to 1967.
The present Israeli position on these questions is a function of the
longstanding conviction of Begin and his Herut Party that the West
Bank is an integral part of the land of Israel, and that its separation from
Israel prior to 1967 was a temporary aberration rectified by the war in
that year. This finally came out in the open in February when the Israeli
Cabinet refused to concede that Resolution 242 required Israeli with-
drawal from any of the West Bank. On this, the Israeli position at the
present time is at variance with our own and with that of all other
parties involved in the discussions leading to the adoption of 242. Some
members of the present Israeli Government, while not endorsing Herut
ideology, nevertheless reject West Bank withdrawal purely on security
grounds. Begin believes that Israel has a valid claim to sovereignty over
the West Bank, although it is willing to admit that other competing
claims exist. Even those Israeli political parties which reject Herut ide-
ology are not prepared to accept minor modifications and insist on the
need for “territorial compromise” (meaning more than what the Arabs
would consider minor changes in the 1967 lines) for security purposes.
In April we asked Israel a set of questions designed to get it to
come to grips officially with the matter of how to resolve the status of
the West Bank after an interim period. Israel replied in June with an-
swers that did not move things at all. Three weeks later the Cabinet
somewhat modified its position and agreed either “to consider” any

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
plan for territorial compromise presented by the Arabs or “to discuss”
after an interim period the issue of sovereignty, to which it said that “a
solution is possible.” As an indication of the problem before us, this
was considered a major advance by many Israelis but has made little
impression in Egypt, since it falls far short of what Sadat feels he needs.
It appears that there is little room for further softening of the Israeli po-
sition except, perhaps, in return for a commitment by Sadat to pursue a
Sinai agreement.
Both parties have accepted the need for an interim period between
the beginning of the implementation of any West Bank agreement and
the ultimate disposition of territory and sovereignty. This provides us
with the ability to argue that irrevocable changes need not, indeed
cannot, occur immediately. It does not, however, diminish Sadat’s de-
sire to receive a commitment that those changes will indeed take place
nor Begin’s difficulty in giving such a commitment.
What Each Man Wants
Conceptually, the needs of the two leaders can be expressed as
follows:
—Begin, in order to justify the political and personal crises he
would face in agreeing in principle to withdraw from the West Bank,
will want from Sadat a commitment to see the Sinai negotiations
through to a final solution which includes the removal of the Egyptian
military threat and normalization of relations. It remains to be seen, in
fact, whether even then he could agree to an ultimate relinquishment
of Israeli control (except for security strongpoints) to an Arab author-
ity which would come to exercise many if not all the attributes of
sovereignty.
—Sadat, in order to justify the political crisis within the Arab
world which would follow his agreement to pursue a Sinai agreement
before West Bank details have been worked out, will want from Begin a
commitment to withdraw from the West Bank and Gaza subject to ne-
gotiation of the security and other details of a settlement, to freeze Is-
raeli settlements, and to allow the Palestinians a meaningful voice in
the eventual disposition of that territory.
Begin, in addition, wants to be assured that if he makes the neces-
sary commitments on the West Bank there will be someone on the Arab
side with whom Israel can negotiate. He understands that Sadat’s goal
is to draw Hussein into the negotiations, but will want some assurance
that, if that proves impossible, Sadat himself will undertake to nego-
tiate at least the general guidelines of a settlement for the West Bank
and Gaza and will negotiate a Sinai settlement even if there is no actual
change in the status quo on the West Bank/Gaza.

In more concrete terms, Begin wants as regards the Sinai:
—A credible and public commitment to continue Sinai negotia-
tions with a view toward reaching agreement. This could be given visi-
bility by the reconvening of the Weizman/Gamasy talks soon after the
Camp David talks end.
—Assurance that such an agreement will not entail the immediate
dismantling of either the airfields or the Israeli settlements in the Sinai.
(Because of Sadat’s own needs, this may have to be given in the form of
a verbal side understanding to which you are witness, with the recogni-
tion that Sadat may have to deny its existence if it were to leak.)
Begin has the following additional desires as regards the West Bank, as-
suming he is willing to commit Israel to withdrawal at all:
—Assurance that there will be no resolution of the sovereignty
issue until after the interim period, presumably of five years.
—Assurance that Israel will retain sufficient latitude in future ne-
gotiations to avoid having to confront a final solution which is preju-
diced to permit only “minor modifications.”
—Assurance that Israel will be allowed some agreed form of secu-
rity presence on the West Bank beyond the interim period.
—Assurance that, should King Hussein fail to enter the negotia-
tions even if guidelines for negotiating West Bank and Gaza issues are
agreed between Egypt and Israel, Sadat will either himself negotiate a
West Bank/Gaza settlement or not insist on such a settlement as a pre-
condition for concluding a Sinai agreement. (Sadat has on occasion told
us he will negotiate a West Bank/Gaza final settlement if Hussein and
the Palestinians won’t. Ambassador Eilts feels strongly that it would be
impossible politically for Sadat to do this.)
Sadat, for his part, wants as regards the West Bank and Gaza:
—A clear and public Israeli commitment to withdraw from the
West Bank and Gaza, couched in terms that he can say preclude other
than “minor modifications.” (Ironically, language on withdrawal that
is clear on the principle but vague on the extent may now be more
easily acceptable to Sadat and other Arabs precisely because of the po-
sition thus far adopted by the Begin Government.)
—A freeze on further Israeli settlements.
—A clear and public commitment to resolve the issue of sover-
eignty after the interim period in the context of Israeli withdrawal—i.e.,
a commitment which he can interpret as meaning the area will devolve
to Arab political authority. A reiteration of the Israeli willingness to
“discuss” the sovereignty question at that time will not be sufficient.
—Language in any agreed document that assures active Pales-
tinian participation in the process of determining the future of the West
Bank and Gaza, including their consent to the terms of a final peace

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
treaty. Sadat wants language which includes the code-phrases “legiti-
mate rights” and “a solution of the Palestinian problem in all its
aspects.”
Sadat has the following additional desiderata as regards the Sinai, as-
suming he is willing to continue negotiations at all:
—Assurance that Israel agrees that such negotiations, and any
agreement that may ensue, will be part of a comprehensive agreement.
He may insist on a verbal understanding that final implementation of a
Sinai agreement must await the successful conclusion of the steps
agreed upon during an interim period on the West Bank.
—Assurance that when the implementation of a Sinai agreement
has been completed, the Israeli airfields and settlements will be
removed.
Handling the Dilemma at the Summit
General Considerations
Both men are coming to Camp David with the need to deal with
the West Bank/Gaza and Palestinian issues very much in their minds.
For Begin and his team, however, the goal is a Sinai agreement, and
West Bank negotiations constitute a means to that end. Sadat, on the
other hand, will want to avoid talking about the Sinai. To him this is a
subject that must await basic Israeli decisions on the West Bank and
Gaza. He believes he has already shown sufficient flexibility to warrant
give from the Israeli side and is in no mood to make further conces-
sions, least of all on his own territory. Moreover, Foreign Minister
Kamel and other members of Sadat’s party will be ready to encourage
Sadat to hold firm should he show signs of weakening.
While the relationship between the Sinai and the West Bank will
inevitably surface directly at some point, the result when it does will
not depend solely on the obvious issues themselves. It will also be
greatly affected by our success prior to that time in (a) helping each to
understand the political requirements of the other and (b) building a
sense of shared strategic interest. Success in these areas early on would
hopefully pave the way for a greater willingness by each to acknowl-
edge the substantive needs of the other outlined above.
Bilateral with Begin
The task with Begin in this respect will be twofold:
—To convince him of our sympathy with Israel’s desire to con-
clude an agreement on the Sinai, thus normalizing its relations with its
largest and potentially most dangerous Arab neighbor and going far
toward removing the threat of another disastrous war, and
—To convey to him our understanding of Sadat’s reluctance to do
so in the absence of something he can use in the wider Arab context.

You might express your esteem for the vision which both Begin
and Sadat have thus far shown in confronting very difficult and com-
plex issues. In the process, it would be important that Begin be left with
no doubt that in your mind Sadat’s decision to visit Jerusalem was a
watershed event in Middle Eastern history, undertaken in defiance of
an Arab consensus to the contrary and at great personal and political
risk. Begin should understand that you, without taking sides on the
specific issues at hand, can understand why Sadat, from his perspec-
tive, believes that his act has not yet been reciprocated. It is also clear,
however, that Sadat has not sufficiently recognized the importance of
Begin’s proposals on the Sinai.
You might also wish to stress the conviction that Sadat is serious in
his offer to support security arrangements that will relieve Israeli con-
cerns on this score. Begin would hopefully be left with the feeling that,
in your mind, the existence of the time buffer provided by an interim
period, the resulting ability to think in terms of time-phasing, and the
fact that all arrangements will be freely negotiated and actual with-
drawal will depend on prior agreement on security, make Israel’s secu-
rity concerns manageable. Most importantly, the U.S. remains com-
mitted to Israeli security, including in the context of negotiated changes
in the status quo.
Bilateral with Sadat
The task with Sadat will also be twofold:
—To convince him of the negotiating assets available to him in
seeking Israeli concessions on the West Bank because of Israel’s desire
for a Sinai agreement, and,
—To help him understand what is realistically achievable at this
time on the West Bank without destroying his faith in the constancy of
U.S. positions on key issues.
Sadat will want to focus almost entirely on West Bank/Gaza/Pal-
estinian questions. We will have to try to lay out Begin’s background,
his ideological mindset and the basic support he has within his gov-
ernment—all without conveying the impression that we are sympa-
thetic to the Israeli position on withdrawal from the West Bank. If Sadat
asks whether our interpretation of Resolution 242, including our com-
mitment to “minor modifications,” has changed, you can say that we
continue to believe that should be the end result but a precise commit-
ment to it is not achievable at this point.
It is important to underscore the historic importance of his Jeru-
salem initiative. In this respect, you might wish to refer to the fact that

8.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
204867. For Ambassadors Lewis and Eilts from Saunders. Subject:
Message to Begin on Israeli Settlements. Ref: Cairo 18867.
cret; Flash; Nodis. Drafted by Saunders; cleared by Stanislaus R.P. Valerga (S/S–O); ap-
proved by Saunders. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo.
between Eilts and Egyptian Ministry of Information Under Secretary Mursi Saad El-Din
in which the latter responded to Eilts’ request to “lower” the public media rhetoric
vis-a`-vis the Israeli Government in advance of the Camp David Summit. Saad El-Din
pointed out that an Israeli Cabinet announcement of August 13—which stated that Israel
intended to establish five new West Bank settlements—caused “embarrassment for

1. For Lewis. Secretary has asked me to send you the following text
of a message from him to Prime Minister Begin. Begin text:
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
We have just heard of the rumored plan to establish five new set-
tlements on the West Bank. As you will remember after the historic
steps of last fall, a principal reason the peace negotiations very soon ran
into trouble was the action taken with respect to settlements. I am
deeply concerned, and urge you not to take any step which would under-
mine the Camp David meetings or subsequent peace negotiations.
Please inform me directly what your plans are so that I can help to
ease the concern being expressed here and in Egypt. End text.
2. In passing this on, you may relate it to the Secretary’s conversa-
tions with Begin and Sadat4 on cooling the rhetoric before the Camp
David meetings. The text of the message gives you a peg on which to
hand [hang?] this point.
3. For Eilts. We are providing you with the text of the Secretary’s
message to Begin only for your background so you will have the flavor
of it. However, the Secretary has asked that you get word to Kamel
that, as we understand it, no Israeli Cabinet action has been taken on
new settlements, but we have been in touch urgently with the Israeli
Government and are awaiting their response. We will say this publicly
and will also state that our position on settlements remains unchanged.
Secretary, as of this moment, plans to make this statement himself
when he faces the microphones following his closed session with the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee this morning (Monday).
Vance
the decision to establish five nahal settlements in the Jordan River valley, made in secret
by the Israeli Ministerial Committee on Security Affairs in June, are in telegram 10343
from Tel Aviv, August 13. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
was delivered to Evron on August 14 for delivery to Begin. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P840137–1595)

9.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State
10418. For the Secretary, Atherton and Saunders from Ambas-
sador. Subject: Some Thoughts on Camp David Strategy.
1. The big problem at Camp David will be to get Begin to agree to
certain phrases in a declaration of principles which will be like castor
oil for him. Dayan and many others are skeptical that he will bring him-
self to swallow the medicine, since he would have to walk away from a
lifetime conviction about Israel’s right to rule over the West Bank. But
there is a chance he will rise to the historic moment, which he knows
may be his last and best chance to become the Prime Minister who
brought peace to Israel.
2. To have any hope of bringing Begin around will require far more
than just another vague indication that with “satisfactory” language
about the West Bank and Gaza in hand, Sadat would then go to Hus-
sein to seek his participation, and if refused, might then shoulder the
Palestinian problem himself. Begin will need much more than that to
show for abandoning his ideological position, especially with his asso-
ciates in Herut.
3. Put another way, the GOI will be asking what Israel will get
from Sadat for acquiescing publicly on the principle of withdrawal.
(Explicitly promising eventual Arab sovereignty is, I think, out of the
question for Begin.) To get from Begin what Sadat needs will require
him to make concrete certain understandings at which he has only
hinted to the Israelis thus far. The goal should be a mutually agreed,
specific framework coming out of the summit for a final, if phased, set-
tlement in Sinai. Less from Sadat will bring less from Begin. Sadat’s se-
riousness about peace will be judged here by his seriousness about a
concrete agreement over Sinai, whatever is said about the West Bank
and Gaza.
4. Nobody knows how far Begin is willing to go to reach an agree-
ment with Sadat, probably not even Begin himself. What I am sure of is
that the Prime Minister’s final fallback will not emerge unless Sadat
shows flexibility that has been notably absent from recent Egyptian
statements, both public and private. In order to leave his past behind,
Begin will have to be sure that Sadat will make a deal—not just talk
about one, but eventually make one. Thus, we will no doubt be faced in
the September meeting with Begin and Sadat each waiting for the other
to blink. That of course is where our own ideas come in. But in my
view, we must take great care not [garble] through our own interven-
tion the stark clarity of Begin’s own choice.
5. His first interest will be to blame stalemate, if it occurs, on
Sadat’s inflexibility. In that case, it will not be enough for us to argue
that Sadat was prepared rpt prepared to be flexible in private rpt pri-
vate. The Israelis have heard that song before, and most do not now be-
lieve it. If Camp David were to fail, then it would be critically important
for the subsequent political debate here and in the U.S. that Begin be
seen as rejecting Sadat’s clear, forthcoming and public offer, or Sadat’s
acceptance of U.S. compromise proposals. If Begin adheres to his pre-
vious position, if Sadat does pretty much the same, and if the U.S. puts
forward ideas to bridge the gap which neither side accepts, Begin will
return to Israel generally applauding the President’s effort and specif-
ically blaming the failure on Anwar Sadat. Most Israelis will believe
him.
6. As far as is possible, we must seek in the Camp David talks to
avoid giving Begin this way out. The choice for Begin, and for Israel
should be as clear as we can make it. And that will require at Camp
David a still flexible Anwar Sadat, ready to further moderate his posi-
tions, and recognizable as such by the majority of people in Israel.
7. Since moments of such clarity are as rare in international politics
as anywhere else, we may not be able to pull this off. But we should try,
and in the first instance that means the President should talk to Sadat
along these lines at the outset. I recognize such a course will surely
cause Sadat serious problems with his Arab brothers. In compensation,
the U.S.-Egyptian relationship would be reinforced for the foreseeable
future, a not inconsiderable achievement for him as well as for us. But if
Sadat holds back at Camp David, his Jerusalem initiative will be dead
and buried as far as Israelis are concerned, and that includes those most
critical of the Begin government’s present policy.
Lewis

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

10.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
207141. Subject: Message to Begin on Settlements. Ref: State
Following for your information is Prime Minister Begin’s reply to
the Secretary’s message of August 14, as delivered by Israeli Embassy
August 15. Begin text:

11.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Syria
205958. Subject: Presidential Letter on Camp David Summit.
1. Please pass the following letter from President Carter to Presi-
dent Assad ASAP. There will be no rpt no signed original to follow.
2. Begin text. Dear Mr. President: I wish to share with you some of
my thoughts on the forthcoming Middle East meeting at Camp David.
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by the White House; cleared by W. Nathaniel Howell
(NEA/ARN) and Thomas C. Martin (S/S–O); approved by Veliotes. On August 11,
Vance sent a draft copy of the letter, along with a list of suggested recipients, to Carter.
This draft copy, with Carter’s handwritten amendments, is in the Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 52, Middle East: Camp
Jidda, both August 16, the Department transmitted individualized versions of this letter
to Hussein and Khalid. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
I know from our talks in Geneva3 of your own deep desire for a just
and lasting peace. My understanding is that Syria continues to adhere
to the relevant Security Council resolutions constituting the basis for a
negotiated settlement and has left the door open to rejoining the negoti-
ations if conditions acceptable to Syria are met. We are gratified that
Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat have both responded posi-
tively to the invitation to meet with me next month in a major new ef-
fort to establish a framework for a Middle East peace settlement.
We have purposely not set a fixed duration for the talks, scheduled
to begin on September 6, so as to be able to allow as much time as is
needed for our efforts to succeed. This is an encouraging indication of
the seriousness with which these parties are approaching this meeting.
I extended this invitation because I believe we have reached a cru-
cial point in the search for peace in the Middle East. Nine months have
passed since President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin opened signifi-
cant new possibilities for negotiations with the historic meetings in Je-
rusalem and in Ismailia. The sides have made progress toward re-
solving some of the issues that divide them at this time, but recently, as
you are aware, an impasse was threatened. I am convinced that we
cannot afford an impasse, since the positions would then harden and
the atmosphere deteriorate to the point where the present opportunity
for peace could well become another of the lost opportunities that have
marked the history of this tragic conflict.
The objective of the Camp David meeting will remain as it has
been defined by the two sides themselves in negotiations this year: to
make progress toward an agreement on a framework, based on Secu-
rity Council Resolution 242, that would allow steady progress toward
agreement on specific issues, within the context of the agreed goal of a
stable, just and comprehensive peace. An agreed framework such as
the United States is seeking might ultimately make it possible for other
parties to the conflict, including Syria, to rejoin the peace negotiations.
Our experience in attempting to facilitate and promote negotia-
tions this past year has demonstrated that it is impossible to carry nego-
tiations beyond a certain point on the crucial issues unless the heads of
government themselves can be engaged in a direct exchange. This was
one of the considerations that led me to the decision to extend invita-
tions to the two leaders to meet with me at Camp David. Our objective
will be to achieve agreements at the political level which can provide
guidance for the negotiators on the key issues. I plan to do everything

12.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, August 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Camp David
The State Department will give you a comprehensive book2 re-
garding substance, procedure, and schedule. At this point I would only
like to make the following points:
1. The three leaders will not be truly in the same boat. Sadat cannot
afford a failure and he knows it; both Sadat and Begin think you cannot
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
afford a failure; but Begin probably feels that a Camp David failure is
Sadat’s and Carter’s failure but not his own. Begin might well calculate
that Sadat will be undermined and your policy will be discredited.
Thus things will eventually return to what they were before you initi-
ated the active search for peace.
2. It follows from the foregoing that you will have to make it very
clear to both of them, but especially to Begin, that failure at Camp
David will have directly adverse consequences for relations with the
United States. In addition, failure is likely to reintroduce the Soviet
Union into the region.
3. Sadat will define success in terms of substance, particularly in
regards to withdrawal. Begin will define success largely in terms of
procedure, since he prefers procedural arrangements to substantive
concessions.
4. The above, in turn, means that you will have to extract substan-
tive concessions from Begin, while persuading Sadat to settle for less
than an explicit commitment to full withdrawal and return to 1967 lines
with minor modifications.
5. You should avoid being overly absorbed in details or specific
formulations, particularly during the first few days. Both Sadat and
Begin will be trying to manipulate you to side with them, and Begin in
particular will try to draw you into the details and verbal formulations
that he enjoys discussing as a way of avoiding decisions. The State
briefing papers include specific language on a number of substantive
issues, but this should be thought of as illustrative, not as something
you will want to introduce in the initial talks. As a point of reference,
the attached table gives some idea of possible formulations on the cen-
tral issues of withdrawal, borders, security, and sovereignty that we
might try to get Sadat and Begin to accept.

Attachment
Table
undated
Illustrative Language on Central Issues
Minimum Objective
Maximum Objective
I. Withdrawal
“Withdrawal from
“Withdrawal on all fronts
territories occupied in
from territories occupied
1967 in conformity with
Resolution 242, including
the principle of the inad-
missibility of the acqui-
sition of territory by war.”
II. Borders
“Borders should be
“Borders should be
established on the West
established in conditions
Bank/Gaza that satisfy
of security and peace that
the aspirations of the
approximate the lines exist-
Palestinians and the
ing between 1949 and 1967,
security needs of Israel.”
with modifications as
agreed among the
parties.”
III. Security
“Special security
“Special security
arrangements, including
arrangements, including a
demilitarization, etc.”
continuing Israeli presence
at strategic locations as
agreed among the
parties.”
IV. Sovereignty “The question of
“The question of
sovereignty will be
sovereignty will be
resolved by negotiations
resolved by negotiations
by the end of the five-
in conformity with all the
year period.”
principles of Resolution 242
by the end of the five-
year period.”

13.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
19298. For Secretary, Atherton and Saunders only from Ambas-
sador. Subject: Thoughts on Camp David Strategy. Ref: (A) State
1. To my mind, our objective at Camp David should be obtaining
arrangements, whether they be in a declaration of principles or in some
other form, that do more than get us through this round of talks. They
should be rooted in the realities of the area situation if they are not to be
blown away with the first political gusts, which Camp David will inev-
itably generate. Both Sadat and Begin should be urged to be as flexible
as possible, but form as well as substance should be carefully
considered.
2. This said, and with all respect to Sam, I think some of the ideas
suggested ref B would, if accepted, court grief and impermanence. The
Secretary may know more from his private talk with Sadat5 than I do
about how far he is willing to go, but Sadat’s credibility at home and in
the Arab world would be seriously impugned if he came home with the
type of arrangements Sam suggests. Sadat would be accused of having
bought a pig in a poke. He would in effect have agreed to a significant
territorial compromise in the West Bank and to go ahead with concrete
Sinai arrangements in return for some vague Israeli commitment that
the sovereignty issue will be decided after five years—no one knows
how—and acceptance of Begin’s home rule plan. If Begin even refuses
to bite the bullet on sovereignty, after Sadat has accepted other points,
it will be cold comfort for Sadat to know that the Israeli Prime Minister
may thereafter be criticized at home. Sadat’s concessions, like those he
made earlier on normalization, will from that time on be pocketed by
whatever Israeli Government is in office and negotiations will in ef-
fect have to start from there. Sadat will look foolish to his people and
the Arabs and, worse still, the US-sponsored peace process will be
discredited.
3. In my judgment, if there is to be any chance of Sadat’s being able
to sell to Hussein, the Palestinians and the Saudis (as well as to his own
military and public) whatever arrangements emerge from Camp
David, careful packaging will be required. Any West Bank territorial
compromise that may emerge should be strictly cast in the context of
“minor”, a term which has never been carefully defined and should
therefore lend itself to some reasonable elasticity in interpretation, pro-
vided this is not too blatant. If the Israelis openly call such a concept ter-
ritorial compromise, Sadat will have trouble selling what he has ac-
cepted. It seems to me that within the context of “minor” rectifications,
the Peres proposed (but subsequently dropped) language at Vienna
could be considered, namely “there will be changes in the borders be-
tween the West Bank and Israel which satisfy the aspirations of the Pal-
estinians and satisfy the security of Israel”. Sadat has accepted this.
And all of this should be wrapped in a resounding reaffirmation of the
principle of the inadmissability of the acquisition of territory by war. I
know that this will be hard for Begin to swallow, but we may be asking
Sadat to swallow even more bitter medicine.
4. As far as the Israeli security presence on the West Bank is con-
cerned, demilitarization ought to be the objective, but it is a word that
may be difficult to sell. The concept, on the other hand, should be sale-
able to Sadat, depending upon how it is put. At this stage, we may be
well advised to limit any public declaration to something general, i.e.,
“adequate security arrangements will be worked out”.
5. I frankly am at a total loss as to how Sadat can conclude a full
peace treaty or something less on the West Bank by himself. It would be
nice if he could, as he sometimes says he will, but he cannot do so and
hope to make it stick. Nothing that he negotiates in the West Bank gives
any form of legitimacy to the interim regime. As I have previously
stated, it will be building on quicksand and will not endure.
6. There is much in the Begin plan8 that makes good sense were its
authorship not so suspect in Arab eyes. But ending the Israeli occupa-
tion and setting up self-government, if it is to be acceptable in the Arab
world at large, should be with the consent of all of the parties, in-
cluding the Palestinians. It is not enough to have self-rule delegated by
the Israeli Military Government. That’s an important point.
7. Israeli settlement activities, though now temporarily stopped,
will have to be addressed. Knowing our position, the Israelis have reg-
ularly sought to pull the wool over our eyes until caught flagrante del-
icto, so that admission was inescapable. The Israelis, for reasons which
August 1978, Document 264.
August 1978, Document 177.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
from their point may be understandable, want to change the demo-
graphic picture in the West Bank. Despite Dayan’s talk about only indi-
viduals being allowed to purchase land, I suspect that the Israelis will
continue to try to create facts on the ground that will affect what
happens in five years. Given this situation, the illegality of large scale
Israeli settlement activity in the West Bank should be reaffirmed if
Sadat is to sell some unpalatable territorial concessions to confreres.
8. Since the Camp David meeting may bring us to the crunch, I
have one other general observation to make with which Sam may or
may not agree. Despite his sense of U.S. pressure, Mr. Begin strikes me
as being in an advantageous position. If Sadat does not agree to his ter-
ritorial demands, the Egyptian President can be depicted as being at
fault; if Sadat agrees to those territorial demands, that’s all the better; if
Sadat subsequently goes under because of such agreement, well—
that’s just too bad because Mr. Begin knew all along the unreliability of
the Arabs and, anyway, it removes the one Arab leader who success-
fully challenged Israel’s longtime sole claim on the affections of the
American people; and if it fails because of Begin’s own unwillingness
to go the extra mile, this can be explained away at home and any oppo-
sition criticism will be manageable for as adroit a political leader as Mr.
Begin. Sadat has no such advantage. He must come out with something
saleable or he is in trouble, his already faltering peace initiative will be
irrevocably damaged, and the validity of his reliance on the United
States will be perceived by his own people and the Arabs as having
been misplaced.
9. The above are general thoughts based on reftels. It is difficult to
be specific in the absence of some more precise indication of what our
objectives will be at Camp David. As requested elsewhere, I am pre-
paring a series of messages9 on the political/economic dynamics of
Egypt which I hope to submit next week and which will spell out in
greater length the constraints under which even the normally venture-
some Sadat will have to work.
Eilts
economic dynamics of Egypt as they affected the peace process. Telegram 19438 from
Cairo, August 21, discussed the basic political, economic, and social institutions in Egypt.
from Cairo, August 21, discussed Sadat’s personal compulsions and constraints as he ap-
proached the Camp David talks. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
rate paper, sent in telegram 19377 from Cairo, August 21, overviewed the current state
of the Egyptian economy. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

14.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)
Washington, August 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat’s Perceptions of the Camp David Summit as
of 18 August 1978
1. Attached for your information is a report [1 line not declassified]
concerning Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat’s observations of the
Camp David Summit in which he has expressed hope for the attain-
ment of two separate but related achievements.
2. This information, [less than 1 line not declassified], is a raw report,
not finally evaluated intelligence. The report is also being made avail-
able to the Secretary of State.
Stansfield Turner
Attachment
Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
undated
SUBJECT
Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat’s Perceptions of the Camp David Summit as
of 18 August 1978
1. [less than 1 line not declassified], Egyptian President Anwar al-
Sadat told [less than 1 line not declassified] that despite anticipated diffi-
culties, he has hopes for the success of the Camp David Summit. He
stated that the participation of President Jimmy Carter in the peace
process makes possible, if not probable, the attainment of two separate
but related achievements. The first achievement would be a two-part
publicly announced agreement to include the acceptance of principles,
based on UN Resolution 242, coupled with an agreement on the Pales-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tinian question based on the Aswan Formula announced by President
Carter at Aswan, Egypt in January 1978.
2. The second achievement, to be won through hard bargaining,
would be a precisely written secret agreement on the framework for a
Middle East peace settlement. This secret agreement would be signed
by both President Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachim Begin
with a witnessing signature by President Carter. The reason President
Sadat would insist on a written document witnessed by President
Carter is to prevent subsequent statements by the two parties—either
inadvertently or deliberately—misinterpreting the
understanding
reached between the leaders of Egypt and Israel.
3. In defining what he meant by a precise agreement on the frame-
work for a Middle East peace, President Sadat stated that both he and
Prime Minister Begin had to agree on a clear definition of all the major
aspects of a Middle East settlement. Following the acceptance of this
major, overall framework of agreement, details would then be worked
out by committees, hopefully to include the participation of other Arab
nations also.
4. President Sadat’s own basic tenet for a framework of an agree-
ment allows for considerable flexibility on details, but no compromise
on sovereignty or territory—except for minor adjustments on the West
Bank.
5. President Sadat proposed the Palestinian question as one ex-
ample of the need for both a public and a secret agreement. Whereas
the public statement could announce an agreement on the Aswan For-
mula as a basis for the Palestinian issue, secret negotiations would need
to address Israeli concerns regarding which Palestinians would be the
future leaders of a Palestinian West Bank.
6. President Sadat stated that President Carter’s participation is es-
sential because he (President Sadat) has lost the trust and confidence
which he had in Prime Minister Begin, and now he must fall back on his
trust in President Carter’s sincerity and fairness. President Sadat felt
that if he and Prime Minister Begin reached a precise written under-
standing and if President Carter witnessed that written understanding,
then the peace process could indeed take a major step forward.

15.
Report Prepared in the Vice Directorate for Production,
Defense Intelligence Agency
DIAIAPPR 202–78
Washington, August 22, 1978
SYRIA-ISRAEL: COLLISION OVER LEBANON (U)
Summary
(C/NOFORN) Syrian and Israeli policies in Lebanon appear to be
evolving in a direction that will lead to a major confrontation. This possibility
has little to do with the tactical situation in Beirut or in southern Lebanon, but
is a consequence of fundamentally contradictory policies. Syria must remain
involved in Lebanon if it is to achieve a solution favorable to its own regional
interests. Israel, meanwhile, appears to seek an end of Syrian presence there.
For Israel, the coming clash with Syria in Lebanon represents the awakening of
a conflict that has lain largely dormant since the spring of 1976.
Background
(C/NOFORN) After more than two years of overt involvement in
Lebanon, Syria’s goal of developing a unified, stable, and responsive
state on its western border seems more remote than ever. No visible
progress has been made on the basic problems complicating the Leba-
nese situation; no strong central authority has emerged, no national
consensus favoring unity has developed, and powerful armed groups
opposed to Syrian aims have not been neutralized. The latter problem
is the most immediate.
(C/NOFORN) Syria’s current difficulties are with its erstwhile
allies-of-convenience, the Christian militias of the Phalange and the
National Liberal Party. When Syria first intervened overtly in Lebanon
in 1976, the Christians were being worsted by the combined forces of
the Muslim Leftists and the Palestinians. Syria feared that if that coali-
tion should triumph, the emergent Lebanon would risk coming under
radical Arab influence—particularly that of Syria’s arch enemy, Iraq.
Out of fear for Syria’s strategic interests, Damascus moved against the
Muslim coalition, effectively siding with the Christians. That threat
was eventually surpressed, but the Christians soon turned on their
“rescuers”, realizing that Syria intended neither to dismantle the Pales-
tinian forces nor permit the Christians to reassert their ante bellum he-
gemony in Lebanon.
(C/NOFORN) The Christians utilized the respite afforded by
Syrian intervention to improve substantially their military posture and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
have emerged as the most powerful non-Syrian force in Lebanon. At a
minimum, they are capable of defending the areas under their control
against the Muslim Leftists and Palestinians. It is clear that if the Chris-
tians cannot dominate a new Lebanon, they will try to fragment the
country along confessional lines to achieve unencumbered political
dominance in the areas—the richest in Lebanon—under their control.
This objective has brought them into direct conflict with the Syrians.
The first clash occurred at Fayadiyah in February 1978, and since then
the tempo of fighting has increased. The results have not been disap-
pointing to the Christians, and they seem more determined than ever to
thwart Syrian designs.
(C/NOFORN) For its part, Israel’s policy toward the Syrian pres-
ence in Lebanon has until recently reflected some ambivalence. In late
1975 and early 1976, Tel Aviv expressed strong opposition to Syrian in-
tervention in the Lebanese civil conflict because of the threats such a
development would pose to Israel’s security. Of particular concern
was the threat to Lebanon’s status as a Christian-dominated non-
confrontation state, and that posed by a Syrian military presence along
Israel’s northern border. The careful manner in which Syria handled its
escalating intervention in Lebanon, its tacit acknowledgement of Israeli
security concerns, US pressure on Israel not to over-react to Syrian
moves, and the transitory security benefits that the Syrian involvement
provided Israel allowed Israeli officials to come to accept a carefully
controlled Syrian presence in Lebanon. Israel at times was called upon
to control Syria’s actions, but at no time did Israel appear to be moving
to end Syrian involvement. Tel Aviv, however, never accepted that the
Syrian presence should become either permanent or dominant and, to a
very real degree, Syria is in Lebanon at Israel’s sufferance. It now ap-
pears that the Israeli Government has decided to end the Syrian adven-
ture in Lebanon.
Discussion
Syria’s Position and Options
(S/NOFORN) In the face of its difficult position in Lebanon, Da-
mascus has three basic options: withdraw from Lebanon; confront the
militias and prepare for a prolonged occupation; or temporize and
hope for favorable developments. Syria has so far pursued the third op-
tion, partly out of natural caution and partly out of fear of the repercus-
sions from exercising options one or two. The third option, however, is
beginning to prove counterproductive. No favorable developments are
on the horizon, and a series of escalating clashes, separated by tense
cease-fires of more and more limited duration, has been occurring.
Christian hardliners appear intent on provoking a Syrian military at-
tack in the belief that Israel will come to their assistance. So far, how-

ever, there is no indication that President Assad, who would personally
make the decision to implement one of the other options, has decided
to do so. Nevertheless, Christian provocations and the unproductive-
ness of the present policy probably will eventually force him to recon-
sider. A withdrawal from Lebanon—partial or complete—would be an
open admission of a massive policy failure and would entail serious
risks to the stability of the Assad regime. Before taking such an irrevers-
ible and dangerous step, Assad will most likely essay a military solu-
tion. Although Damascus is thoroughly aware of the Israeli factor in
such a decision, Tel Aviv’s low profile during the fighting in Beirut in
the latter half of July may have led Syria to believe that Israeli support
of the Christians has its limits. Certainly, there is some support in the
Syrian military—especially in Lebanon—and government for a more
militant policy. At some point, it will probably seem preferable to
probe Israel’s commitment to the Christians, rather than move directly
to the withdrawal option. However, if Damascus feels it can count on
Israeli forbearance, it is probably miscalculating. In the final analysis,
Tel Aviv will not permit the Christians to be crushed.
Israeli Perceptions and Responses
(S/NOFORN) The developments that prompted Israel to shift its
policy are not known, but Israeli policymakers may have concluded
after early July that Syria had no intention of ever leaving Lebanon;
there was no chance to restore Lebanon to a unified state; and that Syria
would inevitably attempt to crush the Christians. They probably rea-
soned that, if these conclusions proved correct, Israel’s ultimate night-
mare of a Syrian puppet state on its northern border would become an
accomplished fact.
(S/NOFORN) Israel has consistently opposed such a development
and has worked to avoid it. Additionally, termination of Syria’s pres-
ence would remove a direct threat to Israel’s northern border and leave
the Christians in a dominant military-political position. Ultimately of
course, such a policy would lead to the Balkanization of Lebanon. This,
however, has already occurred to a degree, and Israel might find such a
situation quite comfortable.
(S/NOFORN) Israeli actions since early July suggest that it has
made and is implementing a decision to force a Syrian withdrawal. Tel
Aviv provided an unprecedented level of support to the Christians fol-
lowing Syrian shelling of east Beirut in early July, and allegedly en-
couraged the Christians to harass Syrian forces. The Israelis have made
increasing references to the need for Syria to withdraw from Lebanon
and have alleged Syrian intentions to massacre the Christians.
(S/NOFORN) Pursuit of such a policy is not without risks, for
dealing with the mercurial Christian leadership is at best a delicate pro-

16.
Memorandum of Conversation
Ismailia, August 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Meeting with President Sadat re Camp David
PARTICIPANTS
President Anwar al-Sadat
Vice President Mohamed Husni Mubarak
Ambassador Hermann Fr. Eilts
I met with Sadat for one and a half hours in Ismailia. Vice Presi-
dent Mubarak was also present.
I first briefed Sadat on our current thinking on the scenario for the
Camp David talks. I told him the thought is to devote part of the first
day to bilaterals between President Carter and each of the two visiting
leaders. Thereafter, the scenario might develop depending upon how
the talks progress. Sadat said that this arrangement is agreeable to him.
He is anxious to have the opportunity to have an in-depth talk with
President Carter prior to the first trilateral meeting. I then told the Pres-
ident that I was returning to Washington the following day and asked if
he had any thoughts he wished me to convey. President Sadat asked
that I convey his warm greetings to President Carter and the Secretary
and to outline to them his preliminary thinking as follows:
He first said that we should leave the Israelis to what he called
their own misimpressions. The Israelis believe that he will be seeking a
declaration of principles. This, Sadat stressed, is not his immediate ob-
jective. We should seek what President Carter has already stated,
namely, a framework for a comprehensive settlement. Sadat noted that
Begin has spoken of wanting President Carter to act as a “broker”, not
as a full partner. Sadat was happy that President Carter has reaffirmed
his willingness to be a full partner. He will want to discuss with Presi-
dent Carter their common strategy.
As he had stated, he will not be asking for an immediate declara-
tion of principles. This is still desirable, but should be handled at an-
other level. At the Head of Government level, the focus should be on
what President Carter has said, namely, a framework for a comprehen-
sive settlement. This is the very least that should come out of the Camp
David meeting. The framework should be a written document signed
by Egypt and Israel. Such a written document should be the Camp
David achievement.
Sadat continued that he has not yet formulated his strategy in de-
tail. He is still working on it and will in the next week or so concentrate
on fleshing out his ideas. He already had some broad ideas in mind,
however.
First, Sadat noted, President Carter should be prepared for a “con-
frontation” between Sadat and Begin. But, as he had told the Secretary,
President Carter should be assured that he, Sadat, will not let him
down. It will, nevertheless, require a confrontation with Begin. He reit-
erated that he will want to discuss his strategy with President Carter
when they meet on September 6.
Sadat said that he considers the Camp David meeting to be a
turning point. It will be a crucial meeting, especially if—as he hopes
will be the case—the meeting creates some movement in the stalled
peace process.
Sadat wants President Carter and the Secretary to be sure that he
has taken into account all considerations that they have previously dis-
cussed in formulating his strategy. Apart from land and sovereignty, be
it Sinai or Golan, everything is negotiable. Here Sadat noted that he will
not be speaking for Syria, but any plans that are developed at Camp
David will presumably also apply to the Golan. He will, however, be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
speaking for the West Bank and Gaza. On the West Bank, Sadat stated
he will prepare himself for “flexibility”. (He did not elaborate on what
he had in mind.) He went on to say that in anything he negotiates, it
will not only be Egyptians, but the Saudis as well who should support
it. The Saudi position is terribly important. The U.S. has great interests
in Saudi Arabia and has had a historical relationship with that country.
If a satisfactory framework can be achieved, the Saudis will support it.
He had the previous day received a message from Prince Fahd in reply
to the President’s letter to King Khalid. Fahd’s message had stated
that, apart from relinquishment of Arab land and sovereignty, the
Saudis will support him in whatever he agrees upon.
I said I was glad to hear that there will be flexibility in his West
Bank ideas but noted that some of his closest colleagues contend that
Egypt has no mandate to discuss West Bank matters. How did he see
this aspect of the problem? Sadat agreed that the lack of a clear-cut
mandate from either the Arabs, Hussein or the Palestinians poses a
problem for Egypt in negotiating West Bank matters. But, Sadat ob-
served, if he neglects to negotiate the West Bank, which means the Pal-
estinian case, he will in effect be pressed into appearing to negotiate for
a separate Sinai settlement with Begin. This, as he put it, will subject
him to criticism by the Soviets and the rejectionist Arabs. A separate
agreement for the Sinai will strengthen the Soviets in the area. This
should, at all costs, be avoided. The second reason why he is prepared
to negotiate for the West Bank is the position of Egypt as the leader of
the Arab world. He noted that Egypt has half the population of the
Arab world. Real power lies in Egypt. Israel recognized this in the Oc-
before the Israelis bested the Egyptians. Even then, they would not
have been able to do so if the U.S. satellite photography had not been
furnished to the Israelis. This satellite photography had revealed his
25th Division preparing to cross the Canal. Egyptian leadership in the
Arab world will be totally damaged if he were to discuss only Sinai. An
agreement on a framework of peace signed with Egypt will give the Is-
raelis the endorsement of the largest Arab power. No one can do any-
thing to change this. There may be some terrorism, but there is no real
threat to Israel if Egypt is out of the conflict.
He recalled that his Jerusalem trip3 had given Israel legitimacy so
far as the Arabs are concerned. On the West Bank, he reiterated that he
will show flexibility. The West Bankers, he professed to know from his
Jerusalem trip, are with us. This will provide ample legitimacy to any
West Bank arrangements he might negotiate. He is ready to proceed

with or without Hussein. If there are no Jordanians on Al Aqsa, he is
ready to put up an Egyptian flag and deploy Egyptian forces on the
West Bank.
Sadat went on to say that there can be no concessions on the Sinai
borders. He hoped that whatever proposals the U.S. may make, the
idea of Sinai border concessions will not be included. If it is, he will
refuse it. This also applies to the sometimes mooted concept of Israeli
settlements remaining in Sinai, perhaps under Egyptian Government
protection. This is also not acceptable to him. Retention of the Sinai set-
tlements is as a matter of principle refused. He could under no circum-
stances agree to this. He noted that this is a point of disagreement be-
tween him and the U.S. President Carter had at one point or another
suggested something along those lines, but he wanted to emphasize
that he cannot do this. (He did not spell out why not, but negative
Egyptian military reaction has sometimes been cited as the reason why
he cannot.) “Let us have no illusions on this matter,” Sadat said.
Having said this, Sadat wanted President Carter to know that he
will cooperate in making everything go smoothly. On the West Bank,
he recognizes there is a security problem for Israel. He is ready to meet
that security problem. If Hussein comes in, he is sure Hussein will do
the same. If Hussein does not come in, he, Sadat, will take the responsi-
bility. In negotiating the security problem, Sadat suggested that this
should include the termination of the Israeli military government im-
mediately after signature of an agreement, and also the withdrawal of
Israeli forces. If this can be achieved, it will enable him to get Arab sup-
port for the agreement. The rejectionists will disavow it, but no matter.
Over 90 percent of the Arabs can be persuaded to support Sadat if such
agreement is reached.
When the stage of concrete proposals is reached, Sadat indicated
we may want to tell the press about this. He plans to discuss this with
President Carter at their first bilateral meeting.
There will be a role for the United States to play in the implementa-
tion of the agreement. Begin, Sadat was sure, will oppose it, but Sadat
said he wants Begin to come out in the open and to be exposed on his
opposition. Sadat stated emphatically that he has no confidence in
Begin. It would be better to be negotiating with Peres, Weizman or even
Golda Meir. But Begin is the Prime Minister and he will have to be ex-
posed. Begin’s idea of partial separate agreements is also “completely
excluded”. So is the concept of a third disengagement agreement. Sadat
said emphatically that he will not sign anything of this sort with Begin.
Apart from this, however, he was sure President Carter will be sat-
isfied with his strategy. As he had said at the outset, he has broad out-
lines but must still fill in the details. He will probably give President

17.
Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of
State
6941. Subject: Message to President Carter From King Hussein.
1. Royal Court Chief Sharaf presented Charge August 28 the fol-
lowing message to President Carter from King Hussein.
2. Quote: Dear Mr. President, Thank you for your letter2 of August
15, 1978 in which you kindly acquainted me with your views and
thoughts regarding the future meeting at Camp David. Your initiative
in arranging this meeting reflected your personal courage and pro-
found sense of commitment to peace in our region and in the world. I
am particularly grateful and satisfied at your assurance that your ef-
forts at Camp David will be guided by your views on a just and lasting
peace which have been the subject of our talks and contacts since the
beginning.
—Allow me, in return, to put before you our views of the present
situation and the prospects of future progress.
—Before President Sadat’s unprecedented initiative, Jordan was
seeking to build a consensus among the Arab States [garble] people.
These efforts I was conducting while in close consultation with you and
within our agreed framework. The idea would have assisted in over-
coming the serious procedural obstacles, the problem of coordination
among the Arab parties and the issue of Palestinian representation in
the peace talks. President Sadat’s surprising and unprecedented initia-
tive, although brave, led to a deep eruption within the Arab world
upsetting the atmosphere of cooperation necessary for achieving a
comprehensive settlement. Israel’s negative attitude towards all the es-
sential substantive questions in a future settlement, demonstrated in
the talks following President Sadat’s trip to Jerusalem, caused a serious
setback in the peace process and the atmosphere in general. It has in-
creased the belief in the Arab countries that the Israeli Government is
opposed to a total withdrawal from the Arab territories occupied by
force in June, 1967 under any circumstances, and it does not intend to
allow any reasonable solution of the Palestinian question based on rec-
ognition of the right of the Palestinian people, recognized in many
United Nations Resolutions, or the right to participate under condi-
tions of freedom in solving the Palestinian problem and in exercising
their legitimate human right of self determination. More than at any
time previously, Mr. President, I am now sadly persuaded of this. The
revelations resulting from President Sadat’s initiative have brought us
in the Arab world to this unavoidable conclusion. This is not to say that
we in Jordan are any less convinced of the necessity and urgency of
achieving a peaceful settlement and more precisely a lasting peace in
the area. But we have now a more realistic assessment of the prospects
of such a settlement. For us in Jordan, the situation has always been
particularly unique and delicate in view of our special relationship

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
with the Palestinian question. The Israeli Government has also added
to the obstacles by denying any Jordanian right in the West Bank and
refusing to admit that it is occupied Jordanian territory. It is more
necessary for us now to have a clear and unambiguous indication that
as a result of the process of negotiation Israel would end its occupation
of the West Bank and Gaza and the other territories occupied in June,
1967 and allow a process of self-determination leading to the resolution
of the Palestinian problem along lines outlined and with reciprocal
guarantees for future mutual security to Arabs and Israelis alike. I am
convinced that under such circumstances it would be within our ability
not only to participate actively and positively in constructing peace on
a solid and lasting basis but also to influence our Arab brethren to par-
ticipate in the peace process on the basis of the formula you suggested
earlier for Geneva or a similar collective framework.
—I do hope and pray that your brave initiative in arranging the
forthcoming talks in Camp David would result in the necessary break-
through. I am sure that you are determined to achieve substantive
progress. Permit me, however, to point out that it is feared here in
Jordan that the inability to achieve such genuine progress in the talks,
as a result of Israel’s proven intransigence, might prompt the partici-
pants to issue a vague and uncommiting document of principles aimed
at de-emphasizing the differences and inviting other participants. It
would be unhelpful to move along such a course and, consequently, ex-
pose potential participants such as Jordan to unjustified international
and local conflicting pressures. It would be unfair and unrealistic to ex-
pect Jordan and other Arab parties to shift their stands on principles on
such grounds in the absence of genuine indications of an Israeli posi-
tive attitude on the substantive questions.
—I wish to assure you, Mr. President, that Jordan remains ready
and willing to participate in all peace efforts that have a credible chance
of progress and a productive conclusion. We are committed to the ideal
of peace in our region and the hope of a just settlement. After the talks
in Camp David I hope that we would reopen close consultations re-
garding the situation. I shall conduct consultations with my Arab
partners in this spirit and for the reactivation of the atmosphere of col-
lective search for peace and positive action. I have already conveyed
my country’s views to President Sadat and I am sure that he under-
stands and appreciates them.
—I wish to thank you again for your confidence and friendship. I
hope I can reciprocate and that my country would remain the strong
friend and partner to your great country as it has always been and a
factor for stability and a force for the preservation of the identity of the
area and for honorable peace here and in the world.

—With my best wishes and deep respect. Your sincere friend, Hus-
sein I. End quote.
3. Original letter being pouched to Department (S/S).
4. Report of Sharaf’s background comments on letter being cabled
septel.
Suddarth
Hussein by Suddarth in London on September 4. (Telegram 7030 from Amman, Sep-
conversation with Sharaf regarding Hussein’s letter. After Sharaf reiterated the points
contained in Hussein’s letter, Suddarth “strongly urged” Jordan to “keep an open mind
until after Camp David. Sharaf said it would do so but emphasized that Jordan wants
U.S. to know its position clearly before talks start. King [Hussein] had sent a similar letter
to Sadat.” Suddarth concluded that Hussein’s letter “appears to leave little room for
Camp David talks to produce enough positive results for Jordan to associate itself with
ongoing negotiations, unless a major breakthrough occurs on Israeli willingness to make
major change in its position on West Bank withdrawal and Palestinian
self-
determination—a change which Jordan thinks will not occur.” (Telegram 6942 from
Amman, August 28; National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian
Summit—August 1978)

18.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter
Washington, August 30, 1978
SUBJECT
U.S. Aid to the Middle East
As you prepare for the Camp David meeting with Prime Minister
Begin and President Sadat, I believe you should bear in mind a growing
predicament in our aid to the Middle East. On the one hand, you
should continue to assure both Israel and Egypt that the levels of U.S.
economic and military assistance will not be decreased or withheld as
leverage in the peace negotiations. On the other hand, there is an in-
creasing disparity between the customary levels of U.S. aid to the
Middle East confrontation states and their actual needs for assistance.
Below are some of the facts that point up the increasing difficulty
in justifying continued high levels of U.S. aid to the Middle East. I am
not in this memorandum suggesting a reduction in those aid levels in
1980. But I do suggest that you should consider the need to begin
creating a climate where appropriate reductions will be acceptable dip-
lomatically to Israel and Egypt.
—Total: U.S. aid to the four Middle East confrontation states totals
1978.
—Israel: At $1. billion per year, U.S. aid to Israel amounts to
nearly $500 per capita. Israel’s balance-of-payments surplus is expected
allows Israel to increase its foreign exchange reserves (up 20% since
1976), retire short-term debt, and prepay medium- and long-term com-
mercial debt. GNP growth, low since the 1973 war, is now expected to
In addition, DOD and intelligence analyses indicate that the current
level of Israeli military capabilities insures Israel’s security against any
likely attack by Arab forces. Preliminary analysis as part of the fall
budget process indicates that U.S. aid of $1 billion would be sufficient
to meet Israeli needs.
—Although Egypt continues to have serious economic problems,
its prospects have improved measurably since 1976, largely because of
massive aid infusions from the U.S. and the Arab oil states. World
Bank, IMF, and USG analyses all project a steady decrease in aid re-
quirements in the future. While total new U.S. aid commitments have
been running at about $1 billion annually, disbursements will reach
$800 million in 1978 after two low years as the program gathered mo-
mentum. The “pipeline” of undisbursed AID prior commitments will
thus be nearly $1 billion by the end of this fiscal year. It now appears
that new AID supporting assistance of $600 million rather than the cur-
rent level of $750 million, when combined with outlays from the pipe-
line and food aid ($200 million annually), will be sufficient to maintain
meet your commitment to President Sadat to maintain aid levels (in
disbursement terms) over the next few years. A continuation of new
U.S. commitments at the 1979 level would likely permit the wealthy
Arab oil producers to reduce their aid.
—Aid levels for Jordan and Syria are primarily determined by
levels for Egypt and Israel. Nevertheless, both of these smaller confron-
tation states are sufficiently strong economically that they could with-
stand a reduction in U.S. aid in the context of an overall cut-back of aid
to the Middle East.
The disparity between recipient needs and U.S. support levels in
the Middle East could be particularly important in making 1980 budget
decisions as we consider heavy demands for funds to meet U.S. secu-
rity interests elsewhere in the world. To meet new demands for assist-
ance to Africa (especially southern Africa), Portugal, Turkey, and Latin
America, we expect State to recommend a 1980 security assistance pro-
gram well in excess of the planning ceiling. This in turn will force diffi-
cult tradeoffs with other areas if overall budget objectives are to be met.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Attachment
Table
undated
U.S. Aid to Middle East
Confrontation States, 1977–1979
(in millions of dollars)
1979 est.
Israel
Security Supporting Assistance
FMS Credits
1,0003
1,0004
1,0005
PL 480
Housing Guarantees
Israel Total
1,821
1,817
1,790
Egypt
Security Supporting Assistance
PL 480
Military Training
Egypt Total
Jordan
Security Supporting Assistance
FMS Credits
Military Assistance Program
Military Training
PL 480
Jordan Total
Syria
Security Supporting Assistance
PL 480
Syria Total
Grand Total
3,039
3,081
3,107

19.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State and the White House
11400. NEA for Asst Sec Saunders and Ambassador Lewis. Subject:
Meeting With Prime Minister Begin on Lebanon. Refs: A) State 220265;2
1. Summary: the Wednesday morning (Aug. 30) meeting with
Prime Minister Begin, Dayan and Weizman centered on Lebanon. All
three described the GOI’s grave concern over developments there and
their convictions that Syria intends to wipe out the Maronite forces and
turn Lebanon into a part of Greater Syria. They believe that the Syrians
are using the pre-Camp David period as a cover for their military ac-
tions in the belief that Israel will be hesitant to respond. In fact, Israel
cannot accept Syrian domination of Lebanon and will have to consider
greater military involvement there should the Syrians blockade or cap-
ture the northern ports, try to occupy Christian areas of Beirut, or con-
tinue to interfere with Israeli reconnaissance flights. They emphasized
that Israel cannot allow the situation in Lebanon to continue to deterio-
rate during the Camp David period. If Israel feels it must act, it will act
in enough force to convince the Syrians of Israeli seriousness. Prime
cret; Niact Immediate; Exdis Distribute as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to
Amman, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, and USUN.
points for the meeting with Begin. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
cions that the Syrians intend to crush the right-wing Christian forces have been height-
ened by the erosion of the ceasefire in Beirut and, over the weekend, by Syrian military
action against the Christian villages in North Lebanon.
“The immediate consequences of these developments is that pressure is building
very fast here for the GOI to do something in Lebanon to deter the Syrians from their
Seelye, in the absence of Khaddam, who was on an official visit to the Soviet Union, “get
in touch as quickly as possible” with Deputy Foreign Minister Kaddour, Presidential Ad-
viser Daoudi, “or any other senior Syrian official available” to share U.S. concern about
the Lebanon situation and the “extremely troubling” worries about “panic” detected in
the Lebanese Christian community, and to inform the Syrians that the United States con-
tinued to “deplore” the “shrill rhetoric coming from various quarters, including Israel.”
At the same time, Seelye was instructed to note “that Syria has not been as successful as it
might have been in convincing all concerned that its objectives are strictly limited and
that Syria will withdraw from Lebanon when the Sarkis government is able to maintain
security on its own,” as well as to “urge” Syria to “find a more credible way of allaying
suspicions and restoring international confidence in Syrian intentions.” (National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Minister Begin expressed appreciation for US efforts to reason with the
parties involved, but he proposes that President Carter also send a
letter to Assad immediately proposing a cease-fire and stand-fast in the
weeks ahead. He asked that we get an urgent response to his proposal
so that the participants at Camp David would not all be distracted by
worries over Lebanon. End summary
2. I met for an hour Wednesday morning with PM Begin, FonMin
Dayan and DefMin Weizman. Col. Tehila5 and Elie Rubenstein were
also present. As anticipated, the subject on their minds was Lebanon.
The atmosphere was serious but the participants did not seem particu-
larly tense.
3. PM Begin led off the discussion. His remarks were brief and to
the point. The Lebanese situation is nearing a grave crisis, he said. The
Syrian Army has turned its tanks and guns against the civilian popula-
tion. Israel wants a successful Camp David, he said, but it needs US
help over the next few weeks to contain the situation in Lebanon. The
Syrians are now trying to crush the Maronites and to take over control
of the country. They are attempting to take advantage of the period be-
fore Camp David to do this because they believe Israel will be reluctant
to act strongly in Lebanon at this time.
4. The GOI cannot permit this course of development to continue,
the PM said. It has a moral commitment to prevent the massacre of a
national religious minority. No one else is helping the Christians and it
is an intolerable thought that they be wiped out.
5. The Prime Minister said that, in view of the above, he wanted to
make a request of the US Government. He proposed that there be an-
other American representation in Damascus as soon as possible de-
manding an immediate cease-fire in Beirut and elsewhere. If this can be
arranged, the participants can go to Camp David “with a clear head”
and not have to worry every day about what is going on in Lebanon.
6. Defense Minister Weizman said that he would like to emphasize
the security part of the Lebanese equation. Until ten years ago, when
the PLO arrived, Lebanon was quiet. Today there is not only an attempt
to destroy the Maronites and impose the Syrian will on Lebanon, but
Syrian occupation of Lebanon threatens the northern frontier of Israel.
If Iraq’s appreciable force, which can be moved to the area on short no-
tice is added, Israel can find itself encircled on the northern front. Israel
cannot tolerate the occupation of Lebanon by Syria.
7. Until recently, Weizman continued, IDF aircraft had flown over
Lebanon on reconnaissance missions uncontested by the Syrians. In the
last two weeks, however, there have been two attempts by Syrian MiGs

to intercept the Israeli planes. In Weizman’s opinion it is only a ques-
tion of time before there will be aerial clashes and then the whole
matter will escalate further. Israel must be able to continue its air recon-
naissance unchallenged.
8. Dayan picked up on both the moral and security themes. He
asked what the USG position would be if Syria has decided to take over
Lebanon. This would be a major change in the situation, he said. It ap-
pears that Syria has decided to go ahead and ignore other countries on
the assumption that no one will stop it. He asked rhetorically “is Israel
to sit idle?” Israel has a dilemma, Dayan continued. The US is asking
the IDF to stay out of Lebanon and yet the Syrians are taking advantage
of the situation. Dayan asked “what would be your reaction to our reac-
tion if Israel intervened one way or another?” “How does the US feel
about Lebanon becoming a part of Greater Syria?” Dayan predicted
that this will mean shortly the introduction of Soviet surface-to-air mis-
siles and other sophisticated equipment into Lebanon and Israel will be
facing an enemy on its northern border.
9. “How has this come to be?” Dayan asked. Israeli planes have
only been taking pictures and, from these, supplying information to the
Christians on the locations of Syrian artillery. The Security Council
talks about the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty, not Syrian. He
speculated that maybe it is only a coincidence that all this is happening
during the preparations for Camp David (although he clearly did not
accept this as a serious thought). In any case, Israel is being accused by
the Lebanese Christians of having reduced their assistance because of
the Camp David preparations. “Does the US want to maintain a status
quo, a cease-fire, and no interference with IDF planes or does the US
want Lebanon to become a part of Greater Syria?” Dayan mused that
regardless of whether the US thinks this development would be good
or bad, the US may have concluded that it cannot affect the outcome.
10. Israel does not want to be in the position three months from
now of regretting that it did not take the action it could to deter the
Syrians now, Dayan continued. Syria knows Israel can stop it militarily.
“If we shoot down half a dozen of their planes they will know we are
serious.”
11. At this point Begin interrupted and said that after rethinking
his proposal (para 2 above) he believes that President Carter should
send a personal letter to Assad immediately so that the US Embassy in
Damascus will have prompt access to the Syrian President. Begin was
concerned that otherwise we might spend days trying to get through to
the real decisionmaker. Representation at a lower level. Begin said, is
not productive. Begin reiterated that President Carter must ask for a
cease-fire. There must be “no more shooting.” If Assad should use

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Camp David as a screen to continue action from Lebanon, “this is a
misuse and would be intolerable to us.”
12. Dayan added that Israel wants to put everything on the table
and be 100 per cent honest. Israel is facing three military crises: a) Syria
is threatening to take over or blockade the northern Christian ports. If
they should try this, the GOI will be faced with the problem of what to
do about it by use of its land, sea or air forces; b) in Beirut, if Syria goes
into the Christian quarters the GOI will be asked by the Christians to do
something militarily; c) Syria has tried to convert the Lebanese sky into
a Syrian sky by challenging Israeli reconnaissance flights since last
week. This is a change. “Is Israel to accept it?”
13. At this point Weizman interjected that the situation is highly
volatile. If forced to act on the question of reconnaissance flights, the
GOI will not go in with two or three aircraft to shoot down a few Syrian
planes. The IDF will “bring in the elephant” (meaning that over-
whelming force will be used).
14. I assured the Prime Minister that I would convey the full details
of this conversation to Washington and be back to him as soon as I have
a response. I then went over the points contained in ref A concerning
our plans to calm the Lebanese situation. The Prime Minister said he
very much appreciated our efforts and hoped that the President would
also be able to accept his suggestion about a direct approach to Assad.
He emphasized the need to deal with Lebanon before his departure for
Camp David and said I should call him as soon as Washington
responds.
15. There followed some brief discussion of UNIFIL and South
Lebanon which is being reported septel.
16. Comment: The Israeli message was very clear: if the Syrians try
to close the northern ports, move in force against the Christian areas of
Beirut, or challenge Israeli reconnaissance flights over Lebanon, the Is-
raelis may feel compelled to react militarily—Camp David notwith-
standing. Begin seems convinced that anything less than a high-level
US approach directly to Assad might fail to get across the message
Charge´ d’Affaires for the Embassy in Lewis’s absence, to inform Begin that Israeli con-
cerns had been communicated to Vance and Carter, that Vance would be sending a mes-
sage to Assad conveying the “seriousness of Israeli concerns and the possibility that, if
confrontations continue, the Israelis may become more involved than they are now,” and
that Seelye had made a strong de´marche to the Syrian foreign ministry, while the Depart-
ment had approached the Syrian Embassy in Washington. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P840140–2460) Hart conveyed this message to Begin in an
eign Policy File, D780354–0357)

20.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Syria and Israel
221463. For Ambassador. Subject: Lebanon Problem. Ref: Tel Aviv
1. You should get in touch soonest with most senior and appro-
priate Syrian official available3 to request that the following points
from the Secretary (in effect an oral message) be conveyed to President
Assad:
—We are deeply disturbed by the recent trend of hostilities in Leb-
anon. The humanitarian aspect of our concern is that members of the
Christian community in large numbers are fleeing Lebanon or are
being driven into arms of militants. There is also a sharp increase in
concern here and elsewhere that possible destruction of a key element
in delicate Lebanese political balance would make it all but impossible
to rebuild unity of Lebanese state—a goal which we believe the U.S.
and Syria share. Our strategic concern is that continuation of current
course could lead to wider hostilities with incalculable consequences.
—It has been and remains our practice not to convey Israeli mes-
sages or warnings to Syria, despite what the press may report. How-
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Draper; cleared by James Thyden (S/S–O) and
in substance by Newsom; approved by Saunders. Sent for information Immediate to Je-
rusalem, USUN, Amman, Cairo, and Jidda. Printed from a corrected copy.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ever, I believe it is important for me to be sure you are aware of my own
appreciation of the present mood there.
—I know from my own talks with Israeli leaders during my visit to
Israel early this month4 that they remain deeply suspicious of Syria and
of Syria’s role in Lebanon. We recognize that the Syrian forces in Leb-
anon, along with contingents from Sudan, Saudi Arabia and the UAE,
are there at the request of the Sarkis government and with the approval
of the Arab League for the expressed purpose of preserving the unity of
Lebanon and restoring the authority of the central government. The Is-
raelis at times have tacitly accepted this role but in light of recent Syrian
moves against Christian areas, they again see Syrian moves as steps in a
strategy of assuming a dominant role in Lebanon and preparing a
second front against Israel. That perception arouses deep concern in Is-
rael and heavy pressure on the government to take action. I believe
these pressures to take action have reached a new intensity in recent
days. As long as confrontations in Lebanon occur, misunderstandings
and miscalculations about Syrian intentions in Israel could all too easily
lead to greater Israeli involvement in Lebanon. It is vitally important
that this be forestalled.
—These impressions gained during my own recent talks in Israel
are underscored by more recent discussions our representatives have
had with Israeli leaders.
—While the USG and I personally have made sustained and strong
efforts in urging restraint upon the Israelis, there is a limit to what we
will be able to do if the situation in Lebanon continues to deteriorate.
An accidental clash between Israeli and Syrian aircraft flying over Leb-
anon could all too easily occur, and this could precipitate dangerous
new tensions. We are urging the Israelis to exercise the most rigid disci-
pline and prudence to prevent inadvertent clashes or a contest for con-
trol of the airspace over Lebanon. We urge Syria to do likewise.
—Our purpose in sharing this assessment is not to discuss respon-
sibility for recent events. Syria too is deeply suspicious of Israeli in-
volvement in Lebanon’s affairs. Israel certainly is not without blame for
some of the tensions and troubles which have engulfed Lebanon. Our
purpose is to be sure Syria fully understands the situation in which its
actions are being taken and to urge the utmost caution.
—In addition to sharing this assessment with you, I must also ex-
press the deep concern of many Americans, some with relatives in Leb-
anon, about where the situation in Lebanon is heading. The prospect of
further changes in the delicate political composition in Lebanon raises
questions about how Lebanese unity can be restored. As long as the

civil war continues, there will be little possibility in moving toward that
goal which is of concern to all of us. It seems to me crucial that a major
effort now be made to halt the fighting once and for all so that attention
can turn to that basic objective.
—What I believe must now be done—urgently—is to help bring
about a real and lasting ceasefire and a breathing spell during which
the underlying causes of the various confrontations in Lebanon could
be dealt with. We know that during past ceasefires, provocations
against Syrian forces have occurred, yet, since Syria’s publicly stated
policy, in addition to attempting to preserve law and order on behalf of
the Sarkis government, is to respond only to major provocations, it
might be possible to go one step further and reduce the chances of new
provocations from elements hostile to Syria. This might take place if
Syrian forces would stand fast where they are now and end or cut
down the movement of Syrian forces through areas where provoca-
tions are likely to occur.
—If the Syrian forces made a determined effort to remain only in
well protected and heavily fortified positions, reasonably safe from
provocations—for at least a while—the repeated series of provocations
and counteractions could perhaps be interrupted. If, on the other hand,
Syrians continue to advance in force into areas where Syrian forces
have not been involved previously, and particularly in the Mount Leb-
anon heartland, I fear that the situation will continue to deteriorate and
the risk of escalation will grow rapidly. In our view, it might be prefer-
able for the time being for Syrian forces to remain aloof from fighting
that erupts between Lebanese groups and factions.
—I appreciate the renewed assurances about Syria’s objectives that
have been conveyed in recent days to us by Foreign Minister Khaddam
and Deputy Foreign Minister Kaddour, but I believe the gravity of the
situation demands a major determined effort by Syria to bring about an
immediate ceasefire. I hope that our two governments can work to-
gether to bring about the strong and stable Lebanon which we have
both wanted and which is important to Syria’s well-being and security.
2. Make clear to the Syrians that we will, if asked, flatly deny that
we have conveyed an Israeli warning to the Syrians. We will say merely
that we have continued to be in touch with the Syrian authorities on the
situation in Lebanon. However, please be certain that SARG under-
stands from this message that the atmosphere in Jerusalem is increas-
ingly tense about the Lebanese situation and that we are convinced a
dangerous train of events could quickly develop.
Christopher

21.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, August 31, 1978
SUBJECT
Strategy for Camp David
For the talks at Camp David to succeed, you will have to control the
proceedings from the outset and thereafter pursue a deliberate political
strategy designed to bring about significant changes in both the Egyp-
tian and Israeli substantive positions. I strongly suggest that you bear
the following points in mind:
1. Sadat cannot afford a failure and he knows it; both Sadat and Begin
think that you cannot afford failure; but Begin probably believes that a
failure at Camp David will hurt you and Sadat, but not him. He may even
want to see Sadat discredited and you weakened, thus leaving him
with the tolerable status quo instead of pressures to change his life-long
beliefs concerning “Judea and Samaria.”
2. You will have to convince both leaders, but especially Begin, that
failure3 at Camp David will have directly adverse consequences for our
bilateral relations and in terms of Soviet influence in the region.
3. Sadat will define success in terms of substance, and in particular an
Israeli commitment to the principle of withdrawal on all fronts. Begin
will define success largely in terms of procedural arrangements and will be
very resistant to pressures for substantive concessions.
4. You will have to persuade Begin to make some substantive con-
cessions, while convincing Sadat to settle for less than an explicit Israeli
commitment to full withdrawal and Palestinian self-determination.
5. Your most important meetings will be with each leader individually,
not with both together. You cannot expect Sadat and Begin to reveal their
fall-back positions in front of each other, but in private you may be able
to move them toward greater flexibility.
6. During the first round of meetings, you will want to reestablish a
personal relationship with each leader, expressing your understanding
of their concerns and appealing to their statesmanship. During the
second and third days, you will want to be frank and direct in dis-
cussing substantive points. Begin in particular will need time to reflect
on what you say. There will be a natural break in the talks on Saturday,4
and Begin should understand that you will be pressing for decisions on
Sunday.
7. Both Sadat and Begin must starkly see the consequences of success and
failure if they are to make hard choices.
—Failure brought on by Sadat’s intransigence would bring to an
end the special US-Egyptian relationship. Even if Sadat is not held re-
sponsible for the collapse of negotiations, we would find it increasingly
difficult to maintain the close ties of the past few years and the Soviet
Union would find opportunities to strengthen its position in the area at
Sadat’s expense as well as our own. Sadat must be told that we cannot
afford more surprise moves by him if we are to work together effec-
tively for a peace agreement. We expect to be consulted before Sadat
takes new initiatives.
—Begin must see that US-Israeli relations are based on reciprocity.
Our commitment to Israel’s security and well-being must be met by an
Israeli understanding of our national interests. If Israel is responsible for
blocking progress toward peace in the Middle East, Begin should be told clearly
peace, as well as biographical sketches of Begin and Sadat. In the covering memorandum,
Turner stated that the briefing book was produced in response to a request Carter made
during his “recent visit” to the CIA. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
President’s Daily Diary, Carter visited CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia between
briefing on CIA operations and intelligence procedures. (Carter Library, Presidential
Materials)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
that you will have to take the following steps, which could affect the US-Israeli
relationship:
—Go to the American public with a full explanation of US national
interests in the Middle East (strategic relations with Soviets, economic in-
terests, oil, cooperation with moderate regimes).
—Explain the scale of US aid to Israel ($10 billion since 1973, or
nearly $4000 for each Israeli citizen). Despite this, Israel is unwilling to
reciprocate by showing flexibility in negotiations.
—We will be prepared to spell out publicly our views on a fair settlement.
—We will be unable to defend Israel’s position if the negotiations
shift to the UN or Geneva.
—Both Sadat and Begin can be assured that progress toward peace
will mean a strong relationship with the United States, including in the
economic and security areas, and enhanced ability to control develop-
ments in the region in ways that will serve our mutual interests.
8. The absolute minimum you want from each leader is the
following:
—From Sadat:
—Acceptance of a long-term Israeli security presence in the West Bank/
Gaza.
—A five-year interim regime for the West Bank/Gaza; no independent
Palestinian state; deferral of negotiations on borders and sovereignty
until end of five-year period.
—Acceptance of less than an Israeli commitment to full withdrawal and
Palestinian self-determination as guidelines for negotiations.
—Willingness to negotiate guidelines for West Bank/Gaza even if
Hussein does not come in.
—Repetition of “no more war” pledge; willingness to renew UNEF
in October; honoring terms of Sinai II, including commitment to
peaceful resolution of differences.
—A willingness to negotiate seriously if an agreement on prin-
ciples is reached.
—From Begin:
—Acceptance of all the principles of 242, including withdrawal
and the “inadmissability of acquisition of territory by war,” as appli-
cable on all fronts.
—Modifications in “self-rule” proposal in order to make it sufficiently
attractive to moderate Palestinians to bring them in as participants and
to increase prospects of their accepting its main features (open borders,
some Israeli security presence, some Israeli rights to live in West Bank,
self-government) beyond five years. These modifications require an Israeli
acceptance of the principle of withdrawal; a moratorium on organized settle-
ment activity, in contrast to the rights of individuals to acquire land on a recip-
rocal basis; a visible termination of the military occupation at the outset of the
five-year period; devolution of authority for the new regime from an agree-
ment among Israel, Egypt, and Jordan; and genuine self-government for the
Palestinians.

—Flexibility on the remaining issues of settlements and air bases in
Sinai.
9. Begin and Sadat are likely to try to shift the discussions to new pro-
posals of their own. Begin may concentrate on details as a diversion from
the larger issues. Sadat may try to enlist your support for a bold move
on his part which will put Begin in the corner. The risk is that you could
lose control of the talks and be diverted from the central issues either by
Begin’s legalisms or Sadat’s imprecision. You should keep the focus on
the large picture, and strategic choices, and refer new proposals or sug-
gestions for textual language to the Foreign Ministers and Secretary
Vance. With Sadat, you will have to hear him out on his new strategy
without appearing to collude with him against Begin.
10. Both leaders will constantly be trying to get you to side with them on
specific points. They will not hesitate to remind you of what we have
said to them in the past. Begin will remember that we called his “self-
rule” plan a “fair basis for negotiations,” and Sadat will have very
much in mind the promises made at Camp David. Your best defense
against these efforts to manipulate you will be to concentrate on the fu-
ture choices, on the strategic consequences of success or failure, and on the
need for each side to transcend past positions.
11. Sadat is very likely to want to explore the possibility of reaching secret
understandings with you and Begin on some elements of a settlement. This is
apparently more important to him than a declaration of principles.
There are clearly risks in relying on secret agreements, but Sadat’s will-
ingness to be forthcoming on some issues may well depend upon our
ability, as well as Begin’s, to assure him that he will not be embarrassed
by leaks.
12. If Sadat shows more flexibility than Begin, we may be per-
ceived by the Israelis and their supporters as colluding with the Egyp-
tians. This could be politically awkward, and you may want to suggest
discreetly to Sadat that he not rush to accept any suggestions we put
forward publicly. It will help our credibility if we are seen to be
pressing both sides for concessions. While we do want Sadat to accept our
ideas, the timing and circumstances in which he does so should be very care-
fully coordinated.
13. (The number may be symbolic.) If the meetings end in disagree-
ment, we should not attempt to paper over the differences. The reasons
and consequences of a failure will be publicly explained by you, and
Sadat and Begin should understand from the outset that this will be the
case, including the specifics in #7 above.
Finally, I summarize below what I consider to be the acceptable
minimum that we must aim for on the central issues:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1. Withdrawal/Security on the West Bank/Gaza
Sadat should agree to an Israeli security presence during the five-
year interim period and for an indefinite time beyond; he should agree
to defer decisions on the precise location of borders and on sovereignty
until the end of the transitional period. In return, he should be able to
claim credit for ending the military occupation of the West Bank and
Gaza, and for establishing that the principle of withdrawal will be ap-
plied in the final peace settlement dealing with these areas.
Begin should agree that the principle of withdrawal does apply on
all fronts, including the West Bank and Gaza, provided that its applica-
tion takes into account Israel’s long-term security needs in the area;
sovereignty will remain in abeyance until a final peace agreement is
reached at the end of the five-year period. This will allow Begin to take
credit for protecting Israel’s fundamental security interests, while not
requiring that he explicitly abandon Israel’s claim to sovereignty over
these areas.
2. Settlements
There should be a moratorium on organized settlement activities, but
both parties should agree that provisions should be made for indi-
vidual Israelis and Palestinians to do business and to live in Israel and
the West Bank/Gaza in the spirit of open borders, free movement of
peoples, and normal peaceful relations.
3. Negotiations
Both parties should commit themselves to continuing negotiations
on both the Sinai and the West Bank/Gaza issues.
4. Resolution 242
Both parties should reiterate their commitment to all of the prin-
ciples of Resolution 242 as the basis for peace treaties on all fronts. In
addition, they should agree on the Aswan language5 on Palestinian
rights, and should commit themselves to the concept of full peace and
normal relations. Sadat should repeat his commitment to “no more
war” and agree to the renewal of UNEF6 in October.
Attached at Tab A is a memorandum7 of Ambassador Eilts’ last
conversation with President Sadat. It is well worth reading. Sadat
seems to be preparing more surprises.

22.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the
Department of State
2427. Subject: Camp David—The Missing Palestinians. For the Sec-
retary, Atherton and Saunders.
1. It is indeed ironic that a summit meeting which will have as its
focus the future of the Palestinians, especially those in the West Bank
and Gaza, will not have any bona fide Palestinian representatives
present. The PLO, which a majority of Palestinians say represents them,
is absent because of Israel’s refusal to deal with the organization. Hus-
sein, who could be a surrogate under certain circumstances, has ex-
cluded himself. Sadat is not regarded as an authorized spokesman and
West Bankers fear that Israeli intransigence may compel him to modify
his heretofore acceptable position on the Palestinian problem in order
to achieve a deal on Sinai.
2. As seen from here, Israel at Camp David will have a unique op-
portunity not only to cement its relationship with Egypt but to make
peace with Jordan and a majority of Palestinians if it is able to rise to the
occasion and make genuine concessions on settlements, withdrawal,
refugee return and a Palestinian entity without endangering its
security.
3. What West Bankers want. We believe that a majority of West
Bankers emotionally support the views of Bassam Shaka, the Mayor of
Nablus, the West Bank’s largest city: total Israeli withdrawal to 1967
lines, Palestinian self-determination and recognition of the PLO as the
representative of the Palestinian people. After the achievement of nom-
inal independence, many West Bankers recognize that a close associa-
tion with Jordan as well as open borders with Israel would be a neces-
sity. At the same time, all West Bankers, moderates and PLO
supporters alike oppose the Begin plan lock, stock and barrel for,
among other reasons, it is the plan of the occupier. Its objective is per-
ceived as continued occupation with Palestinian participation.
4. Although nationalistic West Bankers espouse their allegiance to
the PLO and proclaim their pessimism that Camp David will result in
Israeli flexibility, we have detected tantalizing indications that under
certain circumstances authentic West Bank leaders might be willing to
take part in an interim government and participate in negotiations with
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Israel. The challenge at Camp David is to find a formula part way be-
tween the PLO’s position and the Begin plan that Hussein and repu-
table West Bankers can be brought to swallow.
5. What West Bankers would settle for. Given the bitterness and
frustration engendered by 11 years of occupation, they would be pow-
erfully attracted by the prospect of an end to the occupation. Bona fide
moderate West Bank leaders cannot and will not act alone: the key to
their participation isn’t Hussein’s participation, something that Dayan
reportedly realizes. Thus, the best way for Sadat to make headway on
the Palestinian problem is to insist he cannot make a separate peace in
Sinai and to maintain he must have enough to persuade Hussein to
take the plunge thereby also engaging moderate Palestinians in the oc-
cupied territories.
6. West Bankers would assume that Hussein would not be willing
to join negotiations unless he was certain of obtaining Israeli with-
drawal from the West Bank and restoring an official Arab presence in
Jerusalem. This would give them confidence and enable them to
counter radical criticism.
7. The most sensitive burning issue is settlements. A halt to further
settlements would have a great positive impact for it would demon-
strate concretely the peace process can work in Palestinians’ interest.
Withdrawal is also a sine qua non. Although West Bankers could reluc-
tantly be brought to accept adjustments in the 1967 lines, this funda-
mental point would have to be presented in terms consistent with Reso-
lution 242. Stress should be put on mutually acceptable modifications
(perhaps lines could be extended somewhat in the north and south in
order to permit adjustments elsewhere). Refugee return or family re-
unions with de facto Israeli controls would also be a powerful endorse-
ment to participate, because it would allow local Palestinians to dem-
onstrate they were acting for the benefit of expatriates as well. On
sovereignty, we believe moderate West Bankers would reluctantly ac-
cept a limited form of self-determination whereby at the end of an in-
terim period they would vote to ratify a link with Jordan. They (and we
assume Hussein) would not accept Israel’s position that the question of
sovereignty can be discussed at the end of the interim period thereby
permitting an Israeli veto over any change in the interim regime. They
remember Begin’s categoric statements about no foreign sovereignty in
the West Bank and, in the absence of flexibility, the whole exercise
could come to grief on this issue.
8. On security arrangements, West Bankers are pragmatic. After 11
years of living with Israelis they recognize Israel has legitimate con-
cerns and are willing to accept an IDF presence for the interim period
and perhaps beyond as long as their minimal requirements outlined
above are met.

23.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, undated
OPTIMAL OUTCOME FOR CAMP DAVID
Overall
Far-reaching understandings on the following five elements of a
peace settlement: (1) arrangements for a transitional West Bank/Gaza
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
regime; (2) main elements of a permanent solution for the West Bank/
Gaza (what happens after the 5 years); (3) the principles by which the
remaining Sinai issues might be resolved; (4) the relationship between a
West Bank/Gaza agreement and progress toward an Egypt-Israel
peace treaty; (5) the undertakings of peace that would be in a peace
treaty.
1. Transitional West Bank/Gaza Regime
Agreement on the following arrangements for a transitional re-
gime: (a) Israeli military government would be replaced by self-
government by the inhabitants—i.e., an end of military occupation; (b)
authority for the new regime would derive from agreement among the
parties; (c) question of sovereignty would be resolved within 5 years;
(d) Israeli forces would be withdrawn to designated areas; (e) Pales-
tinian displaced persons and refugees would be allowed to return at an
agreed annual rate and under agreed procedures; (f) during the 5 years
negotiations would be conducted and agreement reached on a final
treaty on the basis of Res. 242 including withdrawal, security measures
and commitments to peace; (g) the inhabitants of the areas would par-
ticipate in the negotiations through elected representatives and would
express their consent to the terms of the final settlement; (h) Jordan and
Palestinian representatives would be invited to join negotiations to
conclude a detailed agreement on the transitional regime and to partici-
pate in negotiations for a final settlement.
2. Elements of a Permanent Settlement for the West Bank/Gaza (post 5
years)
Agreement that: (a) the area would be demilitarized; (b) Israel
would retain its own security forces in specified numbers at specified
locations, the arrangement to be subject to review after 10 years; (c) Is-
rael would retain early warning installations (the U.S. could man these
if necessary); (d) the locally-elected governing authority would under-
take commitments to maintain peace and security and to prevent ter-
rorist acts; (e) relationship with Jordan and/or Israel would be defined;
(f) there would be open borders with Israel in terms of movement of
personnel and economic arrangements; (g) Israeli participation in in-
spection of Jordan River crossing points would be defined; (h) certain
Israeli settlements would be allowed to remain and rights of Israelis to
purchase land defined; (i) principles governing immigration of Pales-
tinian refugees would be defined; (j) the consent of inhabitants to the
terms of the settlement would be expressed by plebiscite or parliamen-
tary ratification.
3. Resolution of Sinai Issues
Agreement that an Egypt-Israel peace agreement would be imple-
mented in two main phases over a five-year period.

(a) First phase. Peace treaty initialed. Line to which Israeli forces
withdraw in first phase defined; Israel settlements allowed to remain
under Israeli protection during this period; Israel would also retain use
of airfields in Sinai; some concrete measures of normalization of rela-
tions would be instituted.
(b) Second phase. Peace treaty signed and ratified. Israeli with-
drawal to international frontier; Israeli settlers allowed to remain under
Egyptian jurisdiction; airfields dismantled or made into civilian air-
ports; full normalization of relations completed; demilitarized and lim-
ited armament zones and third party presence in buffer zone defined.
4. Relationship Between Egypt-Israel Treaty and West Bank/Gaza
Agreement that: (a) Egypt would resume and continue to comple-
tion negotiations on Sinai issues; (b) when negotiations were completed
Egypt and Israel would proceed with initialing of the peace treaty and
implementation of the first phase, reserving the signing and ratification
of the treaty, and implementation of the second phase to coincide with
conclusion of a West Bank/Gaza treaty; (c) that if, however, Jordan and
Palestinian representatives refused to join in negotiations on the West
Bank/Gaza on the basis of the principles concluded at Camp David,
Egypt and Israel would, after an agreed period, proceed with conclu-
sion and full implementation of the Egypt-Israel peace treaty.
5. Peace Undertakings
Agreement on the main elements of peace undertakings that
would be part of the peace treaties between Egypt and Israel and on the
West Bank/Gaza, including: (a) end of economic boycott; (b) end of
Arab efforts to isolate Israel in international fora; (c) free passage in in-
ternational waterways; (d) Israeli rights of passage in Suez Canal;
(e) cultural and people-to-people exchanges; (f) commercial and diplo-
matic relations.
Agreement to set up working groups to begin negotiations on the
detailed terms of a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel.

24.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting
Subject
Middle East—Camp David Summit
Participants
President Jimmy Carter
CIA
Vice President Walter Mondale
Adm. Stansfield Turner
State
White House
Cyrus Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Hermann Eilts U.S. Ambassador
Hamilton Jordan
to Egypt
Jody Powell
Samuel Lewis U.S. Ambassador
NSC
to Israel
William Quandt
Defense
Harold Brown
Joint Chiefs of Staff
The President began the meeting by asking Ambassador Eilts and
Ambassador Lewis to discuss briefly the personalities who would be
with President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin at Camp David. Am-
bassador Eilts noted that Hassan Tuhamy would be there, but that he
would not have much influence over Sadat. Foreign Minister Kamil is
the next most important person, and he strongly believes in protecting
Sadat from going too far. Ambassador Eilts concluded that none of the
ministerial-level advisers would have much influence over Sadat.
Under Secretary al-Baz is very able and will be the principal drafting
officer, but he also has little direct influence over Sadat.
Ambassador Lewis then reviewed the Israeli personalities who
would accompany Begin. He ascribed greatest influence to Foreign
Minister Dayan, and noted that the Prime Minister and Foreign Min-
ister now work closely together. Ambassador Lewis suggested that
Dayan should be included in small meetings with Begin. Both Dayan
and Weizman see Camp David as more of a watershed than does Begin.
Weizman has a better relationship now with Begin than he did some
months ago, but his relationship is not as good as that of Dayan. Begin
is more ideologically attached to the land, the West Bank and Gaza,
than is Dayan. Dayan is more concerned with security. Dayan is also
less concerned with words than is Begin. Dayan is the element of conti-
nuity with previous negotiations. He is also personally pessimistic
about getting any agreement with Jordan. Weizman is more instinctual
and less intellectual, but he is basically pragmatic and is very deter-
mined not to miss the chance for peace. He is more convinced of Sadat’s
sincerity than the others. The former Attorney General, Barak, is a very
creative lawyer who will try to help solve problems. Begin has confi-
dence in him. Barak should be included in any talks when four Israelis
are present. The Vice President noted that Sadat does not seem to trust
Dayan and that he prefers Weizman. Ambassador Eilts confirmed that
this is the case.
Admiral Turner was then asked to brief on the regional conse-
quences of a possible failure at Camp David. If the United States re-
mains involved in working for a peace settlement, a failure at Camp
David would not necessarily lead to dramatic consequences. The
Saudis see themselves in a “no lose situation”. If there is a success, they
can live with it. If there is a failure, Saudi Arabia will work to bring
Sadat back into the Arab fold. Saudi Arabia does not attribute the
highest priority now to the Arab-Israeli conflict. They care more about
cohesion of moderate Arab states, and they are concerned with the situ-
ation in South Yemen. They do not believe peace is possible with Israel
under Begin’s leadership. They also believe that the long-term trends in
the area favor the Arab side. They assume that eventually the United
States will use leverage over Israel. They already tend to discount
Camp David however it comes out. They will try to consolidate the
moderate forces in the Arab world. If Saudi Arabia concludes that we
will never use our leverage with Israel, however, the Saudis may move
toward a more anti-American posture. But the Saudis are not inclined
to play a major geopolitical role. They are more interested in self-
preservation than in peace.
Secretary Vance asked how the Saudis want us to apply leverage.
Do they mean that we should cut military and economic aid to Israel?
Admiral Turner replied that the Saudis may not have a clear definition
in mind but they do believe we have leverage. They think of the 1968
experience in Sinai. The other moderate Arab states will go along with
Saudi Arabia. If the summit fails, this will confirm Hussein in his be-
liefs. The rejectionists will make noise, and will wait and see. The PLO
will see a failure as a success. Sadat’s own reaction will be to shift
tactics, but he will not give up. He will be pressed to reconcile himself

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
with President Assad, and may try to do something dramatic such as
ask for the removal of the UNEF forces.
Admiral Turner noted that Begin would be content with an unclear
result. He does not want to take the blame for a failure with his own
people who are generally ahead of him in their willingness to make a
trade of territory for peace. The Soviets will try to blame a failure on
U.S. policy and will try to get back into the peace process and to isolate
Sadat. Concerning Lebanon, Admiral Turner did not think that Syria
would want to fight Israel, but Syria does want to reduce the power of
the Christian militias. The Soviets are not urging the Syrians to do too
much there, and they do want to back the Syrians against Israel in a
military conflict. The real question is whether the militant Christians
will hold back. It is impossible to forecast what may happen between
now and September 6. This will be a dangerous period. It depends most
on the right-wing Christians and how hard they will push.
The President asked about Jordan and whether it looked to Saudi
Arabia for guidance. He noted that there was a possibility that Hussein
would be too timid to join the talks. He asked if Jordan could be per-
suaded by the Saudis to join the talks or whether the Syrians would
also have to be brought in. Admiral Turner said Hussein would need
Saudi support and an Israeli indication of a willingness to give up sov-
ereignty in the West Bank. This will be more important than Syrian
influence.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that he felt that the consequences of failure at
Camp David could be more serious. The Arabs might conclude that the
United States cannot lead the process for peace. They will draw conclu-
sions of a far-reaching nature about the American role, which will cu-
mulatively give them less of a sense of co-responsibility with us on
matters of international economy and oil. Radical forces could be
strengthened. Dr. Brzezinski also thought that Sadat might be less pre-
dictable than Admiral Turner had indicated. Sadat might be prepared
to gamble on another war. He would not have to expect to win, just as
in 1973 he went to war in order to force the United States to take action.
The President said that he felt the Saudi attitude would depend heavily
on what President Sadat says. Secretary Vance noted that Sadat had al-
ready said that if Camp David came to nothing, a strong statement by
the United States would still help in the Arab world, and would have
the effect of mobilizing world opinion to keep things moving. Dr. Brze-
zinski said that Sadat then defines success in terms of our taking a clear
position. Secretary Vance agreed that if the United States did not take a
position, then Sadat would feel that Camp David was a failure. Ad-
miral Turner said that he thought it would be difficult for us to take a
position which would satisfy Sadat without provoking a confrontation

with Begin. The President remarked that he felt Sadat was considering a
rather drastic move about a month ago.
Ambassador Eilts noted that there will be two critical dates coming
up. In October there will be the renewal of UNEF, and then in No-
vember there will be the anniversary of his trip to Jerusalem. Sadat is
turning over in his mind what he should do if there is no movement.
He will find it difficult to acknowledge that his peace initiative has
failed. He may grasp at anything to keep it alive. He has confidence in
the President and he looks to him for guidance. He has said that he
would not let him down. That will give us scope to work with to pre-
vent a failure. If the results of Camp David are inadequate, then pres-
sures will begin to build at home and from within the Arab world. The
Saudis might want him to acknowledge the failure of his initiative, and
then there would be pressures for reconciliation and an Arab summit.
Sadat knows that the United States is the only country that can help
achieve peace. The Saudis basically share the same goal of reaching
peace. They have some influence in Egypt because of the aid they pro-
vide. If Sadat decides to go the route of Arab reconciliation, there could
be a summit within a couple of months. He could keep the peace
process alive by going to the United Nations and calling for a resump-
tion of the Geneva Conference, but if that were to fail, Sadat would in-
creasingly look to the option of war. Egypt is not now ready for this and
it will take time. Israel is stronger than in October 1973. The step that
would be taken prior to preparing for war would be reconciliation with
the Arab world. Neither Sadat nor Gamasy wants war. The losses
would be high. They might have to take the risks, but they do not want
it.
Secretary Vance stated that if no agreement is reached on the
deeply substantive problems, but if Sadat feels that the American posi-
tion is fair, he might agree to a renewal of the no war pledge in return
for a freeze on settlements. Ambassador Eilts agreed that a fair state-
ment of the U.S. position might lead Sadat to reiterate his no war posi-
tion. Ambassador Lewis felt that Begin would not agree to a freeze on
settlements in return for a no war pledge, since Egypt was already com-
mitted to a peaceful resolution of differences in the 1975 Sinai II agree-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ment. Israel will not pay twice for that pledge. Admiral Turner re-
marked that the CIA assessment is that the balance of forces is more fa-
vorable to Israel now than it was in 1973.
Secretary Brown was then asked to review the number of security
issues. He dealt first with the problem of conventional threats to Israeli
security, noting that these were easier to deal with than the problem of
terrorism. To deal with conventional threats, demilitarization is prob-
ably the most important concept. This provides time for Israel to react
to any threat. For example, there might be arrangements which would
prohibit Egyptian armor from going beyond the passes. A second
means of providing Israel with security would be military enclaves in
key areas. Three Israeli battalions in blocking positions along the roads
from the Jordan Valley into the West Bank would provide good secu-
rity for Israel. Access rights to these blocking positions would have to
be worked out. In Sinai, Israel is particularly anxious to keep the air-
base at Etzion. There is not enough airspace in Israel for training. Early
warning sites might also be useful to detect any build-up on the Arab
side. The United States can help improve the capabilities to detect
movement of the forces. Third-party patrols offer another possibility.
The United States could also assure Israel of stable levels of military
assistance, and we could respond to a number of the outstanding re-
quests under MATMON–C. For example, Israel might get more air-
craft and access to advanced technology.
Secretary Brown went on to review ways of defending against ter-
rorism. While these threats are more difficult to deal with, they do not
affect the security of the state as much as the conventional threats.
Therefore, it might be reasonable to ask Israel to accept somewhat less
assurance in dealing with these threats, even though politically they are
just as difficult to deal with than the larger threats. The key to dealing
with terrorism is to have an Arab political authority which is a party to
the agreement which is committed to maintain order. If Israel does give
up the West Bank, this would pose new problems, but if an Arab au-
thority were present it would have an incentive to prevent terrorism.
There would have to be some sharing of intelligence and some coopera-
tion at the local level. There are some technological arrangements
which could be developed to protect infiltration. Secretary Vance stated
that Dayan had agreed that most internal security problems could be
dealt with by a local Palestinian Arab government, and that Israel
would not have to be involved in any significant way. Ambassador
Lewis added that Dayan had sometimes thought of mobile patrols in
the Jordan Valley in order to deal with the problem of terrorism.
Secretary Brown then turned to a possible American role in connec-
tion with security arrangements. He noted that military assistance
would be one means of assuring the security of the parties. The United
States could provide Israel with early warning technology, and acceler-
ated delivery of equipment, as well as access to high technology. Con-
sideration might be given to adding Israel to the list of countries ex-
empt from the arms ceiling limitations. Dr. Brzezinski thought that this
was not a good idea and Secretary Brown agreed that this would open
the door to many other requests for exemptions. Discussion then
turned to the possibility of a mutual security treaty between the United
States and Israel, and it was generally felt that anything less than a
NATO-type treaty would not be worth much to the Israelis. Secretary
Vance and Ambassador Lewis agreed that a NATO-type treaty would
be important to Israel. Ambassador Lewis also felt that some physical
American presence would be welcome in the area, such as Haifa or in
the Sinai but not in the West Bank.
Secretary Brown stated that an American presence in the Sinai
would pose fewer risks than a presence in the West Bank or in Golan or
at Haifa or Alexandria. A naval presence in the area is probably more of
a problem than it is worth. In times of tension, we would want the ships
to get out of the area. The base in Sinai would cause fewer problems.
One might think of additional port visits and use of repair facilities in
Haifa and Alexandria, although this would be less reassuring to the
parties. The JCS has also developed the idea of an air training facility at
Eitam air field. If this were useful, it should be raised with the Egyp-
tians, not with the Israelis initially, since the base would be on Egyptian
territory. Such an arrangement should only be considered as a cap to an
agreement, otherwise it will look as if they are doing a favor to us. In
fact there are problems in doing this and Americans could be held hos-
tage and pressures would build on us to offer other quid pro quos.
Therefore, Secretary Brown concluded, such arrangements should only
be seen as a capstone to the peace agreements if it offers additional
reassurances.
The President asked if any consideration had been given to a
U.S.-Egyptian neutral8 defense pact. Secretary Brown said that this was

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
a possibility but no specific thought had been given to it. The President
added that Sadat had not been opposed to a US-Israeli treaty, and he
had the impression that Egypt would also participate if it were essen-
tial to peace. Secretary Brown thought that a multi-lateral treaty might
be of some benefit. Dr. Brzezinski added that the Saudis might want to
be part of such an arrangement. Admiral Turner added that the Arabs
are a bit squeamish about joining any pact to which Israel would be a
part. They also view foreign bases as anathema. The Soviets might also
react very negatively. Secretary Brown agreed that the Soviets might try
to get bases in Iraq and Libya.
Ambassador Eilts pointed out that the Saudis had not been enthu-
siastic about an American base in their territory and they were very
sensitive about this issue, as much as they might like a strong American
position in the area generally. The Egyptians are also sensitive about a
highly visible American presence in Egypt.
The President concluded this part of the discussion by saying that
no one favored an American military presence in the area unless Egypt
and Israel both wanted it and feel that it is essential. It will not be an ad-
vantage to us. Dr. Brzezinski agreed, adding that it could be counter-
productive. Secretary Brown agreed that the risks seem to outweigh the
benefits. General Jones added that Israel will want some military pres-
ence in the West Bank and at the airfields in Sinai. While not advocating
an American presence, the reason for suggesting the joint training fa-
cility was to deal with the problem of the bases in Sinai. While home-
porting at Haifa does not seem desirable, more frequent visits in the
area and use of repair facilities does make some sense. Secretary Brown
felt that Alexandria was even a better facility than Haifa, but there were
problems connected with use of either of these facilities.
The President concluded the meeting by discussing his plans for
the first few days of Camp David. He thought that he would meet first
with Begin alone and then with Sadat. They would then all get to-
gether. He would make an effort to reassure both leaders of our own
good intentions, and would encourage them to deal with one another.
He would offer our good offices and he would only put forward pro-
posals after consultations. He would try to point out to both of them the
benefits of a comprehensive agreement, and the dangers of failure.
Begin should understand the risks of radicalization in the Arab world,
and a return of negotiations to a U.N. or Geneva form. The President
said that he would not try to rush the talks, but he did not want them to
drag out too long either. He would try to get all of the concepts on the
table before the end of Friday, then take a break on Saturday for a re-
flection. The Vice President would represent him in the White House
during his absence, although he would also want the Vice President to
come up for some of the discussions. He concluded by stating it was

important to keep the number of people at Camp David as small as pos-
sible and to avoid contacts with the press during the talks.

25.
Memorandum From the President’s Senior Adviser (Sanders)
to President Carter
Washington, September 4, 1978
SUBJECT
Camp David Summit
The following is a summary of the points we discussed this
morning:2
(1) The most significant questions3 that I hear raised frequently are:
—if agreement in principle regarding the West Bank is achieved
and Jordan still refuses to join the negotiations, will Egypt be under an
obligation to proceed bilaterally with Israel?
—will Israel be expected to agree at Camp David to withdraw
from the West Bank? If so, what does this mean? Partial withdrawal?
Partition?
—will Israel be allowed to maintain a security presence on the
West Bank after five years?
—how can a Palestinian Administrative Council or other body be
prevented from turning the West Bank into a threatening independent
Palestinian state if Israel has no security presence there?
—what are the security measures Israel will accept in terms of ter-
ritory, rights, and guarantees from the United States?
(2) The following are thoughts that I mentioned during the
meeting:
—Israelis will respond most positively to statements which indi-
cate that we clearly understand and agree with their security concerns.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—neither Egypt nor Israel should be surprised by the other two
parties.
—inducements to either Israel or Egypt should not make it more
difficult for the other side to make concessions.
As we discussed, I am enclosing with this memo a copy of the
memo4 which I sent to the Secretary of State on September 2.

26.
Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter travelled to the Presidential retreat at
Camp David shortly after noon on September 4, 1978, to complete his
preparations for the summit meeting with Egyptian President Anwar
al-Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin scheduled to
begin the following day. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, Presi-
dent’s Daily Diary) Describing the day in his personal diary, Carter
wrote: “This was a hurried morning, with everybody wanting to give
me last-minute advice or information about the summit.” Upon ar-
riving at Camp David, Carter spent the rest of the day “studying the
voluminous notes, maps, past history of negotiations, [and] psycholog-
ical assessments of Begin and Sadat.” (Carter, White House Diary, page
216) As part of his preparations, he drafted a list of the themes and
issues which the summit would have to confront. For the text of this
note, see Document 27. Recalling the final pre-summit preparations
years later, both Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski reflected
on the importance of the forthcoming negotiations for Carter’s admin-

istration and the summit’s prospects for success. Writing in his
memoirs, Vance noted: “Not since Theodore Roosevelt mediated the
treaty negotiated in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, that ended the
Russo-Japanese War had an American president even approached
what Jimmy Carter was about to attempt.” (Vance, Hard Choices, page
218) Brzezinski recorded that “on the eve of the summit, Carter con-
fided to me for the first time his sense of uneasiness about the prospects
for success.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, page 254) Of his own im-
pressions of the summit on the eve of Begin’s and Sadat’s arrival at
Camp David, Carter wrote: “Despite my efforts to the contrary, expec-
tations had built up to a fever pitch. My only hope was that, in the quiet
and peaceful atmosphere of our temporary home, both Begin and Sadat
would come to know and understand each other better, and that they
would trust me to be honest and fair in my role as mediator and active
negotiator. It was soon to be obvious that Sadat seemed to trust me too
much, and Begin not enough.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, page 322)
Over the course of the entire thirteen days of the Camp David
Summit, the United States delegation was organized into two “mutu-
ally reinforcing” teams: one, “political” and the other, a “group of ex-
perts.” (Vance, Hard Choices, page 219) The political team consisted of
Carter, Brzezinski, Vance, White House Press Spokesman Jody Powell,
Presidential Adviser Hamilton Jordan, and, occasionally, Vice Presi-
dent Walter Mondale and Secretary of Defense Harold Brown. The
team of experts, who met under Vance’s direction, was composed of
Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs
Harold H. Saunders, Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton, Ambas-
sador to Egypt Hermann F. Eilts, Ambassador to Israel Samuel W.
Lewis, and William B. Quandt, the member of the National Security
Council Staff responsible for Arab-Israeli issues. On this arrangement,
Vance wrote: “These two groups worked in the closest harmony. The
political group negotiated with the Egyptian and Israeli senior political
figures, while the professional group maintained contact with the
Egyptian and Israeli teams and provided expert advice, analyses of the
sides’ positions as they evolved, and draft formulations to bridge the
differences.” (Ibid.) The President’s Daily Diary recorded numerous in-
ternal meetings of the U.S. delegation during the summit in which Pres-
ident Carter participated. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No
memoranda of conversation or official records of the substance of these
conversations, or indeed any of the internal discussions of the U.S. del-
egation, have been found.
This dearth of official documentation also extends to the negotia-
tions themselves and reflects the idiosyncratic recordkeeping of the
U.S. delegation at Camp David. Examining the documentation relating
to the Camp David Summit printed in this volume, the reader will

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
quickly note significant gaps in the official record, especially the ab-
sence of memoranda of conversation from the numerous, often lengthy
meetings that Carter held with the Egyptian and Israeli delegations.
The President’s Daily Diary records the specific dates and times of each
of the meetings that Carter held between the opening of the summit on
September 5 and its conclusion on September 17. In addition, each
Daily Diary entry contains a list of that meeting’s participants. The
most complete official record of the meetings held between the U.S.,
Egyptian, and Israeli delegations at Camp David is in a draft summary
document produced by the National Security Council Staff. This sum-
mary provides the dates, times, and locations of each meeting held by
the United States with Egyptian and Israeli officials, along with lists of
participants and brief synopses of the meetings’ substance. For the text
of this summary, see Document 28. The reader should note that this
volume includes all memoranda of conversation that have been found
in U.S. Government archives.
In his subsequent writings on the Camp David Summit, Carter has
highlighted his own personal note-taking and its importance not only
for the historical record, but also for the work of the U.S. delegation
during the negotiations. As part of his introduction to the summit in the
published version of his personal diary, the President wrote that he
“kept detailed written notes during all the discussions at Camp David
(September 5 to 17), and from them I dictated entries in my diary a
couple of times a day. Many of the scratched notes are available to
scholars in the Carter Presidential Library.” (Carter, White House Diary,
page 216) These notes, along with multiple annotated drafts of the two
“framework” documents, “A Framework for Peace in the Middle East
Agreed at Camp David” and “Framework for the Conclusion of a Peace
Treaty Between Egypt and Israel,” which in part formed the basis for
the summit negotiations, were collected into a “working papers” file in
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David President’s Working Papers, un-
dated, and Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, Country File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David President’s
undated, unsigned note accompanying the paper collection which
states: “These papers need to be classified (or destroyed). Susan Clough
says the President wants them ‘sealed’ for a very long time.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box
53, Middle East: Camp David President’s Working Papers, undated)
Carter added in his memoirs that following each negotiating session he
“immediately dictated a complete record of the discussion from my
written notes, which my secretary transcribed. Cy [Vance], Zbig [Brze-
zinski], Fritz [Mondale], Ham [Jordan], or Jody [Powell] read the one
original copy that was made; then it was returned to me.” (Carter,

Keeping Faith, page 327) These copies of Carter’s notes, as presumably
presented to other members of the U.S. delegation, have not been
found.
This volume also makes use of notes and documents used by other
members of the U.S. delegation as much as possible. A small collection
of notes kept by U.S. Ambassador to Israel Samuel W. Lewis are
tained a file in which he preserved the successive drafts of the Frame-
work documents negotiated at the summit. These documents, many of
which bear Lewis’s handwritten annotations, are in the Department of
State, American Embassy Tel Aviv, Principal Officer Program Files, Lot
Camp David—Various Drafts—September.
Given the limitations of the official documentary record, this
volume’s account of the U.S. policy making process during the Camp
David Summit must be read in conjunction with available memoirs and
published diaries, which have been based largely upon the personal
notes of the respective authors. President Carter presents a day-by-day
reconstruction of the summit on pages 216–245 of his published per-
sonal diary, titled White House Diary, and in his memoirs, Keeping Faith,
on pages 327–403. Brzezinski presents the summit in a similar
day-by-day style in his memoirs, Power and Principle, on pages 255–270.
Vance’s account of the negotiations is in Hard Choices, pages 218–229.
Quandt’s viewpoint is represented in his account, which is part
memoir and part scholarly study of the events, entitled Camp David:
Peacemaking and Politics. For the Egyptian perspective of the summit,
see Foreign Minister Muhammed Ibrahim Kamel’s memoir of the
summit, titled The Camp David Accords, and Minister of State Boutros
Boutros-Ghali’s Egypt’s Road to Jerusalem, pages 132–152. On the Israeli
side, see Foreign Minister Moshe Dayan’s Breakthrough, pages 149–190,
and Defense Minister Ezer Weizman’s The Battle for Peace, pages

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
27.
Personal Note Prepared by President Carter
Camp David, undated
Notes made at C. David before Begin & Sadat arrived—
Demilitarize West Bank
Israeli military enclave—5 years +3
No new settlements
Terminate military rule
No independent Palestinian state
No hazy security guarantees
242 basis of negotiations on all fronts
Leave W Bank sovereignty ? open—5 years
Give credit to Begin homerule plan (5 years)
Jerusalem a united (Israeli?) city—borough type
Sinai—settlements—airstrips—no military threat—normalization
W B[an]k—withdrawal—security—borders—sovereignty—Pales-
tinians—settlements
Phased implementation—some postponements
Local W B[an]k gov’t control terrorism
Israel monitor open borders
End economic boycott—attempts to isolate Israel
Open waterways, incl Suez
Trade, cultural, student exchange + diplomatic recog[nition]
Agreed number of returning refugees
Long term Israeli security presence on W B[an]k
Who will negotiate w/Israel absent Jordan?
No more war
Renew UN agreement in Oct.
Inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by war
End military gov’t in W B[an]k
Genuine participation of W B[an]k Arabs in own gov’t
Multiple devolution of authority
Some agreements may be secret
We 3 can make any settlement stick
W B[an]k Summary
Palestine auth[ority] in all areas
End Israeli occupation gov’t
Leave [Israeli] security presence
Sovereignty/borders negotiated in 5 years
No new settlements
P 6, “Aswan” on Palestinians (voice; all aspects,
Demilitarization of contested areas
Failure may mean US/Is[rael] lose control in M East
Unilateral statements permissible in final statement
Sadat is leader, not follower—His threat is from Africa
Historic opportunity—need strong leadership/statesmanship
US/Is[rael]/Eg[ypt] new econ/pol/mil coop[eration] & benefits
Success would bring in S[audi]A[rabia] & Jordan
We will back Sadat against moderate Arabs
We have already decided:
Common definition of peace
Israel must have security, incl[uding] presence on W B[an]k
5 year arrangement
Jordan & Palestinians should have negotiating role
No independent Palestinian state
Full Egyptian sovereignty on Sinai w/Int. borders
Staged implementation of agreement
We 3 are strong enough to have public support
W B[an]k withdrawal is a continuum, partial
Sinai [withdrawal] is time related, total
Israel’s acceptance of “withdrawal” leaves bargaining position
Early warning with, perhaps, Israeli overflights
First Eg[ypt]/Jewish peace since time of Joseph
Inducements to Israel (per Sanders)
US technology transfers
Increased FMS credits
Military sales policy equal to NATO
Mutual defense pact
Support for Is[raeli] military action if treaty broken

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
28.
Draft Summary of Meetings
undated
CHRONOLOGY
September 5, 1978—Tuesday
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: Welcomes Sadat at helipad. No substantive conversation.
Secretary Vance accompanied Sadat from Andrews to Camp David.
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: Welcomes Begin at helipad. No substantive conversation.
Secretary Vance accompanied Sadat from Andrews to Camp David.
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: General discussion of proposed Camp David scenario.
President emphasized importance of the conference to all the parties.
At Begin’s request, the President agreed to send a personal message to
Assad about the Lebanese situation.
Memcon-Tab
Secretary Vance
Defense Minister Weizman
Subject: General tour d’horizon of proposed Camp David scenario
and discussion of principal issues.
Memcon-Tab
September 6, 1978—Wednesday
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: Preliminary exchange of views on Egyptian position and
how President Carter proposed to proceed during Camp David talks.
Sadat told President Carter he would present a proposal for a peace
framework.
Memcon-Tab
more fulsome account in Keeping Faith, pp. 332–338.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Kamel
Dr. Brzezinski
Minister of State
U.S. Delegation
Boutros Ghali
Egyptian Delegation
Subject: Preliminary exchange of views with Egyptian Delegation
on Egyptian position with respect to the peace negotiations, Somalia,
Libya, Chad, etc.
Memcon-Tab 3
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: President Carter informed Mr. Begin that President Sadat
would be submitting a new Egyptian paper.
Memcon-Tab
President Carter
President Sadat
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: First trilateral meeting. General exchange of views; Sadat
presented to Begin a new Egyptian paper.
Memcon-Tab
September 7, 1978—Thursday
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
Dr. Brzezinski
Defense Minister Weizman
Subject:
Memcon-Tab
President Carter
President Sadat
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: Second trilateral meeting.
Memcon-Tab
Vice President Mondale
Foreign Minister Dayan
Secretary Vance
Defense Min. Weizman
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Dr. Brzezinski
Professor Barak
U.S. Delegation
Israeli Delegation
Subject: Lebanese situation; Israelis put forward a suggestion that
Sinai issues remain unresolved; withdrawal problems on West Bank,
etc.
Memcon-Tab 8
Vice President Mondale
Foreign Minister Dayan
Secretary Vance
Defense Min. Weizman
Dr. Brzezinski
Professor Barak
Secretary Brown
General Tamir
Subject: Resume discussion of Israeli ideas for West Bank/Gaza
settlement. Explore Israeli positions on refugee return, security/with-
drawal on West Bank, settlements, Sinai air bases and authority for in-
terim regime.
Memcon-Tab 9
Vice President Mondale
Foreign Minister Kamel
Secretary Vance
Ahmed Maher
Ambassador Eilts
Subject: Discussion of Egyptian proposal.
Memcon-Tab 10
President Carter
President Sadat
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: Resumption of earlier trilateral meeting.
Memcon-Tab
Vice President Mondale
Foreign Minister Dayan
Secretary Vance
Defense Min. Weizman
Secretary Brown
Professor Barak
U.S. Delegation
General Tamir
Subject: Resumption of earlier meeting. Exploration of Israeli posi-
tions on refugee return, security/withdrawal on the West Bank, settle-
ments, Sinai airbase, etc.
Memcon-Tab
Marine Tattoo.
President Carter
President Sadat
Vice President Mondale
Dep. Pr. Min. Touhamy
Secretary Vance
Hassan Kamel
Subject: Discussion of Egyptian ideas on West Bank/Gaza issues,
Jerusalem and Sinai.
Memcon-Tab
September 8, 1978—Friday
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
Secretary Brown
Defense Min. Weizman
Dr. Brzezinski
Professor Barak
Amb. Atherton
General Tamir
Asst. Sec. Saunders
Mr. Rubinstein
Subject: Continuation of previous meeting. Sovereignty/with-
drawal on West Bank, settlements, devolution of authority for self-
governed and related issues.
Memcon-Tab 14
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
Defense Min. Weizman
Subject:
Memcon-Tab
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Kamel
U.S. Delegation
Egyptian Delegation
Subject: Lengthy discussion of Egyptian concern over West Bank
sovereignty issue, Israeli settlements, and Jerusalem.
Memcon-Tab 15
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject:
Memcon-Tab
President Carter attends Prime Minister Begin’s Seder.
September 9, 1978—Saturday
Sadat/Weizman meeting.
Secretary Vance
Defense Minister Weizman
Subject: Primarily topics were Weizman’s worries about Begin’s ri-
gidity, concerns about tripartite meeting among leaders having exacer-
bated the situation, Secretary Vance’s providing some hints of the na-
ture of the U.S. paper then in its final stages of preparation.
Memcon-Tab
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
Ambassador Lewis
Israeli Delegation
Subject: General discussion topics which had been addressed in
earlier meeting with Weizman.
Memcon-Tab
September 10, 1978—Sunday
Trip to Gettysburg.
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Vice President Mondale
Foreign Minister Dayan
Secretary Vance
Defense Min. Weizman
Dr. Brzezinski
Professor Barak
Subject: New U.S. draft Framework proposal29 given to Israelis
and discussed on a preliminary basis.
Memcon-Tab
cessions had been made and there was no tangible basis for any optimism, I was much
more encouraged as we returned to our cabin.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 369)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject:
Memcon Tab
President Carter
Foreign Minister Dayan
Vice President Mondale
Defense Min. Weizman
Secretary Vance
Professor Barak
Dr. Brzezinski
Subject: Detailed discussion of new U.S. Framework paper. Israelis
present their objections and some redrafting based on Israeli views.
Memcon-Tab
September 11, 1978—Monday
President Carter
Foreign Minister Dayan
Subject: The President asked Dayan to walk from Holly to Aspen
with him.
Dayan to help me with these phrases when the Israelis meet again. Dayan told me that
the question of Sinai settlements was the most serious. I told him I would bring this up
with Sadat, but I didn’t think there was any chance for success.” Carter further com-
mented: “Dayan is a levelheaded, competent person, and if he or Weizman were prime
minister, we could long ago have reached a resolution. It’s becoming clearer that the ra-
tionality of Begin is in doubt.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 231) See also Carter, Keeping

President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: The President went over orally with Sadat the revised U.S.
Framework paper.
Memcon-Tab
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
Asst. Sec. Saunders
Amb. Lewis
Subject: Luncheon conversation. Israeli suggestion that Sinai
agreement be made more precise. Israeli suggestion that Sinai talks be
pursued in parallel with broad Framework talks.
Memcon-Tab
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
Amb. Lewis
Defense Min. Weizman
General Tamir
Israeli Delegation
Subject: Possible joint Jordanian-Israeli and/or Egyptian-Israeli
border patrols, nature of Israeli security requirements in West Bank,
Gaza and Sinai (with briefings from Tamir’s maps), potential cost of
refugee resettlement in Gaza. Secretary went over quickly latest ver-
sion of U.S. Framework proposal, indicating which Israeli suggestions
had been accepted and which rejected.
Memcon-Tab 24
President Carter
Defense Minister Weizman
Israeli Delegation
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Subject: Sinai and Israeli security requirements.
Memcon-Tab
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Kamel
Amb. Eilts
Amb. Ghorbal
Ahmed Maher
Subject: Preliminary Egyptian comments on revised U.S. Frame-
work paper. Egyptian concerns with it. They view it as retreat from pre-
vious U.S. positions. It makes no clear reference to withdrawal from
Sinai and Palestinians and refugee problems inadequately treated.
Memcon—Tab 26.
President Carter
Foreign Minister Dayan
Professor Barak
Subject: Sinai and handling settlements problem.
Memcon—Tab
September 12, 1978—Tuesday
President Carter
Foreign Minister Kamel
Ahmed Maher
Subject: The President met Kamel and his associates while bicy-
cling. Brief general discussion in which President Carter said he did not
want Sadat to have to bear burden of West Bank. King Hussein should
be absorbed into peace talks. President Carter thought Israelis will be
willing to look at Egyptian suggestions.
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject:
Memcon—Tab
Dr. Brzezinski
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: Settlements.
Memcon—Tab
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
Subject: Luncheon conversation. Dayan urged that as a fall-back
position to avoid a breakdown, the West Bank/Gaza agreement should
be separated from Sinai since the latter seemed at that point insoluble.
Secretary said this would not work.
Memcon—Tab
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Kamel
U.S. Delegation
Egyptian Delegation
Carter then returned to his cabin and “looked again at the detailed maps of the Middle
East I had been studying for the last few months. All of a sudden, I felt fairly confident
that I could get both leaders to agree to a general proposal that could resolve all the
long-term differences concerning the Sinai, and also provide the basis for a future treaty
between the two nations. The only exception was the Israeli settlements, which remained
a crucial problem. Within about a half hour, I had jotted down my thoughts on a yellow
pad.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 234)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Subject: Lengthy discussion of revised U.S. Framework paper and
Egyptian concerns about it. Egyptians presented written comments
and suggestions on U.S. Framework paper.
Memcon—Tab 31.
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: Discussion of new Sinai principles based on President
Carter’s handwritten memo.
Memcon—Tab
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject:
Memcon—Tab
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Israeli Delegation
Subject: Impromptu meeting at dinner. Brief exchange about
Begin’s insistence that he meet alone with President Carter later in the
evening.
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: Begin discussed at length his objection to the “inadmissi-
bility” language and to removing the Israeli settlements from the West
Bank and Sinai.
Memcon—Tab
rate Sinai Framework concept.
Memcon—Tab
September 13, 1978—Wednesday
President Carter
Prof. Barak
Osama el-Baz
Subject: Lengthy drafting session on revising the overall Frame-
work paper.
President Carter
Prof. Barak
Osama el-Baz
Subject: Continuation of redrafting session on a new overall
Framework paper.
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: President Carter called on the Prime Minister in order to
express appreciation for the constructive Israeli approach during the
protracted drafting session earlier in the day.
Secretary Vance
Prime Minister Begin
U.S. Delegation
Israeli Delegation
Subject: Focus on U.S. paper on Sinai.
Memcon—Tab 36.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
September 14, 1978—Thursday
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: Obtain Sadat’s reaction to the work of the joint drafting
committee done on the previous day.
Ambassador Eilts
Foreign Minister Kamel
Subject: Deliver U.S. draft Sinai Framework document.
President Carter
Professor Barak
Subject:
President Carter
Foreign Minister Dayan
Israeli Delegation
Subject:

President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: Discussion of new Sinai Framework paper.
Secretary Vance
Prof. Barak
Osama el-Baz
Subject: Further revision of overall Framework paper developed
during the previous day’s drafting session.
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Kamel
Subject: Secretary stopped by to explain the revised Framework
paper to Kamel.
Secretary Vance
Prof. Barak
Osama el-Baz
Subject: Continuation of tripartite drafting session; indepth discus-
sion of revised Framework paper.
September 15, 1978—Friday
President Carter
Foreign Minister Dayan
Vice President Mondale
Secretary Vance
Subject:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Vance
President Sadat
Secretary Brown (later)
Foreign Minister Kamel
Ambassador Ghorbal
Subject: Sadat explains difficulty of signing an agreement with
President Carter if Begin does not also sign. Such an agreement would
become the basis for further compromises in any future negotiations.
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: Sadat agrees to President Carter’s request that the Egyp-
tian delegation not leave that day and wait until Sunday. This will
allow another effort to be made with the Israelis to obtain their agree-
ment to the revised overall and Sinai Framework texts.
Vice President Mondale (part)
Foreign Minister Dayan
Secretary Vance
Defense Minister Weizman
Secretary Brown
Professor Barak
Dr. Brzezinski
Carter noted in an annotation to his personal diary, “This was one of the worst moments
of my life.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 237)
Subject: Settlements, airfields and withdrawal from Sinai. Reiter-
ated commitment to Israeli security and readiness to provide needed
equipment.
Memcon—Tab
Vice President Mondale
President Sadat
Subject: Conveyed copy of handwritten letter67 of President Carter.
Vice President Mondale
Prime Minister Begin
Subject: Conveyed copy of handwritten letter69 of President Carter.
General discussion of status of summit and Sinai settlements issue.
Secretary Vance
Nabil el-Araby
Subject: Egyptian paper71 on proposed textual changes presented.
Secretary Vance
Professor Barak
Ambassador Lewis
Ambassador Dinitz
Eli Rubinstein
Def. Min. Weizman (later)
General Tamir (later)
Subject: Discussion of Israeli proposed textual changes for overall
Framework paper.
Sadat/Weizman meeting.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Carter
President Sadat
Vice President Mondale
Secretary Vance
Subject: Watched Muhammed Ali/Spinks fight.
September 16, 1978—Saturday
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject: During early morning walk, the two Presidents discussed
Secretary Vance
Defense Min. Weizman
Subject:
Vice President Mondale
Foreign Minister Dayan
Secretary Vance
Professor Barak
that had preceded Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem. In that memorandum, there was a clear dis-

Harold Saunders
Ambassador Dinitz
Amb. Sam Lewis
William Quandt
Subject: Discussion of Israeli proposed textual changes to overall
Framework document.
President Carter
Foreign Minister Weizman
Subject: Sinai Framework
President Carter
Defense Minister Weizman
Subject: Sinai Framework
President Carter
President Sadat
Secretary Vance
Osama el-Baz
tinction between the peace treaties, which were to be concluded between us and the Arab
States, and the issues that were to be discussed with the Arabs in the administered terri-
tories. Vance admitted that was indeed true, but that was in the context of the proposed
Geneva Conference, and since then things had changed.” (Dayan, Breakthrough, p. 175)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Subject: Drafting framework and Sinai papers.
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
U.S. Delegation
Professor Barak
Subject: Discussion of para 1(c), settlements, etc.
September 17, 1978—Sunday
Secretary Vance
Professor Barak
U.S. Delegation
Meir Rosenne
Simcha Dinitz
Eli Rubinstein
General Tamir
Subject: Brief discussion of para 1(c) prior to Israeli side under-
taking redraft of that para.
Sadat/Weizman meeting.
President Carter
President Sadat
Subject:
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
U.S. Delegation
Professor Barak
Israeli Delegation
Subject: Language on para 1 (c) Jerusalem exchange of ideas and
minor drafting questions.
President Carter
Foreign Minister Dayan
Subject:
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
U.S. Delegation
Professor Barak
Israeli Delegation
Subject: Jerusalem
President Carter
Foreign Minister Dayan
Vice President Mondale
Defense Min. Weizman
Secretary Vance
Professor Barak
Hamilton Jordan
Simcha Dinitz
Subject: Jerusalem several points of Sinai agreement
President Carter
Defense Minister Weizman
Secretary Vance
Professor Barak
Subject:
President Carter
President Sadat
Secretary Vance
Osama el-Baz
Subject: Finalization of drafting changes on framework documents
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Secretary Vance
Professor Barak
Subject: Finalization of drafting changes on framework documents
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin calls on President Sadat.
President Sadat calls on Prime Minister Begin.
Egyptian party helicopters from Camp David to Washington.
Israeli party helicopters from Camp David to Washington.
President Carter, President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin heli-
copter from Camp David to the White House.
Signing ceremony at White House of the two “framework” documents.

29.
Message From Secretary of State Vance to the Embassy in
Syria
Subject: Presidential Message for President Assad.
1. Please deliver2 the following message from President Carter to
President Assad as soon as possible.
2. Begin text.

30.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Council Advisor to the President
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large
Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary, NEA
William Quandt, National Security Council
Hermann Fr. Eilts, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt
EGYPTIAN SIDE
Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel, Egyptian Minister of Foreign Affairs
Boutros Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States
Ahmed Maher, Director of the Cabinet of the Foreign Minister
Osama el-Baz, Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs
Abdul Rauf el-Reedy, Director of Policy Planning, Foreign Ministry
SUBJECT
Egyptian Foreign Minister Kamel’s Meeting with Secretary Vance
Schedule
The Secretary first outlined the proposed schedule for today, in-
cluding the possibility of an enlarged meeting this evening after dinner.
Kamel wondered if we are not moving too fast. Ghorbal asked if we
have heard anything from the Israelis which might warrant an acceler-
ated schedule. The Secretary said the Israelis have not presented any-
thing new. At Kamel’s request, the Secretary undertook to inform Pres-
ident Carter of the Egyptian Foreign Minister’s view that it might be
wise to proceed more leisurely. The Secretary noted, however, the two
Presidents may already have decided on the schedule.
Camp David Talks
The Secretary invited Kamel to present any points that the Egyp-
tians might wish to make. Kamel said that Sadat is coming to Camp
David with an “open heart” and a willingness to listen to “the other
party” and to any ideas that President Carter might have. The only
point that should be borne in mind is that no concessions should be
asked in terms of territory and sovereignty. If there is a positive out-
come, Kamel noted, it should bring in the other parties. Hussein should
be able to participate and the peace process would have Saudi blessing.
Kamel noted that Sadat sees the Camp David meeting as “crucial and
very important.” Unless some positive outcome is reached, it will be
difficult to continue. It will undermine Sadat’s position in the Arab
world.
Sadat, Kamel noted, has stated several times that whatever the out-
come of the Camp David meeting, he will get together with the Arabs
and report. Sadat is thinking of a mini-summit. The Secretary asked
what Sadat has in mind in terms of limitation of numbers. Kamel ob-
served that most of the Arabs are opposed to the peace process because
they believe that the Israelis are not changing their attitudes. The
Saudis believe that it is imperative that Sadat be supported by other
Arab elements. Any Arab Summit or mini-summit does not mean a
shift from the peace effort. This will continue on the basis of the deci-
sion made at Rabat to search for peace. Asked who might attend such a
mini-summit, Kamel thought the Jordanians, Saudis and, hopefully,
the Syrians. Asked about the likelihood of Syrian participation, Kamel
noted that this will depend upon what comes out of Camp David. The
Saudis will tackle the Syrians on this matter.
The Secretary asked about the present state of Egyptian-Syrian re-
lations. Kamel noted these are very negative. There are no permanent
channels of regular contact. Sometimes the Syrian UN Representative
Shoufi meets with Egyptian Permanent Representative Abdul Meguid.
Nevertheless, what the Egyptians are hearing about Assad’s positions
is encouraging. Kamel noted, however, that Assad’s positions tend not
to be constant. The Saudis believe that things can be worked out with

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Assad in a manner which would allow the Syrians to come in—not nec-
essarily at the beginning, but later. Brzezinski asked if the outcome of
Camp David is a compromise, will the Syrians attend? Kamel an-
swered affirmatively.
Quandt asked (a) is there likely to be another meeting after Camp
David if the latter has reasonable success and (b) will the Jordanians at-
tend such a meeting? Kamel responded affirmatively, noting that all
Egyptian ideas are based on the concept of Jordanian participation.
Quandt asked whether, in the event the Saudis support a Jordanian role
and the Syrians do not, the Jordanians will still attend? Kamel thought
they will, provided “Palestinian rights” are adequately safeguarded.
Boutros Ghali opined that two other countries might be interested
in participating—Morocco and the Sudan. Saunders observed that
during his post-Leeds Castle visit to Morocco, King Hassan had em-
phasized the need to obtain Arab support for Sadat’s initiative. Kamel
observed that the Egyptians have had similar signals from Hassan.
Egyptian priorities are to obtain Saudi support and Hussein’s partici-
pation. Hussein, Kamel noted, needs a clear and unambiguous commit-
ment on withdrawal from the West Bank.
Quandt inquired where an Arab Summit might be held. Kamel re-
sponded that this is an open question, but identified his preference for
somewhere in Saudi Arabia. Saunders asked who besides Morocco and
the Sudanese might attend? Kamel spoke of the confrontation states,4
the Saudis, Morocco (if she wishes) and perhaps the Gulf States. Kamel
observed, however, that the Moroccans are thinking of a full meeting.
The Secretary wondered whether there might be more problems than
benefits emerging from a full summit. Kamel agreed, noting that the
Libyans would create problems. The smaller the summit, the better.
Saunders asked about the Tunisians and the Algerians, and what
weight they carry? Kamel responded that they all carry some weight,
but did not think the two states would wish to participate. Boutros
Ghali commented that the Tunisians tend to be neutralists: neutralists
between Morocco and Algeria and neutralists between the moderates

and the rejectionists such as Libya. Kamel also reiterated his view that
any success at Camp David will attract other Arabs at a later stage.
The Secretary stressed that President Carter is hopeful that some-
thing can be achieved. President Carter will outline to President Sadat
in the course of their morning meeting what his ideas are. The Presi-
dent has set his sights high. Kamel emphasized that Egypt is concerned
that the close U.S.-Egyptian relationship continue even if nothing is
achieved at Camp David. Egypt will keep trying for peace and will
need U.S. assistance. The Secretary recalled that we have often spoken
of presenting our suggestions when the time comes. He thought Presi-
dent Carter will do so at this meeting.
[Omitted here is discussion of the political situations in Somalia,
Eritrea, Libya, and Chad.]
Lebanon
The Secretary noted our concern about the periodic flare-ups in
Lebanon. We have been in touch on a daily basis with Lebanese Foreign
Minister Boutros, with other Lebanese, with the Syrians and with the
Israelis. He had sent cables last Wednesday to Assad5 and to the
Saudis, at a time when the fighting was heavy, urging (a) the Syrians to
agree to a ceasefire and a standfast and (b) the Saudis to try to influence
the Syrians along these lines. As yet, there has been no reply. Hence,
President Carter had earlier today sent another message7 to Assad
again urging restraint.
The U.S. has also urged restraint on the Israelis. The Israelis have
been deploying reconnaissance aircraft over Lebanon. The Syrians
have recently deployed anti-aircraft artillery to Lebanon, but thus far
no missiles. If the Lebanese situation should explode, the Secretary
noted, it could blow everything up. The Egyptians agreed.
Kamel thought that the Syrians would be only too happy to have a
ceasefire. In his view, the Israelis need to be influenced and pressed. He
opined that the Israelis are keeping the situation in Lebanon heated,
perhaps even in connection with the Camp David talks. The Israelis
withdrew their forces, but left behind Haddad and the Christian forces.
The Secretary said we have been in touch on a daily basis with the
Israelis. Vice President Mondale had also talked to the Pope8 urging the
Vatican to get in touch with the Christians in order to urge restraint.
Kamel agreed that the Vatican is trying, and commented that the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
French are also involved. He asked what answer the Israelis have given
to U.S. representations. The Secretary said they have replied that if
there were a ceasefire, there would be no reason for Israelis to be in-
volved. Boutros Ghali recalled that, while recently in Rome for the
Pope’s funeral, he had talked with Lebanese Christian leader Helou
and Moslem leader Sulh. Both had asked for an Egyptian role in re-
solving the Lebanese problem. Boutros Ghali noted that as long as
Egypt is engaged in the peace process, it is difficult for Egypt to play a
positive role in Lebanon because of Syrian opposition. They had dis-
cussed this with Sadat on the aircraft on the way over. Sadat had said
that as soon as something can be achieved at Camp David, this will
open the way for a more active Egyptian role in Lebanon.

31.
Memorandum of Conversation
Camp David, September 6, 1978
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Hermann Fr. Eilts, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt
EGYPTIAN SIDE
Mohamed Hassan El-Touhamy, Deputy Prime Minister
SUBJECT
Talk with Hassan El-Touhamy re West Bank/Gaza
While walking back to his cabin with Hassan El-Touhamy this af-
ternoon, he noted that President Sadat will be informing Prime Min-
ister Begin today2 of his ideas on the West Bank/Gaza. Touhamy made
a point of emphasizing to me that Egypt is prepared to assume respon-
sibility for negotiation of the West Bank/Gaza even if Hussein and/or
the Palestinians are unwilling to do so. When asked how this squares
with the constant comments of members of the Egyptian Delegation
that Egypt has no mandate to negotiate the West Bank/Gaza, Touhamy
said Egypt needs no mandate to do so. As the strongest Arab power, it
has a responsibility to undertake this mission if the other Arabs are too
timid to do so.
Touhamy said that he had told Sadat that he, Touhamy, is pre-
pared to act as “marshal” of the West Bank/Gaza for as long as it takes.
This would even apply to Jerusalem. He claimed to know Teddy Kollek
well and was sure that he could work with him.
Touhamy stressed that Sadat’s purpose in making such a proposal
to Begin is to assure the Israeli Prime Minister that Egypt is willing and
able to negotiate the West Bank/Gaza, provided the other aspects of
the Arab/Israeli problem are satisfactorily resolved. He did not spell
out exactly what he had in mind by “the other aspects,” but seemed in-
tent upon emphasizing Egypt’s ability to do whatever is needed with
respect to the West Bank/Gaza.
COMMENT: Touhamy’s comments run squarely counter to the
views of Mohamed Kamel and Boutros Ghali on this matter.

32.
Memorandum Prepared by the Ambassador to Egypt (Eilts)
Camp David, September 7, 1978
SUBJECT
State of Mind of Egyptian Delegation on Morning of September 7, 1978
I escorted President Sadat this morning from Dogwood2 to Aspen
and also had opportunity to speak to various members of the Egyptian
Delegation. What follows is my assessment of state of mind of the
Egyptian Delegation as of noon today.
In my brief chat with Sadat, he said he was very pleased with the
way things were going. His meetings of the previous day with Presi-
dent Carter4 and jointly with President Carter/Prime Minister Begin
had been very helpful. He expressed confidence that something posi-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tive will come out of the Camp David talks. Subsequently, Presidency
Director Hassan Kamel confirmed to me that Sadat had told the Egyp-
tian Delegation about his pleasure and satisfaction with yesterday’s
talks. Ahmed Maher later told me that, in his briefing to the Egyptian
Delegation, Sadat had indicated that he had told President Carter and
Prime Minister Begin that he would be willing to negotiate the West
Bank in the event King Hussein still refuses to participate.
In contrast to Sadat, Foreign Minister Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel is
worried and tense (Boutros Ghali is only slightly less so). Kamel is con-
cerned (a) about Sadat’s having told Begin of his readiness to negotiate
the West Bank if Hussein will not play ball and (b) that in today’s tri-
lateral meeting, Sadat may make more concessions than he can imple-
ment. Kamel retains his worry that Sadat will be pressed by President
Carter into accepting compromise positions that will discredit Sadat
and Egypt in the eyes of the Saudis, the Palestinians and other Arabs. I
suggested to Kamel that he ought to have a little more confidence that
Sadat will know his own political limits, but stressed the importance of
Sadat showing maximum flexibility at this delicate stage. Kamel re-
mains decidedly uneasy.
After I had taken Sadat to Aspen, Ahmed Maher said he wished to
speak to me. Maher commented that the Egyptian paper6 is regarded
by Sadat as a comprehensive and balanced approach to achieving
peace. He expressed the hope that both we and the Israelis will recog-
nize this. He argued that the paper is as far as Egypt can go. I told him
that I thought Prime Minister Begin will be commenting on the Egyp-
tian paper at today’s trilateral meeting. At some point I was sure that
President Carter would also comment on it.
Maher then asked if the Israelis are putting forward a plan of their
own. I said that I was not aware of any such Israeli intention and noted
that Prime Minister Begin still stands by his self-rule and Sinai plans. I
understood that Prime Minister Begin had indicated to President Sadat
that everything in these Israeli plans is negotiable.
Maher then wanted to know if we consider it essential that “some-
thing” come out of the Camp David meeting? Would it not suffice, he
wondered, simply to have a statement that the U.S. will continue its ac-
tive efforts to work with the parties to achieve peace. He acknowledged
that this would be pretty thin gruel for a Trilateral Summit, but ex-
pressed concern that Sadat might be pressed to agree to concessions in
the West Bank that will be rejected by Hussein, the Palestinians and the
Saudis. I suggested that Sadat was surely equally mindful of the need
to satisfy the Saudis, Palestinians and Hussein in anything he might

33.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Vice President Mondale
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Council Advisor to the President
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large
Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary, NEA
Samuel Lewis, Ambassador to Israel
William Quandt, NSC
David Aaron, NSC
ISRAELI SIDE
Foreign Minister Moshe Dayan
Minister of Defense Ezer Weizmann
Prof. Aharon Barak, Member Israeli Supreme Court and Prime Minister’s Legal
Advisor
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Major General Avraham Tamir, Director, Army Planning Branch
Ambassador Simcha Dinitz
Dr. Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor to the Foreign Minister
SUBJECT
Meeting with Israeli Foreign Minister and Defense Minister
Secretary Vance introduced this first meeting of the two delega-
tions by outlining the schedule of meetings for the rest of the day.
Lebanon
He then turned to Lebanon, saying that the President had sent a
message2 to President Assad of Syria this morning as Prime Minister
Begin had asked last night. Although there were no answers as yet to
his earlier letter or, of course, to the President’s message, we hoped for
some response soon. We were also waiting for a response to our ap-
proach to the Saudis.
Secretary Vance then said that Prime Minister Begin had men-
tioned to the President an attack by Syrian aircraft on Israeli aircraft. He
asked whether such an attack had occurred. Weizmann said that there
had been no exchange of fire. However, three times in recent days
Syrian fighters had scrambled and attempted to go into an attack mode
in a menacing fashion. They were unable, however, to join combat as
the Israelis broke away. He said that over twenty Syrian aircraft had
been scrambled over Lebanon in these incidents.
Secretary Vance said we have no late intelligence suggesting that
the Syrians have yet deployed any missiles into Lebanon, only
anti-aircraft guns. Weizman said their intelligence agreed, so far, al-
though missiles were deployed right on the border.
Peace Negotiations
Turning to major subjects for the Camp David meetings, Dayan
said that Weizmann wanted to clarify something after his informal
talk3 the previous evening with Secretary Vance concerning Sinai.
Weizmann said it was important to emphasize there are still serious
unresolved problems over Sinai, although great progress has been
made in the various earlier meetings. If the Egyptians have the idea that
everything is settled, this should be clarified. He agreed with Secretary
Vance that in essence the remaining issues are the future of the settle-
ments and the air fields. Weizmann said that although there are many
records of the meetings at which the Sinai has been discussed, there is
nothing in the way of a written agreement at this stage. Dayan asked
whether it would be possible to pick up the Sinai subject at these
meetings and try to reduce understandings to writing. Secretary Vance
said that the Egyptians are indeed prepared to discuss it here, and that
despite Gamacy’s absence, Sadat is of course present. He went on to say
that as for President Carter’s views, he wants to see as much accom-
plished here on both the West Bank and Gaza as well as Sinai as can be
possible.
Barak then said he wanted to comment on President Carter’s dis-
cussion last night with Prime Minister Begin concerning Sadat’s desire
for a statement on the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
war. Barak said it seemed to the Israelis that it would not be fruitful to
go into this subject. The language is admittedly in 242 and they are not
denying or challenging that fact. But, he assumes that what Sadat is
really talking about is withdrawal and that this is what the phrase sig-
nifies. He suggests, therefore, concentrating on breaking down the
principle of withdrawal into its component parts and discussing how
to implement it on the West Bank and so forth. To get into a debate over
this phrase of inadmissibility will only require the Israelis to distin-
guish between wars of aggression and wars of defense and to argue
their position about the origins of the 1967 conflict.
Dayan then underscored this point by saying they wished to go
into the question of what withdrawal would actually look like in all its
specifics rather than argue over abstract formulations. Secretary Vance
said he understood the Egyptians have done more work since the
Leeds talks4 on details of West Bank arrangements and will be pre-
pared to do so. Brzezinski said he understood then that the Israelis
wanted to talk first about the substance of the arrangements on the
ground and then try to extract general principles from concrete agree-
ments. Dayan agreed and said that they were now at the stage in nego-
tiations where it is essential to get down to cases. (Rosenne tried to in-
troduce
an
argument
to
the
effect
that
the
language
about
inadmissibility is only preambular language rather than “operative”
language in 242 but Weizmann diverted his effort.) Weizmann again
asked Secretary Vance whether he could understand that the Egyptians
were now ready to discuss the West Bank in detail from a practical
point of view. How far in this direction can they go without a mandate?
Secretary Vance said he did not yet know. He would meet later in the
day with Foreign Minister Kamel5 and hoped to tell Weizmann
afterward.
Dayan said he was somewhat confused from Begin’s briefing after
his meeting last night with President Carter on one or two points. He
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
had understood from Begin that according to President Carter, Egypt
would be ready to permit Israeli forces to remain in the West Bank after
five years, while insisting on a statement of “full withdrawal”, perhaps
leaving Israeli forces there in some special status. (Secretary Vance
nodded agreement.) But, Dayan said he was not clear on the future of
the West Bank settlements. Did the Egyptians mean withdrawal to in-
clude dismantling all settlements? Secretary Vance said this was un-
clear at this point and has to be further defined. The basic principle is
that there should be no settlements in the West Bank or Sinai in the
Egyptian frame of reference. However, what in practical terms they
will accept is unclear.
Weizmann summarized a number of points from his various
meetings with Sadat and Gamacy which he characterized as “very in-
teresting and tangible”. The question however is whether Sadat still en-
dorses that. (He mentioned such examples as joint policing, retention of
Israeli forces, leaving West Bank settlements intact, permitting private
land sales to Israel, open borders, full commerce, and so forth.) Weiz-
mann said that when he met Sadat he would remind him of their dis-
cussion of these points and that “we don’t start from zero in these
meetings”. Secretary Vance agreed and said that one important pur-
pose here is to get down in writing agreement on some of these points
thus far discussed but not recorded.
Dayan then recalled that in the U.S./Israeli “working paper” of
last autumn, the United States and Israel had agreed on the parties to
be included in the negotiations, and one of the parties was the Pales-
tinian Arabs. He then asked whether we can, in the near future, see a
way to bring in representatives of the Palestine/Arabs to these negotia-
tions, either formally or as advisers. Dayan said he had recently met
privately with some Palestine/Arab leaders and that he was encour-
aged by their point of view, though he recognized that they would not
necessarily say the same things if other Arabs were present. Was there
some way to get them now into the negotiations? Secretary Vance said
he had discussed this point with Kamel this morning who said that if
Camp David ends with a sufficient and satisfactory agreement, that
then he believed Palestine/Arabs would be prepared to join the
negotiations.
Weizmann inquired whether Sadat still wanted to start with a
broad statement covering the West Bank problem and then with that in
hand to go ahead on Sinai. Vance replied that to the best of his knowl-
edge he is still in that mood, but “you will have to hear it from him.”
Weizmann said he hoped everyone understands that there is a major
difference between the Sinai and the West Bank.

Barak then interjected that he sees a clear analytical distinction be-
tween withdrawal and the settlements, and that withdrawal itself has
two elements within it: withdrawal of the military government and
withdrawal or non-withdrawal of the security presence. And, more-
over, soldiers serving in the West Bank may have joint military gov-
ernment and security functions. Brzezinski said that he thought this
was a manageable problem in differentiating elements to be with-
drawn. Barak said this was the reason he thought it more useful to
work initially on concrete details, a position to which Brzezinski said he
was sympathetic.
Vice President Mondale then asked what approach by the Egyp-
tians would be most helpful here at Camp David in order for the Israeli
Government to be as forthcoming as possible. Dayan responded that
they needed to know concretely more about the Egyptian proposals
and to get into discussing their details, as was begun at Leeds. He said
he thought they should pick up and continue the Leeds conversations
about gaps between the Israeli and Egyptian positions to see what
could be done to bridge them.
Vice President Mondale then asked whether it was fair to say that
how much the Israelis could agree to on the West Bank depends at least
in part on whether Sadat is ready to move ahead definitively on Sinai.
Both Dayan and Weizmann said they were not sure. (Note: It was ob-
vious that neither felt comfortable in responding to this question in
Begin’s absence, but the context of their subsequent remarks suggested
the answer would be “yes”.)
Weizmann then spoke at some length about the problem of getting
Sadat to understand that his visit to Jerusalem, important as it had
been, could not wipe out all previous history of conflict and remove
overnight the reasons why the Israeli people still feel terribly insecure
about their borders. Weizmann said he had tried to get this across him-
self to Sadat but without success. He stressed that the origins of the
1967 war, both in Sinai and in the West Bank (where the Israelis had
urged Hussein not to intervene in the fighting) could not be ignored.
Vice President Mondale then asked whether, hypothetically, if the
Sinai problem could be settled, and an agreement reached between Is-
rael and Egypt in some form over the West Bank and Gaza, would that
not be a great breakthrough whether Hussein joined or not? Dayan re-
sponded that he was convinced that if an agreement over the West
Bank could be reached with Sadat that representative Palestine/Arabs
would join in. In that case, Israel would certainly accept it and would
not question Sadat’s “lack of a formal mandate for the West Bank”.
Brzezinski asked Dayan to review in more detail the outcome of
his recent talks with the Palestine/Arab leaders, which Dayan did at
some length. He said he had met with about six in individual meetings,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and that they included the Mayors of Hebron and Bethlehem, Hikmat
Al Masri from Nablus, Anwar Katib from Jerusalem, a leading lawyer
from Ramallah, and two members of the Shawa family of Gaza. Al-
though there were individual differences, they all expressed a great de-
sire somehow themselves to have a role in determining their own fu-
ture. They are afraid that they will be left with nothing if Camp David
fails, and they want very much to see the military government abol-
ished and their own administrative council established. They want to
be able to meet to discuss general political issues, which they cannot
now do. They want reunification of families displaced in 1967, with
perhaps as many as one hundred thousand returning. They feel that
there are all the elements necessary for genuine self rule in the West
Bank and Gaza; for example, there are plenty of Arab doctors now in
the hospitals and Arab agricultural experts. With respect to the Israeli
Defense forces, the Arab leaders distinguish between what they would
like (total withdrawal) and what is realistic. Dayan insisted that their
major concern is to make sure the IDF will not interfere in their daily
lives; that they would, of course, agree they had to give assurances that
their Arab police would prevent terrorist attacks against Israelis from
West Bank locations, and that at present they would need substantial
help from Jordan or Egypt to do so. They could accept an IDF presence
limited to the function of defending Israel in a strategic fashion, though
they of course do not like it. With respect to sovereignty, they agree,
said Dayan, that this issue would be decided at the end of or indeed
during the five year interim period. Therefore, he said it is vital to them
that new settlement activity be frozen for five years so that “all the land
won’t be bought up by the Israelis”. One Palestine leader wanted all Is-
raeli settlements removed. But the consensus position is to freeze settle-
ments, at least insofar as new settlements are concerned. (He said that
they might agree to permit some additional families to pre-existing set-
tlements.) Dayan said they know full well there are more West Bank
Arabs staying overnight legally or illegally in Tel Aviv, etc., than all the
Israelis living in the West Bank, and that their priority is to keep free
access to the Israeli Arabs. With regard to self-determination, the Pales-
tine leaders want that right. If they had it, however, they would want to
keep some relationship with Jordan. Dayan said he had pressed
whether they would give up their Jordanian citizenship for an “Arafat
citizenship”, and they did not wish to do so. They agree that the area is
perhaps too small and too fragmented for a fully independent state but
they want equal rights with other peoples to make that decision them-
selves. Dayan said he was also pleased to find that they put a high pri-
ority on keeping free contact with Israel; they do not want ever to re-
turn to closed borders with the Israelis or, of course, with Jordan.
Dayan concluded this review by saying he was impressed that the
leaders genuinely want to be involved in deciding their future, yet at

the same time have fear of PLO retaliation. They cannot “volunteer”.
He said that they made clear they would be talking to Arafat as well as
with the Jordanians and presumably the Egyptians; he said they used
such defiant phrases as “we will tell Arafat what we intend to do.”
Dayan said he assumed that getting “clearance” from all three parties
for their participation would be more complex, yet he felt confident
that if agreement were reachable with Sadat that one way or another
the Palestine leaders would manage to nominate their own repre-
sentatives to participate either formally or informally as advisers
perhaps to an Egyptian if not Jordanian delegation. Quandt asked
whether there was any Israeli impediment to these leaders seeing Ar-
afat in Beirut. Could they then return? Weizmann replied that there
were now no restrictions on their travel. He cited several cases of PLO
sympathizers who have travelled abroad and returned without diffi-
culty. Weizmann also underscored Dayan’s recital by saying that the
West Bankers “have really started talking a bit differently in the last
few weeks.” Weizmann then recounted his conversations with Sadat
about his concept of peace with Egypt as a “first peace” rather than a
“separate peace”. He said he understood that Sadat’s problem was
whether Israel could give him enough on the West Bank and Gaza to
protect him from charges of treachery by the Arabs. But for the Israelis
it is of course very difficult politically, since practically no one will
agree to return to ’67 borders, even with minor modifications.
Brzezinski said that conceivably one could agree about the interim
solution which might then well become permanent. But an interim so-
lution needed to be attractive enough to permit Sadat to agree to it.
Weizmann agreed. Weizmann then asked whether the United States
was prepared to see an Egyptian/Israeli agreement over the West Bank
if Hussein remained apart. Secretary Vance answered that such an
agreement should go forward even if Hussein will not join, although
obviously it would be better if he did. But, Secretary Vance empha-
sized, the real problem is to find an agreement over the West Bank and
Gaza which is politically sufficiently attractive for Sadat to sell to the
moderate Arabs, especially Saudi Arabia. Dayan again said that he re-
ally believed that the Palestine/Arab leaders would find a way to par-
ticipate with Egypt and Israel, for they can almost “taste” what they
sense to be in their grasp.
Weizmann said he wanted to ask how much influence the Saudis
would have on whether or not an interim solution for the West Bank
would be attractive enough politically, and how much influence they
would have over Palestine/Arab attitudes toward it. Would they sup-
port it? Brzezinski replied he thought it depended on just how attrac-
tive the interim solution were. He said the Saudis are increasinly wor-
ried about other threats in the region and would like to support a

34.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Walter Mondale, Vice President of the United States
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Council Advisor to the the President
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large
ISRAELI SIDE
Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister
Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense
Aharon Barak, Member Israeli Supreme Court and Prime Minister’s Legal
Advisor
Avraham Tamir, Director, Army Planning Branch
Elyakim Rubenstein (notetaker), Assistant Director General, Ministry for Foreign
Affairs
SUBJECT
Exploration of Israeli Positions on Refugee Return, Security/Withdrawal on West
Bank, Settlements, Sinai Air Bases and Authority for Interim Regime
The following is a summary of the follow-on discussions with
members of the Israeli Delegation to explore further some questions
raised during the President’s bilateral meeting with Prime Minister
Begin and his principal advisors the morning of September 7. The
principal subjects discussed were: (a) refugee return to the West Bank,
(b) security/withdrawal on the West Bank, (c) Israeli settlements,
(d) Sinai air bases, and (e) the source of authority for an interim regime.
It was agreed that a further subject to discuss was the question of sover-
eignty and final status of the West Bank and Gaza, but time did not
permit getting into this issue.
Of particular note, Dayan made the point twice during the
meeting—once in connection with West Bank security/withdrawal
issues and once in connection with the settlements problem—that
Egypt could not make proposals going beyond its present positions; it
was therefore important to know what the U.S. would agree to support
and then for the U.S. to make proposals on these issues.
Refugee Return
Secretary Vance asked what Israel had in mind, in its West Bank/
Gaza home rule plan, about the number of Palestinian refugees who
would be permitted to return during the interim period and how this
in-migration program would be carried out. The Israelis explained that
they had in mind providing for the return of West Bank and Gaza resi-
dents who had been displaced in the 1967 War. About 40,000 had al-
ready returned and they estimated that perhaps another 100,000 would
have a claim to return under this program. Dayan stressed that this was
an important issue for the West Bank Palestinian representatives he
had been meeting with. The Israelis did not see this as a major problem;
the principal criteria were that they could be absorbed economically
(i.e., that no refugee camps would be created) and that individuals who
would be a security problem be screened out. The details could be
worked out with the Administrative Council envisaged under the
self-rule plan. Israel would have a veto but as a general principle these
1967 displaced persons would be permitted to return.
Dayan emphasized that Israel made a distinction between the
West Bank/Gaza residents displaced in 1967 and refugees or their de-
scendants from the 1948 War. The “right of return” which the latter
claimed meant returning to Israel proper or to Gaza. In Gaza there were
already 150,000 1948 refugees and no more could be absorbed. Israel, it-
self, could not take back any significant numbers. Therefore, the need is
to have an international body which would resolve the problem of the
1948 refugees through resettlement, largely in countries where they re-
side. All governments where these refugees live would participate in
this body, which would also deal with the problem of Jewish refugees

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
from Arab countries and their claims. The most difficult category
would be the 1948 refugees in Lebanon.
Security/Withdrawal
Secretary Vance pressed Weizman and Dayan for their specific
ideas on what their security requirements in the West Bank would be
during the interim period. Initially, Weizman took the position that Is-
rael would need to retain approximately its present military forces and
positions in the West Bank. He enumerated the categories of Israeli se-
curity requirements as encompassing (a) a military presence in the
Jordan Valley and control of entry to both the West Bank and Gaza;
(b) early warning stations on the West Bank; (c) strong points on the
West Bank heights overlooking the Jordan Valley; (d) control of key
points on East/West access roads in the West Bank plus the building of
some new roads; and (e) prepositioned depots and defense positions on
the West Bank for additional forces that might have to be sent in.
Weizman stressed that, even if there were peace with Egypt, Israel still
had to be prepared against threats from Syria, Iraq and Jordan to the
East.
Secretary Vance made the point that all of this would not take into
account the essential political problem that there needed to be some re-
ductions and redeployment (which could be characterized by the
Arabs as withdrawal) of Israeli forces and a decrease in their visibility
in order to give evidence of the end of the occupation. Secretaries Vance
and Brown and Dr. Brzezinski pressed this point during an extended
discussion. In the end, both Weizman and Dayan acknowledged the
importance of agreeing on concepts which would meet the categories
of Israeli security requirements listed above but would at the same time
reduce the Israeli military visibility. Secretary Vance stressed Israel
should have what it needs for security; at the same time, there could be
withdrawal into encampments. Dayan said he hoped we could say
withdrawal “out of,” rather than “into.”
The Israelis were reluctant to present to us a detailed military plan,
arguing that this could be dealt with in negotiations. They did, how-
ever, suggest a number of ways in which their military visibility could
be reduced: (a) the most important would be the abolition of the offices
of the military government which Weizman said would remove Israeli
military government officials (about 500 personnel) from about 15 mu-
nicipal centers; (b) some service schools now located on the West Bank
could perhaps be relocated in Israel proper; (c) if any troop concentra-
tions were in populated areas, they could perhaps be redeployed to
other points on the West Bank; (d) battalions could be converted into
companies.
Dayan stressed that Israel’s objective was to take itself out of the
daily lives of the local population, even including security functions

provided the local authorities were able to prevent terrorist acts against
Israel. If they could not, however, he clearly implied that Israel would
have to reserve the right to intervene.
Weizman raised the additional problem that the West Bank (as
well as Sinai) now provided the principal training areas for Israeli mili-
tary forces. Given the present size of the Israeli defense forces, and the
small area available in Israel, he did not see how their training needs
could be met within the borders of Israel itself.
The Vice President asked whether, as an additional means of dem-
onstrating the change from a military government regime, it would be
possible to convert some Israeli settlements in the West Bank to mili-
tary cantonments. Both Weizman and Dayan reacted negatively to this
idea. Otherwise, however, by the end of the meeting they were clearly
focusing on ways in which their security presence could be modified,
without a significant reduction in its totality, to meet the political need
to demonstrate that a new situation existed.
Settlements
Secretary Vance said that in his view the settlements in the Sinai
and on the West Bank presented two different problems. On the West
Bank, he believed there should be a freeze on further settlements with
disposition of existing settlements to be dealt with in negotiations
among the parties. As for the Sinai settlements, he did not believe Sadat
would give in on his insistence that they be disbanded. Weizman said it
was not possible to ignore the feeling of the Israeli people about the set-
tlements in the Rafah area, given their memories of three Egyptian in-
vasions. Admittedly these settlements were not a major military deter-
rent. They were psychologically important, however, and Israel’s
experience was that it could better control areas where its own people
lived. Why, he asked, could these settlements not serve to help Israelis
and Arabs learn to live together?
Weizman also recalled a suggestion he had once made to Sadat
that the borders of the Gaza Strip be extended to include the Yamit set-
tlement in the Rafah area; then whatever solution was found for Gaza
could apply there. This constituted a minute part of the Sinai. Weizman
asked if this was a matter of principle for Sadat. Secretary Vance said it
was; to Sadat, the return of Egyptian sovereignty to the international
border was something on which he would not concede. Dr. Brzezinski
asked if there were any possibility in the idea of a new demarcation of
the international border, with Egypt getting some land in the Negev in
return for redrawing the Gaza border. Weizman said this had been dis-
cussed with Sadat and was an idea to consider although it had not been
approved by the Israeli Cabinet. Professor Barak noted that General
Gamasy had said this idea was a non-starter for Egypt.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
With respect to West Bank settlements, Dayan asked whether we
had in mind freezing only the establishment of new settlements or also
the number of people in existing settlements. Secretary Vance replied
that President Carter had come to no final conclusion on this but our
present thinking was that the freeze should apply to both new settle-
ments and enlargement of existing settlements. Our concept was that
there should be a freeze until a negotiated agreement was reached.
Dayan said there was a link between Israel’s right to settle in the
West Bank and its willingness to agree to the return of 1967 displaced
persons. Israel had proposed the latter in its self-rule plan on the as-
sumption that Israel would also be able to settle the West Bank during
the interim period. Dayan suggested that there were three points that
needed to be covered in dealing with the settlements problem: (a) the
relationship between freezing settlements and the return of displaced
persons; (b) the settlement of refugees in Gaza through building new
housing for them; and (c) to establish a plan for a fixed number of Is-
raeli settlements in the West Bank so that the Arabs would be reassured
that Israel’s settlement plans were not unlimited and would not
threaten to colonize the entire West Bank. Dr. Brzezinski thought this
might be resolved by providing that the principle of unanimous ap-
proval by Israel and the local Administrative Council for the return of
displaced persons should also be applied to the establishment of new
settlements. The Vice President asked whether it was conceivable that
this problem could be resolved by Israel’s accepting the principle of a
freeze on settlements, so that Sadat could claim a victory, but with
some flexibility in practice for Israel, with the details to be negotiated
between Israel and the local Administrative Council. Dr. Brzezinski
thought a solution might be possible by agreeing that there would be a
freeze on unilateral settlement activity and by making all three points
raised by Dayan the subject of an agreement by the parties—i.e., a fixed
five-year settlement plan (Dayan indicated Israel had in mind 15–20
new settlements in the Jordan Valley comprising 100 families each); the
return of about 100,000 displaced persons; and permanent housing for
refugees in Gaza.
Secretary Vance concluded this part of the discussion by saying
that we would take note of what the Israelis had said and would reflect
on it.
Sinai Air Bases
Picking up on the earlier discussion of Sinai settlements, Dayan
said he wanted to try a “wild shot.” If the U.S. took over the air base
near Yamit, could the latter be included in a zone under U.S. auspices;
the U.S. base commander could have an Arab deputy for the Arab pop-
ulation in the zone, and an Israeli deputy for the Israelis. Weizman fol-
lowed up by asking how serious was the possibility that the U.S. would

35.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Walter Mondale, Vice President of the United States
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Hermann Fr. Eilts, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt
EGYPTIAN SIDE
Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ahmed Maher, Director of the Cabinet of the Foreign Minister
SUBJECT
Talk with Egyptian Foreign Minister Kamel
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Meeting:
The Secretary first told Kamel about President Carter’s desire to
have a meeting2 this evening with President Sadat and three members
of the Egyptian side. Kamel said he would inform President Sadat.
Kamel noted that after this morning’s tripartite meeting, Sadat was
very relaxed.
Egyptian Paper:
The Secretary said that Sadat and Begin had begun to discuss the
Egyptian paper. They had spent three hours on the subject and will
the Secretary noted, has a number of questions on the paper. Some he
has already raised, others he will want to raise. The Secretary was un-
certain whether a discussion of the paper can be concluded today.
Kamel said he was not sure how things will move forward. The ap-
proaches of Begin and Sadat are totally different. Sadat is searching for
essentials; Begin is concentrating on details. This difference of ap-
proach makes it more difficult for President Carter.
Kamel noted that the Egyptians had worked hard on the paper.
They believe it is the minimum that can be presented to the Arabs. The
Saudis and others will support the concepts set forth in the paper. Any-
thing less will place Sadat and Egypt in a bad situation. Sadat is willing
to agree to “everything on normalizing relations and security,” but on
territory and sovereignty he cannot do so.
On the West Bank, Sadat had mentioned the possibility of insub-
stantial modifications. Kamel insisted that Sadat cannot go beyond this.
There is no reason to give on this point. Egypt, he emphasized, wants
real peace. Egypt is sincere. It wants to deepen the human relationship
with the Israelis. If Palestinian rights are ignored or Arab territory is
not returned, Kamel insisted that there will never be a permanent
peace. He asked the Secretary’s views on the Egyptian paper.
The Secretary described the paper as an obviously serious effort
and one which had been carefully put together. As President Carter
had indicated, there is much in it with which we agree. On some
matters, we do have questions. President Carter will want to talk about
this and will want to make suggestions to overcome the difficulties.
Kamel later asked the Secretary how he saw the paper. The Secre-
tary reiterated his view that it is a serious effort. We will have to go

through it and try to find ways around points of disagreement. Kamel
noted that some points included in the paper, specifically ending the
boycott, will give Egypt problems with the Arabs. Egypt is nevertheless
willing to go ahead if agreement can be obtained on essentials; he was
certain that Egypt can carry the day.
The Secretary noted that the Israelis have said the Egyptian paper
is unacceptable. Maher asked if the Israelis plan to present a counter-
proposal. The Secretary said the Israelis are still pondering this possi-
bility. He noted that we are prepared to offer our suggestions.
Kamel noted that Sadat has reported to the Egyptian Delegation
that President Carter had asked about a “partial” success. He, Sadat,
had responded that the same degree of effort will be necessary for a
comprehensive success. Kamel also noted that the Egyptians have used
many American formulations in their paper.
West Bank Settlements:
The Secretary noted that Sadat had made it clear that sovereignty
and territory are non-negotiable. He wished to know, however, what
the Egyptian position is on West Bank settlements. In the case of the set-
tlements in Sinai, he understood that these should all be removed. But
is this also true of West Bank settlements?
Kamel responded that in principle the West Bank settlements
should all be dismantled. The parties with whom to discuss this, how-
ever, are the Palestinians and/or the Jordanians. Egypt cannot make
any commitment on retaining the settlements. The Israelis could visit
the West Bank as any foreigner can. The Secretary noted that the Is-
raelis make the argument that the security problem is different in the
West Bank than it is in Sinai. Kamel responded that the Israelis seem to
believe that they have a right to retain the settlements. It is not really se-
curity that is the issue. Security is something that the Egyptians are pre-
pared to work out. He doubted that the settlements, if retained, will
provide real security. They will simply be a provocation. Kamel reiter-
ated Egypt’s readiness to provide all feasible security measures.
The Secretary asked if it might not be feasible to retain existing set-
tlements, but freeze all further settlement activities. Kamel thought that
even this arrangement will result in friction. If security is covered by
other means, the matter of the future of the settlements is one for the
Palestinians and Jordanians to decide.
Vice President Mondale noted that, for purposes of negotiations, it
might be stated that the Sinai settlements will be removed but that the
West Bank settlements will be frozen for five years while negotiations
are underway. The parties could then negotiate the details of resolving
the settlement issue, land purchase, etc. Kamel acknowledged that
freezing new settlements might help. He noted that Egypt is not in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
sisting that the settlements be removed overnight. It is a matter that can
be discussed.
The Vice President noted that it is difficult for Begin to waive the
principle of Israeli settlements. Many Israelis do not like the settle-
ments, but it is necessary to find some way to handle the matter. A
five-year freeze in the West Bank should enable the subject to be han-
dled through more permanent negotiations. Begin cannot abandon his
life-long commitment to settlement activities.
The Vice President and Secretary pointed out that another problem
is that some of the settlements in the West Bank were built by Labor in
unsettled areas; Begin, however, has built settlements in populated
areas. Kamel agreed that this is a problem. Egypt, he said, cannot say
now that some settlements might remain. The Palestinians and Jorda-
nians must decide this.
The Vice President noted that Egypt could say that it is opposed to
all such settlements and believes they should be frozen. Kamel said that
this sounded alright to him but Egypt cannot go beyond this. He would
convey this idea to Sadat.
West Bank: End of Transition Period:
The Secretary then asked what Kamel foresees will happen at the
end of five years as this concept is set forth in the Egyptian paper.
Kamel responded that the Palestinians should at that time exercise their
right of self-determination. Egypt can work with the Jordanians so that
any Palestinian entity which emerges is linked with Jordan.
The Secretary noted that previously three options had been cited
for the end of the five-year period: (a) linkage with Jordan, (b) continua-
tion of existing status, and (c) affiliation with Israel. Are these three still
feasible? Kamel said that the last of the three will be troublesome
to Egypt. He was convinced, however, that Egypt can work out the
linkage-with-Jordan concept.
King Hussein’s Role:
Vice President Mondale noted that King Hussein is gunshy when
it comes to the peace negotiations. Kamel responded that Hussein has
for the past eleven years built for himself a secure state east of the
Jordan. He is anxious to keep this. Prince Hassan is even more so when
it comes to the West Bank. Vice President Mondale agreed that Hassan
thinks the West Bank is trouble. Kamel observed that King Hussein
does not think so. He would like to have the West Bank back. Hussein is
admittedly cautious, but if the right framework is developed, he can be
influenced. He was sure that the Saudis and the U.S. can help to influ-
ence Hussein. Kamel opined that when Sadat talked about negotiating

the West Bank, the President had done so in the belief that others will
come in.
Jerusalem:
The Secretary noted that we have some problem with the Jeru-
salem section of the Egyptian paper. Nothing is said in it about an undi-
vided city. Maher argued that the pertinent Egyptian language is in-
tended to mean this. Kamel affirmed that Egypt does not want to
divide Jerusalem again. There should be a municipality council with an
Arab, preferably a Jordanian flag. The Secretary asked whether a Jorda-
nian or an Arab flag is contemplated? Kamel responded that the Egyp-
tian paper starts with an Arab flag. He noted that the Israelis are talk-
ing about the West Bank as a melting pot between the Egyptians and
the Israelis. This, he argued, can also be the case in Jerusalem. An
Arab-Islamic Jerusalem would be of global-wide interest. No Arab or
Muslim, Kamel insisted, can accept a Jerusalem under the Israeli flag.
The Egyptian paper, Kamel stressed, does not envisage a wall within
Jerusalem.
The Secretary said he assumed that Egypt does not want border
guards, checkpoints, or restrictions on freedom of movement. The Vice
President thought that if we can make progress on the West Bank, Gaza
and Sinai, this will already be a success. Additional problems should
not be sought. Maher commented that he did not think the Saudis will
support anything that does not mention Jerusalem. The Secretary ob-
served that there are ways to handle this matter; Kamel agreed and had
Maher read Article 6 of the Egyptian paper. The Secretary said he had
tried to draft something on this matter. Kamel said the U.S. should
always keep in mind worldwide Muslim sentiment when it comes to
Jerusalem. The Secretary said he was mindful of the Saudi problem.
Kamel also spoke of Egyptian support for freedom of access to Je-
rusalem. The Secretary agreed. He noted that a joint municipality
council has some appeal. There are also precedents in support of such a
concept.
Egyptian Proposed U.S. Action:
The Secretary noted that with respect to items in the Egyptian
paper calling for U.S. actions, he had to point out that Congressional
approval is a factor that must be borne in mind. With respect to Article
9 of the Egyptian paper, he thought this could be eliminated since the
ideas are already contained in Articles 7 and 8. Kamel agreed.
Compensation:
The Secretary then asked how important Egypt considers Article 8
on compensation. Kamel observed that the Israelis have taken Egyptian

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
petroleum. The Secretary agreed, but noted such an article will only
give rise to endless claims and counterclaims. Kamel pointed out that
the Egyptian paper does not talk about damage to military installa-
tions. What is being talked about is compensation for damage to ci-
vilian installations. He suggested that the matter be taken up with Pres-
ident Sadat who has strong views on the matter.
The Secretary observed that during the morning tripartite session,
Begin had responded to this article by citing a possible $120 billion-
Israeli-damage claim against Egypt.
Security Arrangements:
Vice President Mondale recalled that Sadat has often said he is
open-minded on security arrangements. He asked about the possibility
of existing security arrangements in the West Bank beyond the five-
year transitional period. Kamel responded that the Egyptian idea is
that after five years, Jordan and Egypt will assume security responsi-
bility. The Palestinians and Israelis, he was convinced, should be able
to coexist. They have many affinities during five years of trying to live
in peace. Both sides will learn to live together. The Vice President and
the Secretary agreed.
Sinai Airfields:
The Secretary then asked how the Sinai airfields issue might be re-
solved? Kamel responded that the Israelis should build airfields of
their own in Israel. The Secretary said that the airfield near Eilat (Et-
zion) could be built elsewhere, but he wondered about the one near
Arish. Kamel observed that Sadat is strongly opposed to having any Is-
raeli airfields in Sinai. He suggested the matter be raised with Sadat.
Compulsory ICJ Jurisdiction:
The Secretary then asked about Article 4 of the Egyptian paper,
having to do with compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. He asked if the Egyp-
tians have any precedents for such compulsory ICJ jurisdiction? Maher
thought there are some precedents and undertook to have the Egyptian
lawyers look into the matter.
Peace Treaties:
The Secretary then asked about Article 6 having to do with peace
treaties to be concluded three months after a framework was signed.
He asked why “treaties” was in the plural? What did the Egyptians
have in mind? Maher responded that the reference is to all of the parties
concerned. Kamel elaborated by saying that the Egyptian paper en-
visages that the Jordanians and the Egyptians will sign peace treaties.
The Secretary thought that something like “promptly” would be
better than specifying a three-month time period. Kamel observed that

36.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Council Advisor to the President
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large
Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary, NEA
ISRAELI SIDE
Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense
Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister
Prof. Aharon Barak, Member Israeli Supreme Court and Prime Minister’s Legal
Advisor
Major General Avraham Tamir, Director, Army Planning Branch
Mr. Elyakim Rubinstein, Assistant Director General, Ministry for Foreign Affairs
SUBJECT
Meeting with Israeli Delegation
This meeting was a continuation of a meeting with the same group
Thursday afternoon. It concentrated on the issues of sovereignty/with-
drawal in the West Bank and the question of settlements there. In the
course of the conversation, there was a brief review of understandings
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
on issues which had been discussed yesterday which produced some
new qualifications.
Just to deal with the review of the two issues from yesterday first:
1. Devolution of Authority. Secretary Vance stated his under-
standing that it was generally agreed that authority for the Palestinian
self-governing authority would devolve from agreement among Israel,
Egypt, and Jordan. Barak and Dayan indicated that they had not yet
discussed this with the Prime Minister and would have to do so. Barak
recalled that, in a Begin-Lewis conversation3 before Begin’s departure
from Israel, the Prime Minister had suggested that authority would de-
volve from the Military Governor during the first two years of the tran-
sitional agreement and then, after that, from a Jordan-Israel-Egypt
agreement. Both Secretary Vance and Dr. Brzezinski said they felt that
the devolution from the three party agreement should come immedi-
ately and to introduce a phase of devolution from the Israeli military
government would undercut the political advantage of enhancing an
appearance of authority moving promptly to the West Bankers. Dayan
said they would take this up with the Prime Minister.
2. Security/Withdrawal. Secretary Vance summarized his under-
standing that what is needed is Israeli withdrawal out of certain areas
and stressed the political importance of reducing the Israeli presence.
He felt there had been general agreement the previous afternoon on the
principle subject to discussing details of the Israeli security presence
that would remain. The main new point introduced on this subject was
Barak’s question on whether the U.S. shares the Israeli view that this
withdrawal would represent the full implementation of the principle of
withdrawal in Resolution 242. In the exchange that followed, Secretary
Vance responded that these moves would be an adequate fulfillment of
the withdrawal principle during the transitional period but, since there
will not be full implementation until the end of the transitional period,
withdrawal in the interim period cannot be considered final implemen-
tation of the principles of 242.
The bulk of the meeting was spent on the issues of sovereignty and
the Israeli settlements.
Sovereignty. Secretary Vance began by stating the U.S. view that, at
the end of five years, there should be a decision on the future status and
relationship of the West Bank/Gaza with its neighbors; that the Pales-
tinians should participate in this decision; that the mechanism for deci-
sion on the final status and relationship should be negotiations among
Israel, Jordan, Egypt, and the West Bank/Gaza authority.
from Tel Aviv, August 26. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

The Israelis replied with a new formula which they had produced
since the last meeting. It takes the form of a draft article which would
have two parts:
1. “The Palestinian Arabs have the right to participate in the deter-
mination of their future through talks involving representatives of Is-
rael, Jordan, and Egypt.
2. “The future status of the West Bank and Gaza, including the
issue of sovereignty, will be discussed and decided after five years.”
Barak explained that this decision would be made with the partici-
pation of the inhabitants in a way consistent with Israel’s autonomy
plan. He explained that Israel would envision an exchange of letters be-
tween the U.S. and Israel which would state that the above formulation
would in no way undermine Israel’s claim to sovereignty.
For clarification, Secretary Vance asked whether the Israelis were
saying that Israel would automatically assert its claim to sovereignty if,
after five years, the West Bankers said they wished to federate with
Jordan. The summary answer, stated by Dayan at the end of this por-
tion of the conversation, was that Prime Minister Begin wants on the
record now his position that Israel is reserving its right to assert its
claim—not that Israel is today saying what it will do five years hence.
In the more detailed discussion, the Israeli position in summary
embraced these two points:
—If a solution like federation is proposed which spreads Arab
authority over the West Bank, Israel is likely to assert its claim to
sovereignty.
—If, on the other hand, there is a solution which breaks sover-
eignty up into its various functional components and leaves unstated
the question of who is sovereign, Israel is less likely to assert its claim to
sovereignty.
Coming at the problem from a different direction, Barak said he
preferred to avoid the use of such “19th Century terms” as confedera-
tion, federation, and sovereignty. The problem with “federation” is that
it would ascertain Jordanian sovereignty to the West Bank and Gaza.
The problem with “confederation” is that it suggests a Palestinian sov-
ereignty. Neither is acceptable to Israel. But if there is a functional
breakdown of the elements of sovereignty and no explicit decision on
who is sovereign, then the issue does not need to arise.
Returning to the new formula Barak had presented, Dayan said he
wished to make three points.
1. This formula now brings the question of Palestinian participa-
tion in determining their future into discussion of the sovereignty
issue.
2. Israel does distinguish between the future of the Palestinian
Arabs themselves and the future of the territory in the West Bank and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Gaza. He stressed that acknowledging the right of the Palestinian
Arabs to participate in the determination of their future does not mean
that they would “take their territory with them.” He argued that al-
lowing the Palestinian Arabs to make the decision on the future of the
West Bank and Gaza put them in a position of deciding an important
element of the Jewish future as well. Israel could not accept that.
3. He felt that deferring a decision on the status of the territories
until after five years would allow for a decision on arrangements which
would not be black and white. Here he was echoing Barak’s point on
leaving sovereignty undefined.
Settlements. Secretary Vance began this portion of the discussion by
stating our tentative view that there might be a freeze on both the
number of settlements and the number of people in the settlements.
The future of the settlements would be decided in negotiations among
Israel, Egypt, Jordan, and the Palestinian authority. He acknowledged
that Israel does not agree with this position and believes there should
be some additions in both categories. The Secretary acknowledged that
the Sinai is different because there is a recognized international
boundary and there is no question of sovereignty in the Sinai. There,
we believe settlements should be removed.
In response to questions from Weizman and Dayan, the Secretary
reported that the idea of extending Gaza to include the Yamit settle-
ments had been rejected and that individual Israeli buying of property
in the West Bank is acceptable.
Dayan then explained with some feeling why freezing the number
of settlers is “absolutely impossible.” He said that no one counts people
who go in and go out of a community except in prisons. He also said
that the freezing of the number of new settlements would be unaccept-
able to the Israeli government and that pressing this issue would have
repercussions on other issues. Specifically, he said he did not see how
Israel could agree to large numbers of displaced persons returning to
the West Bank if Israel’s right to allow new settlers to go to the West
Bank had been frozen. If the settlements are frozen, Israel would have
to impose its own freeze on other issues.
Dayan then put forward Israel’s strategy for dealing with this
issue. Israel would put forward a plan describing the number of settle-
ments it proposed to install during the five-year transitional period,
where they would be, and how they would acquire the land without
confiscating it. By putting forward such a plan, Israel would impose on
itself limitations on the settlements for five years and then would agree
to the return of displaced persons and plans for settling the refugees
permanently in Gaza.
Secretary Vance suggested the following formulation: there will be
no new settlements or expansion of existing settlements without the ap-

proval of the four party council (Jordan, Egypt, Israel, Palestinian Au-
thority). Dayan did not respond but instead reiterated the point that Is-
rael wants to change the practice of the last eleven years of not allowing
displaced persons to return and felt that such a change would be an in-
ducement to the Arabs to accept Israel’s strategy.
Secretary Vance then asked what the purpose of the new settle-
ments would be. Dayan responded that it would be to fill the gaps be-
tween existing settlements. He said there should be some linkage
among the settlements. It is difficult for a settlement to exist without
two or three nearby. He acknowledged that, in theory, one could take a
position that there should be no settlements at all and they should be
replaced by military forces. But if settlements are going to be left on the
West Bank, they must exist in clusters and cannot be isolated.
Dr. Brzezinski pressed the point that the settlements and the return
of displaced persons are unequal issues. In establishing the settlements,
Israel wants to perpetuate in the West Bank an Israeli presence with its
own guards, schools, laws, and other systems. He felt there is an incon-
sistency in the Israeli position. On the one hand, the self-rule proposal
is supposedly designed to arrange something that the Palestinian
Arabs can call their own. On the other hand, Israel insists on main-
taining armed enclaves in this Arab area. No one in the world under-
stands Israel’s purpose. No one in the world supports Israel in this
policy. He asked why Israel should complicate the process of moving
toward peace by insisting on continuing its settlement policy.
Weizman interjected that he had never understood why settle-
ments on the West Bank were called illegal. If eventually there is a con-
federation, there would be a sharing of this area involving Israel as well
as Jordan. Moreover there had been settlements such as those around
Hebron which had existed before the 1948 War. At least those first set-
tlements must be legal.
Dr. Brzezinski stressed that there may not be a confederation if Is-
rael creates the impression that it will use its presence to try to colonize
the West Bank. He went on to argue that if Israel wants to work out an
arrangement with the Arabs on the West Bank, they have to have the
feeling that they control the area in some significant degree. If they feel
that Israel is perpetuating and extending its control, then they do not
feel that they have a place they can call their own. Dayan argued that if
the approach he thought Dr. Brzezinski was implying were taken, it
would be necessary to take a decision on sovereignty in the West Bank
now. Dr. Brzezinski replied that this might be the ideal approach, but
since we cannot do that we are trying to find a way to defer the decision
until the end of five years so that we can allow the settlements to stay
during that period.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Dayan on two occasions in this part of the discussion expressed his
concern that the imposition of a freeze on settlements would very
quickly be extended by the Arabs to apply to east Jerusalem, and Israel
could not make itself vulnerable to that.
Weizman emphasized the importance of the settlements in Israeli
psychology. He said the whole of Israel had been made and defended
on the basis of settlements. Secretary Brown noted that if Israel did not
have the Israeli Defense Forces—as had been the case earlier in its his-
tory—Weizman would have a stronger argument. Weizman then
asked Secretary Vance to confirm his understanding that the United
States is saying all settlements should disappear. Secretary Vance re-
plied, “In the Sinai, yes.”
Secretary Vance then turned to Weizman and told him that Presi-
dent Sadat believes there is agreement between Weizman and Gamasy
on the Sinai airfields. Weizman said that is not the case. Weizman then
got out a map to explain how difficult it is for Israel to substitute for the
Sinai airfields, particularly the one at Etzion near Eilat. Dayan thought-
fully suggested that maybe it would be possible to reach agreement at
Camp David on the airfields so that only the issue of the settlements
would stand between us and agreement. However, Dayan was not sure
this issue could be negotiated with Sadat. Secretary Vance said tenta-
tively he thought it would be desirable to try to resolve the airfield
problem with Sadat at Camp David, but he said he would want to think
about it and talk with the President.
Weizman said he did not want to sound as if he were suggesting a
tradeoff between the Sinai and the West Bank, but he thought that if Is-
rael knew how the West Bank problem were to be solved, it would be
much easier to deal with issues in the Sinai when the negotiations focus
there again. Dayan thought Israel should try to reach agreement at
Camp David between Sadat and Weizman on the military problems in
the Sinai and then return to the issue of the settlements. He wondered if
the Secretary would arrange another meeting between Weizman and
Sadat.
The Secretary replied by saying that he would want to give this
more thought and then suggested that the conversation return to the
West Bank. He said he understood what Dayan and Weizman had said
about the settlements there, told them he did not find their arguments
compelling but promised to report them to the President. Dayan re-
minded him for the third time that any freeze on settlements would ul-
timately come back to apply to Israeli population of annexed portions
of east Jerusalem. Alluding again to his idea of a plan for the settle-
ments, he said that we could perhaps deal with the Arab concern by ap-
plying a freeze at such points where the Arabs feel Israel will use the
settlements to limit Arab activity on the West Bank.

37.
Memorandum of Conversation
Camp David, September 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Egyptian Delegation’s Views on US Suggestions
PARTICIPANTS
American Side
The Secretary
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large
Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs
William Quandt, National Security Council
Hermann Fr. Eilts, US Ambassador to Egypt
Denis Clift, Vice President’s Staff
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Egyptian Side:
Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ambassador Ahmed Maher el-Sayed, Director of the Cabinet of the Foreign
Minister
Ambassador Nabil el-Araby, Director of Legal Department, Foreign Ministry
Dr. Osama el-Baz, Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs
Dr. Boutros Boutros Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
Dr. Ashraf Ghorbal, Ambassador of Egypt to the US
Mr. Ahmed Abou el-Gheite, Office of the Foreign Minister
Minister Abdul Rauf el-Reedy, Director of Policy Planning, Foreign Ministry
Summary: Lengthy discussion of preference for compulsory ICJ ju-
risdiction and concern over (a) sovereignty issue in West Bank/Gaza,
(b) Israeli settlements, (c) the return of Palestinian displaced persons
and refugees, and (d) the future of Jerusalem.
The Secretary said that Presidents Carter and Sadat would meet at
1600. They will discuss generally the nature of the US suggestions. We
had not yet begun to write our suggestions, but will begin doing so to-
morrow. We hope to get a draft4 to the Egyptian side tomorrow after-
noon or Sunday. Vice President Mondale will be returning tomorrow,
and his input will also be needed. The Secretary thought that our ideas
will be acceptable to both President Sadat and President Carter. They
will outline a general framework and will draw heavily on the Egyp-
tian document.
Kamel opined that the Egyptian proposal is in many parts consist-
ent with United States positions. The Egyptians believe that their pro-
posal should be accepted. He had told Sadat that the American and
Egyptian Delegations would meet today. Sadat had approved such a
meeting with all the Egyptian Delegation present. He then asked if we
wanted any clarification on the Egyptian paper.
Compulsory ICJ Jurisdiction: He asked where the concept of ICJ com-
pulsory jurisdiction had come from. Are there any precedents for this?
El-Baz responded that the concept had been taken from the ICJ year-
book for 1975–76. In that volume, he noted, there are recorded at least
100 agreements on compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. The Secretary asked if
any peace treaties are included. El-Baz said no, but referred to a
Chilean/Argentinian copyright convention, a UK/Ghanian loan agree-
ment, and a number of other agreements, both bilateral and multilat-
eral. El-Baz also noted that the Israelis had on October 3, 1956, accepted
the concept of compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, admittedly with some reser-
vations. Their declaration was not as exclusive as the Connally Amend-

ment, however. It simply excludes certain aspects of Arab/Israeli and
domestic affairs. El-Baz thought that the area of compulsory ICJ juris-
diction could be enlarged. It has the advantage, he pointed out, of
de-politicizing the dispute and bringing it into a legal rather than a po-
litical framework. In this context, the resolution of disputes should be
easier. It should lessen tensions and help to eliminate controversy. The
Secretary asked whether this means that disputes flowing from a peace
treaty for contractual arrangements between the parties should be cov-
ered. El-Baz responded that any agreement could be referred to the ICJ
for decision.
El-Araby pointed out that the USG has pressed Egypt to go to the
ICJ on the petroleum issue. Hence, the Egyptians had believed that this
concept could be beneficial to the conflict in general. The Secretary said
he will have the Department’s Legal Counselor look into the matter.
Boutros Ghali observed that this would be our contribution to the ICJ,
which at the moment has little to do.
The Secretary said that on other matters, he understood what had
been said in the Egyptian paper. He noted the omission of Article 9.
Also the general form of the Preamble and then the operational part are
good approaches. He asked if the Egyptians have any question about
our views.
West Bank/Gaza-Sovereignty-Round-and-Round the Mulberry Bush:
Kamel noted that the United States has taken certain public positions
that are on record. The Egyptians hope that these public positions will
be reflected in whatever language President Carter introduces. Specif-
ically, he mentioned (a) withdrawal, (b) the illegality of settlements,
and (c) the Palestinian problem. The previous day, he noted, the Egyp-
tians has gained the impression that we are backing away from some of
these previously enunciated positions.
The Secretary said that this impression is wrong. President Carter
has said that there is a good deal of merit in the self-government pro-
posal of Prime Minister Begin. The Egyptians had assumed that the en-
tire Begin proposal will be taken over. This is not the case. There is
nothing inconsistent in this with our belief that there is a need to talk
about self-government in the interim period. It is important to have a
self-government in the transition period.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Kamel agreed, and acknowledged that his impression was that
President Carter favors the Begin plan with respect to self-government.
He recalled that at the Leeds Castle conference, Egypt had also put for-
ward ideas on the subject. The Secretary said that we take exception to
the Egyptian idea that Jordanian and Egyptian authority should prevail
in the West Bank and Gaza during the interim period. We believe au-
thority for the self-governing authority should flow from Jordan, Egypt
and Israel. There should be an election for representatives of the Pales-
tinians who will govern.
Kamel thought that Jordanian/Palestinian and Egyptian/Pales-
tinian relationships are enough for the interim period. Why should Is-
rael participate in self-rule? Saunders noted that the Secretary had been
speaking of an agreement which would provide authority to the gov-
ernment. He had not been talking about Israeli involvement. The Secre-
tary observed that the Israelis would withdraw. Saunders pointed to
the difference between our concept and that of the Begin Plan, which
speaks of authority deriving from the military government. This, the
Secretary noted, is not acceptable to us. Saunders stressed that under
our idea, authority would devolve from the three governments—
Egypt, Jordan and Israel. They would set up the mechanism for local
elections.
El-Reedy asked about our interpretation of this difference in terms
of the consequences for self-government? The Secretary said he had
read the Egyptian proposal as suggesting a continuing supervisory role
by Jordan and Egypt. This is not good. Authority should be gotten to
the people as quickly as possible. Saunders noted that the Egyptian
plan at Leeds Castle turned over authority to Jordan and Egypt jointly.
This is not realistic. The Israelis are in the West Bank and Gaza. Hence,
agreement by the three is better than any unilateral Israeli authority.
El-Reedy asked if this suggests a role for Israel. Saunders said only in-
sofar as the defined agreement on security is concerned. There would
be no role in government. Security, possibly immigration and some
other matters might be handled through a committee. The Secretary
said we would have to find areas where such committee supervision is
needed. Quandt noted that, under the Israeli plan, authority derives
from the military authority. It can be revoked at any time. This is not ac-
ceptable. El-Baz recalled that El-Araby had alluded to United States
thinking in terms of beginning the self-government role. What about
termination of that role? Would this transpire in the same manner? The
Secretary thought there would have to be a provision indicating what
happens at the end of five years and how to proceed. This should de-
pend in a major way on the will of the people. Saunders observed that

we took our cue from the three points that the Egyptians had given us
at Leeds. Only when the Palestinians are involved can one get a treaty
for termination. One must have a peace treaty before anyone can sign.
Hence, we had gone back to the El-Araby paper.
El-Araby asked whether the five-year transitional period will not
simply be renewed. The Secretary commented that this depends upon
the Palestinians. The decision on sovereignty at the end of the five-year
period will be one for the Palestinians to decide. The Egyptians imme-
diately demurred.
El-Baz argued that what is being discussed is different from sover-
eignty. Israel will be allowed to maintain its claims to sovereignty
under our arrangement. If agreement is reached, sovereignty should
rest with the Palestinian people. This is their inherent right. If we defer
the issue, it is left unresolved. To say decide nor or self-determination is
different from deciding sovereignty. The Secretary commented that the
Aswan8 language speaks of Palestinian participation in the future. It
says nothing about sovereignty.
El-Baz said the Egyptians need our thoughts on sovereignty. The
Secretary responded that we cannot decide this matter now. There is
no single claim to sovereignty. Both Jordan and Israel have claims.
El-Araby argued that the Aswan language implicitly says sovereignty
rests with the Palestinians. El-Reedy continued this point by noting that
the Aswan language has three component elements: (a) resolving the
Palestine problem—in all its aspects (the Secretary agreed, but noted
that it does not say when); (b) recognizing the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people (the Secretary noted this means the right to a home-
land). Self-determination, El-Reedy contended, is one of their rights
and a universally recognized one; and (c) the Palestinians should par-
ticipate in determining their future status. The Egyptians had inferred
from this that the Palestinians are a party to the peace process.
The Secretary said there are different ways of exercising self-
determination. It may be unfettered or it may be a choice among alter-
natives. The Egyptian paper suggests affiliation with Jordan; hence,
self-determination is not an unqualified matter. El-Reedy observed that
the Egyptian paper had indicated the GOE will recommend such a link.
Ghorbal asked whether the American idea is that there should be an in-
dependent Palestinian state or a confederation. Secretary Vance said
we are against an independent Palestinian state. We prefer confedera-
tion, federation or something of this sort. El-Araby thought that the
principal people to decide this issue will be the Palestinians them-
selves. Only the Palestinians will be asked and be a party to the exer-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
cise. The Secretary reiterated that the alternative “will have to be lim-
ited.” El-Araby observed that only the Palestinians can decide this. The
Secretary noted that we cannot say this. El-Baz asked who else might
come into the process. The Secretary said that King Hussein could
come in. Hussein has not foregone the Jordanian claim to the West
Bank. Nor has Israel foregone its claim.
El-Baz said Sadat had told President Carter that Israel has no right
to claim sovereignty in the West Bank and Gaza. The Secretary recalled
that in recent years it has been the practice that the people on the land
where conflicting claims exist have the right to determine their own fu-
ture. El-Baz argued that if the issue is left vague, Israel has a privileged
claim on sovereignty until the last minute. This is an unbalanced ar-
rangement. It will reopen the whole issue at the end of the transitional
period. There is no mechanism to ensure Israeli departure.
The Secretary said we assume that in the transition period talks
will take place between the Palestinians and Jordan on what happens
afterwards. El-Baz argued that the Israeli objective is to keep the West
Bank. Jordan, he insisted, does not claim it. Egypt could go to King
Hussein to obtain his renunciation of the Jordanian claim, should this
be required. Association between Jordan and the West Bank and Gaza
should be left to the Palestinians. The Government of Egypt says it
favors such a link in advance. Egypt will also push for this. But in the
final analysis, the Palestinians should decide. If the issue is left floating,
it will appear that the entire Palestinian problem is unresolved. We
should agree that the question of sovereignty not be left to negotiation.
Quandt said that sovereignty is the word that upsets everyone.
The final status, he noted, should be decided at the end of five years.
Why should we now try to get into the sovereignty question and create
problems for ourselves. El-Baz responded that the reason is that the Is-
raelis are mentioning the issue.
El-Reedy said that the Israelis are introducing sovereignty in order
to confuse their obligation to withdraw under UN Resolution 242. The
introduction of the sovereignty issue was done to make the West Bank/
Gaza appear as disputed territory. Egypt never claimed sovereign
rights in Gaza. It simply administered the area under an armistice
agreement. Jordan was in the West Bank in the same manner. The late
King Abdullah moved into the West Bank in 1950. His takeover was
challenged by the Arab League and was not recognized. In 1967, after
UN Resolution 242, everyone talked of the return of the West Bank to
Jordan. At the same time a Palestinian national movement emerged. At
the Rabat Summit9 a decision was reached that the party to which au-
thority over the West Bank should be returned was the Palestinian
people rather than Egypt or Jordan. He also noted that the Palestinians
were recognized as early as 1947 as having a right to their own state.
Kamel argued that Egypt was sure King Hussein is ready to renounce
any claim to sovereignty to the West Bank. The Secretary noted that Is-
rael is only willing to put aside for the next five years any claim to sov-
ereignty to the West Bank.
El-Baz asked how the problem should be solved in the end. The
Secretary said it should be solved by sitting down with the Palestinians.
El-Baz asked what happens if the Israelis refuse. The Secretary noted
that the Israelis reserve their claim to the West Bank. El-Araby noted
that if the Israelis do not like what is happening, they can go back in
under our ideas. El-Baz observed that the Israelis have not put forward
any claim to sovereignty prior to Begin’s advent. When they did so,
their purpose was simply to annex territory. If they wish to present a
claim to sovereignty in the future, they can also do so in Sinai and else-
where. Sovereignty, he reiterated, should reside with the people.
Self-determination is necessary.
El-Reedy said that legitimate security concerns can be discussed,
such as termination of belligerency, good neighborly relations, etc.
El-Baz insisted that the sovereignty question should be dropped.
Quandt noted that some day it will have to be resolved. Atherton said
it is not simply one of how it will be resolved, but also when. In the
peace treaty, Egypt, Israel, Jordan are all parties and can define their
relationship.
El-Baz noted that deciding a relationship is different from sover-
eignty. Quandt pointed out that we are talking about a political rela-
tionship. El-Baz thought that a link could be obtained. But to introduce
Israel as a party to sovereignty over the West Bank produces a problem.
Quandt pointed out that we are trying to get a framework to see where
we are going. El-Baz noted that after five years the Palestinians may
opt for their own entity. They may prefer an independent state, al-
though Egypt will do what it can to influence a linkage with Jordan. If
Israeli sovereignty is introduced into the equation, it negates self-
determination.
El-Araby commented that the Israelis occupy and the Palestinians
live in the West Bank. Egypt says that the Palestinians are the proper
sources of sovereignty. He asked what the Israeli claim to sovereignty
to the West Bank is based upon. The Secretary said that Begin bases it
on biblical rights, others say by annexation. El-Baz noted that by the
same token, the Palestinians could claim a right to determine the sover-
eignty of Israel. If the issue of sovereignty in the West Bank/Gaza is left
open to Israel, the same should also be done in reverse.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
El-Reedy referred to Atherton’s statement that sovereignty will be
decided in the peace treaties. He asked whether this means that we
cannot now know what a peace treaty will look like. Atherton com-
mented that the peace treaty will be based on the principles of UN Res-
olution 242, including withdrawal. El-Reedy commented that eleven
years after the passage of 242, why is it not possible to say that the Is-
raeli claim to sovereignty is not acceptable. This should by now be
clear. El-Araby asked whether that if the assumption is made that the
Palestinians will wish to join Jordan at the end of five years, will Israel
be able to veto this and continue proposed arrangements for five years
to fifty years. Egypt is not against a limited choice. El-Baz said that
when Egypt accepted the right to a limitation on self-determination, it
never thought that the sovereignty issue would be involved. Egypt
cannot accept anything that keeps the sovereignty question open for
five years.
Quandt observed that there is no such thing as absolute sover-
eignty. Two elements must be worked out: (a) borders, which may re-
quire adjustments, and (b) security, which may dilute some aspects of
sovereignty. El-Baz said that Egypt considers that sovereignty rests
with the Palestinians. Ghorbal noted that we are coping with two dia-
metrically opposed viewpoints—that of the Israelis and that of the
Egyptians. The United States is trying to put off the issue. It cannot be
put that way. Egypt agreed to a limited exercise of sovereignty in order
to satisfy the security needs of Israel. Egypt said it would direct the Pal-
estinian entity into a link with Jordan. But Egypt cannot accept dissolu-
tion of the Palestinians into a greater Israeli state. The Israelis want the
West Bank and Gaza to satisfy their expansionist ambitions. We cannot
paper over the differences. He likened the issue to the UAR/Syrian
union, which was “an act of sovereignty.” Egypt cannot accept a link
of the West Bank and Israel. It cannot accept what it has put forward for
Israel’s security, namely Israeli expansion in five years. The Secretary
asked how the question of sovereignty should be resolved. Ghorbal re-
sponded that the United States had worked on Sadat to make peace
and to normalize relations. Now there must be a political decision also
to press the Israelis.
El-Baz observed that the Israeli claim to sovereignty does not mean
anything. Sovereignty rests with the Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza, he reiterated. The type of entity and self-determination can be re-
solved. But on sovereignty in the West Bank there can be no legitimate
problem. If Israel agrees to withdraw, it is a renunciation of the Israeli
United Arab Republic.

claim to sovereignty. Begin talks about sovereignty to justify the exten-
sion of the Israeli occupation.
El-Araby noted that an agreement between Jordan, Israel, and
Egypt should not have a provision giving Israel the right to continue
the occupation in five-years time or to veto a change in regime. Quandt
asked what happened if agreement cannot be reached on the matter of
security. Does the occupation continue? El-Baz responded that the Pal-
estinians should be brought in on everything. It should then be possible
to work everything out, even at the beginning. If too many loose issues
are left undecided, problems are bound to develop. Ghorbal recalled
that the phrase was included in the Aswan language, “legitimate
rights.” He asked where this is being taken into account. If in five years
the Israelis do not leave or the Palestinians have the right to self-
determination, where does this leave us?
The Egyptian three-stage procedure is vitiated if the Israelis retain
the right to veto. The Palestinians should be given self-determination.
They should have the right to determine their own future. The issue
should not be cast in terms of a security threat to Israel.
Brzezinski pointed out that we do not believe that the sovereignty
question needs be resolved at this time. We concede that sovereignty
rests with the people. But we must also recognize that there is a
problem of security. We believe that the security problem must be re-
solved at an early stage. The solution of the Palestinian question should
not be deferred until the end of the five-year period. If one attempts to
do so, it amounts to an interim, partial agreement.
Quandt asked why the Egyptians had agreed to a five-year period
if they wish everything to be settled at the outset. Time is required to
settle some of the difficult problems. El-Baz responded that the Egyp-
tians accepted the five-year period at the United States’ urging. The
Egyptian concept is two-fold: (a) a transitional period in which the Pal-
estinians are conceded the right to self-determination, even though
Egypt recognizes it is difficult to bring this about; (b) agreement to the
phasing out of “certain things.” While the Israelis are withdrawing,
Egypt will propose introducing security, the determination of belliger-
ency and peace. The transfer of authority in the West Bank/Gaza can
take place in steps. Egypt does not accept the transitional period as a
way of deferring fundamental issues. Egypt is willing to do all it can to
press the Palestinians to link with Jordan and to discuss borders, secu-
rity, etc., with a view to deciding these matters. Ghorbal noted that any
solution must assume that sovereignty rests with the people. The Is-
raelis admit self-rule should be the right of the people, hence this con-
cept fits in. The Israelis ought to be satisfied that the Arabs, with the
help of the United States, will during the transition period work to have
the Palestinians agree to a link with Jordan. They will also agree to nor-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
malizing relations. It should be left to the future to see how this works
out, but the Israelis should not be able to use their armed forces to
achieve their aims in the West Bank and Gaza.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how this would come about. Ghorbal re-
sponded that the United States had seen how, despite its statements,
the Israelis have gone ahead to do what they wish. Brzezinski thought
that we should talk about some of the details of the five-year arrange-
ments, e.g., a freeze on settlements. Let us suppose, he stated, that as a
result of our efforts the Israelis get out of Sinai, in the West Bank the
military occupation is limited, there is a reduction of Israeli forces, a
self-governing authority is set up, and there is a freeze on settlements.
There might also be a return of some divided families. This process will
require five years in itself. It will transform the political realities of the
West Bank. This is what the United States is aiming at. We have to talk
about tangibles and we have to work with Egypt to achieve this.
Ghorbal commented that this must also be present in the Israeli minds.
Brzezinski reiterated that we must create conditions to manage this
type of situation. Five years is not a great deal of time. We need to nail
down specifics: e.g., the end of the occupation, the nature of the strong
points, etc. We should not seek now to solve hypothetical problems. Is-
rael, he noted, would even be willing to solve the Golan problem if
Syria is ready. In Sinai, the Israelis are willing to do so. In the West
Bank, the Israeli presence will be significantly reduced. These are all
tangible benefits.
Kamel said he was astounded that the United States should accept
the Israeli claim to sovereignty in the West Bank. Egypt will not accept
this. It is out of the question. The Secretary pointed out that one cannot
stop the Israelis from asserting their claim. Kamel responded that sov-
ereignty is inherent in the Palestinians. The Israelis have to return ev-
erything. Brzezinski noted that we are seeking a process that will go
ahead. The Secretary noted that sovereignty is not mentioned in the
agreement, but that this is an underlying reality. The Secretary said
there must be some kind of a misunderstanding. Kamel appeared to be-
lieve that we support the Israeli claim to sovereignty. This is not so. All
the Secretary had said is that Israel may be expected to make its claim to
sovereignty. The United States does not support that claim. Brzezinski
added that we will not force the Israelis. We will, however, create con-
ditions that will change the situation in the Arab favor. El-Baz said that
Egypt can endorse this concept if any reference to sovereignty is
omitted. The Secretary said we will not say anything on sovereignty.
(This concluded a long, turgid talk on the sovereignty issues.)
Settlements: The Secretary then turned to the matter of the Israeli
settlements. He pointed out that we consider them illegal. In Sinai, we
believe they should be eliminated over a period of time. In the West

Bank, the settlements should be frozen until such time as the Pales-
tinians and the Jordanians can negotiate their future.
Kamel said Egypt had understood the American position to be that
all Israeli settlements in occupied territories are illegal. Freezing is a
practical solution and this should be begun. It is up to the Palestinians
and the Jordanians to negotiate the future of the settlements. But some
way should be found to dismantle some of the new settlements and
have others transferred to “encampments.” The Secretary asked if this
is not something for the Palestinians to work out. Boutros Ghali agreed
that freezing is a good idea, but suggested some way should be found
to begin a dismantling process. El-Reedy echoed this view, contending
that the Egyptian idea is to dismantle the settlements. The Secretary
said that in Egypt this can be done, but not in the West Bank.
Boutros Ghali observed that if the United States accepts with-
drawal, then this should also apply to the settlements. Cannot a “cer-
tain number” of settlements be dismantled in the withdrawal process?
El-Baz asked if we consider the settlements in the West Bank to be dif-
ferent from those in Sinai and Golan. Dr. Brzezinski responded in the
affirmative. Sinai, he noted, is on the other side of a recognized frontier.
El-Baz asked about the armistice lines as they pertain to settlements.
El-Reedy said that all settlements on the West Bank have the same
“quality.” One of the arguments that the Israelis have sometimes used
is that the settlements are necessary for security reasons. At least some
settlements should be abolished in the context of a general principle of
withdrawal. El-Araby asked whether by freezing, we are thinking of
the number of settlements or the number of people. The Egyptian Dele-
gation chorused that both should be limited. Dr. Brzezinski pointed out
that the problem of the West Bank settlements is more difficult to solve
than that of Sinai.
Refugees: El-Reedy asked about the United States’ view on ref-
ugees. Saunders said we agree with Egypt that an agreement must deal
with displaced persons and with refugees. The latter will involve a
larger group to help work it out. El-Reedy recalled that in the Rogers
Plan, the United States had been clear on this issue. The refugees
should go back or there should be compensation. Why should not some
of the refugees go back under the United States proposal? Atherton ob-
served that the solution of the refugee problem must be an interna-
tional effort. El-Reedy reiterated the need to restate the right of return.
Atherton recalled that we have regularly voted for this. It is a principle.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
To implement it, however, one must look at alternatives. Detailed plans
have never been developed.
Boutros Ghali said that one of the American viewpoints seems to
be to postpone all basic problems regarding the Palestinians for five
years. The Egyptian view is to have some general principles so that the
program can be sold to the Palestinians and the other Arabs. If it is dif-
ferent in Sinai and the West Bank, it makes it difficult for Egypt. Egypt
would like the maximum of general principles which can give security
and guarantee to the Palestinians. He suggested that a freeze and aboli-
tion be applied to Sinai settlements as well.
El-Baz said Egypt accepts the concept of freezing. The starting
point should be that settlements are illegal and ways should be sought
to liquidate the settlements everywhere. In the West Bank one must
look for a special formula to liquidate the settlements over a period of
time.
Dr. Brzezinski said we are not entirely seeking to postpone these
issues. We recognize there is a difference in the West Bank/Gaza, and
the problem that this poses for Egypt. The Egyptian judgment will have
to prevail. The resolution of the Sinai and West Bank problems cannot
be identical. The emotional context of the West Bank problem is diffi-
cult. The United States is seeking to reverse fundamental trends. We
would like to solve the Sinai effort right away, depending on the Egyp-
tian judgment. In the West Bank, we want to begin a process that
is a fundamental reversal. In five-years time, the situation should be
greatly changed.
Kamel observed that any proposal on settlements should include a
freeze and a statement that they are illegal. Quandt asked if the Egyp-
tians want the Sinai settlements dealt with separately. Kamel re-
sponded in the negative.
El-Reedy asked about the reaction to Palestinians outside the West
Bank. Should there be a role for them? Saunders said that the people
must begin to think of alternatives. The present situation is unsatisfac-
tory. The process we are talking about begins something called Pales-
tinian. El-Araby referred to the displaced persons and to the refugees.
Saunders said we are talking about more than a million people. How
can all of them be moved? The displaced persons number about
100,000; the West Bank cannot absorb all of these. Time will be needed
to settle the matter. Quandt observed that Dayan agrees with the Egyp-
tians on this matter. There will be terrible human difficulties. But all
agree that the Palestinians have rights. El-Araby said these rights and
principles should be reaffirmed and then a mechanism should be set up
to implement them. El-Baz talked of restating the principle and
working out modalities for implementation. Atherton commented that
if one gets a framework and a reversal of present trends, some Pales-

tinians outside of the West Bank will request going back. Hopefully,
many practical-minded people will support this. They should be able to
see that they have a stake in the matter. El-Reedy recalled that in the ’69
Rogers Plan there had been a reference to the return of refugees.
Jerusalem: El-Baz asked about our thinking on Jerusalem. Saunders
said we have no refined ideas on the subject. Quandt observed that the
Egyptians know some of our ideas. There should be no division of Jeru-
salem and there should be free access. El-Baz asked if Jerusalem is in-
cluded in the withdrawal concept. Saunders thought it was. El-Baz said
he was aware of the sensitivity on this point. The Saudis, the Chris-
tians and others are keenly interested. El-Reedy asked how the self-
government concept applies to East Jerusalem. Atherton, expressing
his personal feeling, commented that the less specific one is at this time
on Jerusalem, the better. Details should be left to be worked out later
on. El-Araby asked what we already have on record with respect to Je-
rusalem. Saunders observed that we must hold this until we have
high-level guidance.
Kamel said that Egypt is concerned that the American proposal be
agreeable to the Saudis. It should include some language on Jerusalem
in order to get the Jordanians to join. The United States must help
Egypt consolidate its position. Egypt counts on a continued relation-
ship with the United States, and Egyptians want a comprehensive set-
tlement. The Secretary observed that he has always spoken of a com-
prehensive settlement.
FOOTNOTE: Subsequently the Egyptians told Eilts and Quandt
that they do believe that the Sinai settlements should in our paper be
treated differently from those in the West Bank.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
38.
Handwritten Note Prepared by the Ambassador to Israel
(Lewis)
Camp David, September 8, 1978
[Omitted here is Lewis’s brief handwritten notation on bilateral
U.S.-Israeli discussion beginning at 5 p.m., Thursday, September 7. For
the memorandum of conversation of this meeting, see Document 34.]
—EW had big fight with MB on settlements just before lunch
today. EW pessimistic. MB dug in—already working up his fallback
position for home. Describes MB as being in euphoric mood character-
istic of pre-fight.
—Told him $1B FMS will be max. limit. EW will have to look at his
budget, made want [unclear] more for tanks & artillery modernization;
Brown prob. can’t come before Jan.—could send McGiffert there
sooner, or Ezer could come if he prefers.
HB—given $1B level, maybe no force expansion possible; (EW
agreed—though need replace tanks.) Recog. modern technology edge;
he is working on; no promises—but hopeful.
Couldn’t we put on record that we did have our position—& we
will come back to it after all other issues with Egypt are settled. We will
come back to it.
And similarly with regard to Sinai settlements. Let’s see first if we
can agree about everything else. If so, then go back to it. Not close it.
For WB, as well as Sinai settlements (though issue is different—
(freeze & removal)
CV—Let me think about it. Don’t know how realistic that is to put
it off indefinitely.
(Clarify—not till after Camp David.) Put aside.
Has some merit. Let me see it.
MD—Best from practical pt. of view, freeze of settlers just won’t
work.
CV—I asked Pres. to raise with Sadat this afternoon, as you asked,
that he meet separately on airfields. We’ll now see.
EW—He won’t do it. He’ll say talk to Gamasy.
Barak—No he won’t.
—Chats with Eli, Rosenne, & Ezer p.m. Fri. Sept. 73
34 issues where JC thinks agreement has been reached which aren’t
covered in our draft:5
West Bank, Gaza sovereignty—to be resolved in final peace treaty
w/ Jordan
Limited armaments in Sinai/East6 of passes
Air Strips
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
40.
Draft Text Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for
Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)
undated
A FRAMEWORK FOR PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST
AGREED AT CAMP DAVID
Anwar al-Sadat, President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, and Me-
nachem Begin, Prime Minister of Israel met with Jimmy Carter, Presi-
dent of the United States of America, at Camp David from September 5
to
, 1978, and have agreed on the following framework for peace
in the Middle East. They invite other parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict
to adhere to it.
Preamble
The search for peace in the Middle East must be guided by the
following:
—After four wars over thirty years, despite intensive human ef-
forts, the Middle East, which is the cradle of civilization and the birth-
place of three great religions, does not yet enjoy the blessings of peace.
The people of the Middle East yearn for peace so that the vast resources
of the region can be turned to the pursuits of peace and so that this area
can become a model for coexistence and cooperation among nations.
—The historic initiative of President Sadat and Israel’s warm re-
ception of his mission have created an unprecedented opportunity for
peace which must not be lost if the peoples of the Middle East are to
spare this generation and the generations to come the tragedies of war.
—The provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration of Principles of In-
ternational Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
Among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
and the accepted norms of international law and legitimacy now pro-
vide accepted standards for the conduct of relations among all states.
—The only agreed basis for a peaceful settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict is United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 sup-
sizes the obligation of Member States in the United Nations to act in ac-
cordance with Article 2 of the Charter. Article 2, among other points,
calls for the settlement of disputes by peaceful means and for Members
to refrain from the threat or use of force. Egypt and Israel in their agree-
ment signed September 4, 1975, agreed: “The Parties hereby undertake
not to resort to the threat or use of force or military blockade against
each other.” They have both also stated that there shall be no more war
between them. In a relationship of peace, in the spirit of Article 2, nego-
tiations between Israel and any nation prepared to negotiate peace and
security with it should be based on all the principles of Resolution 242,
including the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war and
the need to work for a just and lasting peace in which every state in the
area can live in security. Negotiations are necessary to determine how
best to apply and implement the principles of Resolution 242 and fulfill
all of its objectives in the circumstances which exist today.
—Peace is more than the juridical end of the state of belligerency. It
should lead to normal relations between nations. Progress toward that
goal can accelerate movement toward a new era of reconciliation in the
Middle East marked by cooperation in promoting economic develop-
ment, in maintaining stability, and in assuring security.
—Security is enhanced by a relationship of peace and by coopera-
tion between nations which enjoy normal relations. Under the terms of
peace treaties, the sovereign parties can agree to special security ar-
rangements such as demilitarized zones, limited armaments areas,
early warning stations, special security forces, liaison, agreed programs
for monitoring, and other arrangements that they agree are useful.
Agreement
Taking these factors into account, Egypt and Israel have agreed:
1. They are determined to reach a comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East conflict through the conclusion of peace treaties on the
basis of the full implementation of all the principles of Security Council
Resolutions 242 and 338. Their purpose is to achieve peace and good
neighborly relations. They recognize that, for peace to endure, it must
involve all the nations who have been principal parties to the Arab-
Israeli conflict; it must provide security; and it must give those people
who have been most deeply affected by the conflict a sense that they
have been dealt with fairly in the peace agreement.
2. They undertake not to resort to the threat or the use of force to
settle disputes. Any disputes shall be settled by peaceful means in ac-
cordance with the provisions of Article 33 of the Charter of the United

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Nations. They also undertake to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of
the International Court of Justice with respect to all disputes emanat-
ing from the application or the interpretation of their contractual
arrangements.
3. In order to achieve peace between them, they have agreed to ne-
gotiate within three months from the signing of this “Framework” a
peace treaty between them. In response to Egypt’s offer of full peace
and normal relations, Israel has proposed the restoration of the exercise
of full Egyptian sovereignty in the Sinai up to the internationally recog-
nized border between Egypt and Israel. Security arrangements, the
timing of withdrawal of all Israeli forces and settlements, and the ele-
ments of a normal, peaceful relationship have been discussed and will
be defined in the peace treaty.
4. They will participate in negotiations on resolution of the Pales-
tinian problem in all its aspects. The solution must recognize the legiti-
mate rights of the Palestinian people and enable the Palestinians to par-
ticipate in the determination of their own future. To this end, they agree
that agreements relating to the West Bank and Gaza should be reached
in three stages:6
(a) Egypt and Israel hereby agree that, in order to ensure a peaceful
and orderly transfer of authority, there should be a transitional period
not exceeding five years. They further agree that the Israeli military
government will be abolished and withdrawn as soon as a government
shall be freely elected by the inhabitants of these areas to replace the ex-
isting military government. This transitional arrangement should de-
rive its authority from an agreement concluded among Israel, Jordan,
and Egypt. To negotiate the details of a transitional arrangement, the
Government of Jordan will be invited to join the negotiations on the
basis of this agreement. Palestinian advisers selected by Jordan and
Egypt may be members of their delegations. The establishment of the
new regime should give due consideration both to the principle of self-
government by the inhabitants of these territories and to the legitimate
security concerns of all the parties.
(b) Egypt, Israel, and Jordan should meet to negotiate an agree-
ment to end Israel’s military government in the West Bank and Gaza
and to establish the elected interim government there. This agreement
would define the authorities of the interim government. It would in-

clude arrangements for assuring external security and public order; it
will also include arrangements for withdrawal of Israeli armed forces
from designated areas and will define their duties. Egypt and Israel
propose that, to assist in ensuring security during this period, Jordan
and Egypt would assign officials to share responsibility with the secu-
rity forces of the local authority in the West Bank and Gaza, respec-
tively, and to maintain continuing liaison with the designated Israeli
authority on internal security matters to ensure that no hostile threats
or acts against Israel or its citizens originate from the West Bank or
Gaza. The numbers, equipment and responsibilities of such Egyptian
and Jordanian officials would be defined by mutual agreement among
the negotiating parties. In addition, by mutual agreement, United Na-
tions forces might also be introduced during the transitional period.
(c) When the Palestinian Arab authority in the West Bank and
Gaza is inaugurated, the transitional period would begin. Within two
years after the beginning of the transitional period, Egypt, Israel,
Jordan and the interim authority in the West Bank and Gaza would un-
dertake negotiations for a peace treaty which would settle the final
status of the West Bank and Gaza and its relationship with its
neighbors on the basis of all of the principles of UN Security Council
Resolution 242, including the mutual obligations of peace, the necessity
for security arrangements for all parties concerned following the transi-
tional period, the withdrawal of Israeli forces, a just settlement of the
refugee problem, and the establishment of secure and recognized
boundaries. The boundaries and security arrangements must satisfy
the aspirations of the Palestinians and meet Israel’s security needs.
They may incorporate agreed modifications in the temporary armistice
lines which existed between 1949 and 1967. The peace treaty will define
the rights of the citizens of each of the parties to do business, to work, to
live, and to carry on other transactions in each other’s territory. The
peace treaty shall provide for an expression of consent to its terms by
the people concerned.
5. During the transitional period in the West Bank and Gaza, the
negotiating parties would constitute a continuing committee to reach
agreements applicable during that period on the following:
(a) issues involving interpretation of the agreement or issues un-
foreseen during the negotiation of the agreement, if not resolvable by
the governing council;
(b) the return of agreed numbers of persons displaced from the
West Bank in 1967 and of Palestinian refugees;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
6. During these negotiations10 no new Israeli settlements will be es-
tablished, and there will be no expansion of facilities in existing
settlements.
7. Jerusalem, the city of peace, must not again be divided by the in-
struments of war. It is a city holy to Christian, Jew, and Muslim, and all
must have free access to it. For peace to endure, each community in Je-
rusalem must be able to express freely its cultural and religious values
in an acceptable political framework. An agreement on relationships in
Jerusalem should be reached in the negotiations dealing with the West
Bank and Gaza.
8. They agree to consult with each other and with other interested
parties on a just solution of the refugee problem.
9. Synchronized with the implementation of the provisions related
to withdrawal, they shall proceed to establish among them relation-
ships normal to States at peace with one another. To this end, they un-
dertake to abide by all the provisions of the Charter of the United Na-
tions. Steps taken in this respect include:
(a) Full recognition.
(b) Abolishing economic boycott.
(c) Ensuring the freedom of passage through the Suez Canal.
(d) Guaranteeing that under their jurisdiction the citizens of the
other Parties shall enjoy the protection of the due process of law.
(e) Encouraging the free movement of people and goods.
10. In all of the negotiations described above, they will arrange to
guarantee the security, sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviola-
bility and the political independence of each State negotiating peace
through measures such as the following:
(a) The establishment of demilitarized zones.
(b) The establishment of limited armament zones.
(c) The stationing of United Nations forces or observer groups as
agreed.
(d) The stationing of early warning systems on the basis of
reciprocity.
(e) Regulating the acquisition of arms by the Parties and the type of
their armament and weapons systems.
(f) The adherence by all the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Parties undertake not to manu-
facture or acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.

(g) Applying the principle of free passage to transit through the
Straits of Tiran.
(h) The establishment of relations of peace and good-neighborly
cooperation among the Parties.
11. In all of the negotiations described above, they will explore
possibilities for regional economic development in the context of both
transitional arrangements and final peace treaties, with the objective of
contributing to the atmosphere of peace, cooperation and friendship
which is their common goal.
12. A Claims Commission will be established to adjudicate claims
made by either side against the other.
13. The United States shall be invited to participate in the talks on
matters related to the modalities of the implementation of the agree-
ments and working out the time-table for the carrying out of the obliga-
tions of the Parties.
14. The Security Council shall be requested to endorse the Peace
Treaties and ensure that their provisions shall not be violated.
15. The Permanent members of the Security Council shall be re-
quested to underwrite the Peace Treaties and ensure respect for their
provisions. They shall also be requested to conform their policies and
actions with the undertakings contained in this Framework.

41.
Memorandum for the Record
Camp David, September 9, 1978
At his request, Weizman saw Sadat this morning. He asked the
following questions:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1. Can Egypt and Israel reach any kind of agreement just between
the two of them (by implication, without the US as a party)? Sadat said
no.
2. Will Sadat agree to an Israeli military presence in the West
Bank/Gaza after five years? Sadat said no.
3. Will Sadat agree that the Yamit/Rafah area could be joined to
Gaza district? Sadat said no.
4. Will Sadat agree to open borders and diplomatic relations? Sadat
said he would recognize Israel, but that the other matters pertained to
sovereignty and he would not agree to them.
5. Weizman asked if Israel could keep the Etzion airfield near Eilat
if they gave up Eitan in the north? Sadat said no, but he would help
them build a new airport in Israel and they could keep Etzion for the
two years until withdrawal was completed.

42.
Telegram From the Embassy in Syria to the Department of
State
5335. Subject: President Assad’s Letter to President Carter. Ref: Da-
mascus 5318.
Summary: President Assad’s response to President Carter’s Sep-
alia that Syria would continue to seek a political solution; that funda-
mentally—despite provocations—Syria’s policy in Lebanon is one of
self-defense and standfast; and that the objectives of Syrian policy in
Lebanon remain the unity of the land and people of Lebanon, the sover-
eignty of the central government and the stopping of fighting. He
stressed that all acts of the peacekeeping force, which is responsible for
maintaining security and public order, are motivated by concern for the
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis.

unity of Lebanon and the continued existence of the Lebanese state. He
pledged that Syrian forces would practice a maximum degree of self-
control while efforts are being exerted to help the Lebanese reach a
solution. The remainder of the letter is a catalogue of the Syrian in-
volvement in the Lebanese crisis, highlighting the activities of the
Chamounists and Phalangists in blocking reconciliation or rebuilding
the national army. Assad called attention to the Israeli role in encour-
aging these two groups, and urged the US to exert pressure on Israel to
stop interfering in Lebanon. In delivering the text the presidency high-
lighted Assad’s public statements on Syria’s Lebanon policy in German
interview (septel), including Syria’s intention to withdraw the minute
they are requested to by the Lebanese Government. End summary.
1. President’s Private Secretary, Mohammed Dabboul, delivered to
me September 11 President Assad’s response to President Carter’s Sep-
tember 7 letter on Lebanon. The response is forthcoming. Text of letter
follows.
[Begin] text.
His Excellency Mr. Jimmy Carter
President of the United States of America
Dear Mr. President
I have received your letter dated September 7, and while I share
your concern over the sad events that are taking place in the sister
country of Lebanon, I would point out the following:
1. Since the very start of civil fighting in Lebanon in April 1975 and
until the beginning of June 1976, we exerted great political efforts to
stop acts of violence and to restore calm and stability to the sister
country of Lebanon. However, those political efforts in which other
parties—Arab and foreign—sometimes participated failed and the civil
war continued: hundreds of people were killed daily, villages and city
quarters were destroyed, the state of Lebanon collapsed, the army and
the security forces disintegrated and partition became a factual thing
and the talk of all parties. Indeed, some of these parties made practical
arrangements for the setting up of petty sectarian states and Syria re-
ceived one million Lebanese refugees.
2. Together these events produced grave results which threatened
the unity and independence of Lebanon and the integrity of its terri-
tory. The sovereignty of the State was shattered into fragments that fell
into the hands of various parties. In those difficult circumstances and
while the fighting was favoring one party, we realized that the continu-
ation of the fighting, the imbalance of forces and a victory by one party
tral Foreign Policy File, D780369–1067)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
over the other—all this would mean a defeat for the unity and inde-
pendence of Lebanon as well as more violence, bloodshed and destruc-
tion. Thereupon, Syria assumed its national and brotherly responsi-
bility towards Lebanon and sent units of its armed forces to stop
fighting, restore peace, foil acts aiming at partition and maintain the
unity and national safety of Lebanon. In this effort, Syria clashed with
parties with whom we have political and emotional ties, including the
Palestinians. The Syrian units made use of some of the means available
to them to stop the fighting and to maintain the national balance in Leb-
anon, nothwithstanding the psychological effects produced on us by
this use. But we regarded the interests of Lebanon and the restoration
of peace to its territories more important than the suffering, burdens
and losses we endured. Thus, fighting was stopped and peace was re-
stored to all parts of Lebanon.
3. During the period of calm which followed, we tried to make the
Lebanese Government play a more effective role in achieving national
reconciliation and building up a national army which enjoys the confi-
dence of all parties, because it is nationally constituted and because it
owes allegiance only to the state and not to armed factions or to leader-
ships produced by the civil war. We did this in the belief that a
country’s army should symbolize the national aspirations of its citizens
as well as their desire for peace and stability. Unfortunately, however,
no part of all this could be effected because the Falangists and the
Chamounites placed obstacles in the way of the endeavors of the Leba-
nese Government to produce national reconcilation, commence a na-
tional dialogue, form a Council of Ministers embracing all parties, re-
store the institutions of the State and impose its authority in all
Lebanese territories. In addition to rejecting the reconstruction of the
Lebanese Army whose unity had been shattered by the civil war, they
tied up the majority of its officers and military personnel with the “Mil-
itary Council of the Lebanese Front” and thereby prevented the Presi-
dent of the Republic of Lebanon and his government from taking any
effective measures related to the armed forces. They furthermore re-
sorted to all means to achieve their aim—including threats of murder
and terror—and did all this so that officers of the Army would serve
them and would not serve the State of Lebanon.
4. During that period we displayed a measure of tolerance and
flexibility beyond belief. We did this in the hope that time would per-
suade the deviating parties to go back to the right path and to restore to
the central Government of Lebanon and authorities usurped by them.
In fact they have been exerting authority to levy taxes, control educa-
tion and public services and commit incredible acts of brutality against
citizens in the areas over which they have imposed their authority. The
Falangists and the Chamounites who performed these acts adopted

partition slogans such as “self-ensured security” in the areas in which
they have overthrown the authority of the State of Lebanon.
5. The two parties of the Falangists and the Chamounites were en-
couraged by Israeli intervention in Lebanon and particularly in
southern Lebanon. You recall in this regard, I am sure, the Israeli inva-
sion of southern Lebanon and the part played by Israel in preventing
the effective restoration of the authority of the State of Lebanon therein
and in barring the entry of a Lebanese Army unit into this area, thereby
violating Security Council Resolutions nos. 425 and 426. In fact you
know best the details of the Israeli intervention.
6. Since the beginning of this year, Israeli intervention has become
more evident: arms and military aid are being sent to the Falangists and
Chamounites, who are urged to proceed with their partition policies
and practices and instigated to commit provocative acts against the
peacekeeping forces, including the Syrian forces. The great provoca-
tion, however, was launched on February 8 of this year, when some
military elements made an unexpected attack on a patrol of the peace-
keeping forces, killing a number of its members. Successive provoca-
tions against the peacekeeping forces followed, and the forces which
are the instrument of the lawful authority in Lebanon had to resort to
self-defense and to sticking to their positions without moving over any
territory in the hope that those who challenge the unity, safety and sta-
bility of Lebanon would ultimately return to the right path.
In fact provoking the peacekeeping forces was not the limit for
them. For they went so far as to commit crimes of murder in order to rid
themselves of the policies of Christian leaders opposed to their own
policies and practices. Such was the case of the murder of the late Toni
Franjieh, a former Lebanese Deputy and Minister and the son of Presi-
dent Suleiman Franjieh, a former President of Lebanon.
7. Launching attacks against the peacekeeping forces aims to put
an end to all manifestations of lawful authority in Lebanon inasmuch
as those forces, in addition to being the only force of the lawful au-
thority in Lebanon acceptable to the overwhelming majority of the Leb-
anese people, constitute the only force capable of imposing law and
order. This explains why the Israelis persist in instigating armed
groups to clash with the peacekeeping forces.
8. By virtue of the nature of their mission, the peacekeeping forces
are responsible for maintaining security and public order in Lebanon.
All acts which they have carried out in Lebanon and those which they
will carry out are motivated by concern for the unity of Lebanon and
the continued existence of the Lebanese State. I am sure, Mr. President,
you agree with me that if a armed group were to violate public order
and threaten the safety and security of citizens in an American city, it
would be the primary duty of the American security forces to hasten to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
defend law and public order without awaiting a specific order, the act
being of the very essence of their tasks and duties.
9. In this connection, reference should be made to the campaign
currently being launched by the Israeli information media on the sub-
ject of an alleged liquidation of Christians in Lebanon. I very much
wish that in relation to this campaign you would recall the acts and
practices of Israel against the Palestinians—Christians and Muslims
alike.
When the Christians were hard pressed in the civil war in Leb-
anon, Syria alone assumed the responsibility for relieving pressure and
restoring balance to the Lebanese arena.
I hope you are not unaware of the fact that the overwhelming ma-
jority of the Lebanese Christians are opposed to the policies and prac-
tices of the Phalangists and Chamounites, as has been declared by a
large number of their leaders. Moreover, the Christians living in the
areas controlled by the peacekeeping forces enjoy excellent conditions
of life. If the whole question were sectarian in nature, why is it, it may
be asked, that fighting breaks out only in a limited section of Beirut?
The fact is that the Christians in Lebanon, like the Muslims, are op-
posed to the acts of violence practiced by the Phalangists and Cham-
ounites with Israeli instigation. They are all in favour of the unity of the
country and of restoring the authority of the State to all parts of
Lebanon.
10. It should also be noted here that the talk now being carried on
by the Israelis and Zionists concerning alleged persecution of Chris-
tians—who constitute part of our nation and cannot be subjected to
persecution by anyone—is reminiscent of the European practice in the
19th century—which is now part of history—of using the pretext of the
protection of minorities in order to cover intervention in some areas
and to impose European colonialism.
A more important consideration is that this talk will lead the Is-
lamic world to talk about the fate of the Muslims of Lebanon, consid-
ering that Lebanon, by its very social structure, consists of several sects
and communities. Such trends, Mr. President, will surely lead to the de-
struction of the national unity of Lebanon, which is a matter of the ut-
most significance to all the citizens of Lebanon.
11. While thanking you for the letter in which you expressed con-
cern over the present situation in Lebanon—a concern which I share
with you, I believe that the United States can greatly help the sister state
of Lebanon by exerting pressure to make the Israeli Government stop
its intervention in Lebanon and discontinue the military, material and
political support which it gives to some armed groups—a support that
encourages acts which contradict what both our governments have de-
clared concerning the security, peace, sovereignty and unity of Leb-

anon. Moreover, a declared American stand in this direction, would
constitute a positive and constructive contribution.
Undoubtedly, a continuation of the Israeli attitude constitutes a
factor threatening the security of the region.
12. In conclusion, would reaffirm the objectives of our policy in
Lebanon, namely the unity of the land and people of Lebanon, the sov-
ereignty of the central government and the stopping of fighting. Acting
on these principles, the Syrian forces in Lebanon practice a maximum
degree of self-control, while efforts are being exerted to help the Leba-
nese Government by attempting to reach a political solution acceptable
to the various parties and by taking measures conducive to main-
taining security, upholding the authority of the law and safeguarding
the country’s unity and integrity.
Syria is as desirous to protect the safety of the citizens of Lebanon,
regardless of their social or political adherence, as that of its own cit-
izens. They are all our brothers for whose sake we have endured a great
deal of suffering, burdens and sacrifices.
With best regards and wishes,
Hafez al-Assad
President of the Syrian Arab Republic
Damascus, September 10, 1978
End text.
2. Comment: Dabboul seemed very pleased with the contents of
President al-Assad’s letter, obviously believing that they were respon-
sive to the points made by our President in his letter. After reading the
letter, I said I was glad to see that President al-Assad had alluded to “ef-
forts being exerted by the Lebanese Government . . . to reach a political
solution.” As he knew, we felt very strongly about this, believing that
further military actions would only complicate the situation in Leb-
anon and risk escalation. The situation is very tense and unless Syria
exercises caution, there is the ever present danger of Israeli interven-
tion. Dabboul echoed the standard SARG position that the Syrian
Army is merely reactive to provocations.
3. I then reminded Dabboul of our proposal that the Syrian Gov-
ernment reiterate publicly its ultimate intentions in Lebanon, including
an eventual troop withdrawal. Dabboul enthusiastically showed me a
copy of the daily newspaper Al-Ba’ath in which Assad was quoted in a
German interview as not only reiterating Syria’s “honorable” inten-
tions in Lebanon but also as saying that Syrian forces would withdraw
from Lebanon the minute they were requested to do so by the Lebanese
Government.

43.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Samuel Lewis, U.S. Ambassador to Israel
ISRAELI SIDE
Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister
Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense
Avraham Tamir, Director, Army Planning Branch
Aharon Barak, Member Israeli Supreme Court
Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor to the Foreign Minister
Simcha Dinitz, Israeli Ambassador to the United States
Elyakim Rubinstein, Assistant Director General, Ministry for Foreign Affairs
SUBJECT
Israeli Views on Their Security Requirements
Secretary Vance and Ambassador Lewis met initially alone for a
few minutes with Foreign Minister Dayan at Secretary Vance’s request.
He wanted to explore some of the Israeli views of their security require-
ments, primarily with regard to Sinai but also with respect to some as-
pects of the West Bank and Gaza. Dayan said he would like to invite
Defense Minister Weizman to join since this was the subject of the dis-
cussion, and the remainder of the participants came in ten minutes
later.
Before their arrival, Secretary Vance asked whether the Israelis
could accept joint patrolling with the Jordanian and Egyptian armed
forces. Dayan replied that he would not rule it out for the Jordan River
Valley with the Jordanians; in fact, he thought it was a good idea. How-
ever, he saw no appropriate way to do it in Gaza since the international
frontier was only about three miles long between Gaza and Sinai. It was
apparent, moreover, that Dayan saw no possibility of Egyptian forces
being readmitted to Gaza; he admitted only the possibility of mixed
border control points with some token Egyptian participation.
Vance then went over very quickly with Dayan the latest version
of the U.S. draft “Framework” document, pointing out to him where
the Israeli suggestions on the previous draft3 had been rejected and
where they had been accepted. (Review with Dayan was so rapid that
he could not have obtained more than a very general idea as to which of
the Israeli counterproposals had been accepted.)
Dayan then made his familiar argument in favor of the U.S. taking
over Etam air base, both to solve the problem on the air base itself and
also to make easier an ultimate solution of the Rafah settlements issue.
Vance explained why Sadat had rejected this idea and why the whole
concept of foreign bases on Arab soil is antithetical to the Arabs at this
point. He said that Sadat had not completely ruled out the idea, but
would consider it only with the greatest reluctance, and that he, him-
self, was not enthusiastic about it.
Dayan said that he was against the idea of “civilianizing” the three
Israeli airports; under Egyptian-civilian control they could be trans-
formed over night during a crisis into staging bases for Egyptian mili-
tary aircraft almost adjacent to the Israeli frontier. If the UN had control
over the airport at Sharm el-Sheikh, this would be a good way to pro-
tect it for use as a civilian facility; the same idea could apply to port fa-
cilities at Sharm el-Sheikh. Perhaps the same idea could apply to the
other two airfields as well.
Dayan then said he wanted to raise another subject, that of the
need to resettle permanently the large refugee population in Gaza.
They all have employment, he said; what is needed is sufficient money
to house them properly, and this would all be accomplished under the

44.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
American Side
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Hermann Fr. Eilts, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt
Egyptian Side
Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States
Ahmed Maher, Director of the Cabinet of the Foreign Minister
SUBJECT
Meeting between the Secretary and Foreign Minister Kamel
Kamel met with Secretary Vance this evening. He was accompa-
nied by Ambassador Ghorbal and Ahmed Maher. Hermann Eilts was
present for the American side.
Kamel first expressed his apologies for the Egyptian side’s in-
ability to be ready with its suggestions at 2000 this evening. He ex-
plained that the Egyptian side had not been able to begin work until
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
mid-afternoon, after Sadat had returned from his meeting with Presi-
dent Carter. The Egyptians had thereafter had a brief meeting with
Sadat, who had given them some instructions.
Kamel then said that the Egyptian side had found the American
paper3 “perplexing.” It was not “coherent.” It had given them a great
deal of trouble. Things are scattered throughout the paper, and the
Egyptians were having trouble following exactly what has been meant.
The Secretary asked about the nature of Kamel’s concerns. Kamel said
the Egyptian side feels it is necessary to study our paper carefully. It is
now in the process of doing so. The Secretary stressed that we want the
Egyptian views on where they believe the paper is deficient and what
should be done about it. Ghorbal stated that the Egyptians are doing
exactly that. He indicated that the Egyptians agreed with what Eilts
had suggested, namely, that the Egyptians present us with specific tex-
tual suggestions.
The Secretary then again asked Kamel for precise indications of
where the Egyptians believe our paper is deficient. Reading from a
handwritten memorandum, Kamel indicated the following:
A. First, the Egyptians believe our paper is a departure from previ-
ously expressed American positions. Specifically, in the withdrawal
language on the West Bank, there is no mention of the ’49 lines. The
Egyptian side had expected that there would be a reference to a return
to the ’49 lines with minor recitifications. The Secretary told Kamel that
this subject had been discussed between Sadat and President Carter.
The language included was that agreed upon by Sadat. Kamel was a bit
nonplused, but responded that we should recognize that the Egyptian
side must first study the document before agreeing on specific lan-
guage. There must have been some misunderstanding if President
Carter got the impression that Sadat is in total agreement. Sadat, Kamel
pointed out, is “shy” and wants to be polite. As Kamel understood it,
Sadat had only agreed with President Carter that the paper would be
referred to the Egyptian Delegation in order to obtain the latter’s obser-
vations. These were the instructions that Sadat had given to the Egyp-
tian Delegation. Sadat wants the Egyptian Delegation to scrutinize the
paper. Kamel apologized profusely for any wrong impression that
might have been given. Ghorbal added that Sadat had read what Presi-
dent Carter gave him, but that Sadat’s comments had been preliminary
and off-the-cuff. They were neither complete nor were they intended to
be a final judgment.
Kamel went on to say that Sadat had said he would agree to any-
thing so long as land and sovereignty are excluded. “We are Egyp-

tians,” Kamel said. “You must take us the way we are.” Sadat takes it
for granted that President Carter will take into consideration Egyptian
and Arab interests and concerns. Kamel also noted that Sadat had at the
outset presented proposals, which the Egyptian side consider should
be agreeable to all. These proposals were well balanced. They should be
kept in mind as a background. All of Sadat’s ideas are incorporated in
the Egyptian proposal. The Egyptians, Kamel stressed, do not want to
be embarrassed before the other Arabs. The American language in the
American paper will embarrass the Egyptians in the eyes of the other
Arabs.
B. The second point on which the American paper is deficient,
Kamel indicated, is that it makes no clear reference to withdrawal from
Sinai. The only reference is to the restoration of Egyptian sovereignty in
Sinai. The Secretary interjected that this is because Sadat had told Presi-
dent Carter that he wanted it put that way. Sadat had asked that the
Sinai language be written in terms of sovereignty and the inviolability
of territory. There is no question, the Secretary noted, about the need
for total Israeli withdrawal from Sinai.
The American paper, the Secretary stated, had been given the
Egyptians in order to obtain their reaction.
C. The third objection that Kamel indicated is that the rights of the
Palestinians are inadequately treated. There is only one sentence on the
subject. Moreover, that sentence is a change from the Aswan language.
The Secretary noted that President Carter had told Sadat about the con-
cept of a footnote at the beginning of the paper, expressing the meaning
of the term Palestinians. He regretted that it had not been possible due
to the rush in preparing the paper to include the footnote in the draft
that had been given to the Egyptians, but stressed that this is still our
idea. The footnote would state clearly that when “Palestinians” are re-
ferred to throughout the paper, the meaning is the Palestinian people.
Kamel responded that the original Aswan language had included spe-
cific reference to the “Palestinian people.” This should be retained. The
Secretary again explained the footnote idea. He stressed that we were
not trying to nitpick, but that in our judgment the problem is eased by
such a formulation. Kamel insisted that the Aswan formula is the min-
imum that Egypt can accept. He noted that even the Saudis oppose it.
The Secretary responded that if we define (in a footnote) what we mean
by Palestinians, surely this should be all right. Kamel said Sadat had re-
ferred to the Palestinian people in recent statements, including in his
departure statement. He cannot now accept anything less. The Secre-
tary again stressed that we will be defining the meaning of Palestinians.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Kamel insisted that the way the term is used elsewhere in the paper is
also different. There were frequent references to the “inhabitants”
rather than to the Palestinians. The Secretary thought that “Pales-
tinians” is used throughout the paper. Kamel said this is not the case.
D. Kamel then turned to another objection, namely the reference to
the refugees. This, he noted, departs from previous statements on the
subject. There is no reference to UN Resolution 1945 or to other UNGA
Resolutions having to do with the Palestinian refugees. Moreover, Pal-
estinian and Jewish refugees had been mentioned in the same context.
The Secretary commented that he was aware of the Egyptian views, but
that he thought they might be wrong. The Jewish refugees also have
rights. Ghorbal insisted that the equation distorts what had been
agreed upon unilaterally with respect to the Palestinian refugees for
many years. The Secretary noted that we have talked about the admis-
sion of displaced persons and refugees to the West Bank and also about
the need for an overall settlement of the refugee problem. Ahmed
Maher stated that the Jewish refugee matter is a totally different
problem. The doctrine of Israel, he recalled, is that Jews anywhere in
the world should go back to Israel. This is the essence of the “return
law.” How in such circumstances, he asked, can the Israelis argue that
people who are returning under this law can properly be considered as
refugees. The Secretary urged that the Egyptians read the appropriate
language again. He thought that if they consider it carefully, it should
not give them too much problem. Kamel commented that the Egyp-
tians have always taken it for granted that displaced persons should be
allowed to return to the West Bank and Gaza. Under our language the
Israelis have a veto on these people as well as the refugees. The require-
ment for unanimous agreement gives them this veto. The language of
our paper, he stressed, deeply troubles the Egyptians. The Secretary re-
sponded that part of the language on this subject comes directly from
Sadat. He would be happy to look at any other language that the Egyp-
tians might propose, but he wanted to stress that Sadat’s very words
were used in some of the language having to do with displaced persons
and refugees. Again, Kamel was nonplused. He recalled that when the
Secretary was in Alexandria, he had tried to explain to him that Sadat is
looking as an objective to a real peace, but that the President’s phrasing
is not always felicitous. The Secretary again noted that we will look at
any language the Egyptians care to suggest. We cannot guarantee to ac-
cept it, but they could be sure that we will carefully study it.
1948. Article 11 of the Resolution addressed the status of Palestinian refugees displaced
by the 1948 Arab-Israeli war.

E. Kamel next observed that there is no reference in the paper to
settlements. The Secretary pointed out that this had been deliberately
omitted. He then explained our position on settlements, stressing that
we have clear and strong views on the subject. In the case of the Sinai,
the settlements should be withdrawn. In the case of the West Bank and
Gaza, as he had indicated to Kamel the other day, there should be a
freeze on all settlement activity. Kamel asked why there had been no
reference to our previously expressed position of the illegality of settle-
ments. The Secretary said President Carter will make a speech which
will include a reference to our longstanding view that settlements are
illegal. The Secretary then explained why we had left out in our present
draft any reference to the settlements. This had been done in the hope
that, without such a reference, it might be possible to work out with the
Israelis the other aspects of the problem. The Israelis have been made
aware, however, that our position on settlements is a strong one and
that it will be included in any final document. He could assure Kamel
that when we leave Camp David, appropriate language on the settle-
ments will be included in our paper and that this will be made public.
Kamel reverted to the overall paper, indicating that the Egyptian
side is not at all happy with the paper. The Secretary responded that the
Israelis are also unhappy with it. Kamel wanted to know what the Is-
raelis could find in the paper that would make them unhappy. The Sec-
retary went through his copy6 of the paper and noted the following
points: (a) The inclusion of language on the inadmissibility of the acqui-
sition of territory through war. Ghorbal noted this is only in the pre-
amble, which we and the Israelis have always claimed does not have
the same weight as operative language. (b) The concept of restoring
Egyptian sovereignty in the Sinai. The Israelis want to cast this solely in
terms of the Begin Peace Plan. (c) The language on Suez and Tiran,
which we had refused to include. (d) The Israelis do not like the inclu-
sion of the Aswan language. (e) The Israelis do not like the transition
arrangements as we have worked them out. They want to base these on
the Begin self-rule plan. (f) The Israelis do not like the Vienna lan-
guage. Here Kamel interjected that the Egyptians also do not like the
Vienna language. (g) The Israelis also object to the Palestinian refugee
language. (h) They dislike the Jerusalem language. They argue that in
the case of Jerusalem there is nothing to be resolved. It has been de-
clared to be the capital of Israel. We have not accepted this.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Kamel contended that a major problem with the paper is that all of
the obligations are on the Egyptian side. He continued that the only Is-
raeli obligation is to negotiate.
Ghorbal reiterated that in many instances there has been an ero-
sion of previous American positions. The United States should not
allow this to take place. The Secretary again asked that the Egyptian
ideas be given to us.
Kamel said this will be done, but he pleaded that we take into con-
sideration the overall effect that the document will have in the Middle
East. The United States, he emphasized, needs a strong Sadat. Sadat is a
proud man. What is at stake is implementation of Resolution 242 and
the establishment of peace.
Eilts pointed out that great care has been given in developing the
document to ensure that Sadat is not discredited in the area. The Secre-
tary affirmed this. Ghorbal noted that this is essential.
Kamel observed that the Egyptians hope the present meeting will
come out with something positive. But there are things in the American
paper that Egypt can never accept. He reiterated that the sole Israeli
obligation is to negotiate. The Secretary denied this, noting that the Is-
raelis also have the obligation to withdraw and to negotiate their secure
borders. Withdrawal, he noted, is fundamental, withdrawal in return
for peace and security.
Kamel reiterated that the West Bank language in our paper is unac-
ceptable. Ghorbal added that it is not consistent with previously ex-
pressed American principles. Negotiation of minor changes has always
been the American concept. Egypt and the United States must be sure
that the language is not simply the language that Israel wants. Unless
this is done, it will defeat the purpose of the entire effort. Ghorbal ex-
pressed appreciation for the efforts of President Carter, Secretary
Vance, and the United States Government.
Eilts asked how tomorrow’s scenario will work out. Kamel noted
that Sadat will meet with President Carter at 10: and with the Egyp-
tian Delegation afterwards. Sadat had indicated that he wants to see the
Egyptian paper at that time. The Secretary suggested that it is impor-
tant that Sadat see the Egyptian paper or at least have the Egyptian Del-
egation’s ideas before he meets with President Carter. The Egyptian
Delegation was clearly embarrassed. Ghorbal said the Egyptians will
try to arrange this. If there is no time for Sadat to read it before his
meeting with President Carter, the Egyptian Delegation will alert us to
their idea later. Kamel reiterated this, but expressed personal frustra-
tion that Sadat seemed to be unwilling to read the Egyptian paper be-
fore he meets with President Carter. He wants to do so afterwards. Eilts
suggested that, if the Secretary and Kamel agreed, he would be willing
to go over to Sadat’s bungalow and suggest, in behalf of Secretary

Vance, that he read the Egyptian paper or at least be aware of the Egyp-
tian Delegation’s objections before he meets with President Carter. He
could then indicate to President Carter the areas in which the Egyptians
see problems and suggest that details could be discussed later in the
day with the Egyptian Delegation. Kamel was skeptical about Eilts’
going over there and finally suggested that this not be done. (Com-
ment: Kamel was sensitive to the idea that he had not been able to get to
Sadat and that we might be able to do so on our own.)
Kamel noted with some chagrin that President Carter had said that
President Sadat is flexible, but that his aides are not. President Carter
had indicated the reverse is so with the Israelis. He thought this was not
fair. The Egyptian Delegation is seeking to find a fair and honorable
settlement. He wished to emphasize this point. It was not seeking to
block what Sadat wants to do. We are passing through a crucial phase,
Kamel noted. Sadat has placed all of his faith in the United States. He
again urged that the United States, and specifically President Carter,
take into consideration Sadat’s problems in the Arab world. This is ter-
ribly important. Secretary Vance pointed out that we do so. Kamel in-
sisted that the paper in its present form will hurt Sadat in the Arab
world. Sadat, unfortunately, does not like to go to President Carter and
appear to be “bargaining.” The Secretary pointed out that there is no
desire to bargain. What we want is Sadat’s statement as to what he feels
is wrong with the paper. Details can be discussed with the Egyptian
Delegation. Kamel did not respond directly, but noted that the present
paper will frighten off Hussein, the Saudis, and others. Sadat will be to-
tally isolated.
There were some more exchanges on the possibility of the Egyp-
tian Delegation meeting with Sadat prior to the Sadat meeting with
President Carter in order to persuade the President to point out to
Carter what is wrong with the paper. That part of the discussion ended
inconclusively with the Egyptians indicating they will try, but clearly
not being sanguine about the possibility of such an advance meeting.
As Ahmed Maher and Eilts were going from Walnut9 to Laurel10 to
get ice and glasses, Maher said to Eilts that the basic problem that the
Egyptians have with our paper is that it is viewed (rightly or wrongly)
as a U.S.-Israeli paper. He noted the Egyptian awareness of the fact that
we had given the paper first to the Israelis and thereafter spent six
hours with the Israelis hearing their suggestions. Eilts pointed out that
we had rejected many of the Israeli suggestions and, as Secretary Vance
had pointed out, the Israelis are not very happy about this. Maher said

45.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
American Ambassador Samuel Lewis
Israeli Foreign Minister Dayan
SUBJECT
Dayan’s Unhappiness with Secretary’s Response
As we were leaving the dining area, Foreign Minister Dayan took
me aside in some agitation. He said he wanted me to remember today’s
date very carefully, since he thought history would show that a conver-
sation2 he had just had with Secretary Vance over lunch was the point
at which the chance for a peace agreement had been lost and the seeds
of the next Arab-Israeli war had been planted. He said he had made a
proposal to the Secretary and that he was extremely sorry the Secretary
had rejected it so quickly, “But since he has, I guess there is nothing
more to be done and we will just have to live with the consequences.”
I took Dayan aside for more elucidation. He went over, at some
length, his conclusion that there were at least three insoluble issues
which precluded any chance of Israeli agreement on an overall frame-
work: “The inadmissibility of the acquisition language, the demand for
removal of Sinai settlements, and insistence on a total freeze on West
Bank settlements.” He said there might be a number of other points, but
he believed that, based on what he felt now, the other hurdles could
have been surmounted if we had not been adamant on these.
He said that in this situation he believed strongly that it was a
tragedy not to conclude at least an agreement on how to organize the
West Bank and Gaza for the transition period and “to get on with estab-
lishing the self-rule regime.” This, he said, was now well within reach;
the other two major subjects under discussion, a broad set of principles
applicable to everything and the Sinai problem, did not seem to be
within reach, blocked by the inadmissibility language, settlements re-
moval, and Sadat’s insistence on removal of all airfields within three
years. He had, therefore, suggested to Vance that we find a way to sep-
arate out the agreement on the West Bank and Gaza so as at least to
leave Camp David with that as an achievement. He was sorry that
Vance had replied that this was, in his view, impossible.
There then ensued a lengthy discussion about all of these subjects
in which Dayan revealed, among other things, that he had, with great
difficulty, finally persuaded Begin to accept language on the Pales-
tinian question and on 242, including “in all its aspects” and “in all of
its parts,” which Begin had resisted for months. He said it was totally
impossible to move him on settlements at this juncture, and Begin had
now decided to take the whole issue back to the Knesset where he (and
Dayan) were quite certain an overwhelming majority of members
would refuse to sanction removal. He said that Begin and he were both
now planning to leave Camp David no later than Wednesday night,
September 13, as was Barak—who in any event had to be back in Israel
Thursday night in order to be sworn-in as a justice of the Supreme
Court. Dayan seemed convinced that there was little left now to do but
close out the conference.
I urged Dayan not to jump to conclusions and, above all, not to
plan to leave or to permit Barak to leave before Friday, at the earliest. I
reviewed the anticipated schedule for the next 48 hours with him and
said that they should wait to see the next draft of our paper, which
would be based on their reactions, as well as the Egyptian reactions, to
our first draft. I also urged him to think long and hard about some way
that the “inadmissibility” language could be incorporated into the Pre-
amble in a form which Begin might accept. I said that all of us under-
stood the depth of feeling about the settlements question, and that we
should both continue to seek formulas by which it could be handled in
this framework, since it would be tragic to be able to agree on most
other issues but find no way of dealing with this question.
After lengthy debate, in which Dayan’s mood gradually im-
proved, he finally agreed to seek ways in which the “inadmissibility”
language might be utilized, while asking me to do everything possible
(a) to look for a way to deal with the Sinai settlements issue in this
paper which put off to the period of detailed negotiation its eventual
resolution, and (b) to persuade the Secretary to reconsider his response

46.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Advisor to the President
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large
Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary, NEA
William Quandt, National Security Council
Hermann Fr. Eilts, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt
Denis Clift, Vice President’s Staff
EGYPTIAN SIDE
Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Boutros Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
Osama el-Baz, Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs
Ahmed Maher, Director of the Cabinet of the Foreign Minister
Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States
Nabil el-Araby, Director of Legal Department, Foreign Ministry
Abdul Rauf el-Reedy, Director of Policy Planning, Foreign Ministry
Abou el Gheite, Office of the Foreign Minister
SUBJECT
Egyptian Comments on U.S. Paper
Kamel first expressed appreciation for the efforts of President
Carter, the Secretary and the U.S. Delegation. He said that the Egyptian
side understands the importance of positive results. He had earlier in
the morning met President Carter by chance and in a brief chat ex-
plained to the President what the Egyptians have in mind.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prior to discussing the U.S. paper3 in detail, he wished to outline a
number of points on which the U.S. and Egypt are in agreement: (a) the
desire to keep and to preserve the relationship between our two coun-
tries, (b) concern that a comprehensive and just peaceful settlement be
reached. The results should be such that it will attract others to join,
(c) whatever settlement is reached must “fortify” Egypt and strengthen
the moderate states of the (Middle East) area in order to enable them to
meet the “dangerous trends” that are now spreading in that area,
(d) we must prevent chaos from developing in the area and be alive to
the dangers of Soviet penetration. This means that conditions should
not be created which have the effect of distorting the U.S. image in the
area.
The Secretary said that we agree on all four points. He called the
maintenance of the U.S.-Egyptian relationship vital. There must be a
comprehensive settlement. We wish the result of the Camp David
meetings to fortify Egypt, to protect Sadat, and to underscore Sadat’s
paramount position in the Arab world. We have great respect for Presi-
dent Sadat as a true leader. We agree that world chaos should be
avoided as should anything that jeopardizes the moderate forces in the
area.
Kamel went on to say that the Egyptian side has carefully studied
our paper. He was happy that we welcome any proposals that the
Egyptians might wish to put forward. The Egyptian proposals, he said,
aim at creating a balance between the obligations of the parties. As he
saw it, the American proposal in its present form will in no way obtain
Saudi approval. He thought that we are in agreement that Saudi sup-
port is needed. Hussein will also be reluctant to join. Hussein’s partici-
pation, Kamel stressed, is essential.
The Egyptian position, Kamel recalled, is explained in the paper
which the Egyptian side had earlier presented to us. It is based on (a) a
balance of obligations between the parties, (b) insuring Israeli with-
drawal to the ’67 lines except for minor rectifications, (c) insuring the
security of all parties, (d) respect for the sovereignty and territorial in-
tegrity of all states and for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people, (e) the participation of all parties. Kamel then asked el-Baz to
present the details of the Egyptian ideas.
El-Baz first explained what he called the “Egyptian approach” to
the U.S. formula. The Egyptians had come, he stated, with the objective
of reaching agreement. By this they meant agreement with the “other
party.” A fortiori they wish to reach agreement with the U.S. in order to
see if there is common ground between us. The Egyptians are positive

on the U.S. role. They have an interest in assuring the success of the
American effort. They believe that the American side wishes to be
even-handed and fair. The American paper has been studied in this
light. Points of agreement between us have been sought. So has the an-
swer to the question: what is the main purpose of the United States in
presenting the proposal? It is intended to be a compromise between the
Israeli and Egyptian positions or is it a formulation of U.S. views on
controversial issues involved in the dispute.
The Secretary said that the purpose of the U.S. proposal is to set
forth a fair and even-handed method and framework which will allow
a comprehensive settlement to be achieved. It also takes into account
practical and other related aspects of the problem.
El-Baz said the Egyptian side has some problem with the struc-
turing of the American paper, but that this is not overly important. He
wished to make some general comments about the American paper.
First, the Egyptians do not get a clear definition from our paper of cor-
responding obligations that the parties should have to each other pur-
suant to UN Resolutions, which are the basis for settlement. He specif-
ically mentioned UN Resolution 242. The recurrent theme in the
American paper, as the Egyptians see it, is that the main obligation is to
negotiate. The obligation to “act” has been subordinated by this em-
phasis. Negotiations, he contended, are a process; they are not a basic
obligation. They must also be put in the framework of how the
Arab-Israeli situation has evolved. Our approach only defers dealing
squarely with the problems. The U.S. paper suggests that the parties
negotiate on the basis of such and such resolutions. The history of the
dispute, el-Baz argued, makes it clear that the Israelis conduct their liti-
gation without a full recognition of the mutuality of obligations. Egypt
believes it is essential that there be a clear definition of the obligation of
both parties. The negotiations should focus on how to implement
obligations.
Second, el-Baz noted, the American paper appears to de-emphasize
mutuality and reciprocity, especially in its provisions concerning secu-
rity. The Egyptians realize that security is for both parties. “For certain
reasons” Egypt accepted the “notion” that the Israelis are more sensi-
tive on this point. But this should not be a general rule. Security is a
right and an obligation for all.
When Egypt presented its draft proposal, el-Baz continued, it be-
lieved that the proposal contained many ideas. The Egyptians were
surprised to find that the American paper did not draw much on the
Egyptian paper. There were some serious omissions in the American
paper, e.g., (a) any reference to the declaration of human rights, (b) a
declaration to the principles of international law, (c) any reference to
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. The Egyptians had thought that this last

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
provision, in particular, should give no problem, since as early as Oc-
tober, 1956, Israel accepted the concept of compulsory ICJ jurisdiction,
(d) the concept of UN Security Council guarantee of borders. The latter,
el-Baz argued, should be in the interest of every party to the dispute.
The Secretary explained that these omissions were prompted by
our belief that if certain declarations are cited, the Israelis will wish to
add their own list of citations. We want to achieve the objectives of the
Egyptian proposal within specific reference to a series of documents.
On compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, he noted that when the Israelis signed
this agreement, they specifically excluded its applicability to Arab-
Israeli matters. The Israelis do not believe that the ICJ is unbiased. If
there were some method other than the ICJ, it might be more palatable.
On borders, the Secretary pointed out that we have covered this in
paragraph 7 of the American paper. Our language is simpler, but the
Egyptian concept is included.
El-Baz commented that Israel appears to be seeking to force Egypt
to accept only one method in resolving disputes. This method is unin-
terrupted negotiations, even if these lead to no progress. Article 33 of
the United Nations Charter, which the American paper cites, speaks of
other methods of resolving disputes. Israel regrettably thinks it can
deal with the Arabs on the basis of the de facto situation.
The Secretary suggested that the Egyptians make their suggestion
on this point. Nabil el-Araby observed that the methods of settling dis-
putes are contained in Article 33 of the United Nations Charter. The ar-
ticle leaves it to the parties to choose the method they wish to employ.
Why should the method of direct negotiations be singled out? The Sec-
retary responded that we have not singled out any method. The ICJ lan-
guage has been taken out.
El-Baz then commented that in the Egyptian paper, there had been
the proposal that all parties agree to the NPT. The Egyptians had as-
sumed this would meet with enthusiastic American approval. The (nu-
clear) issue creates a special element of tension in the area. It gives psy-
chological and physical concern to both sides. There is no need, el-Baz
argued, to accommodate the Israelis on this point.
El-Baz then said he wished to make some specific comments:
A. The Palestinian problem: This, he noted, is the crux of the issue.
The formulation and concept to resolve it must be clear. The sovereign
rights of the (Palestinian) people must be clear. He understood that the
Egyptian and American positions on this are similar. If one begins from
this assumption, one must go on to say that in principle, Israel is obli-
gated to withdraw in the West Bank/Gaza in accordance with the “in-
admissibility” language.
El-Baz stated that, in recognition of the sensitivity of this problem,
Egypt has accepted the concept of a transitional period. It did so in an

effort to be cooperative and to ease the resolution of the problem. It also
did so to accommodate the United States. Israeli withdrawal will en-
able the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-determination.
The Egyptians find basic defects in the way this problem is presented in
the American paper. The interim arrangement envisaged in our paper
carries with it the seeds of perpetuation. It can become a permanent ar-
rangement. There is no clearcut Israeli commitment to withdraw or
how to do so. Israel is also given a prominent role in deciding the final
outcome. Granted, the American paper calls for the abolition of mili-
tary government, but Israel remains a major participant in running the
area. All authority is derived from Israel. This, el-Baz contended, ne-
gates the concept of abolishing the Israeli military government. Egypt
and Jordan, he noted, can play a role to provide additional needed se-
curity in the West Bank/Gaza.
The Secretary said that it is not correct that the American proposal
envisages the interim regime will become a permanent one. We have
spoken of an interim settlement and the participation of the inhabitants
in the determination of their own future. He drew attention to page 7,
para 2 in support of this view. The people elect the self-governing au-
thority. That authority derives its competence from Egypt, Israel and
Jordan, at such time as the latter joins. We sought to place authority in
the hands of the people through an election process. Egypt, Jordan and
Israel should have a role so that they can in a practical way set up the
authority.
Abdul Rauf el-Reedy contended that this simply creates confusion.
It can be used by the Israelis to claim that Israel is a partner in the in-
terim period. This prejudices the basic principle that authority should
derive from the people. The Secretary noted that the Egyptians believe
this and so do we, but the Israelis do not. Our belief is that the Amer-
ican formulation is a practical way to handle the problem. Nabil el-
Araby stated that as long as there is a provision that Israel is one of the
parties from whom authority is derived, Israel will claim a favored po-
sition. On page 8 of the American draft, Israeli residual rights are cited.
The Egyptians’ study of those rights suggest that the self-governing au-
thority will be limited to maintaining internal security. Others will
handle the territorial aspects.
The Secretary asked if it might be better to delete the sentence
about the source of the authority for the self-governing group. The
Egyptians readily agreed that this should be done. The Secretary said
we will consider this.
El-Baz noted that if this concept is deleted, page 9 of the American
proposal still gives the Israelis an important voice in determining the
future of the West Bank/Gaza. This should be handled through self-
determination of the Palestinian people. The Egyptians know the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
American concept. But the parties must agree at the beginning on perti-
nent principles to be applied. This should not be left to the end, other-
wise the self-governing arrangement will simply be perpetuated. The
Israelis will have a veto. Leaving the issue vague, as the American
paper does, poses a problem for the final settlement.
The Secretary observed that if one tries to eliminate Israel at this
point, one is prematurely forcing a decision on the sovereignty ques-
tion. The Israelis are reserving their claim to sovereignty in the West
Bank, but are not now asserting it. The United States and Egypt believe
that the people of the area should decide. El-Reedy contended that it
will be difficult to proceed with two interpretations of this issue. If a
way is left for Israel to assert sovereignty, it will cause trouble. The Sec-
retary said we cannot stop the Israelis from doing so. El-Baz argued
that this is a basic issue. The Secretary agreed, but said we had agreed
not to face it now. El-Reedy said that if Israel is to determine the future
of the West Bank/Gaza, Israel will always believe that is its objective.
El-Araby argued that the sovereignty issue should be faced squarely.
El-Araby stated that when the right of self-determination is men-
tioned, this means the final step. It should be decided by the Pales-
tinians living there, either through plebiscite, referendum, etc. No one
but the Palestinians should participate. Egypt accepts negotiations with
the Palestinians and Jordanians on security measures, but not on de-
ciding the final status of the West Bank/Gaza. The American paper
confuses this issue. El-Baz asked what happens if Israel does not reach
agreement with the Arabs? The American proposal omits any clear and
unequivocal obligation on the part of Israel to withdraw from the West
Bank/Gaza with the possibility of minor rectifications that do not re-
flect the weight of conquest. This has been the constant United States
position.
El-Baz also noted that the Aswan formula4 has not been repro-
duced in full in the American paper. The term “people” had been
omitted. The Secretary said that he was willing to put this back.
El-Araby next indicated Egyptian unhappiness with the “amalga-
mation” of the Palestinian refugees and displaced persons. The Israelis,
he noted, are given a veto in our paper on the return of displaced
persons. In the case of the refugees, El-Araby acknowledged, Israel has
a say in accordance with UN resolutions. However, UN Resolution 237
of 1967, which the United States had voted for, governs the status of
raeli Government to ensure the safety and facilitate the return of residents who had fled
the fighting during the June 1967 Arab-Israeli war. For the complete text of the Resolu-

the displaced persons. It is different from UN Resolution 194, which
covers the Palestinian refugees. These two concepts, el-Araby asserted,
should not be amalgamated.
El-Araby also was unhappy with the inclusion on page 12 of a ref-
erence to Egypt and Israel reaching agreement on “Arab and Jewish
refugees.” On Arab refugees, it is the Palestinians who are involved. In
the case of Jewish refugees, El-Araby noted that this can only apply to
Egyptian citizens of Jewish faith who left Egypt after 1967 or before.
Egypt is agreeable that such individuals may return to Egypt at any
time they wish.
The Secretary noted that we are aware of the refugee program. It
has not been adequately dealt with. Our paper is trying to show that
the entire refugee problem needs to be handled. El-Baz stated that the
Egyptians object to equating the Jewish refugee issue with the Pales-
tinian refugees. The Palestinian refugees, he reiterated, are separate
from the displaced persons and should be so treated. They are also sep-
arate from Jewish refugees. He saw no real problem with Jewish ref-
ugees. If an individual has a claim, it is his or her right to seek redress
through the courts or through international adjudication.
The Secretary asked if the Egyptians object to the use of “Arab”
and to the inclusion of Jewish refugees also to the non-reference to the
UN Resolutions. Saunders pointed out that there is a separate Jewish
refugee problem. He did not think it sufficient to cite UN Resolution
194. Israel must somehow be brought into the action in order to solve
the refugee problem. El-Araby suggested the matter be taken
piece-by-piece: displaced persons should be cited, Palestinian refugees
should be cited, but in a manner where their rights are not prejudiced
during the interim period. (He made no reference to Jewish refugees.)
El-Baz referred to our reference to a continuing committee to
handle by unanimous agreement unresolved issues. He asked what we
have in mind with this provision. Saunders observed that the reference
is a purely technical one. He recalled the mixed commission that was
set up in the Sinai II Agreement. There are certain issues which such a
group could discuss and, hopefully, resolve. El-Baz responded that
putting problems into hands of the two parties might in effect result in
a stalemate. He pointed out that mechanisms do exist to handle this
sort of a situation and referred again to the ICJ.
El-Araby noted that day-to-day operations in the West Bank/Gaza
should be within the competence of the local, self-governing authority.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Saunders suggested that the Egyptians provide us with appropriate
language.
The Secretary asked whether the use of the term “consensus” will
solve the Egyptian problem. The Egyptians responded unanimously
that it will not. Saunders pointed out that the Israelis are a party to the
problem during the transitional period. El-Baz agreed to provide us
with pertinent language.
El-Baz then referred to the paragraph in our paper on Jerusalem.
He expressed understanding that the problem is difficult and sensitive.
But, he pointed out, Arab Jerusalem is part of the West Bank. Neither
the United States nor Egypt recognize the amalgamation of Arab Jeru-
salem into Israel. Jerusalem, he insisted, is included in the Israeli obli-
gation to withdraw. Egypt agrees that the city should not be redivided.
He drew a distinction between the issue of sovereignty in East Jeru-
salem and that of the life of the people. The Secretary pointed out that
our paper says that Jerusalem should not again be divided. El-Baz
noted that the United States also agrees that Jerusalem is not a part of
Israel. The Secretary observed that trying to solve the Jerusalem
problem now is a mistake. It will simply create problems. He suggested
it be left to the Jordanians for the future. Kamel observed that we want
Hussein to come in. El-Baz stated that if this is our common concern,
the United States formula is harmful. The “future relationship” phrase
used in the American paper, he contended is Israeli phraseology. The
Secretary pointed out that it is not, it is our language. El-Baz insisted
that two sovereignties in Jerusalem should not be allowed. The issue
should be handled first by Israeli withdrawal, and thereafter by agree-
ment not to redivide the city. The starting point should be non-
recognition of the Israeli occupation. Unfortunately, the phraseology in
the American paper leads to the conclusion that the Israelis may re-
main. The Secretary pointed out that we are simply saying that the ulti-
mate arrangements for Jerusalem must be worked out some time in the
future. Atherton suggested that the final sentence in the paragraph on
Jerusalem should take care of the Egyptian concern. The Egyptians in-
sisted it will not. The Secretary asked whether the Wailing Wall should
be under Jordan. El-Baz said it should be so far as jurisdiction is con-
cerned. The Jews might have the right to visit, and claimed this is al-
ready taken care of by the reference to freedom of access to religious
shrines. El-Reedy pointed out that internationalization of Jerusalem is
another possibility. The Secretary wondered whether anyone would
support this. El-Baz did not answer the question, but urged that
nothing be included to prejudge the final outcome. Doing so would
mean that the status quo will be perpetuated. The Secretary observed
that the more one goes into detail with respect to Jerusalem, the greater

is the problem for Sadat. El-Araby again referred to UN Resolution 267
of October 1967, which the United States has approved.
El-Reedy asked if the Palestinians in East Jerusalem will or will not
be included in the self-governing regime. The American paper seems to
suggest that it will not be (page 8). Saunders opined that we should
think of Jerusalem separately. El-Araby suggested that the reference be
to the West Bank and Gaza, instead of to areas now under Israeli mili-
tary government jurisdiction. Saunders suggested that our phraseology
protects Sadat. It leaves the Jerusalem question separate. El-Araby re-
sponded that the West Bank/Gaza has specific geographic meaning.
The Secretary suggested that the Egyptians provide us with their pro-
posed language.
El-Baz then referred to the absence of any reference in our paper to
settlements. The Secretary pointed out that this omission had already
been explained to Sadat and Kamel. Before our paper is finalized, lan-
guage on the settlements will be included. On the matter of the ille-
gality of the settlements, President Carter will repeat our position in a
speech to the Congress.
The Secretary then said he would like to raise a question or two.
On page 4, the fourth line from the bottom, he asked if the Egyp-
tians would like to have the phrase “based on the principle of reci-
procity” included. The Egyptians said this was agreeable to them and
observed that President Carter had already agreed to the inclusion of
such a phrase.
El-Araby asked what is meant by “special security forces” on page
4 of our paper. Saunders said the reference is to the collection of police
forces that might be involved.
The Secretary alluded to the phrase on page 6 of the American
draft “assist in the restoration of Egyptian sovereignty.” He suggested
an addition, “based on phased withdrawal, Israeli forces, etc.” He said
we have some language to this effect. The Egyptians suggested that
“phased” be removed, withdrawal should not be qualified. A state-
ment could be included suggesting withdrawal in accordance with
some timetable.
El-Araby suggested that on page 6 a statement be included to the
effect that “security arrangements will be reciprocal,” or some other
similar phase based on the principle of reciprocity.
El-Reedy returned to the issue of the basic structure of the paper.
Some of the fundamental principles for Egypt, such as the inadmissi-
bility language, is in the Preamble. The Secretary observed that this is
for Peace, pp. 23–24.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
where it is in UN Resolution 242. El-Reedy stated that it is in 242 be-
cause it is also in the UN Charter. Egypt suggested that there might be a
general part of the paper to cover fundamental principles. The issue, he
pointed out, would not be important if the Israelis had not come up
with the idea that the “inadmissibility” language is not binding be-
cause it is in the Preamble. The Secretary said he believes it should be in
the Preamble. Perhaps the matter could be treated by citing the entire
Preamble. El-Reedy noted that the American paper had also added to
the pertinent preambular language the phrase, “within secure and rec-
ognized borders.” This is not in the UN Resolution 242 Preamble.
El-Baz noted that because the Israelis insist that because the “inadmis-
sibility” language is in the Preamble, it is not important. For that reason
the Egyptians believe it should be in the operative language. The Secre-
tary pointed out that the Israelis “climb up the wall” with any such sug-
gestion. El-Baz suggested that this shows their intentions.
El-Baz then referred to para 7 on page 12 having to do with the
possible inability of Jordan to join in the negotiations. This, he insisted,
does not help and could be offensive to Jordan. The Secretary re-
sponded that the phrase is intended to show that the negotiations
would go ahead even if Jordan does not participate. Kamel observed
that the Egyptian side is proceeding on the assumption that Jordan will
join. The Secretary said we hope so, but cannot be sure. El-Baz thought
it is not necessary to provide for such a contingency. It goes without
saying, he argued, that if Jordan does not participate, Egypt will go
ahead. The Secretary noted that the language is for Egyptian protec-
tion. El-Baz argued that Egypt does not need it. Boutros Ghali thought
that the matter might be handled by a side letter.
El-Baz then referred to para B–2 on page 12 having to do with dip-
lomatic, economic and cultural relations. He contended that diplomatic
recognition does not require immediate diplomatic or other relations.
Sadat, he claimed, is clear that diplomatic relations should not be pro-
vided for at this stage.
On page 13, El-Baz referred to para 3–E on the deployment of
armed forces. He noted that the Egyptians had proposed regulating the
acquisition of arms in order to stop the arms spiral. This, he noted, had
been taken from the original Israeli proposal of last year. The Secretary
thought the entire paragraph might be eliminated. The police issue
could be taken care of on page 4. The Egyptians seemed agreeable, but
El-Baz insisted that what is also needed is a reference to a general re-
duction of armaments. He reiterated that the Egyptian language had
been taken from the September 77 Israeli draft.
Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978.

The Secretary agreed to study the Egyptian suggestions. The Egyp-
tians then provided a draft paper, which in effect recasts the American
paper. It was agreed that we will go over the paper and provide the
Egyptians and the Israelis with a revised draft tomorrow evening.
El-Baz contended that since our paper is being revised on the basis of
the latest Egyptian-Israeli proposals, we should meet first tomorrow
morning with the Egyptians and only afterwards with the Israelis.
lution of the dispute between Israel and Egypt.
PEACE TREATY
Unless otherwise mutually agreed, terms of this peace treaty will
be implemented between two and three years after the peace treaty is
signed.
In the peace treaty the issues of: a) the full exercise of Egyptian sov-
ereignty up to the internationally recognized border between Egypt
and mandated Palestine; b) the time of withdrawal of Israeli personnel
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ofir5 for civilian purposes only; d) the right of free passage by ships of
Israel and other nations through the Strait of Tiran, the Gulf of Suez
and the Suez Canal; e) the construction of an international highway be-
tween the Sinai and Jordan near Eilat; and f) the stationing of military
forces; steps listed below (will be resolved by negotiations between the
parties.)
Stationing of forces
—Within an area lying approximately 50 kilometers (km) east of
the Gulf of Suez and the Suez Canal, no more than one division of
Egyptian mechanized or infantry armed forces will be stationed.
—Only United Nations forces and civil police equipped with light
weapons to perform normal police functions will be stationed lying
west of6 the international border and the Gulf of Aqaba, varying in
width from 20 km to 40 km, and east of the same border approximately
5 km in width.
—in the area not included above, border patrol units, not to exceed
three battalions, will supplement the civil police in maintaining order.
The exact demarcation of the above areas will be as mutually
agreed during the peace negotiations.
Early warning stations may exist as mutually agreed to insure
compliance with the terms of the agreement.
United Nations forces will be stationed in the Sharm el Sheikh area
to insure freedom of passage through the Straits of Tiran, and will be
removed only if such agreement is approved by the Security Council of
the United Nations.
Normal relations will be established between Egypt and Israel, in-
cluding: full recognition; termination of economic boycotts; and mutual
protection of citizens by the due process of law.
INTERIM WITHDRAWAL
Between three months and nine months after the signing of the
peace treaty, all Israeli forces will withdraw east of a line extending
from a point east of El Arish to Ras Muhammad, the exact location of
this line to be determined by mutual agreement.

48.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large
Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary, NEA
William Quandt, National Security Council
Samuel Lewis, Ambassador to Israel
ISRAELI SIDE
Prime Minister Menachem Begin
Foreign Minister Moshe Dayan
Minister of Defense Ezer Weizman
Prof. Aharon Barak, Member Israeli Supreme Court and Prime Minister’s Legal
Advisor
Dr. Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor to Foreign Minister
Major General Avraham Tamir, Director, Army Planning Branch
Mr. Elyakim Rubinstein, Assistant Director General, Ministry for Foreign Affairs
Ambassador Simcha Dinitz
Brigadier General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Mr. Dan Pattir, Advisor to the Prime Minister for Public Affairs
SUBJECT
Israeli Discussion of U.S. Paper on Sinai
Secretary Vance and Ambassador Lewis went to Foreign Minister
Dayan’s cabin to deliver to the Israelis the draft framework agreement
on the Sinai which had been discussed briefly earlier in the evening3 by
the President with Mr. Barak. Dayan looked it over quickly, asked De-
fense Minister Weizman to come over to the cabin to join him, and initi-
ated a discussion about problems he immediately saw in the document
concerning the use of airfields and the provisions for stationing of UN
Forces at Sharm el Shaikh. He was also concerned about the language
on withdrawal of all Israeli personnel and the immediate establishment
of the exercise of Egyptian sovereignty. A confused discussion with
Weizman then ensued about definitions of the various zones in the
paper, interrupted by a telephone call from Begin to Dayan. Dayan said
that the President was sitting with Begin and Barak at the present mo-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ment and suggested that we all adjourn to Holly Cabin rather than con-
tinue the discussion in two places. The Secretary agreed.
While arrangements were being made to move to Holly, Dayan
said that of the three zones mentioned in the paper, so long as Weizman
agreed with the deployments described for the two westernmost zones,
then he had no problem. All of the problems, as he pointed out, are in
the zone from 20 to 40 kilometers west of the old international frontier
between Sinai and Palestinian mandate. He did not see a way to reach
agreement at Camp David on all of the complex problems in that zone,
and suggested leaving negotiations on these issues for the next phase,
retaining the status quo while those negotiations went on.
Secretary Vance asked Weizman whether the dispositions of forces
his understandings with Sadat. Weizman said that they were, though
some rewording and readjustment would be necessary.
The Dayan-Weizman-Vance meeting then adjourned to Holly,
where it was joined by the remainder of the Israeli Delegation and by
Saunders, Atherton, and Quandt. Begin began by asking Rosenne to
read out slowly the text of the US Sinai proposal. Begin then initiated a
paragraph-by-paragraph discussion, after some preliminary and rather
prolonged discussion among the Israelis in Hebrew.
Begin said that according to his agreement this evening with Presi-
dent Carter, paragraph B would be dropped and would be replaced by
language which stated in essence that the issue of the Israeli settlements
“would be decided in the peace treaty.” After further discussion in
which Dayan restated his view of the difficulty in resolving the com-
plex issues in the easternmost zone at this point, Dayan suggested re-
vising paragraph B to read, “Except as otherwise agreed in the final
peace treaty, Israeli armed forces will be withdrawn from Sinai.” He
said that this should be coupled with a statement that during the period
of negotiations for a final peace treaty, the status quo should prevail,
and that all the issues involving that zone will be discussed and de-
cided in the negotiations for the final peace treaty.
Begin then went back to a paragraph-by-paragraph approach,
saying that the first paragraph was fine, and that the second paragraph
should read, “All the principles of UN Resolution 242 will apply in the
resolution of the dispute between Israel and Egypt.” (He stressed that
the dispute was between the two countries, and did not just involve
Sinai. Secretary Vance agreed.)
They then agreed that the word “full” in paragraph A would
follow the first word “the”, rather than precede the word “Egyptian”.
There was some objection by Begin to the use of the word “full” but he
dropped it.

49.
Editorial Note
On September 14, 1978, General Secretary of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union Leonid I. Brezhnev wrote a letter to President
Jimmy Carter on the state of U.S.-Soviet relations. As part of his tour
d’horizon of the “specific manifestations of the unsatisfactory state of
affairs in our relations,” Brezhnev offered an assessment of the
“problem” of the Middle East and of the Carter administration’s role in
the Egyptian-Israeli peace process. Brezhnev wrote that the Soviet

51.
Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat and
Israeli Prime Minister Begin
Camp David, September 15, 1978
To Pres. Sadat & P.M. Begin:
We are approaching the final stage of our negotiations. With your
approval, I propose that today we receive your most constructive rec-
ommendations, that tomorrow (Saturday) be devoted to drafting ef-
forts, and that we conclude the meeting at Camp David at some time
during the following day. We will, at that time, issue a common state-
ment to the press, drafted together. Additionally, we should agree not
to make any further public statements prior to noon on Monday. Please
let me know if you object to any of these proposals.
J.C.
52.
Handwritten Note Prepared by the Ambassador to Israel
(Lewis)
Vance, Lewis, Barak, Dinitz
Vance went over Egyptian suggestions2—Barak accepted some, re-
jected others. Will call back tomorrow on some.
several problems:
1) last sentence (“own form of govt”)—I discussed with MB. He
agrees to (change).
2) re (d)—The peace treaty will be submitted for approval to the
elected representatives of the parties.”
(or maybe—“submitted to the vote of the elected reps of the parties.”)
3) (c)—Barak has new language:
(gave copy)
Purpose of word “also”: means final solution must also cover poss.
claim of sovereign[ty] by both Jordan, Israel, etc.
i.e. to Barak—also means “other claims”.
To Egyptions—also could mean + self-determination
CV—I think it’s a real step. Re the old text of (c), other problems:
Reads whole new “c” per Barak.
9:20—Weizman/Tamir join us.
He had just dropped in on Sadat—½ hour.
Free access tomorrow.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
53.
Handwritten Note Prepared by the Ambassador to Israel
(Lewis)
Vance, Mondale, Zbig., Saunders, Lewis, Quandt
Dayan, Barak, Dinitz
—Barak reconfirms GOI views on Egyptian proposals re Sept. 15
draft given last night.
—GOI rejects Egyptian “package” language
Vance tables new US language for A–1–c in the Framework. All
read carefully. Consultation in Hebrew.
—Barak:
a) Less important point:
highlights it too much—and leaves out vote by all parties.
b) major problem is structural; is 242 the basis for final status of
WB/G?
—Dayan:
We feel absolutely that there’s a mixture here; peace treaties on 242
w/individual countries; (not mixed up—two treaties with E[gyptian]
role. Clarified in working paper last year (Oct. 5): 242, boundaries, & se-
curity arrangements belong to peace treaties—& in this case, should be
with Jordan. E[gyptian]s said at Leeds that they don’t want any in-
volvement in Gaza after 5 yrs.
Roles in peace treaty has nothing to do w/E[gypt]. We must make
treaty w/Jordan based on 242—boundaries, security, forces, etc.
Proposes 2 negot. track, per their paper. Conclusion of future
status negot. can be incorporated into the US-Jordan peace treaty.
Re future status—
1) Shouldn’t try now to define it, or set principles about it. Just
agree on general framework. Need experience.
2) a good deal of the future status should be implemented before
the end of 5th year & then go with final agreement.
Barak: Of course many issues decided in final status would affect
Israel-Jordan relationship; “can’t be divided”; Jordan is in both; what-
ever 4 party agreement reached—including on borders; will end up in
Israel-Jordan treaty
(At about 12: Carter called Dayan out of meeting.)
Vance—we believe you just can’t have an adequate discussion of
status, unless borders & security are included.
Barak—put 242 in a general [unclear—chapter?].
Vance—but this is a fundamental point, can it be glossed over.
We’ve accepted “thru talks”; we have to specify what the talks are
about.
Barak—using “boundaries” prejudges it—states have borders.
Argues that Palestinian issue has to be solved outside 242. It is to-
tally inadequate.
Argues for precedent of US-Israel Working Paper.
CV—That was done re respect to preparation for going to Geneva.
Not relevant now. Prob. of Syria isn’t now involved.
Long debate about how to deal with border/boundaries in
negotiations.
(Dayan returns at 12:50)
Vance finally proposes new language concocted earlier by Hal for
C–1 preamble.
Dayan refuses any wording which implies negot. of borders with
Palestinians or Egyptians. (He would accept 242 as [unclear—chapter?]
governing all of the H.—but wants to remove all enunciation of p. 2.
Vance insists you can’t divide the final status from issues of bound-
aries with Jordan.
In response to question from Vance, Dayan & Barak say the “final
status” does include all the possible forms of sovereignty, except an inde-
pendent state.
Adjourn at 1320 for lunch—reconvene at 1500.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
54.
Note Prepared by President Carter
undated
Settlements in West Bank and Gaza
Late in the evening, Saturday, September 16, 1978, Prime Minister
Begin, Foreign Minister Dayan, Attorney General Barak, Secretary
Vance and I were concluding discussions on the final wording of the
section on the West Bank and Gaza.
Section 6 referred to the Israeli settlements, and as drafted in the
American proposal, stated:
“6. After the signing of this framework and during the negotia-
tions, no new Israeli settlements will be established and there will be no
expansion of physical facilities in existing settlements unless otherwise
agreed by the parties.”
Prime Minister Begin objected to this language, and began to make
several alternate proposals. They included: (a) a fixed time (three
months) during which no new settlements would be constructed;
(b) prohibitions against civilian settlements only; (c) right to build a
limited number of new settlements; etc. All of these proposals were re-
jected by me.
Finally, we agreed on the exact language concerning the settle-
ments, and that the paragraph would be removed from the West Bank-
Gaza section and included in a letter from Begin to me. I told him it
could not be a secret letter and the Prime Minister replied that the text
would be made public.
The agreed text was:
“After the signing of this framework and during the negotiations,
no new Israeli settlements will be established in this area. The issue of
future Israeli settlements will be decided and agreed among the negoti-
ating parties.”
It was clear and obvious that the “negotiations” applied to the
West Bank and Gaza.
Early the next day I informed President Sadat of the agreement.
On Sunday afternoon4 Mr. Barak brought to me from Prime Min-
ister Begin a proposed text which differed substantially from that on
which we had agreed. I informed him that it was unsatisfactory, and
read to him the text on which we had agreed, which was still lying on
my desk. He did not disagree with the agreed text.
Jimmy Carter
never vote for a withdrawal of settlers prior to negotiation of an Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 398) Following this, a further dispute emerged in which
Begin objected to the U.S. draft letter to Sadat, outlining the U.S. position on Jerusalem. In
a “very unpleasant session,” Carter met with Dayan, Weizman, Barak, Mondale, Vance,
and Brzezinski, and offered to revise the letter, striking out quotations from U.S. repre-
sentatives made at the UN on the subject of Jerusalem. (Carter, Keeping Faith, pp. 398–399)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
55.
Handwritten Note Prepared by the Ambassador to Israel
(Lewis)
Dayan, Barak, Dinitz, Vance, Saunders, Lewis, Rosenne, Rubenstein
—Discussion of El Arish as place for Sinai negotiations—Dayan
will accept Egyptian flag over their quarters, & UN flag over meeting
place—as gesture to Sadat. Vance very grateful.
—Barak: agrees to text of 1–c. But it is their interpretation that
words “these negotiations . . . shall be based” applies to negotiation for
peace treaty, not status agreement. Wants this recorded formally for the
record.
—CV—OK. And I will say for the record that we interpret it as ap-
plying to both.
—Barak & Dayan: Argue very strongly against inclusion of the sen-
tence from the Vienna fallback formula.
Lengthy debate.
Vance goes off to see Pres.
Vance meets privately with Dayan.
More discussion of detail on language of 1–c and hammering out
of agreement—slowly.
Dayan—This letter in this form will just be the end of the Confer-
ence. Jerusalem too sensitive. Had it been about Gaza, well, possibly.
(grimaces.) But you’re not insisting on stating your views now on set-
tlements, etc.
Barak (after talking to Begin)—OK we accept “shall govern them-
selves”—but want it clear in the minutes of the meeting that Israeli in-
terpretation of the phrase will by [be?] “shall govern themselves
through their autonomous institutions.”
(Mondale & Jordan + Dinitz enter)
Dayan: (Restates position on letter to Mondale).
(Dayan & Barak insist none of them heard Pres. talk last night
about this letter—if so, would be impossible.)
(Carter enters)
JC—Sadat this morning said he could accept placement perma-
nence of UN forces in Raffah, if GOI had perm. UN observers on their
side & be flex. on Jerusalem. I said they can’t be. He said perhaps he
could delete, if exchange of letters. We can word them as moderate as
possible, re-endorse UN resolutions we have voted for.
MD—Argues against any restatement of US position.
JC—I can’t go back on my promise to Sadat. I’m willing to let Barak
& Cy work on wording, however.
MD—OK. But let me review problem of “occupied territory” lan-
guage. Reviews Mt. Scopus, Hadassah, Wailing Wall, Jewish quarter
history. They took it, we took it back. We have our position—& when
time comes we’ll negotiate about it. But for you to propose to restate
I have nothing to suggest.But for first time at Camp David, we’ve
been presented with a statement of your position—we didn’t come here
to argue with you over Jerusalem.
JC—Well. I understand your position. Sadat has frequently said
here that he doesn’t contemplate return of all East to Arabs.
But we need to work on this.
Barak: Why doesn’t Sadat state his position in his letter, & express
in it your position? And you just send it to us.
CV—Maybe we could merely refer to statements made by Yost,
Scranton, & Young.
Discussion Dayan/Carter—re definitions of East Jerusalem, etc.
Carter—You can’t deny us right to state our position. We might
qualify our statement re Holy Places, etc.

57.
Editorial Note
Following his meeting with the Legal Adviser to the Israeli Camp
David delegation, Aharon Barak, and Israeli Defense Minister Ezer
which they discussed the text of the U.S. draft letter in “another tense
moment,” President Jimmy Carter walked to the cabin of Israeli Prime
Minister Menachem Begin. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials,

President’s Daily Diary; Carter, Keeping Faith, pages 398–399) There,
Carter presented Begin with a set of photographs taken at the summit
and signed by Carter and Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat with per-
sonal dedications to Begin’s grandchildren, mementoes Begin received
emotionally. In an entry in his personal diary, Carter noted that the epi-
sode represented a “turning point” in Begin’s attitude toward reaching
a peace agreement “from obdurate objections to an obvious desire to be
successful.” Begin asked Carter to step inside his cabin, where he in-
formed Carter “he was sorry, but there was no way he could accept the
Jerusalem letter from US to Egypt. I told him we had submitted a new
version of it, told him to read it over, and call me and let me know what
he decided.” Begin replied that he would telephone in “about fifteen
minutes” and Carter returned to the Aspen Lodge, he noted, “very de-
jected.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 242)
Upon returning to the Aspen Lodge, Carter recorded in his per-
sonal diary: “Sadat was there, and we went over the entire text of the
Sinai and the West Bank/Gaza framework.” (Carter, White House Diary,
page 242) According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with
Library, Presidential Materials) Carter noted in his diary: “Sadat made
a few minor suggestions which I knew would suit the Israelis.” (Carter,
White House Diary, page 242) According to the President’s Daily Diary,
Begin telephoned at 3: p.m. and spoke briefly with Carter. (Carter Li-
brary, Presidential Materials) Carter summarized the call in his per-
sonal diary: “Begin called to let me know that they would accept the Je-
rusalem letter, which removed the last major obstacle with Israel! [Or
so I thought].” (Carter, White House Diary, page 242)
While making arrangements to return to Washington, Barak deliv-
ered to Carter Begin’s draft of the West Bank and Sinai settlements lan-
guage, which, Carter noted, “was completely unsatisfactory and in vio-
lation of what they had agreed the night before.” (Carter, White House
Diary, page 242) Begin telephoned Carter at his cabin and informed the
President that “he could not accept my language on the Knesset vote,
because he interpreted it as a threat to the independence of the parlia-
ment.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, page 400) Following their conversation,
Vice President Walter Mondale informed Carter that Begin was then
meeting with Sadat at the latter’s cabin. In his personal diary, Carter
described subsequent events:
“I ran out the front door, and Begin was just leaving Sadat’s cabin
in a golf cart with Barak. Begin was quite happy, saying they had had a
love-fest, and that Sadat had agreed to Begin’s language on the Knesset
vote. I knew this was wrong, and every time I asked Barak to tell me ex-
actly what Begin and Sadat had said, Begin would interrupt him and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
not let him reply. Finally, I asked Prime Minister Begin to please let
Barak answer. What Begin had asked Sadat was: ‘Do you think the
Knesset should be under pressure when they vote? Sadat said, ‘No, I
don’t think the Knesset should be under pressure.’ This was the total
conversation. Begin therefore assumed that he could write any lan-
guage he wanted concerning negotiations versus the Knesset vote.
“I asked Barak to come with me. Begin excused him, and we went
to my cabin. I checked their language very carefully and finally thought
of a way to say it that was in the final letters and satisfactory to both
Begin and Sadat. Susan [Clough] typed it up. I wrote a note to all our
people: ‘This is the exact language to be used. Do not use any other lan-
guage on or off the record.’ We firmed the issue up, literally at the very
last minute. Only then did I realize that we had finally succeeded.”
(Carter, White House Diary, page 243)
The note referenced by Carter, and to which he appended the
handwritten message quoted above, reads: “There is one major issue
on which agreement has not been reached. Egypt states that agreement
to remove Israeli settlements from Egyptian territory is a prerequisite
to a peace treaty. Israel states that the issue of the Israeli settlements
should be resolved during the peace negotiations. Within two weeks
the Knesset will decide on the issue of the settlements.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 53,
Following this, the three leaders and their staffs departed Camp
David by helicopter for Washington. At the White House, a nationally-
televised signing ceremony was held in the East Room from 10: p.m.
President’s Daily Diary) The three leaders signed the final versions of
the two “framework” documents, “A Framework for Peace in the
Middle East Agreed at Camp David” and “Framework for the Conclu-
sion of a Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel.” For the texts of these
two documents, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, pages
1523–1528. Accompanying the two framework documents were nine
letters: a) a September 17 letter from Begin to Carter informing the Pres-
ident of his intention to submit the question of Israeli settlements in the
Sinai to the Knesset; b) a September 17 letter from Carter to Sadat trans-
mitting to the latter Begin’s letter; c) a September 17 letter from Sadat to
Carter affirming the Egyptian position on Israel’s Sinai settlements; d) a
September 22 letter from Carter to Begin acknowledging letter (a) and
attaching letter (c); e) a September 17 letter from Sadat to Carter af-
firming the Egyptian position on the status of Jerusalem; f) a September
17 letter from Begin to Carter affirming the Israeli position on the status
of Jerusalem; g) a September 22 letter from Carter to Sadat acknowl-
edging letter (e) and informing Sadat that he intended to transmit it to

Begin; h) a September 17 letter from Sadat to Carter informing him that
Egypt “will be prepared to assume the Arab role” with regard to the
Framework for Peace’s provisions related to the West Bank and Gaza;
and i) a September 22 letter from Carter to Begin acknowledging
Begin’s understanding of “Palestinians” or “Palestinian people” in the
Framework text to mean “Palestinian Arabs” and Begin’s under-
standing of “West Bank” to mean “Judea and Samaria.” The texts of
these letters were published on September 22 and are printed in Public
ceremony, the Egyptian Minister of Foreign Affairs Muhammad
Ibrahim Kamel resigned from the Egyptian cabinet in protest of the
Camp David Agreements and was replaced by Minister of State
Boutros Boutros-Ghali on an interim basis. An additional side letter,
from Secretary of Defense Harold Brown to Israeli Minister of Defense
Ezer Weizman, in which the United States pledged to consult with the
Israelis on assistance the former could give in connection with the relo-
cation of Israel’s Sinai airbases in Eitam and Etzion to new locations in
the Negev desert area of Israel, was agreed on September 28. The De-
partment transmitted the text of this letter in telegram 247570 to Tel
Aviv, September 28. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D780396–1338)
On September 18, President Carter addressed a Joint Session of
Congress on the outcome of the Camp David Summit and the agree-
ments reached. The text of this speech is printed in Public Papers: Carter,
On September 28, the Israeli Knesset concluded its debate on the
Camp David Agreements, approving them by a vote of 84–19. The Is-
raeli Commerce and Industry Minister Yigael Hurvitz resigned from
the Israeli cabinet in protest. For Begin’s statement to the Knesset fol-
lowing the debate, see Israel’s Foreign Relations: Selected Documents,

58.
Memorandum for the Record
SUBJECT
President’s Telephone Conversation with King Hussein of Jordan
The following conversation took place between President Carter
President. I think we have had a very successful Camp David con-
ference. We have come out with a tremendous improvement in the
status of the Arabs in general and the Palestinians in particular. Let me
just summarize briefly some of the provisions in the settlement which I
think you would like. Then I would like to make a request of you.
—First of all, the Israelis accept the proposition that, in the West
Bank, Resolution 242 applies in all its parts, all its principles and all its
provisions.
—Secondly, the Israeli military occupation will be concluded im-
mediately as soon as a self-government can be set up in the West Bank/
Gaza and the provision calls for full autonomy for the Palestinians who
live in the West Bank area. It also provides for a strong police force for
the local inhabitants who can also be joined by Jordanian citizens of
course, and with strong liaison directly with you or Egypt or Israel to
control terrorism and to promote internal security.
—The Palestinians would have complete and full and equal in-
volvement in negotiating the final status of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, and, if you have no objections, when the treaty is negotiated be-
tween you and Israel, the Palestinian Arabs will have full rights to par-
ticipate in those negotiations. The Israelis have agreed. Of course, if you
have objection, they cannot attend. But that will be up to you.
—After the negotiations take place between you and Israel and
Egypt and the Palestinians, there will be a separate vote by the Pales-
tinians themselves to either accept or reject the agreement that has been
worked out. There would be an immediate withdrawal of Israeli secu-
rity forces. I would say a substantial reduction. And the Israeli security
forces could only remain in specified points that you, the Egyptians
and the Palestinians would have to approve. There would be a Jorda-
nian participation in joint patrols and monitoring of the borders if you
agree. The Israelis have already agreed.
—The Israelis recognize that the legitimate rights of the Pales-
tinians have to be honored and that there will be no new settlements in
the West Bank or Gaza Strip during the time of the negotiations and
any additional settlements would be as determined by the negotiations
themselves.
—The Israelis have agreed also that there will be a final settlement
of the status of the West Bank/Gaza Strip and also a treaty with you
within the five-year period.
These are some of the provisions which are in the Camp David
agreement that directly involve you and/or the Palestinians. Our hope
is, Your Majesty, that you would agree to have a thorough briefing
from us, and following that briefing, that you would agree to join the
present negotiations. This is a first step, but it provides a framework
through which all the hopes and dreams of the Palestinian people who
live in the West Bank and Gaza can be realized. But it is very crucial
that you be willing to participate.
If you have specific questions after you have a thorough briefing
on the documents, or have objections, I would like to have an opportu-
nity to work with the Israelis to remove those objections before you re-
ject the possibility of your participation. I hope that you will not make a
decision on this until we can have a thorough briefing for you.
I have already invited Crown Prince Fahd to come to Washington
as soon as it is convenient to talk to him about the provisions of the
Camp David settlement. But I urge you in the strongest possible terms
to participate fully in it along with ourselves, if you desire, and the Is-
raelis, the Palestinians, and the Egyptians.
King Hussein. Thank you very much indeed, Mr. President. I ap-
preciate very much indeed your kind call. Mr. President, the last few
hours have caused us very many surprises and call for very deep
thought. And with your kind permission, sir, it is something I will
think about very carefully and I will be looking forward to receiving
the briefing. On the other hand, we will see what we can do not only
within Jordan but also within the area itself. Against the background of
these many many years of tragedy and see what we can come up with.
With your permission, Mr. President, I will be in touch with you.
President. Can I assume, Your Majesty, that you will try to partici-
pate in the negotiations, but that you will not make a decision until
after you get a thorough briefing from us? Is that correct?
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
King Hussein. I would appreciate a thorough briefing, Mr. Presi-
dent, but on the subject of participation . . . If you don’t mind, sir, I
would like to be able to, with the Government, over a whole day to go
over details of exactly where we stand. Then hopefully we should be
able to be guided by God to take whatever decisions will serve the area
in the best possible way.
President. So you will not make any statement against participation
until after you get a briefing from us, is that correct?
King Hussein. We won’t be making any statement whatsoever until
after I have had a chance to really absorb all that has happened.
President. Can I tell Secretary Vance to send someone to meet with
you and go over the questions that you might have?
King Hussein. I would appreciate that very much indeed, Mr.
President.
President. We will do that. I know that you are coming to see me be-
fore too long, but I would like to give you this briefing very quickly.
King Hussein. Thank you very very much. As you know, I have not
yet received it officially. I only arrived back in Jordan a few minutes
ago. I hope that it will be possible very soon to respond to your kind
invitation.
President. I’m going to see Secretary Vance in just a minute and I’ll
tell him to be in touch with you through diplomatic channels to give
you a thorough briefing.
King Hussein. I hope Mrs. Carter is well. Give her our regards and
respect.
President. I’ll do that. Thank you very much, sir.
King Hussein. All the best.
President. Good bye.

59.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
President Sadat
Substance of Discussion
1. The two presidents reviewed the purposes of the Vance mission
to Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Syria. President Carter summarized the
substance of the letters that the Secretary will take with him. He also
stressed the importance of discussing with the Saudis such issues as
Lebanon and Yemen. President Sadat both endorsed the mission and
agreed with the substantive points.
2. The President stressed the importance of restraint in public dis-
cussion of the Camp David accords. In this connection he strongly
praised the very positive as well as restrained posture taken by Presi-
dent Sadat, especially in President Sadat’s comments on some observa-
tions made in the last two days by Prime Minister Begin.
3. The two presidents discussed the forthcoming Egyptian-Israeli
negotiations. In this connection, President Sadat stated that he very
much hoped that the U.S. will take part in these talks through the pres-
ence of a representative of the President as well as the pertinent U.S.
Ambassadors. The President indicated that he expected that Roy Ath-
erton would be present, in addition to Ambassadors Eilts and Lewis.

60.
Memorandum for the Record
Washington, September 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 19 September 1978
1. I congratulated him on the success of the Summit. I asked what
we could do to help from here. He indicated that we are trying to find
ways to help Sadat survive. These are not to be symbolic actions but ac-
tions that would really be of support.
a. David Aaron has suggested that because there are reports of dis-
satisfaction within the military about their lot in life that we might help
here. Specifically, we might build barracks or otherwise help to im-
prove the material conditions of the soldiers. This goes to a report we
promulgated that General Gamasy had found lower ranking officers
willing to criticize his standard of living. I said I had my doubts as to
whether we could really get at this because barracks wouldn’t do for
many of the people; they need better housing for their families, but that
I would have a look at just what the dissatisfaction of the Egyptian mili-
tary is. What are the specific bases of complaint? This might give Aaron
and those working on the policy side some clue as to where they could
make a suggested offer of help.
b. [1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified]
c. The two actions above should be done on an urgent basis.
[Omitted here is discussion of issues unrelated to the Arab-Israeli
dispute.]
Stansfield Turner

61.
Letter From President Carter to King Hussein of Jordan
Washington, September 19, 1978
THE WHITE HOUSE
Washington

62.
Letter From President Carter to Syrian President Assad
Washington, September 19, 1978
Dear Mr. President:
I want to add a personal note to my message to you of September
17, 1978, in which I informed you of the results of the talks at Camp
David. Your country’s concerns have been very much on my mind in
the past two weeks. I would appreciate very much hearing from you di-
rectly in order to avoid any possible misunderstandings.
Let me emphasize a point that I made last night in my speech be-
fore a joint session of Congress3—the peace we seek in the Middle East
is a comprehensive one. The general Framework document signed by
Egypt and Israel specifically deals with principles applicable to all
fronts of the conflict. United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 in
all its parts remains the agreed basis for a peaceful settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. I also stated in my speech that there must be a just
solution of the refugee problem which takes into account appropriate
United Nations resolutions.
I know of your deep commitment not only to Syria and the Arab
Nation, but also of your concern for the legitimate rights of the Pales-
tinian people, which Israel has now, for the first time, recognized.
While the Camp David agreements do not answer all of the questions
related to the Palestinians, they do provide a basis for solving the Pales-
tinian problem in all its aspects. Under the terms of the agreement
signed by Israel, a solution would be possible in two stages. First, the
Israeli military occupation of the West Bank and Gaza would be ended,
a substantial number of Israeli forces would be withdrawn, and those
that remain would be redeployed into a few specified locations to pro-
vide Israel with security from external attack. Internal security would
be handled by a strong Palestinian police force. With the end of the mil-
itary occupation, a freely elected self-governing authority would be es-
tablished. After the signing of this framework and during the negotia-
tions to set up the governing authority, no new Israeli settlements will
be established. The issue of future Israeli settlements will be decided
and agreed among the negotiating parties.
The second stage would involve negotiations on the final status of
the West Bank and Gaza, and on peace between Israel and Jordan, with
Palestinians participating in those negotiations. Those negotiations
should be based on the principles of Resolution 242, including with-
drawal of Israeli armed forces. The results of these negotiations should
allow the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza to decide how they
wish to govern themselves.
I know that there are many issues that we were not able to resolve
at Camp David. But I do want to assure you of my deep personal com-
mitment to remain involved in the search for a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. I am hopeful that you will share your views with me
and with Secretary Vance when he visits you in Damascus on Sep-
tember 23.
You have my very best wishes.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter

63.
Telegram From the Department of State to the United States
Observer Mission in the Sinai
Glaspie. Paris for Nicholas Murphy. Other addressees for Chiefs of
Mission.
Warning notice sensitive sources and methods involved not releas-
able to foreign nationals
1. Camp David Summit. The Jordanian Government issued an offi-
cial statement on Camp David yesterday following a three-hour Cab-
inet session. The statement said Jordan:
(A) would not be bound by agreements it had not helped to
negotiate;
(B) believes that the Arab-Israeli crisis requires a comprehensive
solution; and
(C) criticized the signing of a peace treaty between Egypt and Is-
rael. “The dissociation of any of the Arab parties from the responsi-
bilities of the collective action to reach a just and comprehensive solu-
tion . . . constitutes a weakening of the Arab stand and the chances of
reaching a just and comprehensive solution.”
2. Despite this negative statement, King Hussein’s attitude toward
the post-Camp David era is not yet clear. The King, however, seems
aware that the outcome of the summit will oblige him to make a diffi-
cult decision on his entry into the peace process.
3. The Jordanian press has been universally critical, and the ma-
jority of Jordanians seem to oppose entry into direct peace negotiations.
The East Bank Jordanians who dominate the government are very re-
luctant once again to be held responsible for the West Bank and the Pal-
estinian problem. They also fear that if Jordan becomes saddled with
negotiating for the Palestinians, the future of the Hashemite Kingdom
would be jeopardized.
4. The large Palestinian community in Jordan is also unlikely to
support a Jordanian role in the negotiations. They recognize the PLO as
cret; Priority. Drafted by Albert A. Vaccaro (INR/RNA/NE); approved by W.D. Wolle
(INR/RNA); cleared by C. William Kontos (SSM). Sent for information Priority to Abu
Dhabi, Algiers, Baghdad, Brasilia, Cairo, Doha, Jerusalem, Kuwait, London, Madrid, Ma-
nama, Mogadiscio, Moscow, Muscat, Nicosia, Nouakchott, Paris, Rabat, Tehran, Tel
Aviv, Tripoli, Tunis, Sana, USUN, and the Department of the Treasury.

the legitimate representative of the Palestinians. Hussein seems also to
be under pressure from the other Arabs not to break ranks and join
Sadat. Syrian President Assad called him late yesterday, and Hussein
spoke with Saudi Prince Fahd as well.
5. Following a special meeting chaired by King Khalid, the Saudi
Cabinet also issued an official statement on Camp David. We believe it
is likely that the Saudi and Jordanian statements on Camp David may
have been partially coordinated. The Saudi statement called the docu-
ments an “unacceptable formula for a definitive peace” because “it did
not make absolutely clear Israel’s intention to withdraw from all Arab
territories it occupied, including Jerusalem.” The statement also noted
that the Agreements failed to record the Palestinian right to self-
determination and ignored the role of the PLO as recognized by Arab
summits.
6. The Saudi statement goes on to say that, in spite of its reserva-
tions, the Saudi Government “does not consider that it has a right to in-
terfere in the internal affairs of any Arab country or to oppose such a
country’s right to regain its lost territories by way of armed struggle or
peaceful means as long as these do not contradict the higher Arab in-
terests.” The statement praised President Carter for his efforts but said
Saudi Arabia’s decision was based on its deep commitment to its Is-
lamic and Arab principles and to the decisions of Arab conferences. It
called for a collective Arab stance which would lead to victory. We be-
lieve, however, that the Saudis are indicating that they do not object to
Egypt’s negotiating the recovery of the Sinai but they oppose any
agreement with Israel which fails to meet the fundamental demands of
the other Arabs. (Confidential)
7. Israel. Embassy Tel Aviv reports2 that several dozen Gush Em-
unim members established an unauthorized settlement a short distance
south of Nablus on September 18. Gush leaders claim this is the site of
the biblical Elon Moreh and the action was termed the “proper answer
by the land of Israel faithful to the Camp David Agreement.” The set-
tlers have been joined by Knesset member Geula Cohen. Deputy De-
fense Minister Tzipori told the Embassy that he wanted to prevent the
settlers from getting to the site but was overruled by a high authority,
probably, the Embassy reports, Acting Prime Minister Yadin. The site
was surrounded yesterday by the IDF. Yadin told the Embassy that the
settlers would be removed forcibly if they did not leave voluntarily but
he postponed resolution of the problem until conferring with Weizman
Foreign Policy File, D780381–0538)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and Dayan. The Cabinet reportedly decided last night that the settle-
ment will be removed.
8. There is certain to be greatly heightened interest and focus—as
well as controversy—over the settlements issue as a result of the Camp
David Accord calling for a freeze on settlement development for at
least 90 days. Israel has steadily expanded its settlements in the occu-
pied territories since the 1967 war. There are five types of civilian settle-
ments, in addition to para-military Nahals. The most successful civilian
settlements are associated with large kibbutz federations. The kibbutz
is a communal settlement, in which the land is leased from the State,
and worked collectively. A moshav is a smallholders’ community, in
which each settler works a separate piece of land leased from the State.
A dormitory settlement is a type of bedroom community, where most
residents work elsewhere. A regional center is a larger community, sur-
rounded by four to six small agricultural communities, for which is
provided administration, support, and services. And finally, an urban
center is a community planned and built by the government.
9. The 48 settlements on the West Bank, pose the greatest problem,
as far as pressure for new settlements is concerned. Comparative pho-
tography of one such community on the West Bank, Shiloh, illustrates
the rate at which one of the settlements can be expanded. A comparison
that the number of housing units at Shiloh had increased substantially.
Tel Aviv has also continued to increase housing units at other existing
settlements in the last several months, suggesting that Israel wanted to
achieve as large a buildup as possible in the territory before negotia-
tions with Egypt caused a halt to further development. Between late
March and mid-July, 500 housing units were added at 17 settlements.
These new units could accommodate up to 2,000 more settlers. They
appear to be part of a broad-based plan, rather than efforts of one reli-
gious group or political party. (Secret/Noforn)
10. Steadfastness front. According to Embassy Damascus4 all
“steadfastness” states except Iraq are expected to be represented by
their leaders at today’s meeting in Syria. A Foreign Ministry official

commented that his colleagues were studying the Camp David docu-
ments “phrase by phrase.” He said the Front members would compare
their analyses and draw conclusions.
11. The Syrian Government has not yet reacted officially to the con-
ference although the media have again begun calling Sadat a “traitor”
and a “capitulationist.” A senior Baath Party official published a
sharply negative commentary on the Camp David results. Not surpris-
ingly, the reactions of many politically aware Syrians are more mod-
erate than their leadership. They recognize that Egypt got a good deal
in the Sinai but are concerned with the absence of any mention of the
Golan. Despite Syria’s opposition to Sadat, these Syrians believe that
Sadat had publicly committed himself to work on behalf of all Arabs.
12. A definitive Syrian reaction is not expected until after the Front
meetings conclude but it will, undoubtedly, be very negative. Assad is
known to believe that once Egypt is excluded from the Arab-Israeli
equation, Israel will have little incentive to compromise further.
(Confidential)
13. Lebanon. Reports are circulating in Beirut that Sarkis intends to
call for the renewal of the ADF mandate which expires in October but
hopes to blunt Lebanese rightist criticism by circumscribing the Syrian
role. The Phalangist radio and other sources report that Sarkis is ex-
pected to try to reduce the number of Syrian troops operating in Leb-
anon and confine the Syrians to assembly areas from which they would
be used as a ready reaction force in support of Lebanese forces. Even if
Sarkis succeeds in restricting the Syrian role, this would not satisfy
hardline rightists. Dany Shamun warned after leaving a meeting with
Sarkis that it would be “a gross mistake” for Sarkis to renew the ADF
mandate. (Confidential)
Christopher
tion calling for the Front’s member states to break political and economic relations with
Egypt and for the transfer of Arab League headquarters from Cairo. A full summary of
the summit’s resolutions is in telegram 5738 from Damascus, September 27; National Ar-

64.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
U.S. Side
Jordanian Side
Secretary Vance
King Hussein
Ambassador to Jordan
Crown Prince Hassan
Nicholas Veliotes
Prime Minister Adnan Badran
Ambassador Alfred Atherton
Chief of Royal Court Abdu Sharaf
Ambassador Michael Sterner
Minister of Court
Assistant Secretary for Public
Amer Khamaash
Affairs Hodding Carter
Minister of Education
DCM Roscoe Suddarth (notetaker)
Abdul Salem Majali
Minister of Information
Adnan Abu Odeh
Commander-in-Chief Lt. General
Zayd Bin Shaker
King Hussein: I would like to seize the opportunity to welcome
you to Jordan. It is a personal pleasure to meet you at any time as a
friend. I very much appreciate the fact that President Carter was kind
enough to ask you to come to Jordan to speak about the current impor-
tant issues. Needless to say, I have always held the highest regard for
President Carter’s sincerity and determination for a just and durable
peace. He has spent many hours on this fundamental problem.
Recent developments have taken us by surprise, not only in terms
of the results at Camp David but also because of the unexpected posi-
tions of Egypt. We have looked at President Carter’s letter2 describing
Camp David and held a meeting with the Cabinet. At every level in
Jordan and in the area people are preoccupied with these develop-
ments and also in terms of the meaning of the Camp David documents.
We are not able at this stage to adopt any final position before get-
ting the details on what happened at Camp David and the meaning of
the words of the documents. We hope you can cover some of the gaps. I
interrupted my travels abroad and came back immediately after Camp
David; I have been in constant consultation with my Government and
in touch with Syria and Saudi Arabia. The implications of Camp David
are very serious and will have an affect on the future in a very basic
manner. We are reserving judgment until it is clearer where Camp
David stands and where it is headed.
Thank you for the Presidential letter after Camp David. As a result
we now have at least a glimpse of what happened at Camp David.
Thank you also for the President’s letter3 conveying an invitation
for me to visit the United States. I accept with great delight. We will be
in touch to ask President Carter if he can spare time at another appro-
priate date for my visit.
Camp David has placed us in an untenable position. Nothing is
more important to us than maintaining the closest relations with the
United States. Furthermore, if we have an idea of the end result that we
would be striving for in a peace settlement we would believe in doing
our utmost to attain a just and durable peace. In reviewing the past, you
should remember that we were the first “Palestinian refugees” and the
Hashemite Family was involved since the beginning of the century in
the struggle for Palestinian rights. Many of our citizens are from Pales-
tine and a sizeable number of our citizens have been affected by this
tragedy: some in 1967 moved to this part of the country, some of whom
were uprooted from their homes in Palestine two or three times. My
grandfather4 stood for Arab rights in Jerusalem and gave his own life in
that cause. My own experience has been to make a durable peace and
this has been a precious objective for me. This problem has affected us
all personally and left many scars. Our objective is to live through this
problem until a solution is found.
We have many questions. One element of surprise was in the
change of events and attitudes since the initial adoption of Resolution
would be implemented in a short time not exceeding a few months.
This meant Israel would withdraw from all territory occupied in the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
was more for internationalization. For us this meant internationaliza-
tion of both the Israeli and the Arab sides of Jerusalem.
Jordan
has
been
consistently
in
favor
of
Palestinian
self-
determination. Before Camp David we sent President Carter and Presi-
dent Sadat a letter outlining our position. We had assurances from
Cairo that this was also the Egyptian position and we thought a total
solution and a comprehensive settlement was also their goal.
Throughout the many months of the past we talked about nothing
other than a comprehensive solution, and we argued with others in the
area when they said Egypt would go its own way (for a separate peace).
Previous to that, we were all working for a unified Arab delegation to
Geneva. With the Sadat initiative6 everything changed, but Egypt said
they were pursuing a comprehensive settlement even just before they
left for Camp David.
We very much appreciate U.S. efforts in pursuing a solution to the
Middle East problem. And we have carefully read the two documents
coming from the Camp David meeting. These documents suggest that
they provide a framework for a settlement. We hope this is the case and
have many questions.
One: Do these documents in fact provide a framework for a com-
prehensive and final settlement?
Two: There is a question of the five-year transition period. In our
mind, are Israeli attitudes that prevail in the last eleven years going to
continue to prevail during this five-year period?
Three: There is the question of the Israeli military presence and the
withdrawal to specified locations for security purposes. What specified
locations? What security purposes?
Four: What are the details of the transition arrangements including
the Jordanian role for the maintenance of security. Whose security and
in what way? Against what threats? We have already positioned troops
along our border with Israel for many years to prevent hostile infiltra-
tions from attacking Israel. How would this new situation differ?
Five: During the five-year transition period Palestinians are sup-
posed to participate. In what and from where? What freedoms will they
enjoy? What rights will they enjoy and to what degree?
Six: Is the West Bank/Gaza formulation supposed to be a total so-
lution to the Palestinian problem? Who are the Palestinians who have
the right to join in the negotiations?
Seven: There is discussion of a Jordanian/Israeli peace treaty. On
what basis?
Eight: There is mention of Resolution 242. Would it apply equally
to Jordan, Egypt and Syria, as well as to the West Bank and Gaza?
Which territories would be ceded to whom? This question is particu-
larly important since the Israeli position on territorial withdrawal even
in statements by its leaders after Camp David is contradictory to Reso-
lution 242.
Nine: How can Palestinians determine their own future or organize
the way to self-government under even a partial Israeli occupation?
Ten: Would Palestinian representatives be drawn only from the oc-
cupied territory or would electors have a wider choice?
Eleven: Regarding Israeli settlements: Would all actions on en-
larging present settlements or building new settlements be stopped
from the moment of the Camp David agreement or only stopped
during the initial negotiations for a self-governing authority?
Twelve: The Jerusalem question is of very great significance for us
and for others. The U.S. position is that the status quo is not acceptable
as a final solution. However, what is the precise U.S. attitude towards
Jerusalem?
Thirteen: All persons are now depending on Jordan regarding the
implementation of Camp David. We are flattered and touched but on
the other hand what are we able to do the way things presently stand?
Is, in fact, Jordanian participation as crucial or essential as outlined?
Fourteen: What can the United States do in terms of support and in
obtaining support of others for Jordan? We mention this only in a gen-
eral context since we know there will be risks. We wish to see a sound
final solution that will be acceptable to future generations. Anything
short of that would cause further turbulence and reflect on those in-
volved as well as the United States.
In responding to the points of the President’s letter we have the fol-
lowing observations:
One: We frankly have reservations on the results of Camp David.
Despite assurances about your interest in a comprehensive peace, in
fact Camp David spells out a separate Egyptian/Israeli agreement
which is unconnected or binding with the other aspects of the Arab/
Israeli problem. This will lead to the isolation of Egypt and the para-
lyzing of the peace process. We feel this very strongly, particularly
since a separate peace has been a primary Israeli objective throughout.
Two: On the invitation for us to participate in administering the
West Bank and Gaza, we are asked to assume legal, military and polit-
ical obligations before knowing what the end result of the transition
period will be. If we knew the end result we would be prepared to con-
sider such an involvement. However, since the nature of the transi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tional period as described is so vague, it could result in an unacceptable
end result in five years.
Three: Apart from some insubstantial changes in the Israeli posi-
tion, the Camp David framework does not assure Israeli withdrawal to
its pre-1967 borders, self-determination for the Palestinians, a resolu-
tion of the refugee problem or the future role of Jordan. It is, therefore,
not possible to conclude from Camp David that these questions will be
answered affirmatively at the end of five years of negotiations. This is
precisely the situation that we have faced for the past eleven years with
respect to resolution 242.
Four: The two documents are also extremely different. The Israeli/
Egyptian document is extremely explicit as to terms and end result in
contrast to the vague nature of the other document, particularly as con-
cerns the end result.
Five: Jordan is asked to participate in West Bank security arrange-
ments aimed against Palestinian subversion, yet without knowing if
there will in fact really be an end of the Israel occupation (that the sub-
version is presumably aimed at terminating).
Six: President Carter seems to be departing from positions earlier
in his Administration on the Palestinian question.
Seven: If Jordan is expected to participate, the basis for it must be
clearer and more balanced. We are not tempted to participate in the im-
plementation of the Begin Plan. If the Begin Plan will be implemented
anyway, with U.S. assent, why then involve Jordan? It would appear
this Plan could be unilaterally implemented.
Pardon us for our frankness. I feel bad personally after your long
ordeal at Camp David to discuss things in this manner. However, it is
my duty to ensure that there are no misunderstandings in our position
regarding problems of such magnitude.
We studied the results of Camp David but because of their gravity
we had no choice but to make our statement8 of yesterday in which we
said that Camp David does not constitute a binding legal document for
us until a lot is cleared up and that we were not involved in bringing
this document about. To tell the truth, we feel less let down by the
United States than by our sister Arab state (Egypt), since there is no
linkage between the two documents of Camp David. But this is some-
thing between us and Egypt and not for us to discuss at this point. We
have received many requests from you to keep quiet on Camp David.
However, we have a public opinion including many persons who have
suffered the most regarding the Palestinian problem. We have been
startled by the many local statements against the documents, vague as
they are. Israel has a U.S. commitment to support its survival and other
countries in the area have similar great power backing. We here how-
ever have nothing but ourselves and our links to the past and the future
and a desire for peace and a more stable and progressive area. I hope
there is no question that we will play a role toward achieving a peace
we feel we can live with. For this we are ready to risk everything, but
short of that, this risk is not justified and is not honest in terms of U.S.
interests in this turbulent area. To you, once again thanks for being
with us today.
Secretary Vance’s Reply:
I want to express my deep gratitude for the gracious and warm
welcome I have received on behalf of President Carter and my country
to discuss the incredibly important questions involved here. I want to
answer all the questions you have put to me, but first I want to mention
some general considerations behind the reasons why the President con-
sidered it so important to send me here.
We have not pressed for Jordanian participation until we felt we
had achieved a workable framework for further progress. We are
pleased that we now have a framework which, in the language of Your
Majesty’s August 28 letter, has a “credible chance of progress and of a
productive conclusion . . .”
Assuming a favorable vote by the Knesset on the Sinai settlements
question, a concrete, substantive, and procedural framework has been
established which will make it possible for serious Egyptian-Israeli ne-
gotiations to begin in the very near future. President Carter also at-
tached great importance to an early beginning of the negotiations re-
lating to the West Bank and Gaza. He believes very strongly it is of
great importance that Jordan be in on the process at an early stage be-
cause if it goes ahead without Jordan’s being a participant from the be-
ginning, we are fearful that Jordan’s ability to influence the process will
become much more difficult as time passes.
We recognize that the Camp David agreements do not contain ev-
erything Your Majesty or we would have wished. We also recognize
that this makes the decision Your Majesty faces all the more difficult. It
is important, however, to look not only at what is not in the agree-
ments, but also at the very substantial new elements which they contain
from the Arab point of view. I might just summarize some of those
points:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Israeli military occupation ends. In both the West Bank and
Gaza, Prime Minister Begin has committed Israel in principle to with-
draw in accordance with Resolution 242.
—For the first time ever, a self-governing Palestinian authority
will be created during the transitional period. This will take place in the
West Bank/Gaza as the Israeli military government is withdrawn. We
believe that if responsibly conducted, this should set in motion an
evolutionary process which will enable the Palestinians to govern
themselves.
—Once started, we believe that this process will become irrevers-
ible so that at the end of the five year transitional period an outcome
which meets basic Arab requirements will be almost inevitable. A
major advantage of this approach is that it deals with the West Bank
and Gaza in their totality, rather than talking about some form of parti-
tioning of the West Bank—e.g. along the lines of the Allon Plan, or
other forms of partition.
—Next, the Israelis have recognized the “legitimate rights” of the
Palestinians. The implications of the acceptance of this principle are
very important. They should enable a political, economic, and social re-
lationship to develop between the Palestinians and their neighbors
which will, we hope, promote political stability and economic develop-
ment in the area.
—The document states that the Palestinians are recognized as a
party to negotiations with Egypt, Israel, and, we hope, Jordan. They
will have a real voice in determining their own future.
—The settlements on the West Bank will be brought under agreed
limitations. I might comment on what other documents say on issues
not covered in the Camp David framework. In an exchange of letters
we said that after the signing of the framework and during the negotia-
tions there would be no new settlements in the area. The issue of future
settlements would be decided by negotiations. There would be a freeze
on new Israeli settlements. During these negotiations the future of the
settlements would be agreed to among the four negotiating parties.
—There is an Israeli commitment to work out procedures
promptly on persons displaced in 1967, which have been such a great
burden on themselves and on Jordan’s resources.

—Finally, the framework does apply to all of the confrontation
states and we believe provided the desired framework of the compre-
hensive settlement.
—In addition to the gains I have just mentioned from the Arab
point of view, the Camp David agreements also offer important stra-
tegic advantages. They provide in our judgment a basis around which
moderate forces in the area, with the support of the United States and
our friends, can rally. They can help strengthen the moderates in the
area and insulate them from radical pressures.
—Precisely for those reasons, it is inevitable that the Camp David
agreements will be attacked by a number of countries and radical ele-
ments, and that they will create a certain amount of dissention (in the
area) in the short run. Over the longer run, however, they hold out a
better prospect for stability and moderation than any alternative we
can envisage.
—We are very mindful of the pressures which will be brought to
bear on Jordan, should it join the negotiating process. We have always
believed, however, that Jordan has a leadership role to play in the
search for peace. Your Majesty has played that role at key moments in
the past; we believe we are again at one of those historic moments.
—We recognize these agreements do not bind Jordan but if there is
a just solution, that Jordan must play a major role to bring that about.
—We can understand that Your Majesty will want to consult with
your friends in the area, in particular the Saudis, as well as your in-
ternal advisors, before making a final decision. Before you make that
decision, President Carter wants you to know that he remains fully
committed to the role of a full partner. He does not intend to see the
substantial achievements of Camp David, which have been recognized
as such by most of the world, fail to lead ultimately to a comprehensive
and just peace in this area. We will be involved in very practical ways in
the on-going negotiations. The results of Camp David demonstrate
what we have long maintained—that real movement can only emerge
from the dynamics of on-going negotiations. We believe those dy-
namics can continue to produce movement in the direction that Your
Majesty considers essential and important.
—Our own view of the ultimate outcome of the process remains
unchanged. We continue to prefer and will support an outcome which
links the West Bank and Gaza with Jordan. We have made this clear to
the Israelis, and President Sadat has also indicated that he supports
such an outcome should that be the desire of inhabitants of the West
Bank and Gaza.
—If Jordan decides to join the negotiations on the basis of the
Camp David framework, we are convinced that there will be broad
support in our Congress to provide the help that you may need under

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
those circumstances. We will review sympathetically what might be
done to provide additional military and economic assistance to Jordan.
—It goes without saying that we would also give Jordan full polit-
ical diplomatic support through our contacts with other area gov-
ernments and through our public statements. In this connection I
should note that among the side letters to be published in connection
with the Camp David agreements is a letter from us reaffirming our
historic position on Jerusalem. We tried to resolve Jerusalem in the doc-
ument. It was impossible. Therefore we agreed with Egypt and ulti-
mately with Israel to state our positions in documents to be made
public. Our position on Jerusalem remains that outlined by Ambas-
you are familiar. The most fulsome expression was that of Yost.
bassador Arthur J. Goldberg declared: “with regard to the specific measures taken by the
Government of Israel on June 28 [1967], I wish to make it clear that the United States does
not accept or recognize these measures as altering the status of Jerusalem. My Govern-
ment does not recognize that the administrative measures taken by the Government of
Israel on June 28 can be regarded as the last word on the matter, and we regret that they
were taken. We insist that the measures taken cannot be considered other than interim
and provisional, and not prejudging the final and permanent status of Jerusalem.” He
continued: “We believe that the most fruitful approach to a discussion of the future of Je-
rusalem lies in dealing with the entire problem as one aspect of the broader arrangements
that must be made to restore a just and durable peace in the area.” (Department of State
sador Charles Yost declared: “the United States considers that the part of Jerusalem that
came under the control of Israel in the June [1967] war, like other areas occupied by Israel,
is occupied territory and hence subject to the provisions of international law governing
the rights and obligations of an occupying power.” He continued: “Among the provi-
sions of international law which bind Israel, as they would bind any occupier, are the
provisions that the occupier has no right to make changes in laws or in administration
other than those which are temporarily necessitated by his security interest and that an
occupier may not confiscate or destroy private property. The pattern of behavior author-
ized under the Geneva convention and international law is clear: The occupier must
maintain the occupied area as intact and unaltered as possible, without interfering with
the customary life of the area, and any changes must be necessitated by immediate needs
of the occupation. I regret to say that the actions of Israel in the occupied portion of Jeru-
salem present a different picture, one which gives rise to understandable concerns that
the eventual disposition of East Jerusalem may be prejudiced, and that the rights and ac-
tivities of the population are already being affected and altered.” He continued: “My
Government regrets and deplores this pattern of activity, and it has so informed the Gov-
ernment of Israel on numerous occasions since June 1967. We have consistently refused
to recognize these measures as having anything but a provisional character and do not
accept them as affecting the ultimate status of Jerusalem.” (Department of State Bulletin,
Security Council that “as far as the United States is concerned, such unilateral measures,
including expropriation of land or other administrative action taken by the Government
of Israel, cannot be considered other than interim and provisional and cannot affect the
present international status nor prejudge the final and permanent status of Jerusalem.
The U.S. position could not be clearer.” (Department of State Bulletin, April 19, 1976, pp.

—I would welcome any suggestions Your Majesty may have with
respect to my forthcoming talks with the Saudi leadership. I would also
appreciate your thoughts about my forthcoming meeting with Presi-
dent Assad. We recognize that Jordan cannot totally ignore Syrian
views and, while we do not expect to convince Syria at this stage to
support the Camp David agreements, we will do all we can to maintain
our dialogue with Syria and to persuade it to keep an open mind.
—Finally, I would be happy to explain any of the specific parts of
the Camp David framework which Your Majesty may wish—in partic-
ular the paragraphs dealing with the West Bank/Gaza problem and the
Palestinian role. In this connection, I would welcome Your Majesty’s
judgment about ways in which moderate Palestinians, in particular
Palestinian leaders in the West Bank and Gaza, might be brought to see
the opportunities which the Camp David agreements offer to them.
Secretary Vance continued: Let me now go through the specific
questions you asked. (NOTE: The sequence below, in which the Secre-
tary repeated the King’s questions and responded, does not correspond
exactly with the sequence in which the King posed them.)
One. Jordan’s role in maintaining security and whose security?
Security is not for the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. The
document provides for the establishment of a strong local police force.
There is an unwritten understanding that the local police will be re-
sponsible for internal security. They could discharge this function
without assistance from others with the exception of certain situations
when they might need some additional assistance. Therefore, there will
need to be drawn up procedures covering the roles of the police and
other security forces in the document setting up the self-governing
authority.
Two. The question of Israeli withdrawal of armed forces to speci-
fied locations.
According to Israel, they have approximately 10,000 troops on the
West Bank, comprising three brigades plus other forces. In a tentative
and unfinalized figure, they would withdraw roughly 4,000 of their
troops to Israel and the remaining forces would be deployed to loca-
tions away from population centers so as not to interfere with the daily
activities of the inhabitants. We were shown maps on their locations.
There would also be retained two or three installations including
“black boxes” of technological instruments to give early warning.
There would be a total of 12 to 15 military installations containing some
with only 15 or 20 people. All would be laid out very promptly with
their precise locations designated. It should be emphasized that this is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
for the transition period only. At the end of this period, there would be
further withdrawals to be worked out by the parties.
Three: What would be the Palestinian participation in the negotia-
tions and what rights would they have?
There are the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. They would
not include Palestinians from outside unless by mutual agreement. On
the rights of the Palestinians: The document refers to “legitimate
rights” and says that any solution must recognize the legitimate rights
of the Palestinians and their just requirements. The Israelis fought this
hard but have now been willing to put this concept in a formal
document.
Four. How will the Palestinian problem be solved?
The document says it will be resolved in all its aspects, another
concept that Israel has consistently fought against. The document also
addresses the refugee problem not only for displaced persons but in a
broader refugee context.
Five. To whom do the principles of 242 apply?
The document says that 242 and its principles apply to all the
parties. The negotiations in Paragraph 1 are not only between Israel
and Jordan, but also on the final status of the Palestinians on the West
Bank and in relation to their neighbors. It states that 242 applies in all its
parts. There was big debate on this question because Israel knows what
“all its parts” means.
Six. How would the Palestinians determine their own future?
The answer to this is contained in Paragraph 1C providing for two
committees which would commence their work within three years and
complete it within five years. Israel wanted to start after four years with
no commitment to end it. This was a major step forward in our negotia-
tions at Camp David. It provides for negotiations to determine the final
status of the West Bank and Gaza and its relation to its neighbors. Para-
graph 1C also provides “negotiations for the resolution of other out-
standing issues by the end of five years.” Furthermore, the document
must be submitted to elected West Bank representatives for approval.
Seven. What is an elected representative?
The West Bank inhabitants would be free to elect a number of rep-
resentatives to govern the West Bank and Gaza during the transitional
period. Anyone can run for the election even a PLO inhabitant of the
West Bank and Gaza. This is another step for providing the participa-
tion of Palestinians.
The document also provides (assuming this is acceptable to Jor-
dan) for Palestinian participation in the work of the Jordanian/Israeli
treaty. While Jordan may not agree to this concept, we found that the
problem of the final status of the persons in Jordan and the West Bank,

plus the broader questions were so entwined that both sets would re-
quire participation of the Palestinians. Paragraph 1C3 provides that the
elected representatives will decide how to govern themselves, consist-
ent with the determination of the West Bank and Gaza issue and other
outstanding issues.
Eight. What about the dissolution of the military government?
This would occur at the moment of the establishment of the self-
governing authority, which we believe would take about three months
to set up, including electoral and self-government provisions. (I do not
know if three months is correct—but this was urged on us as a desirable
figure—at that time 650 Israelis would be withdrawn. These are the
military and civilian members of the military government.) That means
that a disturbing presence would be withdrawn from the cities and
towns in the short period of three months. But a number of regular
armed forces personnel would remain in specified locations. I believe
that Israel wants to turn over the governance and maintenance of secu-
rity to the West Bank inhabitants.
Nine. Are the representatives only to be from the West Bank and
Gaza?
Yes.
Ten. Settlements?
On Sinai, no agreement could be reached at Camp David on its set-
tlements. Sadat said the commitment to withdrawal was a prerequisite
to a Sinai agreement. Begin’s position was that they should be worked
out in a three month period before the peace treaty. Since they were not
worked out, Begin said he would take the question to the Knesset
casting aside partisan discussion and voting with members voting their
conscience. No one knows how this will turn out although many think
the vote will favor withdrawal. Begin first said he would stand aside,
but Dayan urged him as Prime Minister to vote and take a leadership
role. My guess is the Likud and Labor will split on this issue. My belief
is that when many see that this is a vote for peace or no peace, they will
vote in favor of withdrawal. On the related security issue, I do not be-
lieve it is a valid argument but it is, nevertheless, held by many people.
We mentioned the possibility of having UN forces permanently sta-
tioned in the Rafa Junction so they would not need settlements because
of the UN buffer. Dayan said he needed that in order to convince
people to give up those settlements.
Eleven: Jerusalem.
We have indicated our position on this issue.
Twelve. Comprehensive peace.
For peace to endure we believe it must constitute a basis for not
only Egypt and Israel but also for others. We have felt strongly that the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
document had to have this element in it and we feel deeply that there
must be a comprehensive peace in order for the framework to be
durable.
Thirteen. Is it possible that an unacceptable result could come
about at the end of the five year period?
The document provides that there must be a conclusion reached by
the end of five years, regarding relations with the neighbors and the
other issues. We have also stated that these negotiations are based on
242 and on all its parts. Obviously it requires negotiations and the out-
come is not certain. But the document does state that the result must be
accomplished by the end of five years.
Fourteen. Ambassador Atherton noted that King Hussein men-
tioned that the Israeli/Egyptian document is more specific than the
West Bank one.
He pointed out that Secretary Vance said that in the former case
you had two parties (Egypt and Israel) who were negotiating directly
and could, therefore, reach a specific agreement. The other document
was general because the other parties (Jordan, the Palestinians, Syria)
were not there.
Fifteen. Ambassador Atherton mentioned the question regarding
the refugee problem and said President Carter in his speech14 to Con-
gress stated the refugee problem must be solved under the relevant Pal-
estinian refugee UN resolutions.
Sixteen. There is a different tenor to President Carter’s earlier call
for Palestinian rights and a homeland in contrast to the new direction
that Camp David is alleged to take.
We still support a Palestinian homeland and we promote this con-
cept by (a) the transitional stage which provides for full autonomy and
(b) allowing the Palestinians to choose their status and relations with
their neighbors. We have made no change in our view on Israeli with-
drawal nor on legitimate Palestinian rights. In fact, we added the con-
cept of “just requirements” for the Palestinians. There has also been no
change in our position of Jerusalem.
This conclude the Secretary’s response to the King’s questions and
the session turned to general discussion.
Sharaf made the following point:
If Jordan plays a role, it must be on a more solid basis. Self-
government during a transitional period makes sense only if the transi-
tion leads to a final solution.

VANCE. We can not give the assurance of a final solution now.
One must be practical.
SHARAF: This is the whole problem. The current position is a rad-
ical change from the past and has put the cart before the horse. In the
past, the whole discussion was on self-determination and withdrawal
with considering being with the modalities of how to attain those goals
by negotiation. Now we have the opposite “escapist” approach. We
now have transitional modalities without any assurances that a final
determination will be worked out. Jordan has been asked to participate
in negotiations for three years in order to reach a result that is by no
means guaranteed. The transition therefore becomes not a part of the
implementation, but rather an exercise taking place in a vacuum. We
give a commitment to get involved on the West Bank while Israel’s
leaders are now saying they will continue their settlements in the West
Bank. We, therefore, end up giving a Jordanian endorsement to the
Begin Plan.
VANCE. We will not be able to resolve the question of the final
status of the territories overnight. The document provides for a period
of time for the negotiation of that issue. This is precisely why a transi-
tional period is necessary.
SHARAF: Why does Jordan have to play a security role?
VANCE: Jordanian help was felt necessary because Egypt felt that
if there are forces left in the West Bank there should also be an Arab
presence there during the transitional period.
SHARAF: If everything rests on Israeli intentions at the end of five
years, why not let them implement the Begin Plan now without Jorda-
nian involvement?
VANCE: You have a real interest in promoting Palestinian rights
during this period and also from Jordan’s standpoint in influencing
those who will be on your border.
SHARAF: In consenting to the Begin Plan, Jordan does a disservice
to the Palestinians by endorsing it, since the situation only changes
from a military to a civilian administration.
VANCE: The U.S. would feel more confident if Jordan were
keeping an eye on the West Bank than we would if you were not there.
SHARAF: The point is that we have no assurances regarding the
future final disposition of the West Bank, which is a particularly impor-
tant consideration in the context of repeated Israeli statements that they
do not intend to give up the West Bank, the settlements there or Arab
Jerusalem. To speak frankly, the U.S. seems too absorbed with the for-
mulas of Camp David to look at the broader picture, which includes
forces for peace arrayed against forces for destruction. Radical forces
are increasing. Jordan is asked to underwrite an Israeli occupation

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
while covering a separate agreement being negotiated with Sadat
which is unconnected with the West Bank document and is to be signed
within three months. Jordan, therefore, absorbs the whole Palestinian
question itself without being involved in any assured final outcome.
We are, therefore, asked to erode our own credibility. One must take
into account that the Israeli leadership is saying that Jerusalem is to be
united under Israeli rule forever, that Sumaria and Judea will not be
given up. We are not being over cautious in our position. How can one
ignore this blatant situation.
VANCE: Unfortunately, if there is no negotiation, then your objec-
tive of working for Israeli withdrawal is even less likely to come about.
Begin only has two and a half years left. Once you start a process of
self-government and negotiations there is a good chance—and even a
near inevitability—that you can work out a solution. If there are no ne-
gotiations, the odds are very small that you will achieve any Israeli
withdrawal.
KING HUSSEIN: President Carter said that if we have any points
on which we are not clear we should bring them up. We will, therefore,
have to consult among ourselves and go to others in the Arab world.
Our people must involve themselves in this issue.
We must, however, be sure of the U.S. position on these positions
in a very clear fashion. This may help to make up our own minds and to
clarify the way that we approach our own people. I remember after
Resolution 242 that Nasser said “I will not reopen the Suez Canal or
discuss the Sinai until Jordan and the West Bank situations are dealt
with.” Now we find the Suez Canal open and a peace treaty being
signed over Sinai. We are talking now from a position of weakness with
regard to Israel and this will be especially true if Egypt moves out of the
conflict; in three or four years under such conditions Israel would not
even be interested in what we are speaking about today. We need clear
and, if possible, written assurances of what the U.S. position is re-
garding what lies at the end of the road.
VANCE: Would it be helpful for us to provide written answers to
your questions.
KING HUSSEIN: Yes. It would help us to formulate our own op-
tions. But, in addition, we want a U.S. commitment and a description of
your own position.
MINISTER MAJALI: Does the West Bank include Jerusalem?
VANCE: In the transition period, Jerusalem would not be included
since there are conflicting claims in its regard. We believe it is occupied
territory, however, and this is a conflict between us and Israel.
MAJALI: Would Israeli settlements be included in the self-
governing territory? And are the West Bank and Gaza 1967 borders?

VANCE: The answer to the latter question is—Yes. The question of
settlements was not discussed.
MAJALI: The biggest issue is whether the borders would include
the Israeli settlements and whether the settlers would vote.
VANCE: I assume they would vote but I must get a clarification on
this.
MAJALI: How would the government be financed and who would
sponsor elections?
VANCE: Regarding elections—Israel, Egypt, Jordan and the Pales-
tinians would sponsor them. We assume there is no problem in
bringing in the UN or others to supervise elections. The greatest
problem is the question of the status of the West Bank. At any rate these
are all questions that would be worked out during the three month
period.
MAJALI: The central question is where the West Bank borders
would be. These must be defined.
ABUODEN: Everyone admits that the psychological aspect is im-
portant, especially in the Arab world. We have asked our people to
read the documents closely and taken pains to see they have been pub-
lished. We have surveyed our people and found that they have no
feeling of assurance about the outcome of the transitional period. If we
could have a phrase saying that the transitional period is a stage on the
road to reaching a treaty and thus achieving a durable peace and that it
would be conducive to the attainment of Palestinian self-determination
as provided for in Resolution 242, then we would have a different situa-
tion. If at the end of the five-year period there is no agreed solution or,
alternatively, if the Palestinian voters rejected then what is the result?
This is a very ambiguous situation.
VANCE: We have provided for three stages in the transitional
framework. Your questions are good ones but we do not believe that
amending the document is realistic. Perhaps you could get a clarifica-
tion during the negotiations.
MAJALI: The document makes no mention of past UN resolutions.
VANCE: There is mention of Resolutions 242 and 338. Further-
more, President Carter said in his speech to Congress that all pertinent
UN resolutions “had to be taken into account regarding the refugee
problem.”
SHARAF: What does the U.S. envisage for the future of the other
Palestinians outside the West Bank (who are armed)?
VANCE: We recognize that problem and it must be addressed, but
in a broader spectrum—involving Lebanon and Syria. As to immigra-
tion into the West Bank, this is a problem not easily resolved, although
the question of displaced persons has been resolved.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
SHARAF: How much is this now a framework for other parties?
VANCE: The document provides a broad solution which would
include even Golan Heights. On the Palestinian issue there is as much
in this for Syrian interests in that respect as for others.
SHARAF: If agreement is not reached and Jordan does not take
part in the negotiations, what is the situation regarding Israeli inten-
tions on self-government on the West Bank?
VANCE: Israel would like to proceed with the Begin Plan’s imple-
mentation, but Egypt does not accept this. The agreed procedure is that
negotiations on this would start soon. Also, Egypt has an interest in the
Palestinian issue in Gaza.
KING HUSSEIN: The people in Arab Jerusalem would fall under
what category? Do the people there exercise independent rights or are
they considered Israeli citizens?
VANCE: This was a problem we labored over for hours. How do
you suggest we address it?
MAJALI: At the end of the agreement, it calls for open borders,
diplomatic relations, etc. In such a case, Jerusalem is no longer a
problem since the door is open for the full exercise of the rights of its
Arab population. No one would put up barbed wire.
VANCE: This is a good point. Everyone agreed on free access to
the Holy Places, that the Holy Places would be fully administered by
each respective faith and that the city would no longer be divided.
There was also agreement on free movement within Jerusalem. The
hangup was on sovereignty. The U.S. position is that the status of Jeru-
salem must be negotiated by the parties. We have our own view but we
can not compel the Israelis to accept it. We have stated that annexation
was illegal but to enforce our view is a different story.
KING HUSSEIN: This is a crucial question for us.
VANCE: We recognize that.
CROWN PRINCE: Why was Jordan mentioned as participating
in the local police force, particularly since this would set a precedent
for Jordan with respect to other aspects of the West Bank governing
authority.
VANCE: Jordan was included because of your expertise and the
feeling that it would be necessary to have Jordan help operate the po-
lice force. This, however, is not mandatory and Jordan might not
choose to take part.
CROWN PRINCE: During the transition period would inhabitants
of Arab Jerusalem perhaps become gradually acceptable as voters?
VANCE: This was argued at Camp David and it could be possible
after two years or so.

65.
Memorandum of Conversation
Riyadh, September 21, 1978
PARTICIPANTS
Saudi Side
HRH Crown Prince Fahd bin Abd al-Aziz
HRH Prince Sultan bin Abd al-Aziz, Minister of Defense (and Acting Foreign
Minister)
Counselor Rashid Pharaon
Abd al-Rahman Mansouri, Deputy Foreign Minister
Ismail al-Shura, Director of Western Affairs, Foreign Ministry
U.S. Side
The Secretary
Ambassador John C. West
Ambassador Roy Atherton
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Hodding Carter, Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs
Joseph Twinam, notetaker
Isa K. Sabbagh, interpreting
Prince Fahd opened the meeting by referring to the rigors of
present day diplomacy conducted by air travel. The Secretary noted
that it must have been easier in the days of ship travel at the time of the
Versailles conference. He said that except for Wilson’s involvement in
Versailles, no American president has been longer involved in a diplo-
matic conference than was President Carter at Camp David.
Fahd said that as difficult as Camp David must have been for those
inside the camp, it was even harder on those outsiders like himself,
since the insiders at least knew what was happening, while he could
only guess. Fahd said that whatever the results, there was no denying
that Camp David represents a good step forward which opens certain
paths.
The Secretary emphatically agreed and referred to the Congres-
sional reception of the President’s report, which was unlike anything
seen in the halls of Congress in decades. There was a spirit of joy and
hope on both sides of the aisle, without regard to party affiliation.
Fahd said he appreciated that a stalemate of many years was
broken. He wished that all of the participants would heed Carter’s ad-
vice to refrain from making rash statements after the agreements had
been reached. He continued that Saudi Arabia was greatly pleased by
the Secretary’s visit, since it regards the United States as its greatest
friend and always finds it useful to exchange views.
The Secretary expressed appreciation at having been received on
such short notice and asked if he could brief Fahd on the agreements.
The Secretary said the President considered the results of Camp
David so important that the President wanted him to come immedi-
ately to the area to brief Fahd and others and answer any questions. He
appreciated Fahd’s suggestion that he go to Damascus.
Fahd said he considered the Damascus visit a wise thing to do.
King Khalid had sent a message to Assad urging calm and restraint. In
the message the King sought to emphasize that President Carter from
the beginning of the Administration had seriously and with much ef-
fort focused on the Middle East problem. The Saudis had advised
Assad to bear with us and to give us a chance to move toward a
common goal.
The Secretary said the President wanted him to convey the need to
seize the opportunity provided by Camp David. We have seen the
Saudi government statement. We realize that a number of our friends
in the area have concerns about the agreements. The Secretary said he
would like to try to resolve any questions Fahd might have. We recog-
nize that the Camp David agreements do not contain everything we
and others would have liked.
Fahd said the Saudi statement had been carefully worded. In his
view it had forestalled a few things from happening. Time will point
out the advantages of the Saudi statement.
The Secretary said it is important to look not only at what is not in
the agreements, but at the very substantial new elements which they
contain from the Arab point of view. Camp David achieved an Israeli
commitment to resolve the final status of the West Bank and Gaza
within five years. For years Israel refused to face up to the West Bank
issue. Even this year the Israelis talked only about considering it at
some point in the future. Now Israel is committed to considering it
within five years. This may seem long but political vitality of the West
Bank is like a new born child which takes time to gain strength and
learn to walk. The agreement states that solutions must be in accord-
ance with all the provisions and all parts of resolution 242. This means
also that the principle of withdrawal in the West Bank and Gaza ap-
plies, as it does to the other fronts. The U.S. side had sought for hours
and days to get Israel to sign a document saying that 242 applies in all
its parts and provisions.
The Secretary continued that the framework agreement is de-
signed to provide a comprehensive settlement. In its first operative
paragraph it says
“They therefore agree that this framework as appropriate is in-
tended by them to constitute a basis for peace not only between Egypt
and Israel, but also between Israel and each of its other neighbors
which is prepared to negotiate peace with Israel on this basis.”
The Secretary continued that Israeli military occupation would
end. The agreements provide that a commission of Egypt, Jordan, if it
will, and Israel will sit down with a committee of West Bankers to pro-
ceed through free elections for an administrative council. Although it is
not spelled out, the understanding of the parties was that inhabitants of
the West Bank and Gaza, regardless of political affiliation, could be
elected, including persons affiliated with the PLO. The Secretary said
he wanted to make clear that he means residents of the West Bank or
Gaza and not PLO members from outside that area.
Fahd said he understood this to mean that the governing authority
would not include Palestinians from outside the West Bank and Gaza.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The Secretary said this is correct but that the agreement provides a
mechanism for admitting displaced persons in an orderly way. This is
to assure that they will have means of support rather than having to go
to refugee camps.
Fahd asked if the number of persons permitted to return is to be
limited.
The Secretary replied that the limit would be imposed by the com-
mission which would determine how many could return each year. He
read Fahd from the agreement:
“During the transitional period, representatives of Egypt, Israel,
Jordan, and the self-governing authority will constitute a continuing
committee to decide by agreement on the modalities of admission of
persons displaced from the West Bank and Gaza in 1967, together with
necessary measures to prevent disruption and disorder.”
Fahd asked if this provision applied only to the refugees of 1967.
The Secretary said there was another provision for earlier refugees.
He quoted the relevant paragraph:
“Egypt and Israel will work with each other and with other inter-
ested parties to establish agreed procedures for a prompt, just and per-
manent implementation of the resolution of the refugee problem.”
Fahd asked if all 1967 refugees have the right to opt to return.
The Secretary said yes, but the committee will determine the
number to return each year. The Secretary continued that he should
add that President Carter had made clear in his speech to the Congress
that all this should be in accordance with relevant United Nations
resolutions.
When the Palestinian authority takes over in the West Bank and
Gaza the Israeli military government is to be withdrawn, lock, stock
and barrel. The thousands of Israeli military personnel in the cities and
towns will be withdrawn. In our view, if the Palestinian authority con-
ducts itself responsibly this would set into motion an evolutionary
process which will enable the Palestinians to govern themselves.
The Secretary continued that we fully believe that this process,
once started, will be irreversible. At the end of five years an outcome
which meets basic Arab requirements will be almost inevitable. The
great advantage of the way this is structured is that it deals with the
West Bank and Gaza in their totality rather than talking about parti-
tioning the West Bank or Gaza.
The Secretary continued that in this document the Israelis have
recognized the “legitimate rights” of the Palestinians. The implications
of the acceptance of this principle are great and obvious. For years Is-
raelis have had trouble accepting this concept. Now they have signed a
document saying, “The solutions from the negotiations must also rec-

ognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and their just
requirements.”
Fahd said that is fine but he had heard that Begin refused to use the
term “Palestinians” and continued to refer to them as the “Arabs of
Israel.”
The Secretary said what Begin had said was that he would con-
tinue using the term “Palestinian Arabs.” He never said “Arabs of Is-
rael.” We would reject that and so would Egypt.
The Secretary noted that on the West Bank settlement Begin had
given us a letter which we had rejected.
Fahd deplored Begin’s “verbal acrobatics”, noting that he had
heard the details as the Secretary described them on Israeli radio. The
Secretary said he had a message from Dayan4 in which Dayan agreed
with what the Secretary and the President had been saying on the set-
tlements, and indicating that they would straighten things out when
Begin returned to Israel and give the U.S. an acceptable letter. The Sec-
retary said that he felt at Camp David that Begin’s advisors sincerely
wanted an agreement which would bring lasting peace.
Fahd said on the basis of the recent poll, Israeli public opinion ob-
viously wants to relinquish the Sinai settlements. He feared Begin
wants to make trouble in his remaining years in office. What is impor-
tant, however, is what the U.S. Government understands the agree-
ment to mean.
The Secretary said that our own West Bank settlement language
will be in a published letter. The Saudis should wait to see what it says.
The Secretary continued that the Palestinians are recognized as a
party to negotiations with Egypt, Israel and Jordan in which the final
status of the West Bank as well as its relation to its neighbors will be set-
tled. The negotiations are to be completed within five years. Parallel
with this negotiation, Israel and Jordan will negotiate a peace treaty.
We insisted in a difficult fight that the agreement provide that Pales-
tinians can participate in the Jordan/Israel treaty negotiations. Our po-
sition was that the treaty would affect the future of the people of the
West Bank and Gaza and that they therefore had a right to participate

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
in negotiating it. Finally, after long argument, Israel accepted this prin-
ciple. The Secretary said that Israeli settlements on the West Bank
would be handled in accordance with the letter to be published next
week. In essence, Israel has agreed not to create any new settlements
while negotiations are underway for a West Bank transitional regime.
The question of future settlements will be subject to agreement among
the negotiating parties setting up the regime.
Fahd said this was good work on President Carter’s part. He read
the Saudi government’s Arabic language translation of the appropriate
section of the agreement.
The Secretary continued there is an Israeli commitment to work
out procedures promptly on the persons displaced in 1967. Dayan said
that he thought most of the 1967 refugees will return and that a place
could be found for them. Fahd said that the important thing is that the
Palestinians outside the area be given the choice of returning.
The Secretary continued that in addition to the gains he had just
mentioned from the Arab point of view, the Camp David agreements
offer important strategic advantages. They provide a basis around
which moderate forces in the area, with the support of the United States
and our friends, can rally and expand the position and influence of
moderate Arabs in the area. The Secretary said he thought this of stra-
tegic importance. A major motivation in the President’s mind at Camp
David was to strengthen moderate forces by means of establishing a
peace framework that would break the stalemate which provided an
opportunity for radicals to move in. This is a critical moment for the
moderates as we look around the area. At this moment, we feel mod-
erate forces in the Arab world are looking to Saudi Arabia and the
United States for leadership. We believe and hope Saudi Arabia will
play a key role in seizing the opportunity. We can understand that
Saudi Arabia will want to consult with its friends in the Arab world. As
the Saudis do so President Carter wants to make very clear he remains
fully committed to the role of a full partner in seeing this through.
Now, with Camp David achieved, we are not going to walk away and
cease to pay attention. We are going to see it through.
Fahd said that at this time not just governments but individuals in
a position to be influential must do what they can with the stalemate
broken to achieve a satisfactory solution. While there are others in Is-
rael besides Begin who will take tough positions which are not in Is-
rael’s interest, there are persons of reason and good will who recognize
the logic of peace. But the paramount question of Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza and outside of it is what will happen after the
transitional period. This is what the moderate Palestinians will ask the
Saudis.

The Secretary said that in his view evolutionary progress will start
in the transitional period, reminding Fahd that there will have to be dis-
cussions among the parties in order to work out the treaties.
Fahd said the agreements spoke of negotiations up to the end of
the transitional period.
The Secretary said they provide a limit so that they cannot drag on
indefinitely. The process will determine what evolves from it. It was his
belief that in the West Bank and Gaza some sort of Palestinian entity
will emerge. It is his guess that this entity will have some sort of link
with Jordan but that is up to the Palestinian people.
Fahd said that is fine and logical. It represents the principle of non-
imposition by outsiders.
The Secretary said that is precisely why the Palestinians must be
given a role in the negotiations.
Fahd said that freedom of choice is the only sensible solution.
Thanks to the American effort, by the end of the transitional period the
Palestinians will be ready to make a responsible choice.
The Secretary said it is our deep hope that they will be ready to
govern themselves responsibly.
Fahd said the problem, which is deep one, would be if Israel is per-
mitted to insist on not permitting the existence of a Palestinian entity.
What if Israel permits local government but keeps for itself the ele-
ments of sovereignty such as defense and foreign affairs? He had
wanted to see language giving the Palestinians a free choice with re-
gard to attachments or affiliation at the end of the transitional period.
The Secretary said we were not able to get “self determination”
into the agreement. Instead we were able to get the Aswan wording
about Palestinian participation in determining their future. We had felt
this inadequate without spelling out the procedures to achieve it.
Fahd said there is a basic difference. After five years either Israel
says there will be no Palestinian entity or Israel says the Palestinians
will have to determine their own future. That is a big difference. What
worries the Saudis is that the ink is hardly dry and Israel is already
saying that there will never be a Palestinian entity. This is causing anx-
iety. This will tie the Saudis’ hands. For instance, on the settlements,
now they are saying three months. If they are saying this the Saudis
will not be able to help President Carter as much as they would like.
Even on the Egyptian agreement the Saudis fear Begin might obfuscate.
These agreements are serious, and Israel must treat them as such.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Fahd continued another point is that the Palestinians living out-
side the West Bank and Gaza think that the agreements are keeping
them out of the process. This is disturbing because they are likely to be
the primary makers of trouble. Also, self rule may not be fruitful if Pal-
estinians in the area hesitate to come forward to participate in it in def-
erence to those Palestinians outside the area.
The Secretary said that with respect to those Palestinians outside
the area there is provision for the return of those displaced in 1967 and
the sketching of guidelines to achieve prompt, just and permanent im-
plementation of the refugee problem.
Fahd said once the Palestinians outside realize that they have the
choice of returning and participating in the administration and deter-
mining the future of the area, all would be well. If that is not clear he
felt that things would not go well. He asked whether President Carter
has in mind that after five years Israel will withdraw totally leaving the
Palestinians free to determine their own lives.
The Secretary said that the answer is yes, with the proviso that if
necessary to protect Israel’s security, Israel could have specified limited
areas in which limited numbers of military forces could be placed for
defense.
Fahd said he would like to pursue this. Israeli security points will
not be effective but will only agitate the Palestinian population. Why
should they be in Palestinian territory? Why not in Israeli territory? The
Palestinians will not feel free if they are in Palestinian territory.
The Secretary replied that after five years Israel and Jordan and Is-
rael and Egypt will have negotiated treaties. There is no security
problem there. The Israelis, however, fear Iraq. Fahd asked where the
Iraqis would come from, through Saudi Arabia, or across Syria? He as-
sured the Secretary the Iraqis would not interfere with Israel’s security.
The Secretary replied that is the Israelis’ concern.
Fahd said that it is his deep conviction that in its heart Israel is con-
fident it is here to stay. The security concern is a fabrication. Real Israeli
security lies in support by the United States and peace with the Arab
states and in the willingness of the Palestinian people to live in peace.
The Secretary said he agreed with this. In five years as the situation
develops, the Israelis may come to feel that the security points are not
needed. He wanted to make clear that we are talking possibilities. The
agreement does not specify arrangements after five years. It simply
says there should be provision for security but does not specify. Fahd
stressed the importance of the psychological element that the Pales-
tinians realize that they will be free after five years and that those out-
side the area will be free to return. If they realize this all problems will
cease. He urged the United States not to lose sight of this.

Fahd continued that Saudi Arabia wishes President Carter every
success. What would seem to spoil that wish, however, is how the Pal-
estinians outside the area will react because they feel neglected. It
would not be as smooth as Saudi Arabia or the U.S. would wish. If the
outside Palestinians felt after five years that they would have self deter-
mination, all would go smoothly. They are at loss to see what is in-
tended for them. The PLO is organized; it is recognized in the UN.
What will it do?
Fahd continued by asking what Saudi Arabia could tell the Pales-
tinians in the absence of assurances. Without such assurances they
would consider Saudi Arabia an enemy, not a friend, if it urged support
for the agreement. Saudi Arabia hopes for a clear-cut reference pro-
jecting past the five-year period so that it can calm the Palestinians
down. Fahd continued that he stressed this point because Saudi Arabia
wants to cooperate with the United States. Thus Saudi Arabia is
pleading for a significant indication or promise that the United States
can give. He urged the Secretary to go back and discuss this with the
President. He urged the Secretary to convey the strength of Saudi
feeling. He asked that we come up with something tangible that the
Saudis can use if they are to carry out their side of the bargain. This is
urgent, so that Saudi Arabia can take an active role. It is extremely im-
portant for Saudi Arabia to support President Carter’s magnificent
effort.
Deputy Minister Mansouri asked if there is linkage between the
two agreements.
The Secretary replied that there is no specific linkage in the docu-
ments but that Sadat had said he would not sign the Sinai agreement
until Israel had signed the general agreement.
Fahd said Saudi Arabia wants to help Sadat. He asked the Secre-
tary to convey to the President the tone, the spirit and the urgency of
his remarks. He said that if the U.S. would give Saudi Arabia the
wherewithal the Saudis will summon the PLO and others to soothe the
situation. Saudi Arabia is fearful of an explosion. The Soviets and rejec-
tionists are lighting a fire under the Palestinians. It is easy to do. If the
U.S. will enable Saudi Arabia to hold the reins the Saudis can help with
the Palestinians. The U.S. should also get Begin to “pipe down”.
The Secretary said that he had called Begin personally6 to say that
Begin is doing a disservice to his own country and to Sadat. Counselor
Pharaon noted that the absence of reference to Palestinians outside the
area will cause Israel to insist on security barriers as long as there are
displaced Palestinians who might cause trouble. The Secretary noted

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
that the provision for displaced persons should help us to start dealing
with that problem immediately.
Fahd said that is fine but what is needed is something tangible. The
Secretary said he understood and said he would see if we could do
something to help. He would be meeting with the President Monday
and would convey his remarks. Fahd urged him to do so and reiterated
that if he had this from the President he would invite the Palestinians to
talk. The rejectionists are now meeting and Saudi Arabia needs some-
thing to counterbalance. Fahd said that three days ago he had talked
with Palestinian representatives, urging them to be calm and work for
peace. He felt that he had calmed them somewhat but he was missing
something in his presentation to them because they lacked assurances.
The Secretary asked as a hypothetical question whether, if the U.S.
could resolve the problem it has in talking with the PLO, a dialogue
with them would be helpful.
Fahd said the PLO would be delighted. Saudi Arabia would ar-
range the meeting. He asked that we think about it.
Fahd asked if the Secretary could confirm that Sadat had written
Assad that the Golan solution would be the same as the Sinai solution.
The Secretary said he didn’t know whether or not there had been a
letter but that Sadat had said that the Sinai agreement could be a model
for the Golan agreement.
Fahd asked if Golan were discussed at Camp David.
The Secretary said there was no real discussion of the Syrian as-
pect, just reference to Syria and the fact that we had to have a frame-
work applicable to all the countries.
Fahd expressed appreciation for the Secretary’s patience with the
Saudi concerns. He assured the Secretary that Saudi Arabia would like
to support anything that the United States embarks upon. He ex-
pressed appreciation for the invitation to go to the U.S., saying that he
was actually packed when he learned that the King had to go for med-
ical treatment, thus he had to stay in Saudi Arabia. He said he was re-
serving the invitation as a rain check.
The Secretary said that Fahd had a standing rain check. (At this
stage Fahd asked his advisors if they had questions and Mansouri
asked about Jerusalem.)
Fahd said that Jerusalem is another large and urgent problem.
There is no mention in the agreements of Jerusalem. This gives the im-
pression that it is ignored and Israel is free to work its will. The Secre-

tary explained that we had tried desperately at Camp David to have an
operative paragraph on Jerusalem. The parties reached agreement on
such issues as holy places and free access but hit a stone wall on the
question of sovereignty. Therefore we were not able to include it in the
framework.
Fahd urged that it not be neglected.
The Secretary said each of the parties has written a letter stating its
position. These letters will be made public. They will supplement the
framework without attempting to resolve the question.
Fahd noted the question of Jerusalem is important not just to the
Arabs but to all Muslims. The Secretary said we understand this, we
will state our position, which is the historical American position.
Fahd said the whole world expects the United States to be clear
and fair on this position. There was a clear division of authority in Jeru-
salem before 1967. Saudi Arabia would welcome a clear U.S. position.
Fahd said he would ask the Secretary to reserve the discussion of
the situation in South Arabia until he met with Prince Sultan the fol-
lowing day.
The Secretary said he would like to make two final points. This is
not a perfect agreement. It lacks points we would like to see in it. But if
we don’t seize this opportunity and it slips through our hands it may be
a long time before an opportunity comes again. That is why all of us
must work to make it work.
The Secretary said that secondly he would like to see Fahd’s advice
on the upcoming meeting with Assad. What subjects might interest
him?
Fahd said Assad is wise, honest and discerning. For instance, de-
spite pressure at the Tripoli conference9 he refused to renounce 242.
The Secretary should take time to explain the agreement to him and
show him what is the official outcome of Camp David as opposed to
subsequent rumor. The Secretary should ask him to examine the situa-
tion calmly, noting that there is no overnight solution and that the
United States position is based on deep conviction. The Secretary
from Riyadh, September 22. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
to Jerusalem the previous month. The conference established the Steadfastness and Con-
frontation Front to oppose Sadat’s peace initiative toward Israel. The Front was joined by
all of the attending heads of state, from Libya, Syria, Algeria, and the People’s Demo-
cratic Republic of Yemen, and by leaders of Palestine Liberation Organization factions.
On December 5, Sadat broke diplomatic relations with all countries that attended the con-
ference. (Marvine Howe, “Arabs Meet in Libya On Opposing Sadat; Accord Is Uncer-

66.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State
White House for the President and Dr. Brzezinski from the Secretary.
Department for Christopher and Saunders.
1. We have just come from a marathon four and one-half hour
meeting with President Assad. There was discussion of Lebanon2 for
part of this, but bulk of time was spent on Camp David Agreements. At
end of my presentation, Assad called for his copy of Agreements and
began long list of penetrating questions about documents. He and
Khaddam had obviously given close and careful scrutiny to the docu-
ments and in course of our discussion they asked questions designed
both to zero in on certain aspects of the Accords which are particularly
important to him. i.e., Jerusalem, the Palestinian question, etc., as well
as many points on which he felt genuinely in the dark, or confused.
2. Assad raised so many points it is impossible to mention them all
in this initial report, which I want to get off to you quickly. But I will
touch on what appeared to be the main areas of his concern. He ex-
pressed keen interest at several points which were “not in the Agree-
ments.” He asked whether there had been any discussion of where final
borders would be on West Bank (I said this had been left to negotiations
for final status of this area). He asked what discussions there had been
on Jerusalem. I reported that there had been areas of agreement but that
final agreement had foundered on issue of sovereignty. He asked me to
restate US position on Jerusalem. I did and he seemed reassured.
3. I discussed at length the outcome on West Bank settlements
issue in which Assad was keenly interested. I explained at length our
agreement with Begin that new settlements would be frozen during ne-
gotiations for the transitional regime, and that those negotiations
would also deal with question of future settlements. Again this was a
point on which it appeared possible to reassure Assad. On another
point, Assad seemed puzzled by provisions at end of general frame-
work agreement in which we invited the Security Council to endorse
the peace treaties, and the permanent members to underwrite the
treaties and conform their policies thereto. I explained that the latter
provision only requested the permanent members to act and that this
provision was included with the Soviets in mind.
4. Assad asked some penetrating questions about our view of
Jordan’s role in any West Bank settlement. Did we feel Jordan had same
kind of role in West Bank situation as Syria was playing in Lebanon? I
explained that Jordan had profound interest in peace settlement with
Israel and that we did not think problem of determining final status of
ities,” citing his visits with Lebanese Christian leader Camille Chamoun. In response,
Vance countered that the United States “fully” supported the “unity and territorial integ-
rity of Lebanon,” adding that he believed that Parker’s meetings with Chamoun “have
been aimed at persuading the Chamounists to terminate their resistance and to cooperate
with the Central Government.” A summary of this exchange is in telegram 5655 from
Damascus, September 25. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780391–1017) Assad reportedly replied to Vance’s explanation, “I did not know that.”
eign Policy File, D780394–0430)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
West Bank could be separated from negotiations for a Jordan-Israel
peace treaty. This was why we saw them as linked and had proposed
that elected Palestinian representatives participate in both sets of
negotiations.
5. We had lengthy discussion of question of Israeli forces re-
maining on West Bank during and after 5 years. Assad pressed particu-
larly hard as to whether there had been agreement behind the scenes
for Israeli troops to remain after 5 years. I told him this question would
be determined in negotiations for final status in which, I pointed out,
elected Palestinian representatives would participate as well as the
three parties. Assad said he noted Begin was saying otherwise, and I
told him Begin was saying a number of things these days, presumably
in anticipation of the vote in the Knesset.
6. Assad also pressed to know whether Golan had been discussed
at Camp David. I said only in the general sense that all agreed that the
negotiations for a Syria-Israel peace, when Syria decided to join the ne-
gotiations, would be governed by all the principles of Resolution 242.
Assad said as far as he was concerned the Camp David Agreements
were seriously “unbalanced.” They were specific on things the Israelis
wanted—such as ending the boycott—but remained vague on things
the Arabs wanted—such as withdrawal. I took issue with him and went
through chapter and verse. This led to discussion of the withdrawal
question with Assad asking whether the US position that withdrawal
should be to 1967 lines with minor modifications had changed. I said it
had not.
7. At end, Assad thanked me for these explanations but then
summed up Syrian attitude which was standard Syrian hard line. He
said he considered the Agreement to be completely in the interest of Is-
rael. He did not see that it served Syria’s interest. He could not give it
legitimacy except as an Egypt-Israel understanding. He said Sadat had
regrettably slipped from the united Arab front and no single party
could achieve peace on its own.
8. Assad said in spite of this Syria wants peace and will not be de-
flected from pursuing peace in accordance with Resolution 338. But
there was a serious contradiction between 338 and the Camp David
Agreements, because 338 calls for conference of all the parties whereas
at Camp David only one on the Arab side had been there. There could
be no compromise with Israel on territory or on Palestinian rights.
9. I rebutted Assad’s summation, asking him once again to focus
on what the Agreements achieved and reflect carefully on the advan-
tages, which I had detailed, of what they offered the Arabs. In partic-
ular, I pointed out they provided the Arabs with the prospect of
changing the status quo which had not been in the Arab interest. I
asked him, as I had earlier, to see Agreements not as an ending them-

selves but as beginning of a process which I was convinced would lead
ultimately to a solution which would meet Arab objectives.
Vance

67.
Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat
Washington, September 25, 1978

68.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State
13295. For the Secretary from the Ambassador. Amman for Am-
bassador Atherton. Subject: Dayan on “Settlements Freeze” Contro-
1. I met with Dayan midday September 26 to discuss unresolved
side letter4 concerning freeze on new settlements in West Bank and
Gaza. Ciechanover, Rosenne, Rubinstein and Blackwill were also
present.
cret; Niact Immediate; Exdis Handle as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to the
White House, Amman, Cairo, and Jerusalem.
Foreign Policy File, P840153–2623)

2. Noting Prime Minister’s unbending statement on this issue at
yesterday’s Knesset debate (septel), I asked Dayan to explain Israeli
position. Dayan said he had spoken to Begin this morning, and letter to
the President had been drafted but had not yet been signed. It would be
sent today or tomorrow. After his return from the U.S., Begin had
checked carefully with Barak and was now “absolutely determined”
that he had agreed at Camp David only to a freeze on settlements
during the three months of the negotiations for the peace treaty with
Egypt. According to Barak’s notes on the night meeting September 16,
Begin had twice, once in the middle of the conversation and again at its
conclusion, said that he wanted to think about the President’s formula-
tion overnight. Dayan said that the next day Begin had sent his letter to
the President via Barak with the language which contained his posi-
tion—a three-month freeze on settlements during the Sinai negotiation.
The Prime Minister felt strongly that his memory was correct, Dayan
continued, and Barak’s notes confirmed it. Therefore, Begin would in
his letter to the President commit himself at this time to nothing further
than a three-month freeze on West Bank/Gaza settlements.
3. More than somewhat taken aback, I said I had the clear impres-
sion from earlier conversations that both he and Barak agreed that the
negotiations referred to in Begin’s talk with the President concerned
the West Bank and Gaza and that the only difference between the Is-
raeli record and our own was the reference to Begin’s saying he would
have to think about our language overnight. I said I had thought Dayan
and Barak had agreed that the settlements freeze had not been men-
tioned in context of Sinai negotiations.
4. Not answering me directly, and obviously trying to put the best
face on Begin’s position, Dayan argued that in practical terms it made
little difference whether the freeze was tied to the Sinai or the West
Bank/Gaza negotiations. He said that the latter talks should last no
more than three months. In any event, he stressed, Begin had certainly
made no commitment to freeze settlements for the five-year interim
period.
5. I then repeated to Dayan what I had told him several times since
my return to Israel. It was the President’s strong conviction that the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister had agreed at Camp David to the American language
on a settlements freeze. On that basis, the President had conveyed the
GOI position to Sadat, who had in turn agreed to sign the Camp David
Agreements. The President was thus left in an extremely awkward po-
sition, and I had no doubt that this Israeli interpretation would cause
real problems in Washington.
6. Admitting he realized how badly this would go down in Wash-
ington, Dayan indicated he was extremely relieved that it was Barak
who had made their record of the meeting. The President would cer-
tainly not doubt Barak’s honesty, and his notes show clearly that
Begin’s memory of that evening was correct. Rosenne then read from
Barak’s notes a sentence in which Begin said, “I shall think about it and
I will write to you tomorrow.” According to Barak’s memcon, Begin re-
peated at the end of the meeting that he would consider the President’s
proposal and convey his response in writing the next day. That re-
sponse, in the form of a letter6 to the President, indicated the Prime
Minister’s agreement only to a freeze on settlements during the Sinai
negotiations.
7. I reminded Dayan that the President, having received that letter,
wrote his language back in and returned it to Begin via Barak. There
was no question that the President thought he had Begin’s agreement
to the U.S. formulation and had acted with Sadat in good faith.
8. Dayan then speculated on the roots of the misunderstanding. He
said that there had been whispering during the meeting in question
and separate conversations between the principals from time to time.
He did not doubt that the President believed his language had been ac-
cepted, but, Dayan repeated, that was simply not the case. The Israelis
regretted the misunderstanding, but the Prime Minister’s letter to the
President would commit the GOI to a settlement freeze for only the
three months of the Sinai negotiation. Again trying to find a silver
lining, Dayan stressed that after the three-month period, the issue of an
extension of the settlement freeze would come up and “then we shall
see.” But, the argument over whether the freeze was tied to Sinai or the
West Bank was inconsequential since both negotiations should last no
longer than three months. Rosenne said that Sadat has now publicly re-
ferred on three occasions since Camp David to Begin’s commitment for
a three-month freeze on settlements. Therefore, he argued, Sadat can be
under no misapprehension.
9. I responded that, given the complications of getting the Pales-
tinians and the Jordanians to participate in the talks, three months was
an extremely short period to conclude negotiations concerning the mo-
dalities for setting up the self-governing authority. Dayan disagreed,
and said that if the others don’t come in, Egypt will not wish to go into
great detail relating to the West Bank and Gaza. Instead, Sadat would
devote himself to principles which would govern West Bank/Gaza ar-
rangements and then turn the negotiations over to the Palestinians and
the Jordanians. This first phase of the negotiations might take no more
than one month to conclude. In Dayan’s judgment, Sadat would want
to have launched the “modalities” concerning the West Bank and Gaza
authority before he signed his peace treaty with Israel over Sinai, and
that would propel the former talks forward at considerable speed.
10. I then stressed to Dayan that you and the President understood
“negotiations” as used in our formulation to refer to the period of dis-
cussion leading to agreement on setting up the self-governing au-
thority. The second U.S. sentence dealt with the subsequent period, and
future new settlements would be the subject of negotiations and agree-
ment among the four parties, and not the three. Rosenne confirmed that
both U.S. sentences were indeed in Barak’s notes, but he repeated yet
again that Begin had only agreed to think about this formulation
overnight.
11. In concluding, I said that I would report what Dayan had told
me and would, of course, transmit the Prime Minister’s letter when it
was received. But this news would be very badly received in Wash-
ington. Dayan got in the last word by saying that despite this disagree-
ment, he was optimistic that once the issue of settlement freeze was out
of the headlines, it could be dealt with practically. But the issue had to
be treated quietly. Could I imagine, Dayan queried, what Geula Cohen
would do “if we had made a mistake at Camp David and now had to
agree to the U.S. proposal. The summit agreements would be rejected
by the Knesset.” (sic)
12. Comment: As indicated in reftels, Dayan, since his return from
Washington, has been optimistic that he and others in the Cabinet
could prevail on Begin to modify his position on cessation of settlement
activity in a way that would be acceptable to the U.S. I cannot be sure
why Begin has stuck to his guns, but several possibilities come to mind.
He may simply be sure that his recollection of the meeting with the
President is the right one. If that is the case, Barak’s notes are a handy,
indeed indispensable, buttress for that position. Another explanation is
that Begin, emotional and exhausted, did not understand what he was
agreeing to at Camp David. Finally, Dayan’s remark about Geula
Cohen raises the possibility that Begin did understand the U.S. formu-
lation and accepted it, but in the cold light of day, and especially now
that he is in the midst of an agonizing domestic debate about the Sinai
settlements, decided that he had gone several steps too far and pro-
ceeded to backtrack. Whatever the reason for Begin’s rigidity on this

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
issue, I left Dayan in no doubt about how this conversation [garble—
would?] be judged by the President and by you. Dayan did his best to
minimize the disagreement, but I am sure he realizes what damage
Begin’s adamant position can cause to his relationship with the admin-
istration. On the other hand, Begin is feeling extremely beleaguered by
Gush Emunim demonstrators and the desertion of his oldest personal
allies. He is very unlikely to budge at this moment of political
hypertension.
Lewis

69.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
Tosec 110017/245637. Subject: Oral Message From the President on
Settlements Issue.
1. Following is text of an oral message from the President to Begin
for you to give to Begin in the course of your discussion2 with him on
Camp David Agreement on question of settlements in the West Bank
and Gaza. President’s intention is that you have this message to use at
the moment you consider most useful in your further talks with Begin
on this issue. Unlike other message4 that is being sent you at same time
this one is not necessarily to be delivered immediately but, as already
stated, to be used at the time and in way you judge most appropriate
and useful. You will understand that this oral message is not rpt not a
part of formal exchange of letters on settlements issue.
2. Begin quote.

70.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State, the Mission to the United Nations, and the White
House
13420. Subject: Begin on Settlements Freeze Controversy. Refs: (A)
1. I had a long meeting with Begin afternoon September 27 at
Knesset on side letter concerning freeze on new settlements in West
Bank and Gaza. Begin’s aide Yehuhda Avner and Pol Counselor Black-
will were also present and Weizman joined us near the end of the
conversation.
2. Begin who had just stepped out from the Knesset debate began
with lengthy and emotional description much like that in reftel of polit-
ical flak he was taking over Camp David Agreements. Especially from
his own party (reported septel). When he moved to the settlements
letter question, he said that after his return to Israel he had consulted
with Weizman, Dayan and Barak about the September 16 meeting and
was absolutely convinced that he had not committed himself to U.S.
formulation.
3. He then said he wanted to read to me a draft letter from him to
the President on this dispute and subsequently ask my advice on
whether he should send it. The draft letter he read was as follows:
Begin text.
Dear Mr. President.
As I promised you, upon my return to Jerusalem I checked with
my colleagues, the Foreign Minister and Professor Barak, their recollec-
tion as to the contents of our discussions on the matter of the settle-
ments at our evening meeting of September 16, 1978, in which Secretary
Vance also participated.
According to the minutes of this meeting, as recorded by Professor
Barak, you suggested, in summing up, the following text as a commit-
ment to be undertaken by the Government of Israel:
“after the signing of the Framework and during the negotiations,
no new Israeli settlements will be established in the area, unless other-
wise agreed. The issue of further Israeli settlements will be decided and
agreed by the negotiating parties.”
As recorded in those same minutes by Professor Barak I responded
to this proposed text by saying: “I shall think about it and I will write to
you tomorrow.” By any standard, such a reaction cannot be construed
as an acceptance.
You will perhaps recall, Mr. President, that throughout our
lengthy discussions at Camp David I employed a consistent vocabu-
lary, always brief, when acknowledging acceptance of a point of agree-
ment between us. My language of assent was always expressed with
the words: “agreed,” or “accepted,” or “all-right.” The lengthiest
phrase I was wont to use was: “we accept your proposal.”
In the course of the meeting in question our Foreign Minister re-
marked that it would be preferable to formulate the issue in positive
terms. He gave his opinion that during the negotiations on the estab-
lishment of the administrative council, and during the five-year transi-
tional period, we would discuss with the Arabs our proposal for the ad-
mission of displaced persons within this period, as well as our plans for
new settlements, also within this same period.
You will remember, Mr. President, that I discussed with you our
plans to establish a number of nahal settlements8 in the course of the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
next three months, on the Golan Heights, in the vicinity of Beier Sheva
and perhaps in the Jordan Valley.
At the close of our meeting, while we were all standing prepara-
tory to our leave-taking, I again reiterated to you my previous state-
ment with regard to your proposed formulation, promising that I
would think about it and convey my answer in writing the next day.
This, too, is affirmed by Professor Barak’s minutes.
And, indeed, on the following day, Sunday, September 17, 1978, I
transmitted my written response through Professor Barak who brought
it to your cabin. The text read:
“Dear Mr. President,
“I have the honour to inform you that during the agreed period for
negotiations for the conclusion of the peace treaty, no new settlements
will be established by the Government of Israel in Sinai, in the Gaza dis-
trict and in the area of Judea and Samaria.”
As shown by the record taken on the spot by Professor Barak, this
was the only commitment I assumed at Camp David on behalf of the
Government of Israel with reference to the settlement issue.
Respectfully and sincerely,
Menachem Begin
End text.
4. When he had finished, Begin emphatically stressed that he could
never have agreed to the U.S. formulation for two reasons. It would
have meant an indefinite moratorium on new Israeli settlements on the
West Bank and Gaza, and would give Arabs the right to veto Israeli set-
tlement activities in those areas. He would never, never agree to such a
thing.
5. Referring to the first phase of this controversy in the U.S. just
after Camp David ended, Begin asserted that he had had a “horrible
two days” with the media after the U.S. sentences had been given to the
press. How did the journalists get those two sentences? Begin believed
Doctor Brzezinski’s denial that anyone in the White House was respon-
sible, but someone in the administration had done it. Saying that he
was deeply hurt by this, Begin called the leak of the U.S. language un-
fair and destructive. The ink had not yet dried on the Camp David
Agreements before a conflict had arisen between Israel and the United
States, a conflict that was unnecessary. The letter to the President which
he had just read to me was the complete truth and he would not agree
to any other interpretation of what he had said at the September 16
night meeting. Begin then asked for my reaction to his letter.

6. I responded that I had been pondering the problem and I
wanted to describe to him the situation as I saw it. The public in both
our countries had been promised the text of a letter on a settlements
freeze which would be made public. It was obviously important that
the Prime Minister’s complete recollection of that evening’s meeting be
brought to the attention of the President. However, I had serious
doubts whether the letter he had read to me should be made public. If it
were, the press in both countries would dissect every word of the mes-
sage and our differences would become more and not less serious. Fur-
ther, if Begin sent the President such a letter, and it were made public,
the President would surely be compelled to state publicly in a letter to
the Prime Minister his conviction that Begin had agreed to the U.S. lan-
guage. He would doubtless also restate the U.S. position on the settle-
ments freeze, perhaps with much more specificity.
7. I continued that the President’s notes, which the Prime Minister
had seen, made no rpt no mention of Begin’s desire to think the matter
over until the next morning. The President did not recall that Begin had
spoken those words.
8. Moreover, and on the basis of the President’s conviction that the
Prime Minister had committed himself to the U.S. formulation, Sadat
has signed the Camp David Agreements. Thus, the President’s own
credibility with Sadat was at stake.
9. Begin then said that it was not necessary to publish the lengthy
letter he had read to me earlier, although he stressed it was important
that the President be personally aware of the way he remembered the
September 16 conversation and of the “minutes” of the conversation
kept by Barak. Instead, a shorter message to the President could be sent
and published which simply stated the Israeli position on the settle-
ments freeze. Pulling another piece of paper from a stack in front of him
he read me the following draft language: Begin text
Dear Mr. President
I have the honor to inform you that during the agreed period of ne-
gotiations (three months) for the conclusion of the peace treaty no new
settlements will be established in the area by the Government of Israel.
Sincerely yours,
Menachem Begin
End text.
10. I told Begin that language got nowhere near solving our mutual
problem. Something had to be said about the period after the three
month freeze. I told Begin I had written out some language in the car on
the way up to Jerusalem which I wanted to try out on him although it
had no status whatever in Washington. Could he agree to the following
two sentences being added to the one sentence he had just read me.
Begin text: It is my hope and expectation that, during this same period

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
of three months, agreement will be reached on the modalities for estab-
lishing the elected self-governing authority in Judea, Samaria, and the
Gaza Strip. Thereafter, the course of future settlement activity in those
areas will be the subject of negotiations among the parties, including
the representatives of the elected self-governing authority. End text.
11. With only a moment’s hesitation, Begin indicated he could
agree to my first sentence but that the second one was totally unaccept-
able. It meant that Arabs could veto Israeli settlements in Judea and Sa-
maria which were Israel’s inalienable right. Jews had as much right to
live in Hebron as in Tel Aviv. Under no circumstances would he
commit himself to a freeze beyond three months. If the Sinai negotia-
tions lasted six months, his commitment to no new settlements re-
mained only for three months.
12. Was there no way, I asked, that the Prime Minister could state
his readiness at least to discuss the future settlements issue with the
parties after the three month period? Begin said no. He believed with
all his heart that Israel had a right to settle in Judea and Samaria and he
would agree to no language which prejudiced that right.
13. Weizman, who had joined us a few moments earlier, then said
that in his judgment it was a gross mistake for the US to press the Prime
Minister on this issue at a moment when the party he had led for so
many years was in open revolt against him. Vigorously picking up this
point, Begin contended that if he were to do what Washington was
asking, “there would be a revolution in my own party”.
14. Winding up the conversation, I suggested to Begin that I trans-
mit his long letter as a private oral message to the President. In that
way, he could honestly say to the press if asked that he had not sent a
letter to the President. I would also send the text of his short message
although it had no status since it had not been signed. I urged him to do
nothing more with either of his messages until I had an opportunity to
report this conversation and to get Washington’s reaction. Begin
agreed and said he was willing to send the long letter and make it pri-
vate or public, send the short letter and make it private or public, send
both letters and make them private or public, or send no letters at all.
He was sure his memory of the September 16 conversation was correct.
He had not agreed to the US formulation, and Professor Barak’s notes
proved him right.
15. Comment: Throughout the conversation Begin was intense and
emotional but always in control. He listened carefully to what I had to

71.
Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin
SUBJECT
Summary of Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Prime
Minister Begin
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Prime Minister Menachem Begin
The President: I believe your actions in the last two days in de-
fending the Camp David agreements before the Knesset were the most
courageous I have ever seen during my political life. I know how diffi-
cult it was for you. Last night I was with a large Democratic fund
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
raising group2 when the news came of the Knesset vote. I announced it
to them and I pointed out to them the courage that you had shown.
They gave you a standing ovation for three minutes.
The Prime Minister: Mr. President, I appreciate your calling me.
We spent seventeen hours debating in the Knesset without interrup-
tion. All 120 members took part. We got a big majority. I told them I
would have resigned if I had not gotten a majority in my own party. It
was a very serious debate. Some of my friends left me, and the opposi-
tion supported me. You will remember that I wanted to separate the
issues in the vote, but when I got back to Israel, I read the press and it
was strongly against that idea so I presented the agreements and the
vote on the settlements to the parliament together. I decided there
should be a single vote on the agreement and on the settlements. So we
had it, and we won with 85 votes against 19. I told Ambassador Lewis
how difficult it was for me.
The President: I know it must have been difficult to have many of
your close friends oppose you. I want to refer to one other subject.
There has been an unfortunate disagreement between us on the ques-
tion of the West Bank and Gaza settlements. I want to resolve it quickly.
We have a difference of opinion.
The Prime Minister: I sent you a letter3 through Ambassador
Lewis. Have you received it?
The President: No, I haven’t seen it yet. I also sent you a letter4 con-
gratulating you on the Knesset vote.
The Prime Minister: Thank you for your letter. I did receive it. I
have now sent you a letter5 through Ambassador Lewis. Ambassador
Dinitz will also have the details and he will talk to Secretary Vance. You
know that Mr. Barak took notes of our meeting. I spelled out every-
thing in this letter.
The President: I am concerned about our misunderstanding. There
was no thought of tying the West Bank and Gaza settlements to the
Sinai negotiations. Nor was there any discussion of a five-year morato-
rium. I hope that we can get some language that is mutually acceptable.
The Prime Minister: When you read my letter, you will understand
what happened. We took the record compiled by Professor Barak who
is a very precise man. You will see our views. I read your statement on
this issue in the press today. I don’t agree that there should be a freeze
for more than three months. When you read my letter you will under-
stand my position.
The President: I am determined to solve this question and we will
try to minimize our differences.
The Prime Minister: I have already received an invitation from
President Sadat to send a communications group to Egypt. They will go
after Rosh Hashana. Mr. Atherton is coming here tomorrow.
The President: I would like to see the Sinai agreement settled
within days.
The Prime Minister: We can do it. We need only take an interna-
tional peace treaty and copy its passages and write in what we agreed
at Camp David.
The President: Do you think it would be a good idea for Weizman
and Gamasy to meet privately?
The Prime Minister: Foreign Minister Dayan will be the head of
our delegation. I will suggest this to Dayan, but he is the head. There
are other ministers who will be included, such as Ezer, but we will con-
sult on this. We need also to decide where to meet. I suggest that we
meet first at a place where all three of us find mutually agreeable. This
might be Washington. Maybe when we reach the peace treaty we
should sign it in the White House. You should witness it. We will do
this by mutual consultations. Our preference is to have the delegations
meet under the sponsorship of the United States.
The President: We are ready to move. I will contact Sadat. The
place of the meeting does not matter. Give my regards to Dayan, to
Weizman, and especially to Barak. I am in love with him. He is the un-
sung hero of Camp David. He is a wonderful man.

72.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
Tosec 110031/246945. Subject: Message From the President to
Begin on Egypt—Israel Negotiations.
1. Deliver2 following to Prime Minister as soon as Knesset votes
approval of Camp David Agreements. Begin text.
Dear Mr. Prime Minister: Once again, let me express my deep ad-
miration for the courage and statesmanship you showed at Camp
David. I am naturally gratified by the overwhelming approval given to
the Camp David Agreements by the Government of Israel and by the
Knesset.
2. The task we now face is to translate the framework documents
into a negotiating process which can quickly resolve the remaining
issues in Sinai, while also setting in motion the first stages of the agree-
ment on the West Bank and Gaza. I want to assure you, as I have Presi-
dent Sadat, that I remain ready to lend my full support to the successful
conclusion of the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty. To this end, I believe
every effort should be made to begin the talks on Sinai without delay
following the Knesset vote. Now that the Knesset has acted, it would be
desirable for Minister Weizman to meet with General Gamasy in Wash-
ington to explore the issues regarding Sinai security arrangements and
withdrawal. Could you please give me your thoughts on this?
3. We will also want to move as rapidly as possible to initiate talks
to implement the provisions of the West Bank and Gaza portion of the
framework agreement. Ambassador Atherton will fill you in fully on
Secretary Vance’s talks with King Hussein, the Saudi leadership, [and]
President Assad. King Hussein has not made up his mind about joining
the negotiations but is giving the matter his most serious consideration.
He has indicated he needs more time and would like to have further ex-
changes with us on the subject. I hope that he will decide to join once he
fully understands the benefits that Jordan and the Palestinians stand to
reap from their participation in the Agreements.
4. With friendship and respect, Sincerely, Jimmy Carter
End Quote.
Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

73.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and
President Sadat
President Carter: Mr. President, I thank you for your support in the
peace negotiations.
President Sadat: I value your contribution for peace. Without you
nothing would have happened.
President Carter: How has the reception been in Egypt?
President Sadat: It is marvelous. It is as I expected.
President Carter: I was very grateful for the Knesset’s vote.
President Sadat: It was very good news indeed. It was a good vote.
President Carter: We want to conclude the peace treaty as soon as
possible? How soon can talks begin?
President Sadat: The discussions could begin on October 12th. Oc-
tober 6th is a special day in Egypt.
President Carter: When are you going to discuss the terms of the
agreements with the Saudis and Jordanians?
President Sadat: I will consult with them tomorrow.
President Carter: After you have your consultations, let me know
the results through diplomatic channels. We will help to get their
support.
President Sadat: I will keep you informed.
President Carter: We want to move as rapidly as possible after Oc-
tober 10th. If you have any messages send them directly to me. I hope
we can resolve the place for the negotiations.
President Sadat: I have no preference at all. I will leave that to you.

74.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, September 29, 1978
SUBJECT
Consultations on Lebanon
At his press conference on September 28, the President referred to
the possibility of “a conference of those who are involved” in Lebanon,
“primarily the people who live in Lebanon, the different factions
there.” He also mentioned a “new charter” for Lebanon and some form
of UN action, presumably in promoting a conference of interested
parties. (See the attached portions of the press conference.)
In response to questions, we have been saying that the President’s
statement does not constitute a formal proposal. We will be consulting
with the Lebanese government and others on possible next steps to al-
leviate the crisis in Lebanon.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Vance will be discussing this issue at the UN4—he meets
with the French Foreign Minister today5—and you will want to com-
pare notes with him before you depart for Europe.
Without knowing how Secretary Vance is handling this in his
talks, let me make a few points:
—An “all parties” conference on Lebanon is probably not in the
cards, since the parties include Syria, the PLO, Israel, and the Christian
militias, as well as the Sarkis government. I do not see these disparate
groups all sitting down with one another.
—There may be some prospect for us to organize talks among
“friends of Lebanon”—France, Saudi Arabia, the Vatican, Jordan. We
should be a bit cautious in taking our cues on Lebanon from Egypt or
Israel in present circumstances. Both have their own axes to grind.
—Lebanon’s problems will not be solved by a “new charter.” A
fairly good political formula was worked out in late 1976 when Sarkis
was elected President. (It provided for an equitable sharing of power
among the various political communities in Lebanon.)
With those caveats in mind, we should recognize that there will be
no solution to the Lebanese crisis until the following steps are taken:
—The Syrian army disengages from the areas of confrontation
with the Christian militias in Beirut. This requires the introduction of a
loyal Lebanese armed force.
—The creation of a Lebanese army/gendarmarie loyal to Sarkis
and responsive to his orders. (This seems to be politically impossible,
but the effort has to be made.)

—Some reduction in arms and serious restraint on the part of the
extremist Christian militias (who are aided and abetted by Israel).
—Some means of reducing the size of the Palestinian presence in
Lebanon, particularly that of the armed PLO elements.
Significant progress on any one of these steps would be worth
more than a dozen conferences. The problem is to find channels of in-
fluence to move forward on any or all of these fronts. What we should
be doing now instead of calling for conferences or discussing new
charters is to identify correctly the problem, then try to figure out how
to influence directly or indirectly the Syrians, the Christian militias, the
Israelis, and the PLO, while simultaneously providing Sarkis with a bit
of backbone. But we have to think of what we can realistically ask each
of these parties to do. A plea for restraint and moderation is not going
to get very far.
I suggest that we explore with Sarkis, the Syrians, the Israelis, the
Saudis and the French the following steps:
—Disengagement of Syrian troops from Beirut and their replace-
ment by Lebanese army units.
—Simultaneous steps to insure that the Christian militias do not
take advantage of a Syrian withdrawal by seizing control of more terri-
tory by force. (The Israelis will have to help with the militias.)
—Active consultations with Sarkis and other Lebanese political
leaders to mobilize support for a more assertive Lebanese gov-
ernmental role in ending the fighting. (The arrival of our new Ambas-
sador7 provides an opportunity for extensive political contacts.)

75.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the
Department of State and the Embassy in Israel
2707. Subject: Atherton Meets West Bank/Gazan Palestinians.
Summary: Ambassador Atherton initiated high-level U.S. dia-
logue with West Bank/Gaza Palestinians evening September 29. Pales-
tinians expressed their concerns over perceived shortcomings and
ambiguities of Camp David Framework and received detailed US ex-
planations and clarifications. Atherton made clear US recognizes cen-
trality of Palestinian issue and quoted from Secretary’s UNGA speech
to good effect. Palestinians stressed, among other things, necessity: set-
tlement freeze throughout transitional period; either Hussein or PLO
entering negotiations; Jerusalem must be discussed and Arab residents
of East Jerusalem must be able to vote for transitional authority. Ath-
erton indicated that while Palestinians might find their particular
framework wanting in some respects, it did offer genuine opportu-
nities and they should consider carefully their alternatives. At end, Nu-
seibeh said West Bankers/Gazans would draw up document setting
forth their views on Camp David Framework’s shortcomings. Meeting
was boycotted by pro-PLO mayors but we are certain they will receive
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent Niact Immediate to Tel Aviv. Sent for information Imme-
diate to Cairo. Sent for information to Amman, Beirut, Damascus, Jidda, Kuwait, and
USUN. On September 22, the Consulate General in Jerusalem reported that while “we
have not thought it appropriate” for Vance or Atherton to meet with West Bankers in pre-
vious visits, “[i]n the fundamentally changed circumstances after Camp David, we be-
lieve a quiet unpublicized meeting by Ambassador Atherton with leading West Bankers
could help build support for the Camp David Agreements.” (Telegram 2631 from Jeru-
0095) After discussing the proposal with Lewis on September 27, Newlin confirmed the
plan to hold a meeting between Atherton and West Bank/Gaza notables on September
29, in order to “allay some of their underlying fears and misgivings.” (Telegram 2673
from Jerusalem, September 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
State Bulletin, November 1978, p. 49)

full briefing. Palestinians expressed genuine appreciation for opportu-
nity to meet high-level US official for first time. End summary.
1. Atherton met with six West Bankers (Bethlehem mayor Freij,
Nablus notables Hikmat and Zafar al-Masri, Jerusalem notable Nuse-
ibeh, Ramallah lawyer Shehadeh, and Bir Zeit professor Nazzal), and
three Gazans (Mansour Shawwa, son of Gaza mayor, Gaza notable Abu
Ghazzalleh and Gaza lawyer Abu Rahmi) at DPO3 residence in East Je-
rusalem evening September 29. Invited pro-PLO mayors of Nablus,
Tulkarm, Ramallah, El Bireh, and Halhul had agreed to boycott
meeting; three of the invited Gazans did not show up. In addition to
Consul General and DPO, Twinam, Blackwell, and ICA Officer Smith
were present.
2. Introducing his remarks by noting that Secretary Vance had per-
sonally wanted him to meet with West Bank/Gazans while in Jeru-
salem, Atherton expressed his own pleasure for this opportunity. He
then gave an account of Camp David summit concluding by noting that
meeting was “a cliff hanger” with agreement achieved on last day. One
of the main new elements coming out of the meeting which should be
recognized by all is the personal engagement of President Carter and
fact that U.S. will continue to be fully involved as active partner in all
negotiations flowing from Camp David. Atherton stressed centrality of
Palestinian issue.
3. Leading off for Palestinians, Jerusalem notable Nuseibeh
(brother of Jordanian UN Ambassador) stated frankly that he was not
happy with Agreements and found there were many gaps. He thought
that Sadat had put Palestinians in difficult position. For example, Sadat
had insisted on Israeli recognition of Arab sovereignty in Sinai and sub-
sequent dismantling of Israeli settlements there, but had not required
same Israeli recognition for equally Arab sovereign land in West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. According to Nuseibeh, there was an “un-
even” quality in the two documents which encouraged Palestinians
suspicions that basically Camp David was a bilateral Egyptian-Israeli
deal at the expense of Palestinians.
4. Next up was Nablus notable Hikmat al-Masri who also struck
note of difference in treatment of Sinai and West Bank. In the former, a
total immediate withdrawal was sought and obtained, while for the
West Bank, it was left as negotiable.
5. Atherton responded by recounting history of Carter administra-
tion’s efforts at reaching comprehensive Middle East peace settlement
and Sadat initiative. He reminded Palestinians that Sadat could have

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
had a bilateral deal as early as last November, but wanted to negotiate a
framework for all parties. Sadat, however, could only act for Egypt at
Camp David; he could not negotiate further for Palestinians. In fact,
Atherton noted, there was no other party who could negotiate for Pal-
estinians at Camp David. Acknowledging that Camp David Agree-
ments did not have everything Palestinians desired, he said that choice
became either what was attainable or nothing at all. The U.S. is con-
vinced that Accords do move the process forward and represent signif-
icant changes in Israeli positions. Clearly Accords go beyond SC Reso-
lution 242 and Palestinian problem is now recognized by Israel for first
time as having political and territorial dimensions; not just a refugee
problem. Although all issues were not resolved at Camp David, Sadat
gave up no Arab positions there, Atherton concluded.
6. Ramallah lawyer Shehadeh was concerned about use of term
“West Bank” rather than “occupied territories” in Camp David Agree-
ments as this might make it difficult to bring East Jerusalem into negoti-
ations. Israelis will want to consider East Jerusalem as outside purview
of negotiations while Shehadeh noted it is essential for Arabs that it be
included. At this point, son of Gaza mayor Shawwa defended Sadat by
asking if anyone could have gotten more. For him, the most important
thing was ending the settlements. Hikmat al-Masri agreed that ending
settlements was 70 percent of Palestinian position. Expressing apol-
ogies on behalf of mayors who did not attend, Nazzal said he had just
seen several of them who wanted to relay two questions—(1) why was
U.S. meeting with Palestinians now and not before? (did GOI ap-
prove?), and (2) why not deal with PLO who are the real represent-
atives of Palestinians?
7. After dinner, group discussion resumed with Atherton re-
sponding to Nuseibeh’s request for briefing on what other Arabs were
saying. After describing reactions he had gotten in other places, Ath-
erton described his Amman stop where he found the King undecided.
There was a debate going on in Jordan. He said that Jordanians took his
explanations at face value. However, when he asked Jordanians what it
would take to get them in process, Atherton reported that they were
unable to answer. Jordanians have asked questions of U.S. and wish to
continue dialogue with us, Atherton said.
8. Atherton then explained in detail Camp David Accords and
urged that Palestinians should focus on positive rather than negative
aspects. He counselled them to focus on wording of Agreements rather
than subsequent statements by either Israelis or other parties.
9. During following wide-open discussion period with all Pales-
tinians participating, following were themes and concerns raised:
(a) Israeli settlements—this was primary preoccupation. Freij,
Hikmat al-Masri and others stressed need for Israeli commitment to

settlement freeze during interim period. Nazzal said “we don’t mind
Jews buying land” but settlements are different. He thought it vital that
self-governing authority be responsible for all public land from Jorda-
nian times as this was land which Israelis had primarily taken for settle-
ments. Atherton reiterated U.S. understanding of settlement freeze
issue.
(b) Arabs in East Jerusalem—Shehadeh and Freij were concerned
about 100,000 Arabs in East Jerusalem and especially their right to par-
ticipate in West Bank elections. They thought Israelis would veto this.
Atherton said that he was not sure this was the Israeli position and sug-
gested that Dayan be queried. Freij said he would do so next time he
saw Dayan.
(c) Return of 1967 displaces—several Palestinians asked when 1967
displaced persons would be allowed to return and Atherton said the
Framework agreement provides for return during transition period.
(d) End of military government and administration—Shehadeh
said that General Orly had told him recently that Israelis were com-
mitted by Camp David Agreements to end military government in
West Bank/Gaza within three months and that this would be done
come what may. Atherton noted comprehensive Framework provided
for negotiations to set up modalities for elections to self-governing au-
thority and that there was no time limit involved. Shehadeh said if Is-
raelis were going to get out within three months, this would force West
Bankers to adopt a position. Other Palestinians present considered
Orly’s remarks to be a hollow threat since Israel would never permit
the state of civil anarchy to develop on the West Bank similar to that in
Lebanon.
(3) Restriction on individuals—in response to inquiries about who
can participate in self-governing authority, Atherton said that there
was no restrictions on inhabitants of West Bank/Gaza but that those
from outside would have to be acceptable to all parties.
10. Throughout discussion, there were frequent references by West
Bankers to their inability to represent all Palestinians and a call for U.S.
to talk to PLO as the “national liberation movement” of Palestine. As
Nazzal put it, “we are in a tough situation; we don’t want to dig our
own graves.” Also there were statements suggesting that US guarantee
outcome of negotiations. Atherton responded that US could not guar-
antee the results, but does guarantee the process and continued US in-
volvement in the process. Reiterating deep American interest in Pales-
tinian issue, Atherton quoted from Secretary’s UNGA speech earlier
that day.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
11. In a final statement, highly respected Hikmat al-Masri said that
all present appreciated this first opportunity to speak to high-level US
official and asked that Atherton carry back to Washington all of the
points raised. He reminded Atherton that despite willingness of those
present to convey personal views, they could not speak on behalf of all
Palestinians; “only Arafat or the King can now represent us.”
12. Nuseibeh said that West Bank/Gaza would attempt to prepare
paper which would point out shortcoming in Camp David Agreements
as seen by Palestinians.
13. Comment: This was a meeting “whose time had come.” Pales-
tinians who attend wanted to hear high-level expression of US policy
and were prepared to ask serious and thoughtful questions. Recrimina-
tions and polemics were noticeably minimal. Granted that group was
composed of relatively moderate leaders. Nevertheless, all West Bank/
Gaza participants were genuine Palestinian nationalists. It was unfor-
tunate that mayors could not hear Atherton’s authoritative explana-
tions and clarifications. Nevertheless, I am sure the word will soon
spread and I think (via al-Masri, Freij, Shehadeh and Nazzal) our dia-
logue with West Bankers/Gazans has had a significant boost. End
comment.
14. (Ambassador Atherton made no comment to the press either
before or after this meeting.)
15. Foregoing was reconstructed from memory by ConGen and
Embassy participants after Ambassador Atherton had departed. He
may wish to comment.
Newlin

76.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Carter-Gromyko Plenary Meeting
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Secretary Harold Brown
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Warnke
Ambassador Toon
Mr. David Aaron
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
First Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. V.G. Makarov
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. A.A. Bessmertnykh
Mr. N.N. Detinov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Middle East.]
Middle East
The President believed that both our countries wanted to pursue
peace in that region. Each of us had close relations with the countries
involved in the Middle East dispute. We felt that the Camp David dis-
cussion had produced a viable mechanism for working out a peace
treaty between Egypt and Israel, the main combatants in that area. He
expressed the hope that the Soviet Union could help to move this
process along, and that within the bounds of its own foreign policy it
would support the Camp David agreements. We did not have any mili-
tary forces in that area and, in fact, our observers in the Sinai might be
removed once that peace treaty went into effect.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Middle East.]
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Gromyko wanted to speak briefly on some specific aspects the
President had touched upon.
Middle East
With regard to the Middle East situation he had to say that the So-
viet Union took a different approach to the actual state of affairs in that
area. He would note that both sides agreed that the situation there
was complex and dangerous. As for methods to resolve Middle East
problems and the specific political steps necessary to ensure a settle-
ment of the Middle East problems, our respective standpoints were en-
tirely different. Regarding the Camp David meetings, of course the
President would know that the Soviet Union did not share his views
concerning the results achieved and would not associate itself with the
process and methods used. The Soviets were against separate “deals.”
Gromyko would say that the United States had acted rudely toward the
Soviet Union despite the common understanding achieved last year, to
the effect that we would take concerted action with respect to the
Middle East. He noted that the United States had gone a separate way,
demonstratively disregarding the previous understanding with the So-
viet Union.
As for Camp David, if anything was accomplished there, it was
that Israel had obtained what it had been striving for from the very be-
ginning, while Sadat had received nothing and had in fact lost every-
thing he had. At the same time Syria and Jordan and the Palestinians
had been completely circumvented, producing great disarray in the
ranks of the Arabs. Was this really the path to peace and calm in the
Middle East? The Soviets did not believe so, and no one could convert
them to the views of the United States or Sadat or Begin on this score.
They had their own assessment and views. That the Soviet Union
wanted peace in the Middle East was well known throughout the
world. It wanted to see the states in the Middle East live in peace as in-
dependent sovereign states, and this, of course, included Israel. The So-
viet Union had stated this hundreds of times for all the world to hear,
and its position was well known. It was equally well known that the So-
viet Union wanted to do all in its power to safeguard the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians. Now he could only say that they would have
to wait and see how events developed in the future.
Gromyko asked the President not to consider him a pessimist. The
Soviets were optimists and firmly believed that eventually all the
problems would be resolved for the people of the Middle East. The So-
viets had never had any idea of pushing Israel into the sea. On the con-
trary, they had upheld Israel many times in the international arena, cer-
tainly to a much greater extent than the Israelis themselves were doing
by their ill-considered extremist statements. Gromyko concluded his

77.
Editorial Note
In the aftermath of the resumption of artillery clashes between
Lebanese Christian militias and Syrian forces in the area around the
Lebanese capital, Beirut, on September 27, 1978, a new, more intense
round of fighting broke out on September 30. That morning, the U.S.
Embassy in Beirut reported the shelling of the villages of Bikfayah and
Beit Meri by Syrian artillery, the “first time villages in [the] Christian
heartland have been subject to bombardment since [the] Syrians came.”
Central Foreign Policy File, D780399–0898) For Embassy officials, this
new round represented a “qualitative change for the worse” and was
“the heaviest fighting since the 1975–76 civil war.” This “significant es-
calation,” they suspected, had been “intentionally provoked” by the
Lebanese Christian militias in order to “dissuade” Lebanese President
Elias Sarkis from asking for a renewal of the Arab Deterrent Force
(ADF), the multi-national Arab peacekeeping force dispatched to Leb-
anon in the aftermath of the 1975–1976 conflict, which was due to ex-
pire. They also speculated that the Lebanese Christians may also have
provoked the fighting “as a way of pressuring USG to follow through
on [the] idea of [an] international conference on Lebanon.” Despite this,
however, the Embassy believed that the Syrian forces were “very seri-
ously over-reacting.” (Telegram 5710 from Beirut, September 30; Na-
Hostilities escalated further early on October 2 as Syrian forces began
shelling East Beirut. The Embassy in Beirut cabled regular situation re-
ports to Washington on the continuing artillery duels between the
Syrians and the Lebanese Christian militias between October 2 and Oc-
tober 5. The telegrams are in the National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File.
President Jimmy Carter asked the Department of State to prepare
policy recommendations for bringing an end to the crisis in Lebanon. In
response, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance prepared for Carter a memo-
randum outlining twelve possible initiatives the U.S. Government
could undertake. At the beginning of the undated memorandum,
Vance wrote that any “serious effort, to resolve, rather than simply to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
contain, the Lebanese crisis will require international support.” “Equally
important,” Vance continued, “it will require pressure on Israel to re-
duce significantly and ultimately to end its military relationship with
the Maronites” and “particularly to refrain from employing their pres-
ence in Lebanon to alter the political balance. Syria will also have to
keep the Palestinians under control.” Vance’s suggested initiatives
called for inviting greater United Nations participation, including UN
military and police forces, the appointment of a special UN repre-
sentative to Lebanon, and the expansion of the mandate of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Southern Lebanon (UNIFIL) to include
tional conference under UN auspices with Saudi assistance (Option 5)
or a conference of Arab States exclusively (Option 6); imposing an arms
embargo and blockade of Lebanon (Option 7); initiating direct U.S. in-
teraction with the Lebanese Government through the establishment of
a U.S. military training mission (Option 9) or the formulation of a U.S.
proposal to resolve the “domestic political aspects of the crisis” (Option
10); and urging Lebanon to invite a “Wise Man’s Group” of interna-
tional statesmen “acquainted with Lebanon’s problems” to visit the
country (Option 12). In a series of handwritten annotations on the doc-
ument, Carter indicated his views: United Nations involvement was a
“possibility” and an arms embargo and blockade would bring a “prob-
able confrontation w/Israel.” At the top of the memorandum, Carter
wrote: “There don’t seem to be any really good ideas. Saudis and UN
best hope.” (Memorandum from Vance to Carter, undated; Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office
On October 4, French President Vale´ry Giscard d’Estaing wrote to
President Carter, suggesting a ceasefire solution. Giscard informed him
that he had been in touch with Lebanese President Sarkis who had sug-
gested redeploying ADF forces “in the most exposed sectors of the
Beirut metropolitan area in such a way as to avoid contact between the
military elements of one side or the other,” with the objective of eventu-
ally replacing these forces with Lebanese army units. The French Presi-
dent agreed to support this initiative and to take it to Syrian President
Hafez al-Assad for the latter’s approval. Giscard stated to Carter that he
had done this “in the most urgent terms.” Carter responded to Giscard
on October 5, stating his strong support for the initiative and empha-
sizing the need for the continuation of U.S.-French cooperation over
Lebanon. The texts of Giscard’s October 4 letter and Carter’s October 5
response are in telegram Tosec 110083/253369 to Secretary of State
Vance and Damascus, Tel Aviv, Beirut, and USUN, October 5. (Na-
Carter also sent a letter to Assad, who was then in Moscow for talks
with the Soviets, urging him to accept the ceasefire terms. The text of

Carter’s letter, sent in telegram 253368 to Moscow, October 5, is in the
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East,
lock delivered Carter’s letter to Assad at the Kremlin at 9: a.m. on Oc-
tober 6. After going through the letter with an interpreter, Assad deliv-
ered a preliminary response to Matlock. Assad stated that Syrians also
sought to avoid bloodshed, that the “main responsibility for the situa-
tion lies on the Israelis,” and that he would study Carter’s letter “care-
fully” in Damascus and confer with Sarkis. Matlock responded that
Vance had made “strong representations to top Israeli officials re-
garding Israeli military support for the militia” and that the United
States was prepared “to go to the Security Council today if the fighting
does not stop.” (Telegram 24032 from Moscow, October 6; National Ar-
tailed record of this conversation is in telegram 24033 from Moscow,
October 6. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Vance contacted the Israelis on October 6 through a personal mes-
sage to Israeli Minister of Defense Ezer Weizman. In the message,
Vance stated he was “deeply concerned” about Israeli involvement in
Lebanon, including the shelling of the Lebanese coast by Israeli gun-
boats, and the “threatening language” used by Israeli officials “to sug-
gest that Israeli intervention in northern Lebanon may be desirable in
order to provoke UN intervention.” Vance cautioned that Israeli mili-
tary intervention would be a “historic mistake,” and undermine the
“fragile” Camp David Accords. (Telegram Secto 11033 from USDEL
Secretary in New York, October 6; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D780408–0645) U.S. Ambassador to Israel Samuel
Lewis conveyed the substance of the message to Weizman by tele-
Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin responded to Vance’s message
on behalf of his government stating that Israel “cannot under any cir-
cumstances ignore the cry of men, women, and children being cruelly
slaughtered by artillery and tanks.” Begin urged the United States to
push for an immediate ceasefire. (Telegram 255417 to Tel Aviv, October
Carter sought Soviet support for the ceasefire and dispatched an-
other letter to Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev via the hotline
on October 5. The letter is in the Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 69, USSR:
October 6, stating his agreement that “the immediate termination of
hostilities by all sides participating in the conflict must be realized.”

78.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter
Washington, undated
Subject
Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel
We have received agreement in principle from both Egypt and Is-
rael to send Foreign and Defense Ministers to Washington in October
for talks on the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. Begin has told Sam Lewis
that Dayan, Weizman and a group of advisors could be in Washington
on October 12 to begin talks; Sadat has told Hermann Eilts and Roy
Atherton he could send his delegation of nine to ten members for talks
to begin on October 12. I suggest that we now move to extend formal
invitations for talks to begin here on October 12. Attached are draft
letters from you to Begin and Sadat.
We have looked at a number of possible locations for the confer-
ence. We do not believe that an out-of-town site would be desirable, for
it would be inconvenient and would slow messages we might wish to
send to Sadat and Begin. In Washington, we think that Dumbarton
Oaks would be an ideal site not only because of its fine facilities, but
also for the symbolism of holding the Egyptian-Israeli peace negotia-
cret. Printed from an uninitialed copy.

tions at the site of the 1944 negotiations for the UN Charter. If you
agree, I would like to have the Department begin immediately to make
the necessary arrangements with Harvard University, the owner of
Dumbarton Oaks, for its possible use as site for the talks.
I recommend that our negotiating team be headed by myself, with
Roy Atherton as my Deputy. We have been considering whether to
bring Ambassadors Eilts and Lewis back to Washington to participate
in the talks. Sadat and Begin will remain in their respective capitals,
and I believe it will be more important to have Eilts and Lewis stay at
their posts to work with Sadat and Begin on problems that arise in the
talks. Unless you have other views, I will instruct Eilts and Lewis
accordingly.
Recommendation:
1. That you approve the attached letters to Sadat and Begin.
2. That you authorize the Department of State to explore the possi-
bility of having Dumbarton Oaks as site for the Egyptian-Israeli talks.

79.
Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Comments of King Husayn on his Perception Of U.S. Pressure on Jordan to Join
the Middle East Peace Negotiations and on his Recent Discussions with Saudi
and Gulf Leaders
1. In King Husayn’s contacts with the United States, and in partic-
ular in three letters2 and one telephone call3 he has received from Presi-
dent Carter, Husayn has discerned the following theme: entering the
negotiations is a difficult and risky course, but the King has taken risks
in the past; furthermore, not getting involved holds far more risks.
These and other messages—indicating that if Jordan “falls into line” its
military and economic needs will be satisfied—add up in the King’s
mind to an implied threat. (Comment: In a separate conversation, Jor-
dan Armed Forces Commander in Chief Lt. Gen. Bin Shakir stated that
during his June 1978 visit to the U.S. he was told by a U.S. Presidential
Advisor that Jordan had been too “passive” about getting into the
peace process.) At one point, Husayn noted that he will never reach the
level of importance that Israel has in U.S. eyes, and that he can never
turn to the Soviets. He said, “I may go down.”
2. Very evident throughout the conversation was Husayn’s frus-
tration with the Saudis. He described Crown Prince Fahd as indecisive
and ineffective while having all the power in the world at his disposal.
He urged Fahd that they set up a committee of two to discuss “alterna-
tives”, as time was running out. Fahd agreed in principle; when Hu-
sayn asked when they could meet for a follow-up, Fahd said he would
have to check first with King Khalid. This apparently exasperated King
Husayn, who figured that getting Khalid’s clearance could take weeks.
In Saudi Arabia, Husayn observed, nothing gets done right and
nothing gets done on time. (Comment: Though Husayn did not men-
tion Saudi aid to Jordan, we can probably safely assume that he got no
definitive answer from Fahd on this score either.)
3. Husayn’s overall prediction is that the Saudi regime is going to
go under. “I think people are underestimating the capacity for madness
in this part of the world”, he observed. Husayn observed that some of
the younger princes of Saudi Arabia do not care for the traditional
ways of the people at the top; and furthermore, it was one of these
princes who killed the late King Faysal. Husayn then recalled how King
Faysal with one masterful stroke (i.e., the oil embargo) completely re-
stored Saudi Arabia’s credibility. Husayn felt certain that if Faysal were
alive today, the Saudi reaction to Camp David would have been deci-
sive and different.
4. This led Husayn off on one of his conspiracy theory of history
tangents, as he mused aloud why Faysal had been killed and whether
this was part of a larger plan. He then went on to describe the pattern of
events in which Jordan has been systematically squeezed for the past
several years. He sees Egyptian President Anwar Al-Sadat as the
leading figure behind this, but implicit in what Husayn said was that
there was U.S. backing throughout as well. “Sometimes I think I was
born in the wrong century”, said Husayn, who added that it is no
longer a question of principles but rather a situation in which com-
puters take over and one’s position and role are war-gamed by some-
body from afar. (Comment: Read Washington).
5. Also during the conversation, Husayn touched on his visits to
the individual Gulf countries, which he found to be completely under
the influence of Saudi Arabia. He has a special feeling for the Bahrainis
as wiser and more genuine than the rest. He found the Qataris worried
about pressure from Iraq. In Kuwait, he was told by the leadership that
the Iraqis are worried as to what would happen were the Shah of Iran
to be overthrown. (Comment: Overall, Husayn reads the Iraqis as dis-
posed to be more moderate.) In Oman, Husayn found the Sultan to
have the tribes under much better control than previously, as Qabus
has appointed new chiefs and received new pledges of loyalty. Every-
where Husayn went in the Gulf he found anger with Sadat, not so
much for having placed Egypt first, but for his tactics and methods.
6. Husayn plans shortly to write a letter4 to President Carter in
which he will explain fully his position on the peace process and the
Camp David accords. He is still planning to visit the U.S. soon after the
first of the year and feels more than ever that to visit now would be
very bad timing.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
80.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to
Secretary of State Vance
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Preliminary Views on the Conduct of the Egypt-Israel Negotiations in
Washington
Major bilateral issues between Egypt and Israel have been re-
solved and, while the negotiations will take some time because of the
care and detail involved, it should not be difficult for the two sides to
move steadily to agreement on the precise terms of a peace treaty. In
our role as participant and chairman of the talks we face no obstacles as
serious as those at Camp David on this aspect, although there are a
couple that have not been discussed and there will be snags where our
own intervention will be important in moving issues to resolution.
The main issues we face in the talks opening October 12 are:
(a) how to engage the two sides in discussion of West Bank/Gaza
issues, if possible reaching further agreement on at least some issues, so
as to improve the prospects for Jordanian and Palestinian participation
in West Bank/Gaza negotiations; and (b) related to this, whether the
Egyptians will at this stage try to reintroduce some link between imple-
mentation of their Treaty with the agreement on the West Bank/Gaza.
Organizing the Talks on Bilateral Issues
Our own approach to the Egypt-Israel peace treaty, as you know,
envisages a fairly short basic treaty text supplemented by two annexes
that spell out (a) the withdrawal and security aspects, with an accom-
panying map, and (b) commitments to peace in specific terms. Even if
the two sides decide to approach it differently from the point of view of
a Treaty text, the basic division of work we have sketched out appears
logical. This would suggest that the talks could, very soon after open-
ing, break down into 3 working groups that would work on (a) the
basic Treaty text; (b) a military annex; and (c) an annex detailing com-
mitments to peace and normalization of relations. (The Israelis have
signaled their wish to proceed first with the commitments and normali-
zation of peace aspect; we assume they can be talked out of this since
the talks will be in immediate trouble if either side insists on a one-
sided approach.) Under this kind of format we would need to field a
delegation (see below) that can keep a member present in each of these
committees. We will also need, in addition to good general strength in
Arab-Israel affairs, expertise in two special fields—military and legal.
We see all the real work being performed in these sub-groups, with
the plenary convened for opening and closing sessions, or perhaps pe-
riodically to hear progress reports from the working committees. Our
delegation members will presumably serve very informally as chair-
men in the working committees but we envisage letting the two sides
get on with the work in their own manner as much as possible without
guidance from us so long as they are able to make progress in this
manner. Our role in the negotiations on bilateral issues will be to be
present so that we know what is going on, to be available for consulta-
tions, and to be alert to possible trouble spots which might require our
intervention, either with the ministers here or through our ambas-
sadors in the capitals.
Your Role
The President will open the proceedings on October 12 with a
short public speech, after which the meeting will go into closed session
and you will be in the chair. We suggest you use the remaining time be-
fore lunch that first day to outline our suggestions for a format for the
talks and to settle on procedural matters. After a working lunch, which
we suggest you host, we may wish to continue discussions in plenary
for a further afternoon session before breaking up, for the following
day, into working groups. The afternoon session might be the time for
you to make it clear we intend to use the talks here to tackle West
Bank/Gaza issues as well.
With the negotiations moving into its working group phase the
next morning, there would no longer be a need for you to maintain a
regular presence at the talks. Roy Atherton would take over as Chair-
man. We hope that you will keep time available in the first few days to
engage the two ministers in discussions about West Bank/Gaza issues.
The U.S. Delegation
We recommend:
Alternates:
Cyrus Vance, Chairman
Morris Draper
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr.,
David Korn
Deputy Chairman
Harold Saunders
William Quandt
Michael Sterner
William Kirby
James Covey

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
General Richard Lawrence, Military Member
Herbert Hansell, Legal Advisor
George Sherman, Spokesman
While part of the delegation, I would not plan to spend full time
with the talks. With the Egyptian-Israeli talks launched, I would plan to
devote my time—in addition to tending other NEA matters—to pre-
paring for the West Bank/Gaza talks.
Engaging the Two Sides in West Bank/Gaza Issues
The Egyptians will be all for this, although we do not know how
far Sadat is prepared to go in slowing down progress on an Egypt-
Israel treaty to achieve a further stage of understanding on West Bank/
Gaza issues. Boutros Ghali, in his latest conversation2 with Hermann,
continues to deny any formal linkage but says Egypt will be expecting a
“gentleman’s agreement” with Israel that progress on West Bank/Gaza
issues should be synchronized with movement toward agreement on
an Egypt-Israel treaty. He warns that the pace of Egypt’s willingness to
see normalization of relations put into effect will be affected if Israel is
“stiff-necked” about moving further on West Bank/Gaza issues. The Is-
raelis will be prepared to talk about the West Bank/Gaza but will be re-
luctant to make any further concessions prior to Jordan entering the
talks.
In particular, the issue of the settlements in the West Bank looms as
crucial, and may have to be isolated if we are to progress on other
issues. The credibility of the Framework will be seriously vitiated in
Arab eyes if Israel is allowed to continue to “create facts” on the
ground, and this would also weaken Arab confidence in the U.S. role.
On the other hand, it will be the hardest point for the Israelis to give
ground on because to do so will strike at Begin’s ability to maintain, for
his domestic political purposes, that the Camp David Framework
leaves room for an essentially “Israeli solution” for the West Bank and
Gaza.
Thus, with the Israelis signalling us that they want to talk immedi-
ately about normalization of relations, and the Egyptians telling us this
will be linked to progress on the West Bank and Gaza, West Bank/Gaza
issues will probably emerge early as the crux and potential sticking
point of the talks. It will be important to make our own early assess-
ment of Egyptian intentions, because regardless of Boutros Ghali’s in-
tentions, it will be Sadat that ultimately decides to bring into play the
sanction of delaying progress on the bilateral treaty, and we will need
to tailor our approach accordingly. We believe the best approach

81.
Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Crawford) to the
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and
South Asian Affairs (Sterner), the Deputy Assistant Secretary
of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Draper),
and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and
South Asian Affairs (Saunders)
Washington, October 6, 1978
zinski’s meeting on the coming Egypt-Israel negotiation. The meeting
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
lasted about 25 minutes. Only Bill Quandt and David Aaron were
present.
Highlights: Brzezinski focused immediately on the essentiality of
using the Israel-Egypt treaty negotiation to make progress on elements
of the other framework, although he recognized this might carry us
only so far on the latter if Egypt wanted to wrap up its peace and didn’t
really worry about more than a fig leaf for the other. In this context,
Brzezinski said what is lacking is contact with Palestinians. If we are to
be talking about questions of interest to them as an adjunct of the
coming negotiation, we should/must be in touch with them, and
quickly. I said this is very much in our minds and a paper3 is being de-
veloped for the White House which sets out alternative levels of rela-
tionship ranging from what we have now at one end of the spectrum, to
direct discussion with the PLO at the other, but several in-betweens.
Brzezinski said he would like to see this paper soonest. I ventured our
thought about bringing Walid Khalidi to Washington and sketched out
how this might be done. (HHS: See attached4 which Mike and Morrie
already have). Brzezinski commented that he liked Khalidi and twice
said, “Fine, that is a good approach.” Comment: in the context of other
remarks by Brzezinski, I think we now have a green light on the Khalidi
idea which does not exclude other approaches as well as they will be
outlined in the paper we send forward. End Comment.
Brzezinski asked who would handle the side negotiation on the
West Bank framework with the Israelis (which he thought the President
should open as soon as Dayan comes to Washington), the Egyptians
and Palestinians. He emphasized twice that State should handle diplo-
matic relationships with the Palestinians as contacts by the White
House had a difficult domestic dimension. Quandt and I said you had
hoped to hold yourself available for the side of the coming negotiation
dealing with that Framework and Brzezinski said that was fine.
Quandt said that in discussions with Palestinians, such as Khalidi he
would like to share the responsibility with you. Brzezinski didn’t ex-
actly demur but emphasized that White House officials should in gen-
eral steer clear of Palestinian contacts; it “should be a diplomatic
responsibility.”

After discussion, Brzezinski outlined a memo5 which he asked
Quandt to prepare to be ready for the President by no later than
Monday6 night. This is to contain our strategy for the negotiation with
much fuller emphasis on how we bring in the West Bank/Gaza frame-
work and engage the Palestinians, the latter in a way that “doesn’t blow
the Israelis right out of the negotiation.” Quandt will do a first draft as
directed by Brzezinski and bring it to the meeting7 scheduled with all of
you for 11: Saturday.
Brzezinski noted that Sanders had announced at a breakfaster with
the press that the question of an exchange of letters with the Israelis on
settlements is dead. He asked if this were true and answered his own
question aloud by saying Begin seems to understand that if he sends us
a letter, we will send ours and it will be much stronger than he wants.
We may be alright if Dayan confirms to us that he will hold to the
public statements he made following his return to Jerusalem after
Camp David. If we can trust the Israelis, “those are good enough.”
Brzezinski thought we should not say anything about Blair House
until we have the President’s approval. He is going to Camp David
(2: p.m. Friday and will not be back until Monday night). The issue
can wait until then. Pending the President’s decision, Blair House
should not be mentioned in telegrams. The Egyptians and Israelis have
no need to know just now; it is sufficient that we have invited them to a
site in Washington.
There was agreement that Murray could best represent DOD on
the U.S. delegation and that Lawrence would be available in a sup-
portive, more technical role.

82.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Jimmy Carter, President
Walter Mondale, Vice President
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Council Advisor to the President
Alfred L. Atherton, Ambassador at Large
ISRAELI SIDE
Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister
Ezer Weizman, Defense Minister
SUBJECT
Middle East Peace Negotiations
The President opened the meeting by confirming with Dayan that
he was prepared to stay in Washington until a peace treaty was con-
cluded. Sadat was eager to conclude a treaty without delay. The Presi-
dent said he would be available to help if the negotiations slow down.
The President said we had prepared a draft treaty which we would
make available Wednesday to both the Egyptian and Israeli Delega-
tions. We had studied the maps carefully and had done our best in
drawing the lines.
Dayan noted that the Camp David framework speaks of full nor-
malization of relations after the interim withdrawal but does not say
this would happen immediately. Is it Sadat’s intention that normaliza-
tion should be immediate?
The President said his position was that Sadat should move to full
normalization immediately, including open borders and recognition,
including the establishment of diplomatic relations, perhaps with the
exchange of Ambassadors occurring a bit later. The President re-
sponded affirmatively to Dayan’s question of whether this meant full
normalization would occur in a matter of weeks after the interim
withdrawal.
The President said he would also like to see an early Israeli with-
drawal. Weizman responded that this would be easy so far as military
units and equipments are concerned but was more complicated with
respect to the Israeli listening posts in Sinai. Israel would like to arrange
for some of these to remain, perhaps with U.S. help. Weizman esti-
mated there were five such sites involving radar stations and telephone
systems (he mentioned for example at Jebal Libni). Israel would do its
best to pull back within three months to specific spots in the northern,
central and southern sectors but it would not be a direct line. With-
drawal would definitely be concluded to the interim line, however, in
nine months. Israel may ask for U.S. help with respect to its intelli-
gence sites. Weizman said he could also foresee a need for assistance
with respect to the total cost of withdrawal from Sinai and reloca-
tion in Israel over the three-year period, which might amount to $2
billion.
The President said he would hesitate to ask Sadat to permit early
warning stations to remain on Egyptian territory, though this might be
possible if they were operated by the U.S. The Secretary added that if
any Israeli sites remain on Egyptian territory, Sadat would want the
same rights on the Israeli side. Weizman said Israel was prepared to
discuss reciprocity and, in response to a specific question by the Presi-
dent, said this could include an Egyptian site in the Negev. Weizman
said he would ask General Tamir to discuss these questions with Gen-
eral Magdoub early in the conference and would report the results to
the President.
Dayan said Israel wanted to move as fast as possible and in some
areas could withdraw within three months. He thought Egypt would
cooperate with respect to intelligence sites until Israel constructed new
ones even if this took more than three months, with U.S. personnel
manning the sites in the meantime.
In response to Dr. Brzezinski’s question about how many per-
sonnel would be involved, Weizman said it was not the number of
people but the installations themselves—e.g., fuel and ammunition
dumps—which were the problem.
The President said Sadat would not yield on the exchange of nor-
malization for withdrawal. If even a few Israeli troops were to stay on
the Egyptian side, Sadat would delay an agreement and this would risk
having everything go down the drain. If Sadat agreed, the U.S. could
man two watch stations with each side choosing its own location.
Weizman said Israel would be withdrawing faster than it had ever
imagined. It had to be an orderly withdrawal but Israel wanted to
move fast for the same reasons the U.S. did.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President turned to the question of the UN zones envisaged
in the framework agreement. He had talked2 with Waldheim who
thought the present UNEF of about 3,000 personnel could be used. If
the number were increased, Security Council action would be needed
and would risk a Soviet veto. In response to the President’s question,
both Weizman and Dayan thought that UNEF with its present strength
could do the job. The President added that we are prepared to leave the
Sinai Field Mission in place for a period of time if Israel and Egypt
wished.
Reverting to the earlier discussion, Dayan said the key question
was whether Israel could be assured that Sadat would agree to full nor-
malization a few weeks after the interim withdrawal.
The President replied that Sadat says he (the President) had forced
him to accept diplomatic relations and open borders. The President had
told Sadat this was in his interest, in order to have a means to discuss
routine problems as they arose. The President said he would pursue
with enthusiasm the objective of immediate normalization following
the interim withdrawal. Dayan said it was not a question of having an
Egyptian Embassy in Tel Aviv per se; he was worried about what
might happen after two or three years if relations had not been fully
consolidated. The President said he intended to marshal all possible
U.S. help to consolidate normalization of Egyptian-Israeli relations—
e.g., trade missions, capital investment, etc. Sadat was impulsive and
could be brought to support this objective if handled correctly, but he
could also be impulsive in negative ways.
The President then asked how soon Israel envisaged complete
withdrawal from Sinai. Weizman said not before three years because of
the airfield construction problem. Israel was squeezing itself back into a
small area and needed the best possible new airfields.
The President said we would like to help expedite Israel’s airfield
construction. With respect to Israel’s interest in using Sinai air space for
training purposes, the President said he could not reveal Sadat’s posi-
tion but thought that Sadat sees this as an inducement to expedite the
withdrawal process. If the talks go well on both sides and we can get
Sadat in a good mood, the President believed he would agree to Israeli
training in Sinai air space. If Sadat agreed, however, it would be as a
good faith gesture; he is not required to do this. Weizman said Israel
would seek Egypt’s agreement to this, for unarmed training in speci-
fied corridors.
The President asked how long it would take for the Israeli settlers
to leave Sinai. Dayan said a few months one way or other made no dif-
ference. The airfield construction would be the controlling factor.
The President said it is important to keep Sadat in a good mood.
He can be generous if he thinks he is being treated fairly, but he can be
mean if he feels pushed. Sadat wanted the President and Mrs. Carter to
visit Egypt and this would be an incentive to him to expedite matters. It
is important, the President added, to keep the trust of the Egyptian Del-
egation. If El-Baz proves difficult, the President instructed Atherton to
bring him to the White House for a talk.
Dayan again emphasized that Israel wants to move rapidly. Sadat
has problem, but Israel also has domestic political problem which must
be taken into account.
The President asked how much could be accomplished in Wash-
ington on West Bank/Gaza issues. Dayan said nothing could be accom-
plished; with whom would Israel negotiate? The President replied it
was not a question of negotiating but of discussing how to get the West
Bank/Gaza process started, and how to get Hussein and Palestinian
Arabs involved. We have questions from Hussein to answer, and there
will be difficulties when the answers become public.
The President then raised the problem of settlements on the West
Bank, saying that his personal word of honor was at stake. If Israel
could write a letter relating the settlement freeze to the West Bank/
Gaza negotiations for establishing a transitional regime and could com-
bine this with the statement Dayan made on his airport arrival in Israel
September 19, this would be sufficient.
Dayan replied that he would not advise Begin to do anything more
on the settlements issue, given his political difficulties at home. Begin
had already pushed matters to the limit and there was the risk of losing
his Knesset majority, which would require new elections; this would
require time and delay negotiations undesirably. There would be no
new settlements for three months beginning Thursday, October 12.
Why would this matter need to be raised now?
The President said he was not pushing it but was not certain that
Egypt would not insist.
The President said there was no decision at Camp David to post-
pone West Bank/Gaza negotiations.
Dayan replied that Israel did not want to postpone them, but the
reality was that there had to be Palestinians who would cooperate so

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
that West Bank/Gaza elections could be held as a first step toward es-
tablishing a Palestinian administration and the withdrawal of the Is-
raeli military government.
Secretary Vance said preliminary work could be done in Wash-
ington on how to organize elections and a local administration. The
President asked how Palestinians could be brought into the process.
Dayan responded that if the Palestinians see the Egyptian-Israeli nego-
tiations progressing, they will join. In response to a question by the
President, Dayan said he was referring to their joining a short time after
the Egyptian-Israeli treaty was signed. This could not be done, how-
ever, in the next two or three weeks.
With respect to Hussein, Secretary Vance said he had three
choices: to join the negotiations, to stay out but encourage Palestinians
to join, or to reject negotiations entirely. The Secretary said he doubted
Hussein would reject totally but was not certain precisely where Hus-
sein would come out given the many pressures he is under.
Dayan thought it most likely Hussein would give a green light to
the Palestinians while not committing himself. Hussein would watch
carefully how the Washington talks would progress. If a treaty is
signed in two to four weeks, the chances were that the Palestinians
would join. Dayan said it would have a negative impact if in the Wash-
ington negotiations we seem to be patronizing the Palestinians by ne-
gotiating for them.
Secretary Vance said he saw another problem. While there is no
linkage between the two frameworks, Sadat sees them as part of the
same context. He needs to show that he has not forgotten the Pales-
tinians. If there is no movement on West Bank/Gaza issues, Sadat will
have problems. Dr. Brzezinski stressed that we needed to keep in mind
Weizman’s distinction between a “separate peace” and a “first peace.”
Weizman responded that if West Bank/Gaza issues are rushed too
much, nothing will result. Once an Egyptian-Israeli treaty is signed, Is-
rael should seek to implement what it has promised by moving toward
West Bank/Gaza self-government. If Israel demonstrates that it is pre-
pared to go ahead—and Israel can do this—this will help Hussein.
The President then commented that he had honored his pledge to
have no contact with the PLO. If he goes to Cairo, however, Sadat
wants him (the President) to meet with some Palestinians. How far, the
President asked, could he go in this respect? The President said he does
not want to violate his promise to the Israelis but could not check the
credentials of Palestinians Sadat might ask him to meet. Dayan said he
did not know which Palestinians Sadat might bring to Cairo. The Presi-
dent commented that perhaps Hussein could choose them. Dayan
said this would be better. If the issue to be discussed was the self-
government proposal, they should be Palestinians who live in the West

Bank/Gaza, whatever their political sympathies. The President asked
why it could not be any Palestinians who were qualified to participate
even if they did not live in these areas. Dayan said this would create a
problem. In response to the President’s comment that Hussein could
choose any Palestinians living in Jordan, Dayan thought this would be
no problem; Hussein would not choose PLO Palestinians. He saw no
problem with the President’s meeting Palestinians from Jordan but was
not so sure about Egypt. In response to the President’s comment that he
assumed there were thousands of PLO members in the West Bank and
Gaza, Dayan said he was concerned primarily about a small group of
leaders of the PLO. The best thing would be to let Israel look at the list
of Palestinians involved.
The President said he would not want to show Israel the list. If he
went to Cairo, he would ask Hussein to bring a group of Palestinians to
meet with him.
Dayan said he saw no problem with this. Hussein might bring Pal-
estinians Israel had expelled but Israel could live with this. Israel’s con-
cern is about those Palestinians it must work with; they must be elected
representatives. Dayan concluded this discussion by saying it would be
a wrong move to focus now on West Bank/Gaza issues instead of con-
centrating over the next few weeks on the Israeli-Egyptian treaty. It
would only antagonize the Arabs. Let us work within the framework
agreement, Dayan said. The Palestinians will join when they see that
the train is moving.
Secretary Vance said we need to move fast but urged Dayan not to
close his mind to discussing West Bank/Gaza issues; this may be neces-
sary in order to expedite the treaty negotiations. (Dayan and Weizman
did not respond to this point.)
The President then raised the question of claims. Sadat had said in
his and Begin’s presence that he would have a claim for the oil that Is-
rael had extracted. The President said his own inclination was to try to
get both sides not to make any claims against the other. Negotiations
over claims could be a festering sore. If we could get Sadat to agree not
to press claims, the President hoped Israel would also agree.
Dayan said Israel has questions to raise about the oil fields. Israel’s
interest was in being able to purchase Gulf of Suez and Sinai oil; this
could be left to the oil companies, which were American on both sides,
perhaps with Israeli and Egyptian representatives participating. Dayan
said he agreed the best solution would be to have no claims.
In conclusion, the President said we would prefer the same ar-
rangements for briefing the press as had been adopted at Camp David.
Dayan and Weizman both agreed. Dayan noted, however, that this
would be harder to enforce in Washington than at Camp David, but if
there were any leaks, they would not come from him.

83.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of President’s Meeting with Egyptian Delegation
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Hon. Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Hon. Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs
Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff
H.E. Kamal Hassan Ali, Minister of Defense
H.E. Boutros Boutros Ghali, Acting Foreign Minister
H.E. Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States
H.E. Usama al-Baz, Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs
The President welcomed the Egyptian delegation and referred to
the good feeling produced in Egypt and Israel by the Camp David
agreements. He expressed his hope that the remaining differences
might be identified quickly so that the talks could reach a conclusion
within days not weeks. The Israelis have agreed to work quickly.
The President said that the United States had drafted a standard
form2 of a peace treaty to use as a model in the discussions. This will
provide a starting point. Ambassador Eilts has also gone over the Sinai
map with President Sadat. We want to work toward realization of the
Camp David agreements within the shortest timeframe envisaged. The
President has already talked to the Israelis about the need for rapid
moves. He urged them to complete the first withdrawal within three
months, not nine months. The Israelis in return raised the question of
how rapidly Egypt could move toward recognition and the normaliza-
tion of relations.
The President referred to the many pressures that exist within the
Arab world. He fears that if the process of peacemaking goes on for a
long time there will be more chances of problems arising. He expressed
his hope that President Sadat would be willing at the time that the in-
terim withdrawal had been completed to go ahead with open borders
and normalization of relations without delay. The President said that he
also asked the Israelis how soon they could carry out total withdrawal.
They said that it would depend upon building alternate airfields. The
United States will help in this process and will examine sites. If this can
be done in two years, then we want total withdrawal, including set-
tlers, to be completed by then.
The President said that he had talked to U.N. Secretary General
Waldheim, as well as to Dayan and Weizman, about the U.N. forces in
Sinai. There is general agreement that there is no need to increase the
present force of about 3,000 men. If it were necessary to go back to the
U.N., the Soviets might debate the question and could veto any in-
crease. It will, therefore, be best to stay at the present level. This appar-
ently suits Israel. We do not need larger forces. They should be a token
force in any case, with a specific role, for example near the airfields in
the Rafah area and near Sharm al-Shaykh. The U.N. forces there would
just routinely inspect the airfields as agreed upon.
There is also the question of early warning stations. The President
has told the Israelis that President Sadat required reciprocity if there
were to be any early-warning stations on Egyptian territory. Based on
this principle, there should be stations within Israel as well. The Israelis
agreed to this principle. It will be worth discussing this further with
them, but they agreed to reciprocity. This is a major step. The level of
U.N. forces at places like Sharm can be negotiated. The President said
that he had no preferences.
The President then stated that we had taken a map5 and drawn
some lines for the interim withdrawal. This line is the most controver-
sial. The President curved it eastward, but the Israelis may insist on a
straight line, and it will be hard to dispute them. We have looked at a
topographical map and have tried to find the most appropriate line, but
we have no preference. We just want things to go quickly. The Presi-
dent has urged the Israelis to be forthcoming, and they are taking a con-
structive attitude.
Concerning the buffer zone envisaged for the Egyptian side of the
border, the President said that the Israelis had spoken of a zone thirty to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
fifty kilometers wide, but the President knew that Sadat wanted it to be
only twenty to forty kilometers and he has agreed to this. We have,
therefore, suggested a line that is about twenty-five kilometers wide.
Our lines are not final, however, and are meant to be the basis for nego-
tiations. If Egypt and Israel cannot reach agreement easily, we will try
to help.
There is also a question, the President noted, of demilitarized zones
on either side of the interim withdrawal line. There should be some
buffer in this area, and this needs to be decided. A ten to twenty-
kilometer zone would be good. This is not written into the agreement.
There might also be a U.N. force, simply to inspect this area. This has
not been discussed yet with the Israelis. Finally, the President men-
tioned that he hoped that the press arrangements during the talks
could be similar to those at Camp David. We want to keep the negotia-
tions out of the news.
The President said that he also hoped to use the talks in Wash-
ington to lay out a plan for the West Bank and Gaza. He understood
that President Sadat felt disgust with the attacks that had been leveled
against Egypt, but he would not want to give up on Hussein or the Pal-
estinian Arabs. We need to try to move to reach an understanding on
the authority of the self-governing body, on who will represent the Pal-
estinians, and on the timeframe for these talks. It will be best not to in-
ject these issues into the formal Israeli negotiations, but Egypt should
prepare a list of questions for the President. Then we could act as an in-
termediary with the Israelis. It is better for Israel and Egypt to meet to-
gether directly to deal with the Sinai issues, but on the West Bank and
Gaza there is little that can be done now without Jordan and the Pales-
tinians. Therefore, it is preferable for the Egyptians to deal with the
President and for him to talk to the Israelis. The United States can be the
intermediary. We don’t want some dispute over Jerusalem to disrupt
the Egypt-Israel treaty talks. As those move forward, then we can ad-
vance on the West Bank and Gaza.
President Sadat has asked the President to come to Egypt for the
signing of the peace treaty. The President said he was inclined to accept,
although he had not given a formal response. If he did go to the Middle
East, he would want to talk to President Sadat about how to help bring
the other parties into the negotiations. When they see the Egypt-Israel
agreement being finalized, their opposition will dissipate.
Minister Hassan Ali said that President Sadat appreciates President
Carter’s efforts in the Middle East. He said that Egypt had some differ-
ences with the Palestinians and with King Hussein, but that Egypt
hoped that by giving some impetus to the West Bank and Gaza talks
this will help encourage moderate Palestinians. President Carter said
that he had a list of questions from King Hussein that he had not yet

personally studied. Ambassador Atherton might go over these ques-
tions with the Egyptians and the President would do the same with the
Israelis. Then he would respond to King Hussein. He wanted to en-
courage the King. He also said that the Saudis appeared to be taking a
somewhat constructive role and were not an obstacle at present. If the
Saudis see the United States working actively in the West Bank and
Gaza, this should help. We do not intend to go over our answers with
either Egypt or Israel, but we will discuss the questions that King Hus-
sein has posed.
Minister Boutros Ghali then explained recent developments in
Egyptian thinking. He had personally spent twelve hours explaining
the Camp David agreements in Parliament. There were many questions
reflecting a fear that Egypt might become isolated in the Arab world.
There was criticism of the idea of a bilateral, separate peace with Israel.
Many deputies pointed to the fact that the Egyptian constitution starts
by referring to Egypt as part of the Arab world. He was asked about the
correlation between the two Framework Agreements. After the first
Agreement is achieved, what pressure would be left on Israel to carry
out the West Bank and Gaza agreements? Why had the letters on the
settlements not been received? Many felt that Jerusalem was important.
The most difficult question of all was that of the correlation between
the two peace agreements. There must be some synchronization of
steps.
Boutros Ghali said that President Sadat had spoken of parallel
movement in the two agreements when he was in Morocco. He spoke
of a de facto link. If Egypt is to obtain some advantages in Sinai, the Pal-
estinians in the West Bank and Gaza should also gain some advantages.
If the treaty is signed between Israel and Egypt, then the military gov-
ernment in the West Bank and Gaza should also end. Otherwise Egypt
will be isolated. There was some concern expressed in Egypt about
what would happen to the two billion dollars that Egypt receives from
Saudi Arabia.
Egypt’s prestige is also at stake. There were more than seventy
questions raised in Parliament, some of which were minor, but many of
which were serious. Opposition came from the government’s own part,
not just the left and the right. There is a fear of isolation. Even in Mo-
rocco, and with the close ties between Egypt and Morocco, there was
criticism of the idea of a separate peace. This comes back to the need for
some correlation between the Sinai talks and the West Bank and Gaza.
There should be some clarification of the settlements question before a
treaty is concluded. We need some gentlemen’s agreement with Israel.
If everyone agrees that Egypt should be helped to play a leadership role
in the region on behalf of moderation, then practical advantages for the
Palestinians are important.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Minister Boutros Ghali said that he had met with many Palestinians
and with the Arab ambassadors, as well as with the French leaders just
recently. They all asked the same question: Won’t Egypt lose leverage
over the West Bank/Gaza negotiations after the signing of a treaty with
Israel? If the West Bank/Gaza negotiations are postponed, sooner or
later there will be real problems in the Middle East. The Minister said
that some correlation must be found, and some exchange of letters or
some gentlemen’s agreement must be reached. This is very important.
This is more important than the points that the President had reviewed
in his opening comments.
Minister Boutros Ghali said the President had also spoken of
normal relations. This question had come up also in the Egyptian Par-
liament. Questions had been raised concerning how far Egypt could go
toward normalization while foreign troops were on its territory. This
can be answered, but it was harder to answer the question about the
lack of any direct correlation between the two agreements. Boutros
Ghali has spent his full time on this question. New members of the gov-
ernment are even asking these questions. Some have asked why Presi-
dent Carter has not yet received a letter on the settlements.
President Carter said that he considers the framework agreement
on the West Bank and Gaza to be binding on Egypt, Israel, and the
United States. His own reputation is at stake. He wants to know from
the Egyptians how we can move forward, especially if Jordan stays out,
and if the Palestinians refuse to participate. What could be done in
those circumstances? The President said that he had also spoken to
Dayan about the settlements. President Sadat’s memory was that there
would be a freeze on settlements for three months, and that then con-
sultations would take place. The President and Prime Minister Begin
disagree over whether the period referred to was the Sinai negotiations
or the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. President Carter said it was not
meant to refer to the Sinai negotiations, since it was being discussed in
the context of the West Bank and Gaza. There should not be any new
settlements set up during the negotiations for the self-government.
Later there should be consultations among the parties. Dayan has re-
emphasized that there will be no new settlements for a period of three
months beginning tomorrow. The West Bank/Gaza talks should also
be concluded in this three-month period. Dr. Brzezinski and others re-
minded the President that this had not been specified in the framework
agreements.
The President stated that the best way then to avoid any problems
of timing would be to get King Hussein into the talks as soon as pos-
sible. There would be nothing to prevent him from having his delega-
tion made up of Palestinians. They could be from Jordan or from the
West Bank, or by mutual agreement, from outside these areas. The Pres-

ident wants to move on the West Bank and Gaza. He sees the two sets of
issues as interrelated. He urged the Egyptians through their contacts
with Palestinians to start to encourage Palestinians to sit down and ne-
gotiate, even without Jordan. Perhaps there could be Egyptian, Israeli,
and Palestinian talks at a minimum.
Mr. al-Baz stated that the Egyptians are already in contact with
moderate Palestinians. Some have come to Cairo and seen Sadat. They
have come from the West Bank and from Gaza. The Egyptian assess-
ment is that the situation will improve for Palestinians participating in
the negotiations as time goes by. It is hard now for them to participate
openly, but they believe that it will become easier. The opposition to
the Camp David agreements has just about reached its peak. Secondly,
the attitude of King Hussein will probably improve in the next two to
three months. The United States and Saudi Arabia can influence them
to be more positive. Hussein will realize that he has no other good alter-
native. More Palestinians will want to accept the agreements on a de
facto basis and will respond to the argument of trying to improve the
agreements from within. Hussein wants to try to improve the frame-
works to justify his participation. This is the purpose of his questions.
He can then justify joining the talks. The people from the West Bank
and Gaza who have talked to the Egyptians think that it will take an-
other two or three months for the situation to ripen. The people in Gaza
are more willing to participate than those in the West Bank. They feel
closer to Egypt and their interests are tied more to Egypt. Jordan has
little influence in Gaza, whereas it has great influence in the West Bank.
Some moderates in the PLO leadership have even tried to discuss the
positive aspects of the Camp David agreements, but the PLO leader-
ship has overruled this approach and their attitude will remain nega-
tive for some time. Some in the West Bank and Gaza are intimidated by
the extremists outside the area.
The President said that he would appreciate receiving suggestions
on what might be done before the Palestinians and the Jordanians join
the negotiations and what could be done if Jordan did not participate.
Minister Boutros Ghali said that we should find some way to get prac-
tical advantages to the Palestinians quickly even before the conclusion
of the peace treaty with Israel. Dr. Brzezinski noted that military rule
could not be brought to an end before some Palestinian authority had
been formed. This would require talks. Minister Boutros Ghali agreed,
but said that some steps short of ending military rule should be found,
such as some redeployment of Israeli forces. Dr. Brzezinski added that
there might be a lifting of the ban on political meetings, but that Pales-
tinian participation would be important to produce “partenaire val-
able” to whom authority could be bequeathed.
President Carter said that we are as interested in the West Bank and
Gaza as in the peace treaty negotiations, but we do not want to see the

84.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Egypt and Israel
259062. For Ambassadors from Atherton and Saunders. Subject:
First Day of Blair House Talks—Oct. 12, 1978.
1. We had a very productive first day of talks, marked by more
substantive progress than we had anticipated and the early identifica-
tion of some potential problem areas.
2. Following opening ceremonies at the White House, we had a
plenary session that served to pin down general procedural questions.
Both sides agreed to meet as full delegations rather than subdividing
into working groups, although there have already been private
meetings between counterparts (Dayan-Boutros Ghali; Weizman-
Hassan Ali).
3. The rest of the day was devoted largely to bilateral meetings,
which focused on a draft treaty text that we had prepared and made
available to both delegations, and which both agreed to use as common
negotiating text. We met first with the Israelis who had done their
homework on our text and suggested a number of changes. (We are
aware that you do not have our draft text and so will not try to convey
the specific Israeli comments at this preliminary stage.) Unfortunately,
we do not have either side’s agreement at this stage to make public that
we are working from a US draft, so please don’t let cat out of bag.
4. We then met with the Egyptians, who were not yet prepared to
offer comments on our text. The Secretary shared with them most of the
Israeli suggestions, and when we resume in the morning the Egyptians
will offer theirs.
5. During our meeting with the Israelis, Weizman brought up their
concern about the speed with which they will be able to withdraw,
pointing out the importance of U.S. assistance in this regard. He ex-
pressed particular concern about their leaving “live installations” such
as Um Khasheib and wondered if a mobile American installation might
not be loaned to Israel while they are establishing an alternate site.
6. Egyptians raised two general concerns. (Osama al-Baz did most
of the talking for their side.) They obviously hope that a treaty will not
erect impediments to their conduct of relations with and obligations to
third parties—i.e., other Arabs. They are also hoping to achieve recip-
rocal gradualism in the implementation of the withdrawal and normal-
ization aspects of a treaty. Obvious Egyptian desire to avoid neglecting
West Bank and Palestinian issues was pre-empted by Secretary’s sug-
gesting that we must begin discussing West Bank/Gaza questions if
only for clarification purposes, with which Egyptian delegation imme-
diately agreed. Secretary will pursue this subject bilaterally with Dayan
Friday.
7. Day ended with brief trilateral meeting of Secretary, Ali and
Dayan for purpose of summarizing day’s highlights and agreeing on
program for Friday.
8. You will appreciate impossibility of sending you daily detailed
accounts. Once main issues have begun to crystallize, we will try to
send you periodic summary of where matters stand and highlight
issues that might be raised with you in capitals.
Vance

85.
Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Yasir ‘Arafat’s Preference to Deal Directly with the United States Government
rather than to Discuss a Middle East Peace with Egyptian President Anwar
al-Sadat
1. The following information was obtained [less than 1 line not de-
classified] October 1978. Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat recently
gave Major General Shawqat, the head of Military Intelligence, permis-
sion to probe Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Chief Yasir ‘Ar-
afat’s views on the Camp David Accords and on continuing Middle
East negotiations. Yasir ‘Arafat conveyed a message to General Shaw-
qat via an emissary on 12 October to the effect that he, ‘Arafat, does not
trust President Sadat and would prefer to deal directly with the United
States (U.S.) on the matter of peace in the Middle East and the role of
the PLO.
2. Given the nature of the message, General Shawqat chose not to
pass the message to President Sadat and instead sent his own emissary
to contact ‘Arafat for clarification of ‘Arafat’s precise views and desires.
General Shawqat’s emissary was expected to return with ‘Arafat’s
more precise views on 19 October.
3. General Shawqat has been appointed by the Egyptian Govern-
ment to maintain discreet contact with the PLO. General Shawqat ex-
pressed the view that Yasir ‘Arafat believes the U.S. Government is
sincere in its efforts to bring peace to the Middle East and desires to
be fair to all parties. General Shawqat believes, therefore, that Yasir
‘Arafat would indeed want his own direct contact with the U.S.
Government.
4. (U.S. Ambassador to Egypt’s Comment: In our talk earlier this
week, Shawqat also mentioned to me ‘Arafat’s alleged desire to engage
in a direct dialogue with the U.S. He did not cast it in terms of a new
effort, but rather as a continuation of ‘Arafat’s longstanding desire to
have direct association with us. ‘Arafat’s desire to do so, Shawqat
claimed, is intensified by the recent Camp David Accords. I reminded
Shawqat of our offer of last summer to engage in a dialogue with the
PLO if it publicly accepted U.N. Resolution 242 with appropriate reser-
vations on the inadequacy of the refugee language and explicitly recog-
nized the right of Israel to exist. I recalled that we, working with the
Egyptians and the Saudis, had last year developed a fair formula for
this purpose. Unfortunately, although the Egyptians had told us that
‘Arafat favored the formula, he could not obtain the acquiescence of the
PLO Executive Committee and the effort aborted. Shawqat should
know that our offer still stands, but in the absence of such public ac-
ceptance by ‘Arafat and the PLO of U.N. Resolution 242, it is not pos-
sible for the U.S. Government to engage in a direct dialogue with ‘Ar-
afat. I suggested that the best thing Shawqat could do was to urge the
PLO leadership to reconsider their rejection of this earlier U.S. offer.
Shaw-qat agreed that the PLO leadership, thanks largely to the Rejec-
tionists and negative Syrian counsel, had been shortsighted, but
seemed uncertain whether the PLO Executive Committee was likely to
adopt a more positive stance in the present circumstances. The whole
thrust of Shawqat’s comment, reported in Cairo Embassy message
number 22724, was on the importance of PLO acquiescence if West
Bank/Gazan leaders are to be willing to stick their necks out and par-
ticipate in the negotiations.)
5. According to information [1 line not declassified] an American of
Arab extraction has been instructed by the PLO to meet quietly with
Secretary of State Vance to ask if the Secretary would be willing to meet
secretly with Shafiq al-Hut, who is in the U.S. as a member of the PLO
delegation attending the U.N. General Assembly. Al-Hut apparently
has instructions from ‘Arafat to attempt to meet secretly with Secretary
Vance to convey Palestinian views on the Camp David Accords to the
U.S. Government as well as what in their opinion, the proper role of the
PLO should be in future negotiations or in a peace settlement. No other
members of the PLO delegation know of ‘Arafat’s instructions that
al-Hut attempt to meet with Secretary Vance.
and Shawqat regarding PLO participation in West Bank/Gaza negotiations. Eilts re-
ported that Shawqat told him that he had sent a colonel with Egyptian military intelli-
gence to meet with “second level” PLO leaders in Beirut in order to ascertain whether
they would “be willing to cooperate” in negotiations. Shawqat “noted that GOE has little
influence with influential West Bankers or with Gazans;” therefore, “Egyptians must be
armed with strongest possible arguments,” a task made “much more difficult” by “recent
Begin and Dayan statements.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

86.
Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State
Vance in Pretoria
Tosec 120023/261453. Subject Progress Report on Egypt-Israel
Peace Talks October 13.
1. Drafting group met again today for four hours: it was a good
session, resolving several minor points, and making definite progress
in bridging the gap on important differences over language about com-
mitments to prevent hostilities and acts of violence from each other’s
territory, it was again a very friendly session with both sides making a
genuine effort to move matters forward, but both were obviously con-
strained by instructions on important issues. On several points the two
sides reached compromises ad referendum to their Ministers in the first
instance and Capitals in the second. Discussion of language in several
articles had to be deferred because the Egyptians were still not ready to
discuss Annex III dealing with normalization of relations, but as we
know they received fresh instructions from Sadat on this today and
they say they will be prepared to go on this tomorrow. At end of ses-
sion today Egyptians, clearly on basis Sadat’s instructions, proposed
inserting “gradually” in several places with respect to normalization.

87.
Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L.
Atherton, Jr. to President Carter
Washington, October 16, 1978
SUBJECT
Status of Egypt-Israel Negotiations
We have reached the stage in the talks where the issues we will
have to contend with are coming into clear focus. They can be grouped
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
in three categories: (1) issues connected with the text of the treaty itself,
(2) Israel’s desire for U.S. assistance in connection with its withdrawal
from Sinai, and (3) the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian aspect.
I. Unresolved Issues in Treaty Text
There are two main issues and several minor ones that remain to
be resolved in the treaty text. The main ones are:
A. Major Issues
1. How to correlate the Egypt-Israel process with language on a compre-
hensive peace framework. The Egyptians started out by proposing a
number of additions to our basic treaty text, both in the Preamble and
in the operative articles, that stressed the continuing commitment of
the two sides to solve the problems of a comprehensive peace and the
Palestinian issues. The Israelis immediately put up a stiff resistance.
Following a meeting with Ghali, Dayan in an effort to be helpful sug-
gested that all of the language along these lines could be embodied in
an exchange of letters, either direct between Sadat and Begin or
through President Carter. Sadat has agreed to this in principle, and it is
now being considered by Begin. The two sides have not yet discussed
the contents of such an exchange of letters, but Dayan insists it must not
go beyond Camp David language.
The Egyptians have now also agreed that, with respect to the treaty
text itself, it will suffice for language on a comprehensive peace to be
only in the Preamble, omitting anything along these lines in the opera-
tive articles—though they probably want more extensive language
than Dayan has in mind.
2. The question of how fast normalization of relations will be put into ef-
fect. The Egyptians are not yet prepared to discuss this subject in spe-
cific terms as laid out in our draft Annex 3 (they are meeting today to
try to develop a coordinated position). They have received instructions
from Sadat to put emphasis on a phased schedule for normalizing rela-
tions. I met privately with Boutros Ghali today to stress the importance
that we, as well as the Israelis, attach to rapid normalization, and that
we regard this as implicit in the Camp David undertakings. The Israelis
attach the most importance to an immediate establishment of diplo-
matic relations; they warned in a drafting group meeting this morning
that if the Egyptians tried to stretch this out beyond the interim period,
it would cause Israel to reconsider its commitment to conclude its in-
terim withdrawal within a shortened time-frame. This is going to be
a difficult issue, but we will not know the exact dimensions of it until
we see what the Egyptians propose for the specific steps outlined in
Annex 3.
B. Minor Issues
1. Controlling third party acts of violence from either party’s territory. Is-
rael wants more detailed and specific language than Egypt. The Egyp-

tians do not want language that seems to make the treaty specifically
directed against the Palestinians. However, steady progress has been
made in narrowing the difference on this paragraph, and we think that
with a little bit more work, agreement can be reached.
2. The UN Role. The problem here is that the parties cannot, by
mere agreement between themselves, commit a UN Force or observer
presence which of course must also be authorized by the Security
Council. Dayan feels that the treaty text which is based on the Camp
David language is inadequate. In this morning’s session he cast around,
in a thinking-out-loud manner, for the possibility of some kind of U.S.
assurances in the event that the UN Force were withdrawn against the
two parties’ consent. We are trying to come up with a range of options
that might meet Dayan’s concern on this point.
3. Rights of Navigation. We now have agreed language on Israeli use
of the Suez Canal, but a difference remains on the question of the Strait
of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba. Israel wants, in accordance with the
language at Camp David, to have the treaty state that the parties con-
sider these waterways to be international waterways “open to all na-
tions for unimpeded and non-suspendable freedom of navigation.”
The Egyptians are resisting this language because they do not want to
frame their commitment in terms of a general principle which could
weaken their position to bar Soviet or other vessels from unimpeded
passage in these waterways. The Israelis exhibit no sign of give on this
point however. They take the position that because it was in the Camp
David Framework it cannot be weakened.
4. Arms Limitation. The Israelis originally proposed an article on
arms limitation but now request that it be withdrawn. The Egyptians
do not seem to feel strongly about it one way or the other; they are
checking with Cairo about dropping this provision.
5.
Priority
of
Obligations.
The
Israelis
want
sweeping,
all-
encompassing language to the effect that this treaty supersedes any
other Egyptian obligation. This causes the Egyptians severe problems
because of their numerous defense pacts with other Arab states. There
has been much discussion about this item; both sides fully understand
the other’s problem; and they are beginning to try to formulate lan-
guage that may in the end be mutually accommodating. The latest Is-
raeli suggestion came from Dayan this morning: he wonders whether
Egypt might not supplement the somewhat vaguer language it prefers
in the treaty text with a letter to the U.S. stating that if Syria (for ex-
ample) attacks Israel, Egypt would not honor its defense pact under-
taking to come to its assistance.
6. Oil. The Israelis want to begin discussions about this as soon as
possible; the Egyptians have not made up their minds about it. We see
this as something the two sides will have to come to some under-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
standing on before overall agreement is possible, and we have recom-
mended to the Egyptians that they authorize their experts to begin dis-
cussions now.
7. Review Clause. The Egyptians want a provision in the treaty for
review after five years, which in their mind would be linked to the
five-year period for a transitional regime in the West Bank and Gaza.
For the same reason that Egypt likes this idea, the Israelis don’t. The Is-
raelis have countered with language providing that the parties can
open discussions about “amendments” to the treaty “at any time.”
8. Security Council Endorsement. The Egyptians have signaled that
they want to embody in this treaty the language in the General Frame-
work on Security Council endorsement. We have signaled to them our
concern that this might give the Soviets a handle on the treaty that none
of us want. The Egyptians said they would give some further thought
to the matter.
II. U.S. Assistance to Israel
Weizman has persistently brought up at our bilateral meetings the
extra costs that are entailed for Israel in a speedy withdrawal from
Sinai. He hopes the U.S. will assist Israel financially to compensate for
these costs, and also possibly with certain equipment which the Israelis
would have to leave behind. Weizman has informally put a $2 billion
figure on this and has made it clear he sees it as over and above the
assistance on the two airfields that we are already committed to. He
told me this morning once again that he is anxious to come to grips
with this as soon as possible. He has experts standing by in Israel who
could come here as soon as we signal that we are prepared to begin dis-
cussions on this aspect. Weizman said clearly to me this morning in pri-
vate discussion that he does not see such assistance as a condition to the
rapid conclusion of a peace treaty, but he has also said our response on
this is likely to affect Israel’s final interim withdrawal schedule. At min-
imum, he wants the discussions on U.S. assistance to be underway as
the final terms of the treaty are worked on.
III. Israeli Gestures on West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian Question
We have discussed with Dayan practical steps or statements of
intention Israel might make, in conjunction with the signing of the
Egyptian-Israeli Treaty, to encourage Hussein and the Palestinians to
begin negotiating, such as:
—Reduce military government presence and give more responsi-
bility to the existing local authorities.
—Amnesty for Palestinian detainees.
—Withdrawal and redeployment of some Israeli troops.
—Permit political meetings in the West Bank and Gaza.

88.
Memorandum for the Record
SUBJECT
Summary of President’s Meeting with the Israeli Delegation, October 17, 1978,
1. Dayan expressed his concern with three main obstacles in the
peace treaty negotiations. First is the question of “priority of obliga-
tions.” Israel wants to make clear that Egypt’s obligations under the
peace treaty will supersede any other obligations, such as mutual de-
fense pacts.
2. Dayan’s second problem was the linkage between the Egyptian-
Israeli treaty and the West Bank/Gaza issues. Israel wants the treaty to
stand on its own without any linkage to other obligations. He will ac-
cept mention of the comprehensive framework in the preamble, and
some of the Camp David understandings can be included in an ex-
change of letters. In addition, Israel might be prepared to consider
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
some unilateral gestures to demonstrate its goodwill in dealing with
the West Bank and Gaza issues.
3. The President suggested that Israel might want to let the Egyp-
tians put in some phrases dealing with the broader peace framework so
long as they did not affect the substance of the treaty. Dayan mentioned
amnesty for political prisoners, and removal of military headquarters
from some cities, such as in Gaza, as the type of unilateral gestures that
might be possible. The President suggested that the Israelis might ease
the ban on political activity in the West Bank and Gaza. Dayan said that
they would consider this, but that it might create problems for Sadat,
since there might be demonstrations against him.
4. Dayan’s third concern was the speed of normalization. He fears
that the Egyptians are weakening their commitment to the establish-
ment of diplomatic relations at the end of the interim withdrawal. They
are speaking of gradual normalization. In the economic and cultural
areas, Israel can accept this, but not in the diplomatic area. Israel has al-
ready agreed to speed up the pace of the withdrawal, so that al-Arish
will be returned within two months, Rash Muhammad within four
months, and all of the rest of the area up to the interim withdrawal line,
by the end of six months. This was done on the assumption that the
Egyptians want to move quickly on the normalization of relations. The
President said that he agreed with the Israelis on this point.
5. Dayan also mentioned the problem of one Israeli settlement lo-
cated to the west of the interim withdrawal line. Some arrangement
should be made so that this settlement is not required to withdraw be-
fore the others.
6. Dayan also raised issues in our bilateral relationship. He spoke
first of the need for some form of American guarantee that the agree-
ment will be carried out in good faith. Dayan’s second point concerned
financial assistance to help carry out the withdrawal of forces. Weiz-
man explained the difficulties that Israel would confront beyond those
of building two new airfields. The President agreed that an American
team could consult with the Israelis, but that they would not have au-
thority to make any commitments.
7. Finally, Dayan turned to the question of the cost involved in re-
locating the settlers from Sinai. The President made clear that he would
not be prepared to ask Congress for funds for this purpose in light of
the well-known American position on the illegality of settlements.

89.
Memorandum for the Record
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with the Egyptian Delegation, October 17,
1. Minister Hassan Ali indicated that agreement had been reached
on the main zones on Sinai. He noted that there was some disagree-
ment over including surface-to-air missiles that are integral parts of the
Egyptian division that will be in Sinai. He added that the Egyptians
should be allowed to have four battalions of frontier forces in the buffer
zone, and the President agreed that this had been decided at Camp
David.
2. Boutros Ghali stressed the importance of establishing some
correlation between the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the progress in the

90.
Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State
Vance in Pretoria and the Embassies in Egypt, Israel, and
Saudi Arabia
Tosec 120078/263638. Jidda for Saunders from Atherton. Subject:
Blair House Talks—October 17.
1. We met first today with El-Baz and his colleagues bilaterally.
They handed us a proposed annex2 on oil and after some discussion in-
dicated that they were now ready to begin negotiations with the Israelis
on this subject. We conveyed our view that assurances about long-term
supply of oil to Israel would be important in determining how soon the
Israelis were willing to withdraw. El-Baz took the position that this
could not be expressed in a contractual undertaking but “an under-
standing,” might be reached about it.
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Sterner; cleared by Stanislaus R.P. Valerga (S/S–O);
approved by Atherton. Sent for information Immediate to the White House. Vance was in
Pretoria for discussions on the Namibian question with South African officials.

2. The Egyptians then gave us their proposed redraft of Annex III
on normalization of relations. As we had expected, the Egyptian text
details a more gradual establishment of the various enumerated ele-
ments of a normal relationship. In commenting on their text, El-Baz
said there were two considerations that led the Egyptians to this ap-
proach: first, there had to be “parallelism, between the phased nature of
Israel’s withdrawal and the establishment of relations; and, second, it
was pragmatically impossible for Egypt to “throw the door open” all at
once to the Israelis. He emphasized again the problems this would
cause Egypt with the other Arabs.
3. I told El-Baz frankly that if the text were handed to the Israelis in
its present form it would come as a considerable shock and disappoint-
ment to the Israelis, in particular stretched-out Egyptian phasing for
establishment of full diplomatic relations which envisage an early
announcement, then after some delay opening offices in capitals at
Charge level, with Ambassadors being exchanged after six months. I
said I thought President Carter would also be disappointed in this ap-
proach. We felt that this issue had been resolved at Camp David,
namely, that in the general sense normal relations would be established
immediately following completion of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim
line. Using “gradual” to qualify normalization process would inevi-
tably convey a sense of Egyptian reluctance to take these steps. As for
El-Baz’s concept about the need for parallelism, I said this ignored the
essential imbalance between the tangible and physical nature of Israel’s
withdrawal, which could not be reversed without going to war, and the
intangible nature of implementing Egypt’s commitments to peace and
normal relations. I told El-Baz that I thought it would be helpful if we
could sit down again with them over this text before they presented it
to the Israelis. El-Baz stressed Egypt’s commitment to everything
agreed to at Camp David and to full and permanent peace. He said
Egypt’s interpretation was that “immediately” relates to starting pro-
cess of normalization by phases, not to completion of process.
4. We then had a bilateral meeting with the Israelis, both Dayan
and Weizman present. Dayan reported on a lengthy dinner conversa-
tion he had had with Boutros Ghali the night before. He was clearly de-
pressed by this meeting. Boutros Ghali had discussed with him Egypt’s
desire for rather extensive language in the preamble of the treaty re-
flecting the two sides’ continuing commitment to a comprehensive
peace and to resolution of the Palestinian problem. They talked about a
possible Begin-Sadat exchange of letters to supplement this preamble
language, but Dayan said the Egyptians wanted to choose selectively
and extensively from the Camp David Framework in a manner that

91.
Telegram From the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to the
Department of State
7435. From Assistant Secretary Saunders. Subject: Talk With King
1. Assistant Secretary Saunders meet afternoon October 17 for two
hours with King Hussein. Hussein had Royal Court Chief Sharaf with
him; Ambassador Veliotes, Suddarth
and Howell accompanied
Saunders. Generally cordial discussion was marked by moments of
frustration, some bitterness at Arab colleagues, and some moving
deeply personal comments about dedication to peace.
2. At outset of meeting, Saunders presented original of US re-
sponses4 to Jordanian questions to Hussein, stressing that United States
had been acutely aware that Jordan was not represented at Camp
David and had accepted Jordanian queries with full respect for the con-
siderations which led Jordan to pose them. Hussein expressed appreci-
ation for response and for President Carter’s personal interest in re-
viewing and signing them. He indicated that he would wish to study
cret; Immediate; Exdis Distribute as Nodis. Sent to Amman, Cairo, Damascus, Tel Aviv,
and the Secretary’s delegation. Vance was in Pretoria for discussions on the Namibian
question with South African officials.
hour October 16 meeting with Prime Minister Badran on the U.S. responses to Hussein’s
release of the answers to his questions to Egypt, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and “selected key
congressional leaders” on a “confidential basis.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D780425–0229)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
them further and get into details during his meeting with Saunders on
Oct 19. He welcomed, however, Saunders’ offer to outline US thinking
and philosophical approach which had resulted in Camp David Agree-
ments. King made point of restating his familiar position on Jerusalem
and questioned Saunders closely on status of US disagreement with Is-
rael on West Bank settlements issue.
3. Following introductory remarks by Saunders, King who had
clearly been briefed by Sharaf, replied that he considers that the US and
Jordan are engaged in a very constructive dialogue which Jordan hopes
to pursue. He observed that the US and Jordan have similar objectives
but appear to be working at the problem from different directions. Half
joking, he suggested that the US has attempted to avoid making the
framework as tight as it might be. In a later remark, which is probably
indicative of the strategy he will pursue at least until after the projected
Baghdad summit, Hussein said he would continue for a period of time
to pester us with questions which he jokingly said the US “will con-
tinue to try to evade.”
4. Hussein said, in a more serious vein, that Jordan needs some-
thing in hand to assure it that there has been no erosion of the US posi-
tion on the shape of a final settlement. Decrying the fact that Jordan has
no external guarantor, he said he wished that he had a commitment
from the US similar in fact, if not in depth of sentiment, to that enjoyed
by Israel. Jordan, he emphasized, is being asked to enter into the frame-
work negotiated at Camp David from a position of great weakness. The
results of Camp David, he stated, had come as a complete surprise to
Jordan. Nevertheless, he said he had been seriously considering what
Jordan might do to bring about a starting point for further progress.
Scattered throughout his discourse were references to his unhappiness
at what he perceives as Egyptian strategy and, at one point, he stressed
that Egypt must realize that it is not the “shepherd” with Jordan and
other Arabs playing the roles of the “flock”. Hussein also felt obvious
discomfort with the Saudi role which he felt put Jordan on the line
without quote anything in terms of meaningful support. End quote.
King also repeatedly stressed with bitterness continuing Saudi support
for the PLO.

5. Reflecting his contacts with President Assad of Syria, Hussein
expressed his conviction that Syria continues to desire a comprehen-
sive peace, but that Assad will insist that the Soviets be involved with
Syria to provide, Hussein suggested, a protector for Syrian interests. He
added somewhat cryptically that he and Assad had agreed in principle
to meet and discuss possible alternatives to the Camp David approach.
In response to his rhetorical query about whether the US had made a
policy decision to keep the Soviets out of the process, Saunders re-
turned at a subsequent point in the conversation to a discussion of the
Soviet role. Saunders reviewed Soviet involvement, including the US-
Soviet joint statement6 of October, 1977 and the lack of subsequent re-
sults re progress towards Geneva. The US, Saunders observed, has not
closed the door to a Geneva-style forum in the future if that should
prove useful, but, he pointed out, that would only be helpful if the So-
viets were able, as they have not done in past, to contribute positively
to the process.
Neither Egypt nor the Israelis desired such a role at this time and,
Saunders reminded Hussein, there are aspects of the Soviet position,
[such] as advocacy of an independent Palestinian state, which are not
necessarily in Jordanian interests. In any case, he continued, we have
before us a framework which holds promise of ending Israeli military
occupation in the West Bank/Gaza as soon as the Jordanians and Pales-
tinians decide to take advantage of it. Those who shape what evolved
in the occupied territories, Saunders concluded, will be those who ne-
gotiate in the next few months. Saunders said our assumption has been
that Jordan wants a role in shaping future of West Bank and King af-
firmed that it does.
[garble] acknowledging the difficulties of the choice confronting
Hussein, Saunders raised the issue of the forthcoming Arab summit
and pointed out that, historically, such meetings have seldom had posi-
tive results in terms of peace. Hussein did not disagree but said he had
felt such a summit was inevitable following Camp David. He urged the
Saudis, he reported, to take the lead in convening the meeting in the
hope that this would have assured moderate control over the venue,
agenda, etc. The Saudis, however, had not acted, he said with bit-
terness, permitting Iraq to seize the initiative.
August 1978, Document 120.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
7. If Jordan were to decide ultimately that it could not take up the
negotiations offered by the CDA, Saunders asked, what would be its at-
titude toward the inclusion of West Bankers in an Egyptian delegation?
Hussein replied that Jordan had made it clear that it would not stand in
the way of West Bank Palestinians and will support whatever action
they decide to take. Jordan has already begun increasing its contacts
with the West Bank, he said, but needs time to organize its compaign.
Asked whether those West Bankers who might be inclined to partici-
pate in negotiations could be supported effectively against those with
PLO connections and those who oppose the CDA, Hussein said this
was possible but would require more resources than Jordan possesses.
The Saudis, he said, are tipping the balance in the West Bank and else-
where by their generous financial support of the PLO. Saunders asked
what US could do to help. The King replied: (1) provide Jordan with
materials (such as answers to questions) for a dialogue with West
Bankers, (2) “Ask your friends (read Saudis) to make up their minds”.
8. Saunders closed the discussion by saying that he looks forward
to a more detailed discussion of US responses when he returned from
talks in Saudi Arabia. Once again, he emphasized that the replies are
straight-forward and honest reflection of precise US position. To have
gone beyond them in terms of specific commitments about the results
of negotiations would have been a disservice to the spirit of frankness
that characterizes US-Jordanian relations. He added that Hussein has
received statements of the US view on issues, such as Jerusalem, which
are important to him and to all Arabs and that he had President
Carter’s commitment by word and deed to continue as a full partner in
the negotiations until a successful conclusion is achieved. Saunders
pointed out the strong congressional and public support the President
enjoys for his efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East and the high priority that objective has for the President. He sug-
gested that Hussein ponder these important considerations along with
the other elements of his decision on Jordanian policy. In closing, King
Hussein suggested he now had a better understanding of US strategy at
Camp David and is sympathetic to giving fullest consideration to our
views, in particular on ways to maintain pressure for Israeli with-
drawal and West Bank self-determination.
9. Saunders comment: Jordanian policy toward West Bank/Gaza
negotiations and Baghdad summit8 is still very much in flux. Today’s
reading had to be that Jordan is not likely to make a decision before
Arab summit, but there is a serious interest and increasing activity with
West Bankers which Sharaf promised to discuss with me in more detail
Thursday. Jordanians keep stressing the risks in joining a process
without knowing where and increasing activity with West Bankers
which Sharaf promised to discuss with me in more detail Thursday.
Jordanians keep stressing the risks in joining a process without
knowing where it will lead. I think, nevertheless, it may be possible to
engage Jordanians in getting West Bankers into negotiations. Many ele-
ments in Camp David Framework seem not to have been understood.
West

92.
Telegram From the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to the
Department of State
7455. To INR McAfee only: please handcarry to NEA/Crawford
for transmittal Eyes Only to Brzezinski for President from Saunders.
Subject: Talk With King Hussein.
1. During discussion with me Oct 17, King Hussein made fol-
lowing intensely personal observations with deep emotion on King’s
previous personal involvement in peace process that I believe you
would want to have reported to you. These comments shed light on
background to his current reactions to Camp David Accords.
2. At end of our lengthy conversation, during which his initial con-
siderable reserve gradually dissipated, King said he wished to share
some sensitive and intimate details with me to help in our under-
standing of his reserve with regard to Camp David Agreements. King
then alluded to his extensive secret contacts with Israeli leaders in re-
cent years and mentioned that the former Israeli Prime Minister (Rabin)
had told him (probably in 1977) that Israel’s objective was separately to
take Egypt out of the MidEast negotiating process by making a separate
peace regarding the Sinai. Israel would then deal with the West Bank
issue by making arrangements with the West Bank inhabitants, which
King implied were much along lines of administrative autonomy sug-
gested by Begin plan. King said this strategy had been reaffirmed to
him by Israeli Foreign Minister (Dayan) last year. King suggested that
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the coincidence of these Israeli statements with some of the at least su-
perficial aspects of the Camp David Accords were an element contrib-
uting to reserve with which he has been treating Camp David.
3. King said he hopes we appreciate his efforts over past 11 years
during which he undertook extensive clandestine contacts with Is-
raelis, involving considerable risks, during which he tried his best to
move towards peace. He said that in a sense his previous wife (Queen
Alya) met her death (in night helicopter crash) as a result of this effort
because it was necessary to do extensive night flying in royal helicopter
to provide a cover for the use of helicopter for night meetings with Is-
raelis. King added that he personally would be ready to meet his death
“this minute” if that would help to bring a sound lasting peace to the
area and that “nothing is too great” for him to undertake to advance
that goal.
4. King said he deeply appreciates all you have done and are doing
for peace in MidEast and wishes to convey his gratitude and respect to
you, and his hopes to continue our dialogue. King mentioned your
handwritten letter3 to him in which you referred to your awareness of
risks to his position but to greater risk of not taking steps to continue
momentum of peace process.
5. King said that he will need a little time to look closely at the
evolving situation and to consult and discuss Jordan’s possible role
within Jordan and with Arab moderates. He said that “before he takes
the plunge he would like to know where the shore line is since Jordan is
not a good swimmer”, unlike Egypt, which is more isolated from heart-
land of Arab world, any miscalculation could involve Jordan in fight-
ing on several fronts. As a result Jordan must work on the Arabs for
some support. In this respect, he noted particularly that Saudis with
their fixation with PLO were not rpt. not giving him support he would
need to enter negotiations. I will be following this up in Saudi Arabia.
West

93.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
23172. Subject: Sadat Message to President Carter. Ref: (A) State
1. VP Mubarak asked that I meet with him 2000 hours this evening
at his residence. He had just returned from Ismailia, where he had met
with Sadat. Sadat had asked him to contact me immediately in order to
convey the following to President Carter.
2. Sadat had received a report on President Carter’s meeting with
Kamal Hassan Ali and Boutros Ghali (ref A). He had studied that re-
port and wanted President Carter to have his thoughts. He had four
specific points:
(A) What is going on now in Washington, namely negotiating a
treaty only on Sinai, will isolate Egypt in the Arab world. Sadat believes
that President Carter recognizes this situation. It had been discussed in
Camp David.
(B) The Sinai treaty should refer to the need for a comprehensive
solution.
(C) On the “main point,” namely diplomatic relations, Sadat
agrees with President Carter’s views that the process should be com-
pleted as soon as possible, i.e. six months as President Carter has sug-
gested. Sadat has received President Carter’s message that he could
come for signature in late October or early November and is pleased.
Sadat agrees with President Carter that there should be formal recogni-
tion of Israel and a quick exchange of diplomats. This should be begun
immediately after conclusion of the first phase of Israeli withdrawal
and should be put into the draft treaty as at the Charge level. (Sadat,
Mubarak said, had mentioned that the U.S./PRC precedent might be
applicable.) Sadat wants President Carter to know, however, that when
cret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis.
informing Eilts of the substance of Carter’s October 17 meeting with the Egyptian Blair
For a summary of the meeting, see Document 89.
behest . . . this morning again urged that we and Israelis agree to including Gaza in
present negotiations. According [to] Mubarak, Sadat had made this suggestion to Presi-
dent Carter in order to get the West Bank/Gaza negotiations going in the face of Hus-
sein’s foot-dragging.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850067–
2681)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the treaty is signed in President Carter’s presence, here or at Jabal
Musa, he is prepared to accede to a request from President Carter that
ambassadors be exchanged as soon as diplomatic relations are estab-
lished. Mubarak made a point of saying that this concession is for Presi-
dent Carter and should not rpt not be mentioned to the Israelis, the
Egyptian delegation or be included in the treaty. Moreover, Mubarak
said, Sadat’s willingness to do this is contingent on a specific inclusion
of Gaza in the treaty.
(D) On Gaza, Mubarak said Sadat considers it essential to include a
reference to moving ahead on Gaza in the Sinai treaty lest failure to do
so isolate Egypt in the Arab world. Sadat wants the self-governing
body to be set up in Gaza without delay. The Israelis should withdraw
their military forces to security points that are agreed upon without
delay. Sadat would like these points included in the Sinai treaty, but
Mubarak indicated that the President has an open mind on this sub-
ject—so long as progress on Gaza is synchronized with the progress on
implementing the Sinai treaty. Specifically, if as President Carter has
suggested, the Israelis have completed their interim withdrawal in
Sinai in six months time, a self-governing body should by that time
have been negotiated and established (perhaps on the last day or the
day before Sinai withdrawal) so that “self-rule” is in effect in Gaza at
approximately the same time as Phase I of Sinai withdrawal is com-
pleted. Sadat wants President Carter to know that if new leaders cannot
be found in Gaza, the present ones would be acceptable for this pur-
pose. Sadat is prepared, in accordance with his letter to President
Carter, to begin negotiations on a Gaza settlement immediately and
without waiting for Hussein’s or West Bank agreement, so that there
can be synchronization between Sinai and Gaza. In making these
points, Mubarak stressed that Sadat believes that he cannot go it alone
in Sinai. There must be some parallelism between Sinai and a Gaza set-
tlement. Sadat was confident that President Carter understands this
from their talks at Camp David.
3. I told Mubarak that I would, of course, convey President Sadat’s
views. I reminded him, however, that Sadat had agreed that there be no
formal linkage between the two framework documents. President
Carter has spoken of the need for an inter-relationship between the two
sets of negotiations, but I doubted that the Israelis would agree to in-
cluding Gaza in the Sinai treaty. A Gaza settlement, I pointed out to
Mubarak, would be based not upon the Egyptian/Israeli framework
document, but upon the comprehensive framework. Hence, while we
also appreciate the need for an inter-relationship between the two pro-
cesses, they are not part and parcel of the document under which nego-
tiations are now taking place. Mubarak insisted that Sadat needs a spe-
cific relationship between the Sinai agreement and the establishment of

a self-governing body in Gaza. He reiterated that Egypt is prepared to
negotiate a Gaza settlement under the comprehensive framework, but
that the establishment of the self-governing body in Gaza and related
matters must be synchronized in point of time with the completion of
the first phase of Sinai withdrawal.
4. Comment: Sadat and the Egyptians are feeling the heat at home
and from other Arabs about the lack of any linkage between the two
framework documents. Even Mubarak did not seem to know that Sadat
had agreed that there need be no legal linkage between the two docu-
ments, which suggests to me that Sadat has done the predictable: he has
suggested to his intimates that an understood relationship exists be-
tween the two. Since neither Hussein nor the PLO seems about to play
on the West Bank, Sadat has concluded Gaza should be tackled sepa-
rately if he is to proceed with Sinai without doing irreparable damage
to GOE’s position in Arab world. As Mubarak had said earlier in the
day (ref B), a Gaza settlement would help to put pressure on Hussein
and the West Bankers.
5. Mubarak said that he will be meeting Usama al Baz on Sunday,
October 22, in London for a report. He will at that time give the above
instructions to al Baz for use by the Egyptian delegation. (Note: He will
not rpt not tell al Baz of Sadat’s willingness to announce at the time of
the conclusion of the treaty, in response to a request from President
Carter, that diplomatic relations can be established at the Ambassado-
rial level.) Mubarak had no rpt no objection to our mentioning the
above points (with the exception of the Ambassadorial level point) to
the Egyptian delegation even before he meets with al Baz in London
later this week. This would allow time to discuss Sadat’s ideas in depth
with Egyptian delegation so that Usama al Baz can go to London with
our thinking for use in his talk with Mubarak there. The point at issue
seems to be that Sadat wants the “parallelism” that he spoke about in
Rabat (after leaving Washington) to be concurrent in the case of Sinai
and Gaza rather than sequential.
Eilts

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

94.
Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State

95.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate
General in Jerusalem and the Embassies in Egypt and Israel
265927. Jerusalem for Saunders. Subject: U.S. Revision of Draft
Treaty Text. Ref: State 265774.
1. Our October 19 revision of draft treaty text (described in reftel
para 4) follows:
Article I
Termination of State of War and Establishment of Peace
—1. The state of war between the parties will be terminated and
peace will be established between them upon the exchange of instru-
ments of ratification of this treaty.
—2. Israel will withdraw all its armed forces and civilians from the
Sinai behind the international boundary between Egypt and mandated
Palestine, as provided in the annexed protocol (Annex I–A and I–B),
and thereafter Egypt will exercise its full sovereignty over the Sinai.
—3. After completion of the interim withdrawal provided for in
Annex I–A, the parties will establish normal and friendly relations, in
accordance with Article III.
Article II
Inviolability of Boundary
—The permanent boundary between Egypt and Israel is the recog-
nized international boundary between Egypt and the former mandated
territory of Palestine. As shown on the map at Annex II, without preju-
dice to the status of the Gaza Strip. The parties regard this boundary as
inviolable. Each will respect the territorial integrity of the other, in-
cluding their territorial waters and airspace.
Article III
Future Relations
—1. The parties will apply between them the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law
governing relations among states in times of peace. In particular:
—A. They recognize and will respect each other’s sovereignty, ter-
ritorial integrity and political independence:
—B. They recognize and will respect each other’s right to live in
peace within their secure and recognized boundaries:
—C. They will refrain from the threat or use of force, directly or in-
directly, against each other and will settle all disputes between them by
peaceful means.
—2. Each party undertakes to ensure that acts or threats of bellig-
erency, hostility, or violence do not originate from and are not com-
mitted from within its territory, or by any forces subject to its control or
by any other forces stationed on its territory, against the population,
citizens or property of the other party. Each party also undertakes to re-
frain from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in acts of
billigerency, hostility, international terrorism or violence against the
other party, anywhere, and undertakes to ensure that perpetrators of
such acts are brought to justice.
—3. The parties agree that the normal relationship established be-
tween them will include full recognition, diplomatic, economic and cul-
tural relations, termination of economic boycotts and discriminatory
barriers to the free movement of people and goods, and will guarantee
the mutual enjoyment by citizens of the due process of law. The process
by which they undertake to achieve such a relationship parallel to the
implementation of other provisions of this treaty is set out in the an-
nexes protocol (Annex III).
Article IV
Security Arrangements
—1. In order to provide maximum security for both parties on the
basis of reciprocity, agreed security arrangements will be established,
described in detail as to nature and timing in Annex I–C, including lim-
ited force zones in Egyptian and Israeli territory, United Nations forces
and observers, and other security arrangements.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—2. The parties agree to the stationing of United Nations per-
sonnel in areas described in Annex I. The parties agree not to request
withdrawal of the United Nations personnel and that these personnel
will not be removed unless such removal is approved by the Security
Council of the United Nations, with the affirmative vote of the five per-
manent members, unless the parties otherwise agree.
—3. A joint commission will be established to facilitate the imple-
mentation of the treaty, as provided for in Annex I.
Article V
Freedom of Navigation
—1. Ships of Israel, and cargoes destined for or coming from Israel,
shall enjoy the right of free passage through the Suez Canal and its ap-
proaches through the Gulf of Suez and the Mediterranean Sea on the
basis of the Constantinople Convention of 1888, applying to all nations.
Israeli nationals, vessels and cargoes, as well as persons, vessels and
cargoes destined for or coming from Israel, shall be accorded non-
discriminatory treatment in all matters connected with usage of the
canal.
—2. The parties consider the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba
to be international waterways open to all nations for unimpeded and
non-suspendable freedom of navigation and overflight and undertake
to respect each other’s right to such navigation and overflight.
Article VI
Priority of Obligations
—1. Each party ensures to and agrees with the other, in recognition
of the parties’ commitments to each other in this treaty, that there will
be no conflict between its obligations under this treaty and any of its
other obligations, including those under any other international agree-
ment, whenever made. Each party also assures the other that it will re-
spect its obligations under the United Nations Charter in its dealings
with all states.
—2. The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under the present treaty.
—3. They further undertake to take all the necessary measures for
the application in their relations of the provisions of the multilateral
conventions to which they are parties, including the submission of ap-
propriate notification to the Secretary General of the United Nations
and other depositories of such conventions.
—4. This treaty does not affect and shall not be interpreted as af-
fecting in any way the rights and obligations of the parties under the
Charter of the United Nations.

Article VII
Dispute Settlement
—1. Disputes arising out of the application or interpretation of this
treaty shall be resolved by diplomatic negotiations.
—2. Any such disputes which cannot be settled by negotiations
shall be submitted to an arbitration commission at the request of either
government. This commission shall be composed of five members: two
of each party and the fifth to be selected by them.
Article VIII
Settlement of Financial Claims
—The parties agree to establish a claims commission for the mu-
tual settlement of all financial claims.
Article IX
Final Clauses
—1. This treaty shall enter into force upon exchange of instruments
of ratification.
—2. This treaty supersedes the agreement between Egypt and Is-
rael of September, 1975.
—3. All protocols, annexes, and maps attached to this treaty shall
be regarded as an integral part hereof.
—4. The treaty shall be communicated to the Secretary General of
the United Nations for registration in accordance with the provisions of
Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Done at (blank) this day (blank) of 1978, in duplicate in the Arabic,
English and Hebrew languages, each text being equally authentic. In
case of any divergence of interpretation, the English text shall prevail.
End text.
2. Texts of preamble, annexes, and possible exchange of letters are
being negotiated and will be provided when ready.
Newsom

96.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of President’s Meeting with the Israeli Delegation
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Mr. David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Hon. Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Mr. Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President
Mr. Herbert Hansell, Legal Adviser to the Department of State
Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff
H.E. Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister
H.E. Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense
H.E. Aharon Barak, Justice of the Supreme Court
H.E. Meir Rosenne, Legal Adviser to Minister of Foreign Affairs
H.E. Simcha Dinitz, Israeli Ambassador to the United States
The President reviewed his talk2 earlier in the day with the Egyp-
tian delegation. He confirmed that the Israelis would be able to use the
Suez Canal for their ships immediately upon signing of the peace
treaty. On the question of priority of obligations, the President sug-
gested that Barak might meet with our legal advisers to see if some ac-
ceptable language could be found.
Barak said that this problem had caused them great concern. It was
a political and a legal question. Barak and Rosenne had gone to Yale
today to meet with Professors [Eugene] Rostow, [Leon] Lipson, and
[Myres S.] McDougal. They had explained their problem with the ques-
tion of priority of obligations. The professors suggested some lan-
guage. They all felt that the American draft3 was inadequate, and might
even be worth nothing at all. Rosenne proceeded to read suggested lan-
guage on this issue. Barak said that it did not solve all of the problems,
and that they had concluded that they could not settle such questions
as what might happen if Israel were engaged in a military conflict with
Syria and Egypt felt obliged to go to Syria’s defense under the provi-
sion of the U.N. Charter which provides for collective measures of
self-defense. Rosenne noted that some American treaties have contained
language similar to that suggested by the Israelis. He quoted the NATO
is that it is entering a treaty with Egypt in the full knowledge that Egypt
has fifty mutual defense pacts with adversaries of Israel.
The President asked if the Israelis could accept language similar to
that which we used in NATO and in our treaties with Turkey and
Greece. Rosenne said they could, provided there were an additional
statement on the priority of this treaty over all others. Barak said that
there were two ways of dealing with the issue. You could say that the
most recent treaty supercedes those that have preceded it; or you could
declare that there is no conflict between this treaty and any other. But
the latter solution can be misunderstood. Rosenne said that it is not
enough simply to state that there is no conflict. The President said that it
would be easier to convince Sadat if the language used was similar to
that in the NATO treaty. Barak noted that the problem with the NATO
formula is that it is not adequate because it simply states that there is no
conflict between the Egypt-Israel treaty and other obligations, and this
is not in fact true.
Dayan said that he would be returning to Israel, and that if he re-
ported that Barak and Rosenne had met with the highest legal author-
ities in the United States and that they were not satisfied with the lan-
guage, he could not expect the Cabinet to accept it. The President
bluntly asked if Dayan would prefer for us to withdraw from the nego-
tiations entirely. Dayan repeated that the legal experts had said that the
U.S. draft was not adequate. Barak said that Israel could not ask the
Egyptians to withdraw from their other treaties. The language Israel
has suggested is the best that they can hope for. This is a technical
problem of international law. Rosenne added that if the Egyptians
cannot accept this language, it will raise doubts in Israel about their
sincerity.
The President said that Sadat had insisted6 that the interim with-
drawal line be east of the settlement near al-Arish. The President had

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
told Sadat that he could not agree with this. He would not be able to go
on with the negotiations if Sadat were to insist. The President feels that
the line should be around the settlement. If Sadat does agree to this, he
will not allow the settlers to go into Egyptian territory from the settle-
ment. The President said that he had also informed the Egyptians that
they could only have SAM-7 missiles across the Canal. Weizman said
that this would be no problem. The President said that all other missiles
would have to be west of the Canal. The Egyptians have referred this to
Cairo and they will provide an answer soon. They understand that they
can move their other missiles up to the Canal.
The President said that he had also discussed the question of the
timing of normalization. The Egyptians have talked of a seven-month
period for normalization and the exchange of ambassadors. This was
not specified at Camp David. The President’s first suggestion had been
full normalization at the time of signing the peace treaty. Sadat had ob-
jected. He said that normalization could take place at the time of the in-
terim withdrawal. The President said that he understood the Israelis
wanted the exchange of ambassadors to be within one month of the in-
terim withdrawal. The President had recommended to the Egyptians
that they accept this one-month provision, and that it would be to their
advantage. Israel is withdrawing faster than required, and will be out
of al-Arish within two months. Israel has also offered open transporta-
tion between al-Arish and Gaza. The President asked if that was cor-
rect. Dayan said yes, although there might be some check posts along
the way.
The President said the Egyptian delegation would ask Sadat’s
views on the settlement issue and the exchange of ambassadors. On
Gaza, the President said he thought the Israelis understood the
problem and asked if they had found a solution. Barak replied that
something along the lines of the “question of Gaza will be solved ac-
cording to the framework agreement” might be adequate. The Presi-
dent [asked?] if Israel could accept the language in the text as it now
stands. Barak said that he had called the Prime Minister who had said
the language was unacceptable. This is not a legal problem, but it is one
of public opinion. It could imply that Israel accepted the status of Gaza
as it was previously and that Israel had given up its claims. Barak had
suggested “the issue of the status of Gaza”. Begin gave no answer to
this. Barak had also suggested this language to al-Baz and had not
gotten any reaction.
The President noted that Sadat does not want to acknowledge that
Gaza is a part of Israel. Dayan said that we might refer to the Camp

David agreement. The final status of Gaza might be settled according to
the Camp David agreement. Barak suggested language on “without
prejudice to the status of Gaza, which will be settled in accordance with
the framework agreement”. The President said he felt that Israel was
trying to assert its own claim to sovereignty over Gaza. Dayan said that
they just wanted to tie this to the Camp David agreement. He sug-
gested the following language: “the issue of the final status of Gaza,
which will be decided in accordance with the Camp David framework
agreements.” The President said that Israel cannot lay a claim to Gaza
on this basis. The President said he was wondering what Israel’s inten-
tions were in not accepting the language as it presently was written. He
suggested that we stick to the Camp David language and show a map
with a line at the border and around Gaza.
The President turned to the letter8 that the Egyptians were plan-
ning to write referring to the general framework agreement. He said
that he had urged them to cut down dramatically the specific references
from the Camp David agreement. He asked the Israelis if there were
anything they would like to have in that letter. Dayan said that they
knew what they did not want in the letter. The President urged them to
be in a constructive mood and to leave something in the letter for the
Egyptians. Barak said that the main problem with the letter was that it
could be seen as implying some legal link between the Egyptian-Israeli
treaty and the broader framework agreement. The letter should not be
binding on Israel. The President said that this would not be the case. The
Egyptian and Israeli letters did not have to be identical. Barak said that
if Israel can write whatever it wants in the letter, then Israel does not
care what the Egyptians write in their letter. He had thought that a
common letter was envisaged.
Messrs. Hansell and Rosenne returned to the room at this point
after having worked on the priority of obligations language. They sug-
gested some new language, which Barak said he could accept. The Presi-
dent suggested that we try this language with the Egyptians.
Turning to the exchange of letters, The President argued for a single
joint letter on the beginning of negotiations on the West Bank/Gaza
issue within one month, to which the text of the Camp David agree-
ments would be appended. In addition, there would be mention in the
preamble of the treaty of the Camp David framework agreement. Barak
said that this raised the question of linkage. Barak said that the Israeli
commitment to the framework agreement is a fact, but that it should
not be mentioned in the treaty itself. If it were, it could be seen as the
foundation stone for the Egyptian-Israeli treaty, and could call into

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
question the viability of the treaty if the broader framework were not to
be implemented. The President said that this was not a new concept.
The Sinai framework itself was predicated on the acceptance of the gen-
eral framework.
Barak said that Israel’s problem was that any mention of the gen-
eral framework as the basis for the Egyptian-Israeli treaty would seem
to make the Egypt-Israel treaty conditional upon the implementation of
the broader framework. If this is mentioned, somewhere in the treaty
there must be a sentence that the treaty stands on its own. If that is in-
cluded, then Israel does not care how much reference is made to the
broader framework. Rosenne suggested language which would make
the treaty completely separate from the broader framework agreement.
Barak said that this would balance off any reference to the general
framework. If this were included, the Egyptians could even add lan-
guage in the preamble referring to the comprehensive peace. But if this
sentence were not in the treaty, then no reference could be made to the
broader framework. The President said that he did not believe that
Sadat could agree to the Israeli language. He insists that there is some
tie between the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the comprehensive peace.
The Sinai agreement was meant to be part of a general framework. This
is why he was able to agree to it at Camp David. He needs to be able to
make some specific reference to the broader framework. It seems to the
President that the Israelis were moving backwards.
Barak said that whatever connection existed between the two
frameworks still remained, but out of the framework agreement on
Sinai there was not going to be a specific treaty, and it should stand on
its own. It is a contract between two parties. Rosenne said that the
United States had made reference to the treaty standing on its own. The
Israelis do not want to point to a separate peace with Egypt, but in legal
terms the Egypt-Israel treaty should not be dependent upon anything
else. Israel will still adhere to the broader framework agreement, but Is-
rael needs some guarantee that the language in the preamble will not
pose any conditions.
The President said that if the Israelis could convince Sadat, it would
be okay with him. But he would personally not try. He would not pro-
pose this language to Sadat. He would not say that there was no con-
nection whatsoever. Two framework agreements were negotiated at
Camp David. Everyone knew it at the time that they were linked. Sadat
only signed the Egyptian-Israeli framework on the premise that the
West Bank and Gaza framework was viable and agreed upon.
Rosenne said that there was a difference between a political link
and a legal link. The President said that the Israelis were wasting time
on this issue with him. He would not propose a completely separate
agreement. Rosenne said that this caused a serious problem. The Presi-

dent replied that if that was the case he could not help matters. But he
would not ask Sadat to say that the agreement with Israel was not re-
lated to the broader framework. Israel had already agreed to language
in the preamble reaffirming her commitment to the broader frame-
work. The President has tried to get the Egyptians to remove excess
verbage from their letter and he has proposed simply to have the text of
the framework agreement appended to the exchange of letters.
Rosenne said that the implementation of the broader framework
agreement might depend on some third party and that would give
them the possibility of preventing the implementation of the Egypt-
Israel treaty as well. Dayan added that Israel had accepted the reference
to the general Camp David framework in the preamble. In addition,
there might be an exchange of letters, although they would not neces-
sarily be identical. But there should be nothing in the preamble other
than what the American draft contained. The President asked whether
Israel would accept everything else in our proposal. The Israelis are
trying selectively to accept our suggestions. The President said that he
had tried to get the Israelis to say what they could accept. Barak said
that the text of the framework agreement could be annexed to the ex-
change of letters. This could be done with the letter on setting up nego-
tiations for the West Bank and Gaza within one month. Barak said that
when Israel agreed to reaffirm its commitment to the framework, it did
so in conjunction with a section in the treaty which stated that the
Egypt-Israel treaty would stand on its own feet. This is not a new point.
The President asked the Israelis if they really wanted a peace treaty.
Dayan said that he could not imagine anyone thinking they did not. The
President said that he detected an attitude among the Israelis that they
had gone too far at Camp David, and they now seemed to be trying to
back off some of their undertakings there. Dayan denied this. The Presi-
dent asked why then they were not willing to reaffirm their commit-
ment to those agreements.
Barak asked if the West Bank framework did not work out for some
reason, would the Egyptian-Israeli treaty stand? The President said yes.
Barak said that is what the Israelis were trying to say. The President
asked what would happen in a situation where the interim withdrawal
would be complete, ambassadors had been exchanged, and then Israel
would refuse to withdraw her military government or to redeploy her
forces, or would not negotiate on the West Bank and Gaza, what should
Egypt do? Barak said that Israel would then be breaking her agreement
under the framework document. The President asked whether the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty should then stand. Barak said that it should
stand on its own, but Israel would then be in breach of another
agreement.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Hansell said that the preamble language did not constitute a
binding obligation. It could not be grounds for the termination of the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty if the general framework were not imple-
mented. Atherton added that the Egyptians have not seen that as setting
a condition on the Egypt-Israel treaty. Barak said that he was afraid it
could provide a legal basis for breaking their obligations. The President
added that Egypt merely wants Israel to say in the preamble that it will
reaffirm its commitment to the framework agreement. If after doing so,
you were to declare sovereignty over Gaza, the Egyptian-Israeli treaty
won’t be worth anything. Barak said that politically that was true, but
not legally. Israel wants the legal structure to be correct.
The President said that Begin had shown courage in taking a strong
position on the removal of settlements. Sadat has also shown courage
in breaking with the other Arabs. He has said that he will negotiate in
the place of Jordan. Now Israel is suggesting that the framework might
not go forward, but Egypt has said that it will negotiate. Barak asked
what would happen if the Palestinians were to boycott the elections.
The President said that there was no possibility that Sadat would de-
clare the Egyptian-Israeli treaty null and void in that event. Barak re-
plied that Israel is trying to find a way of stating the legal principle that
the treaty will stand intact in those situations. Israel remains bound by
the framework. Israel is not backing out of its obligations. Israel does
not want the legal structure laid for an argument about the validity of
the Egyptian-Israeli treaty.
The President said that Barak was not trying to help solve the
problem that exists. If Israel cannot accept the language in the pre-
amble, then perhaps other language could be drafted which would say
that if the general framework could not be implemented because of the
actions of third parties, this would not be an obstacle to the Egyptian-
Israeli treaty. Barak said that this suggestion helped, but there could be
a situation in which Egypt might say that Israel was to blame for the
non-implementation of the West Bank/Gaza framework. In reply, the
President said it was impossible to cover every eventuality. If the Egyp-
tians want to attack Israel, they will find some pretext.
The President urged that we return to the kind of spirit that existed
at Camp David when the agreements were signed. We want to remove
obstacles. The Israelis know what Sadat needs in terms of his credibility
in the Arab world. There has to be some reference to the Camp David
agreements. The President said that he would be able to get Sadat to
drop some references in the preamble, but not everything. Pretexts can
always be found to break agreements. The Israelis might want to draft a
paragraph dealing with the contingency in which the Palestinians and
the Jordanians cause the problem for the West Bank/Gaza negotia-
tions. But generally he has the impression that the Israelis are trying to

back away from the minimal agreed linkage established at Camp
David.
Barak said that Israel would reaffirm in a joint declaration or some
other means the commitment to the Camp David agreement. But Sadat
wants this in the preamble to the peace treaty. The President reminded
Barak that Egypt had earlier wanted references made throughout the
treaty and now they were prepared to accept a reference only in the
preamble. If the Israelis can persuade Sadat otherwise, let them try.
Barak insisted again that they do not want a legal link. A letter from
them saying that there was no legal link would be all right.
The President asked whether the Israelis could accept the preamble
as it now stands, with only minor deletions. Would Israel then refuse to
sign the treaty? The President will try to get Israel the settlement in
Sinai, as well as an exchange of ambassadors after one month. He
cannot imagine that the Israelis would then reject the treaty because of
a reaffirmation of the commitment to the Camp David framework. If
that is a problem, we should simply stop the negotiations. Sadat will
not renounce any linkage at all between the two frameworks. This was
the whole basis for Sadat’s willingness to sign the Camp David agree-
ments. If it is so important to Israel that they cannot reaffirm their com-
mitment to the Camp David frameworks, then Sadat and Begin should
just meet again to try to work this out. The President would drop out of
the negotiations. The Israelis seem to be going back into Camp David.
Rosenne said once again that if mention were made of the frame-
work in the preamble some reference had to be made in the treaty that
the treaty itself would stand on its own. There had to be some refer-
ence. Events outside the control of the parties might hinder the imple-
mentation of the broader framework. Rosenne suggested adding lan-
guage to the article on the priority of obligations which would say that
this treaty was binding and was independent of any other agreement
that might exist. Rosenne suggested that reference be made to the
second framework agreement between Egypt and Israel at the end of
the preamble.
Dayan suggested that these suggestions be put in writing. He said
that he felt bad about the discussion. Israel has tried to explain its posi-
tion and its honest feelings. Israel wants a peace treaty and it is com-
mitted to the Camp David agreements. He would be prepared to ask
the Prime Minister if he could accept the preamble as it now stands, but
the political decisions would have to be made by the Prime Minister
and the Cabinet.
The President said that what Egypt wants goes into the preamble or
in an exchange of letters. What Israel wants always has to be in the text.
He suggested including the reaffirmation of the commitment to the
framework in the preamble. He does not see that this causes any

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
problem. If it does, the Israelis should suggest another paragraph to in-
clude in the preamble. If the President can understand the Israeli con-
cern, he’ll recommend to the Egyptians that they accept. But he has al-
ready gone to the Egyptians on the Israelis’ problems, and he has tried
to get favorable action. He has not seen any comparable effort by the Is-
raelis. They wait for the Egyptian draft, we modify it, and they keep
pushing for better advantage.
The President said that he found this very frustrating. He said that
the Israelis were trying to undo the degree of linkage that had been es-
tablished at Camp David. He knew that the Israelis had wanted none in
the first place, but he could not understand why they now wanted to
drop things, such as the U.N. Security Council endorsement of the
treaty. Sadat also wants Israel to help out on international waterways,
but Israel has not been forthcoming. On the points of importance to Is-
rael, such as Suez passage, settlements, and others, the President has
tried to help. If the Israelis now insist on the language they want in
the text of the treaty, they are trying to undo any linkage at all. The
Egyptian-Israeli treaty is based on the overall framework agreement.
Sadat made sure that Israel would understand that at Camp David. He
told this to the Israelis. Now the Israelis are trying to undo that min-
imum degree of linkage. Sadat has his integrity at stake. The President
has told Hussein and Fahd and Assad that the two agreements are re-
lated. We have said that Sadat has not agreed to a separate peace treaty.
For Israel now to create the impression of a separate peace would cause
Sadat great problems. The President does not personally care about this
issue, but he cannot accept the Israeli position in good conscience. Is-
rael should be helping Sadat solve his problem. He cannot say that the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty stands completely on its own. The Israelis know
that there is an interconnection.
Dayan said the President had referred to a political linkage, but not
a legal linkage. The President agreed, and Dayan said that this is the Is-
raeli position. Israel does not want a legal linkage. The President said
that if the Jordanians and the Palestinians do not want to negotiate,
neither he nor Sadat would use that as a pretext for saying that the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty should not be honored. The Israelis could write
something to deal with this situation. Dayan said that if there could be
some statement on political linkage without implying legal linkage, the
Israelis might be able to accept it. Barak was afraid that this might pro-
vide a pretext for not honoring the treaty, but the President replied
again that a pretext can always be found. The Egyptians recognize that
Israel wants to have influence in the West Bank and Gaza and in East
Jerusalem. They know that Israel wants to keep settlements in the
Golan. They are not forcing Israel to take a stand on these issues. They
are not predicating this treaty on assurances that the Egyptian position

will always prevail. Dayan said that they would have to check how le-
gally binding a statement in the preamble would be on Israel.
The President suggested that at the end of the preamble language
should be inserted saying that “in order to implement the framework
[of] an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty the parties agree to the following
provisions”. Rosenne said that this would help, but there should also be
some mention that the validity of this treaty is not conditional upon
any act or development under the control of the third party. Dayan said
that the President might have to contact the Prime Minister directly on
this point.
The President then suggested that we leave the preamble as it is,
and that we add some language referring to the second framework
agreement toward the end. Then later in the section on priorities, there
should be some reference to the treaty not depending upon any action
or inaction by third parties. Barak said that they would have to go to the
Cabinet to get agreement on this, but that he could accept it whole-
heartedly. Dayan confirmed that they would all recommend this for-
mulation to the Cabinet.
The President said that he would try to sell it to Sadat. The Camp
David agreement should also be appended to the treaty not the letter.
Barak said that he felt bad about this whole discussion. The President
said that he would then withdraw his suggestion that the Camp David
agreement be appended to the treaty and that it could be attached to a
letter in which the parties reaffirmed their commitment to the general
framework. It might be appended to the letter on the talks beginning in
one month. Dayan said that Boutros Ghali had agreed to a separate
letter on the negotiations for the West Bank and Gaza beginning in one
month. The President said that he wanted a joint text of that letter. It
should say that the parties are prepared to carry out the provisions of
the Camp David agreement, and that in order to do this Egypt and Is-
rael would meet within one month to begin negotiations on estab-
lishing a self-governing authority. The Camp David agreements would
be appended to that letter. Concerning the priority of obligations, lan-
guage was suggested on page six, paragraph 2, which said that the
treaty would stand “without regard to the action or inaction of any
third party”. The President said he would try this with Sadat. Dayan
said that this would be all right with the Israeli delegation.
The President then turned to the question of free navigation in the
Strait of Tiran, and whether the Egyptians could find some way to close
those waters to Soviet ships. Barak said that the right of ships from all
nations had to be respected or ships carrying cargoes to Israel might be
prevented from passing through the Strait. Mr. Aaron suggested that
the phrase “for access to either country” be included as a way of indi-
cating that the free passage was for ships going to or from Israel or

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Egypt. This would preclude Soviets coming in and maneuvering in the
Gulf of Aqaba. The President suggested that the parties accept this and
the Israelis agreed.
The President then showed the Israelis language that we would be
prepared to use in a letter dealing with the U.N. force or a multilateral
force if the U.N. would not agree to station troops in Sinai. This would
be a letter from the United States to Israel. It should be kept secret for
now, otherwise the U.N. will not act at all. Dayan said that the Israelis
were concerned about the situation in which the United States might do
its best to keep the U.N. force intact, but that it would fail. The President
said that he would have to talk to Congress about the extent of the
American obligation. Dayan said that he would ask the Cabinet not to
publish the text of this letter. The President said it would be very embar-
rassing to him if it were published. He does not want to consult with
Congress until we are closer to agreement on the treaty. Dayan agreed
to this idea.
The President asked what problems would remain if the Egyptians
were to accept what had been decided on this evening. Barak pointed to
three other problems. One was the linguistic problem on page 1. The Is-
raelis would like to say “upon completion of the interim withdrawal”,
rather than “after completion of the interim withdrawal”. This would
mean that the Suez Canal would be open immediately. Atherton sug-
gested that specific reference to the passage of Israeli ships in the Suez
immediately should be put in Annex III, and Barak agreed.
The President said that Egypt wanted to delete the reference to ter-
rorism on page 3. Dayan said that he would have to refer this to the
Cabinet, but that he would suggest that no reference be made to ter-
rorism. The President suggested that some other word might be in-
cluded. Weizman said that he would also recommend the deletion of the
word.
Barak then turned to Article VII on arbitration. The Prime Minister
wants to reopen this issue, and now favors an arbitration commission
of four members, two from each party. If each party agrees that a dead-
lock has been reached in the talks, by agreement they would name a
fifth. But it should not be automatic that there would be a fifth member.
The President said that the Israelis were going on their agreement to Ar-
ticle VII and that it would be hard for the Egyptians. Dayan said that
they could leave it as it is now, and there might be a problem on other
points. The Israelis then might want to reopen this one as well. The
President asked whether they would agree that there would be a four-
person commission and if both agree there is a deadlock, then they will
choose a fifth member. Barak said that this would be okay. The President
said that he could agree to language as follows: “If the parties agree

97.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the
Department of State and the Embassy in Israel
2886. From Saunders. Subj: October 20 Meeting With Prime Min-
ister Begin.
1. I saw Prime Minister Begin for two hours afternoon October 20.
Ambassador Lewis, DCM Viets, Pol Counselor Blackwill and Howell
accompanied me. On Israeli side, MFA Director General Ciechanover
and Begin’s aide Avner were also present.
cret; Niact Immediate; Exdis Handle as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to
Amman, Cairo, Damascus, and Jidda.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. After Begin welcomed my visit and asked if I were tired as a re-
sult of my travels, I recalled that the President had remarked in connec-
tion with the Camp David meetings that making peace is harder than
making war. I added that I had experienced some of the truth of this
during my visit to Jordan and Saudi Arabia where some of the agonies
of making crucial decisions related to peace were as evident as in Israel.
Begin thanked me for recognizing the problems he faces, adding with
evident feeling that some circles in the US always thought of ways to
help out Sadat without realizing that others have problems as well in
the aftermath of Camp David. “I have problems of my own,” Begin said
which are internal in distinction to the external pressures on Sadat.
“For the first time in thirty-five years, since January, 1944, there is divi-
sion among my closest long-term associates in the Irgun. This has
never happened before, but now, a group within the old Irgun, men
with whom I have risked my life, have been writing a letter in which
they denounce the CDA and the policies of the Begin government.” All
I ask, Begin noted is that it is recognized in justice that others besides
Sadat have problems.
3. I responded to Begin’s remarks by saying that, in some respects,
I thought that the difficulties he faces are harder than those of others
because he has to work them out within a democratic process. He
agreed, stressing that half his old friends and comrades-in-arms in
Herut3 either abstained or voted against the CDA in the Knesset.
Sensing, I think, that his dilemmas were understood, Begin asked what
I could tell him about King Hussein’s readiness to participate in the
peace negotiations as a result of my recent talks with him. I told Begin
that Hussein is not yet prepared to enter the process, giving some of the
flavor of Hussein’s agony in facing what he had characterized as one of
the most difficult choices in Jordan’s history. I said he faces divisions
within his country, feels he has no Arab support and believes he was let
down by Sadat. Before Hussein reaches a final position, I commented,
he must go through the Arab summit process which is already in train.
I added, however, that Hussein has confirmed to us that he is prepared
to encourage his friends and supporters on the West Bank to cooperate
with the efforts leading to negotiations and will put his weight behind
the West Bank aspect of the CDA. Begin inquired whether Hussein

would go to the Baghdad summit and I said he would, if it takes place,
but that he had emphasized that he will work for a positive outcome in
terms of the peace process. I reported that he had stated that he will
walk out of the summit if it takes a negative course, although there
would obviously be tremendous Arab pressure on him not to follow
through with this threat, if the time came.
4. Begin summarized his understanding of Hussein’s position and
observed that, until this time, both the pro-PLO and the pro-Hashemite
figures in Judea, Samaria and Gaza have adopted attitudes negative
toward the CDA. What did I learn of the Saudi view, he asked? I said I
had brought two essential conclusions away from my talks in Saudi
Arabia. First, they do not believe the CDA is clear and precise enough
as regards the ultimate future of the West Bank and Gaza. I said I had
explained that the US neither can nor wishes to provide the kind of
guarantee of an independent Palestinian state which the Saudis sought.
Second, I said I came away convinced that the Saudis had adopted a po-
sition that may be described as neutral. They had told Hussein the deci-
sion was up to him. I observed that the Saudis, like the Jordanians,
were concerned about the forthcoming Baghdad summit and want to
maneuver to bring about a moderate outcome, although it is difficult to
perceive any reasoned program to accomplish this.
5. Begin asked who I had seen in Saudi Arabia and I told him I had
held conversations with the Crown Prince, Prince Saud, Kamal Adham,
and Turki Bin Faysal. I said that some of them seemed to understand
the process that we were seeking to set in motion and are intrigued by
it. Our Embassy in Jidda felt that in the post-summit environment we
might expect more support, but I had found the task of selling the CDA
difficult, partly because of differences in cultural conditioning. Patience
is limited and they want to see what lies at the end of the process now. I
said that I had tried, for example, to explain why the US would regard a
determination in advance of the eventual status and relationships of
the Palestinians living in the West Bank/Gaza contradictory to the con-
cept of allowing these people to participate in determining their future.
My success had been limited.
6. Begin turned at this point to the replies4 which the USG had
given Hussein in response to the questions posed by Jordan. He said he
would like to give his analysis of some individual points but would
first like to make a more general statement. He asked first that I express
to President Carter his “deep sadness” that these answers were sent
without prior consultation, stating that the subject matter affects Is-
rael’s rights, security and its very survival. Israel had, he felt, a pre-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
vious commitment from the United States to consult on such matters.
He said that he had received copies of the answers only two days ear-
lier and had an opportunity only to begin his study and that he is
finding new things in the document every time he reads it. He ex-
pressed an intention to write to President Carter, implying that he
would deal with some of the points on which he disagrees.
7. The next hour of the meeting was given over to Begin’s point-
by-point discussion of his disagreement with specific aspects of the US
replies. It was agreed that he would proceed through the document
without my responses until the end. Begin’s comments, keyed to ques-
tion numbers, follows.
pected. . . . : Begin observed that the previous reference to groups or or-
ganizations could apply to the PLO and the language used in the an-
swer could suggest that the US commitment5 of 1975 regarding
contacts with the PLO had been weakened, since what had been ex-
pressed as conditions (acceptance of UNSC resolutions and Israel’s
right to exist) in 1975 had now become expectations. This was a viola-
tion of President Ford’s commitment.
mate rights of the Palestinian people,” Begin argued that at CD this ex-
pression had been accepted only after the Israelis had won agreement
to the inclusion of the word “also” to reserve Israeli “rights.” The cur-
rent formulation, without “also” is not rpt not what was agreed at CD.
He would not have agreed to this wording at the summit. Begin said he
had made it clear in his discussions at Camp David that at the end of
the 5-year transitional period, Israel will claim sovereignty over Judea,
Samaria and Gaza. At CD, he asserted, it was agreed that the question
of sovereignty would be set aside and left open to deal with the human
problems of the territories. At the end of the transition, if there is agree-
ment on Israeli sovereignty, fine. If there is no agreement, autonomy
will continue and Israel will have security while the Palestinians will
have autonomy, “and there will be no harm to anybody.” He noted that
all the Arabs, including Sadat, are interpreting the phrase “legitimate
rights” as meaning an independent Palestinian state. He would never
have agreed to this interpretation at CD, Begin asserted, and would
never have incorporated the phrase into the CDA without the inclusion
of Israel and the United States, the United States agreed to “adhere to its present policy
with respect to the Palestine Liberation Organization, whereby it will not recognize or ne-
gotiate with the Palestine Liberation Organization so long as the Palestine Liberation Or-
ganization does not recognize Israel’s right to exist and does not accept Security Council

of the word “also,” which reserves Israel’s rights as an integral part of
the CDA language. “We will never place this area under foreign con-
trol.” The deletion of “also” is a most worrying departure from the
CDA which the President witnessed as a “full partner.”
he wanted to underline that the differences between Israel and the US
on Jerusalem are most serious problem between the two governments.
He asked that I tell the President and the Secretary that the Israeli
people “will never give up part of Jerusalem to anybody. This people is
ready to fight and to die for Jerusalem. It’s as simple as that.” Jeru-
salem, he continued with great passion, is an Israeli city, the capital of
Israel and will remain so as long as the Jewish people live. It is not a
problem for Israel alone but for all the Jewish people everywhere. For
three thousand years, since King David established it as our capital, it
has remained so. Sometimes, he said, he asked himself, what is hap-
pening to our American friends? 140 capitals are recognized in the
world. Why not recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel? He said he
realized that the US has other interests, such as oil, but for 30 years, his
American friends had not recognized Jerusalem as Israel’s capital.”
Two generations had been born in Israel. How long can this go on?
What other country in the world does not have its capital recognized?
Why is this being done to us? We can’t comprehend it. “And now you
repeat it in writing in midst of our peace negotiations with Egypt.”
11. Begin continued that we had a para on Jerusalem at CD. I told
the President, he said, that we could not live with this letter. Israel
would not have signed on those terms. But then the language was
changed. Begin said he had read the Yost speech, which differs from
that of Goldberg. Yost said that East Jerusalem is occupied territory.
“In 1948, Jordan tried to occupy all of Jerusalem. It destroyed the
Jewish quarter completely, including the synagogues. It never allowed
us to come to the Western Wall to pray and almost destroyed the Had-
dassah hospital and the Hebrew University. On Monday, June 5, 1967,
we asked Hussein through the American Embassy not to attack us. At
one o’clock, he attacked seeking his share of the supposed spoil, but we
fought and we liberated Jerusalem. Now we are called occupiers in the
ancient city of David. The Jordanians were the occupiers without basis
in international law.” Begin said he “is an old man and an old Jew
doesn’t have much time left.” But he must say that “this is one of the
greatest wrongs ever done in the history of the world to a nation.” Here
in 1978, he said, the Israeli character of Jerusalem is being questioned
by the US at a time when negotiations between Israel and Egypt are

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
under way in Washington. Begin said he was sorry but on this question
he was speaking from the heart as well as the brain. Focusing on para 2
rpt 2 of reply 4(a), Begin drew attention to the phrase that “the final
status of Jerusalem could be different . . .” from the rest of the West
Bank. He said this could be interpreted as meaning that Jerusalem in
toto is part of the West Bank.
term “Israeli security personnel” means when at Camp David everyone
had spoken of the IDF. Where, he asked, had it been agreed that, after 5
years, we will negotiate about the presence of the IDF in Judea, Samaria
and Gaza. Israeli security was unimagineable without the IDF in Judea,
Samaria and the Gaza Strip. That is why the CDA spoke of a presence
for five years and “beyond.” When Dayan returned from the meetings
at Leeds Castle, Begin reported, Dayan had told him (Begin) that the
US agreed that the IDF could stay in those areas. The President had told
Begin that it was his impression these forces should be in the Jordan
Valley. Begin had explained the need to have forces in the Samarian
Highlands and the President had agreed. Now, Begin said, you
promise Hussein we will have to negotiate continued IDF presence.
This is a violation of the CDA.
“legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.” He said that the Pres-
ident had agreed to delete this language at Camp David at Israeli insist-
ence and substitute “requirements.” Now suddenly “aspirations” reap-
peared. Why?
national supervisory authority, “nothing in the Framework excludes,
etc.” “The self-governing authority, of course, means administration
council,” Begin asserted. He said that there was nothing in the CDA on
this and no mention of the UN as there is in the US answer. The ques-
tion of such an international authority was never even discussed at CD
he said. Why was it inserted? “We would have rejected it of course.” It
was absolutely not consistent with CDA. I interrupted to agree that this
was not discussed at CD but was raised in Hussein’s question and our
answer was an effort to respond to him honestly.
garding the participation of the “Arab inhabitants of East Jerusalem: in
elections to constitute the self-governing authority. This, he said, was
never mentioned at CD. Israel had not agreed. It was not in CDA.
tion that Egypt would be a participant in the negotiations to establish

the status of Jerusalem, saying pointedly that he did not recall Egypt
being mentioned at CD in this connection.
holy places of each faith being under “the full authority of their repre-
sentatives?” He said they already had these powers and mentioned a
dispute between two Christian sects which the GOI had been asked to
solve. Each religion already had full control over its holy places. He
said he would like an explanation.
ments had been an issue of debate at CD and since. He said he had
given a three-month commitment to the President but had said that Is-
rael might establish three nahals which are part of Israel’s defense es-
tablishment. He had also told the President that there could be in-
creases in the size of existing settlements by several hundred families
on the West Bank during the three months. In this response, to Hussein
he said he found a repetition of the US position on the Israeli commit-
ment, Israel had not agreed.
others territory” which had been deleted at CD at Israel’s insistence.
This language is not in the Framework and Israel does not accept it.
“whatever number (of Israeli settlements) that might remain” which
was very “hurtful” because it would lead the Arabs to expect that not
all of the settlements would remain after the transitional period. Some
would be liquidated. He said he had never heard at Camp David that
Israel might be asked to remove any of them. He added that he is being
cursed literally for agreeing to remove settlements from Sinai and had
the day before attended an angry demonstration of settlers from Yamit.
And now the US promises Hussein that some settlements in Judea and
Samaria will be removed.
how the term “ratify” could be applied in this context. Ratification is a
concept in international law that applies to states. The word does not
appear in the CDA and now it is used with Hussein. He also took ex-
ception to the description of “a strong local police force” which would
assure the political process. He said he understood the function of the
police to be the maintenance of law and order.
tion of “political institutions of self-government” maintaining that
there was not one word at CD about institutions of self-government,
which in his mind implied a political organization quite beyond the au-
tonomy which he envisages. Israel means autonomy, he stressed, not a
state.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
UN Resolutions,” Begin stated that could imply resolutions, including
those of the General Assembly which are not binding, that Israel does
not accept, especially the one of 1948. He said that at CD it had been
made clear that the refugee question would include not only Pales-
tinians but Jewish refugees as well. In the ensuing discussion at Camp
David the US had suggested deleting such a phrase. President Carter
had inserted it again into his address to Congress9 without Israeli con-
currence. “I found it difficult to applaud that portion of the President’s
speech,” Begin said. Now this idea appears in reply to Hussein.
leading in stating, as regards an eventual peace settlement between Is-
rael and Syria for example, “the principles of the Framework should
apply to treating.” He argued that the CDA enumerated a limited
number of principles which were agreed to be applicable between Is-
rael and other confrontation states. It was not, he said, agreed at CD
that all the principles embodied in the framework document would be
applicable in these cases: “We will withdraw to the international
border in Sinai. We will not do that in Judea Samaria and Gaza Strip.”
25. Thanking me for my patience, Begin summarized his general
reaction to the US responses to Hussein’s queries by stating that he felt
the document will harden Sadat’s attitude in the Blair House negotia-
tions. He wanted to express his “deep sorrow” that such a document
was given to King Hussein. I replied to Begin’s lengthy analysis by
stating that, as the signature on the document attested, President Carter
had personally gone over every word of the replies carefully and is
completely familiar with their content. He will, therefore, be especially
interested in the Prime Minister’s comments.
26. I said that I would like to make two general points on the re-
plies and then, with Begin’s agreement, try to respond to his specific
comments and criticisms when I meet with Ciechanover on Sunday. He
agreed. I said I felt that it was important to stress the philosophy of US
strategy in the peace effort. We realize that we cannot solve all
problems at one time and for this reason we decided a year and a half
ago on the idea of a transition period in the West Bank/Gaza. We pur-
sued this tack mindful of the interest Israel has in seeing what it can live
with in the territories as we go along. Because we are putting some
problems off for later resolution, however, we felt strongly that we
should save for ourselves some options to tackle them in imaginative
ways and there is an element in our replies to Hussein of keeping the
door open to human creativity. It is true, as Begin noted, that we had

not confined ourselves to decisions taken and language agreed at CD
because some of the questions asked of us looked beyond the CDA to
what might happen in the process. It is inherent in everything con-
tained in those replies, I assured Begin, that the ideas will be negotiated
by the parties.
27. As to the matter of prior consultations with Israel, I drew
Begin’s attention to the fact that the second part of many of the ques-
tions asked for US positions. In the CDA is embodied what was agreed
by the three participants. Just as Israel had made reservations on cer-
tain issues, so the United States reserves its position on a number of
questions. In the communications between heads of state as we have
not felt it proper to clear our views with a third state. It is fair to say, I
continued, that Israel’s views on a full range of questions are known to
us and we realized that Israel would not like some answers on issues
where we have an honest difference of opinion. The US replies, how-
ever, do not commit Israel. We will enter negotiations, when they arise,
in good faith and will inevitably face some differences of viewpoint. As
we have told the Arabs as well, we cannot guarantee the results of the
negotiating process but we can advance our ideas and cope with new
concepts that arise.
28. Begin said he understood my points and that we are all free
men when it comes to expressing opinions. He knew that the US had
been asked by Hussein about matters concerning the CDA but Begin
had found in our responses novelties, ideas that are not in the CDA and
concepts which were inconsistent with the CDA. This was Israel’s se-
rious complaint. Much in our response to Hussein had nothing to do
with Camp David. He concluded without enumeration that some of the
US replies were excellent and he had chosen not to dwell on them.
29. I told Begin that I wanted to take a moment to explain to him
what I have been doing on this trip so that he would know first-hand. I
said the CDA has posited a series of negotiations—first Sinai, then the
Palestinian and Jordan aspects, Syria, and finally Lebanon. As he knew
the Egyptians had been raising in the Washington negotiations the
question of relationships within the series. While there is no formal
linkage, we need to maintain, and discharge the commitments we all
assumed at CD. I have been seeking to figure out how to carry out these
obligations and had been seeking the ideas of Jordan, Saudi Arabia and
Palestinians about the way to crystalize the process and capitalize on
the opportunity before us. I said I believe in what we did in CD and
would like to find ways to generate moderate Arab support for Sadat
and the peace process.
30. Begin replied that he was glad I understood that I should not
use his comments on the US replies with the Palestinians with whom I
would be meeting (he had earlier asked that I not do so and I assured

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
him I did not intend to do so). He said he had no objection to my
meeting with West Bank and Gaza Palestinians as he understood I
would be doing that evening. He added, however, that he felt our Con-
sulate General in Jerusalem was too active and should not take over the
Israeli job of dealing with Palestinians. No American, he asserted,
should negotiate with the West Bankers and Gazans since that, under
the CDA, is an Israeli task. He said he knows that officials of ConGen
Jerusalem sometimes have contacts with these people and are exer-
cising an Israeli right. Begin said he had just received an intelligence re-
port of threats against those who had met with Atherton. He said he is
watching out for them but faces significant security problems, in-
cluding the availability of large quantities of explosives in the area. He
said he would soon be writing President Carter and would outline the
security problem. In closing, Begin wished me success in my mission.
32. Ambassador Lewis said he would like to make one point before
the meeting broke up. Under the American distribution of responsibil-
ities, it is Embassy Tel Aviv that has responsibility for contacts in Gaza
and the ConGen which carried out the function in the West Bank. What
both are doing, Lewis stated, is exactly what I had said I was doing. We
are quietly explaining the CDA and taking soundings of views. We
were not negotiating. We had no intent to suplant the Israeli role. We
are all on the same team, trying to implement the CDA and bring peace
to the Middle East. We recognize the security problems related to our
contacts but also know that the local inhabitants incur risks by their
contacts with Israeli officials too. Begin nodded assent. If Begin has any
question about what we are doing, Lewis said, he could ask and we
would tell him frankly. I added that I held a similar meeting with Pales-
tinians on the East Bank and believed I was sensitized to the problems
associated with such contacts.
33. Comment: Begin was quite tense when the meeting began (he
barely looked at me while shaking my hand), but loosened up as our
talk went along, after I expressed recognition of the personally difficult
time he had been having and gave him a chance to talk about it. Al-
though markedly distressed with our replies to Hussein, he period-
ically punctuated his comments with humorous asides. He was always
courteous, and emotional only when discussing the Jerusalem issue.
34. At the same time, he had obviously pored over our responses in
his lawyerly way. He seemed genuinely hurt and unable to understand
why we had departed from the agreed CDA language in responding to
the King. My explanation appeared to make no dent on him and I think
we can expect soon a lengthy letter to the President from Begin enu-
merating the Prime Minister’s grievances. The meeting served its pur-
poses, however, in letting him put his initial reaction on the record and

98.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of President’s Meeting with Egyptian Delegation
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Mr. David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Mr. Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President
Hon. Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff
Mr. Hebert Hansell, Legal Adviser, Department of State
H.E. Boutros Boutros Ghali, Acting Foreign Minister
H.E. Abdallah el-Erian, Legal Adviser to the Foreign Ministry
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President began by reviewing his talks2 with the Israelis. He
said that they had shown flexibility and that they would be going back
to their cabinet with a number of specific recommendations. He gave
the Egyptians copies3 of the revised treaty text. In the preamble, the ref-
erence to reaffirming a commitment to the framework agreement
would be left in, and in addition there would be a letter4 in which the
Egyptians and the Israelis would commit themselves to begin negotia-
tions on the West Bank and Gaza within one month of the signing of the
treaty. The President urged that they both sign the same text. The Is-
raelis have no objection to what the Egyptians put in a separate letter of
their own concerning their views on the West Bank and Gaza. The Is-
raelis will have a different letter on that topic. It is up to Egypt to decide
what to put into a separate letter.
The President said that he would suggest the deletion of a couple of
the paragraphs in the preamble and suggested one addition referring to
the Egyptian-Israeli framework agreement. The President asked if the
Egyptians had received any new instructions on the timing of the ex-
change of ambassadors and Boutros Ghali said that they had not.
The President then turned to the reference to Gaza in the treaty. He
said that Israelis were prepared to accept reference to the issue of the
status of Gaza. He might also propose a new sentence saying that the
status of Gaza and the West Bank will be decided in accordance with
the framework agreement at Camp David. The President said that he
understood that Egypt does not claim Gaza as a part of Egypt, but does
not want to acknowledge that it is a part of Israel. The Israelis reserve
their right to claim sovereignty over this area. A map should be ap-
pended which would show the border between Egypt and Israel, as
well as the boundary around Gaza.
El-Erian said the idea which would be reflected is that Egypt has
some responsibility under the general armistice agreements for Gaza.
Boutros Ghali said that he would accept the language proposed by the
President. Egypt will mention its special responsibility for Gaza in a
letter.
The President again said that the Egyptians could put anything
they wanted in a unilateral letter, but that the Israelis would not neces-
sarily say the same thing in their letter. But it is important that both
parties reaffirm clearly their commitment to the framework. El-Erian
noted that it would not be appropriate to refer to the West Bank when
dealing with the Egypt-Israel border, only Gaza was at stake. The Presi-
dent agreed.
The President then informed the Egyptians that the Israeli delega-
tion had agreed to recommend the deletion of the term “terrorism”.
This is subject to Begin’s approval. On page 5, the section on navigation
had been modified to deal with the Egyptian concern that Soviet ships
might try to maneuver in the Gulf of Aqaba. El-Erian said that there
were two problems. Egypt could accept for itself the status of the Strait
of Tiran as an international waterway, but Egypt could not speak for
the other riparian states. Egypt’s position should not appear to commit
them or prejudge the question as it will be dealt with in the law of the
sea conference. He said that the formulation in the revised draft was ac-
ceptable, however, the President said that the Israelis had agreed to this
language.
Turning to page 6, the President discussed the question of arbitra-
tion. The Israelis want to resort to negotiations first. If there are routine
difficulties, there is no need to have a fifth member for arbitration right
away.
Boutros Ghali said that negotiations were already dealt with in the
first paragraph of this article. Arbitration is the fallback position. It
would be unusual to have an arbitration commission of only four
members. El-Erian said that there is need for some umpire in arbitra-
tion. Usually someone appoints the additional member.
The President said that he would like to see disputes normally
solved through negotiations. It should not be normal practice to refer to
a referee. He would prefer that there be a commission of two members
from each party first, then if they agree there is a deadlock they could
invite a fifth member to join them. He would like to see three steps:
normal diplomatic negotiations; the four-member commission; and
then arbitration.
Boutros Ghali said that this was an interesting innovation, but there
was no precedent for it. He would prefer not to spell out the details.
El-Erian referred to Article 33 of the U.N. Charter5 and encouraged that
conciliation be referred to as one step in settling disputes. The President

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
again said that a quick move to binding arbitration would cause him
some problems. He would like to have some in-between step. El-Erian
suggested a slight change in Article VII, paragraph 2. The four-member
commission should be for conciliation, not arbitration. The President
said that this sounded all right to him, but they should try to work out
three stages. El-Erian suggested negotiations first, then conciliation,
then arbitration.
The President then showed the Egyptians the letter that he had
drafted earlier in the morning. He would like Begin and Sadat both to
sign this letter committing themselves to begin negotiations within one
month on the West Bank and Gaza. In addition, the Egyptians could
have their own letter using Camp David language on the West Bank
and Gaza. Boutros Ghali asked if the letter would be part of the treaty.
The President said that it would be signed on the same day. Israel has
not yet seen the exact text of the letter, however, but they will reconfirm
their commitment to the Camp David agreements and they will allow
the full text to be annexed to this letter. It will say that within one
month negotiations will begin on the West Bank and Gaza. This will es-
tablish a strong link between the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the West
Bank/Gaza negotiations. El-Erian said that if this letter were part of the
treaty it would be great. The President said that it would not be in the
text, but the same procedure would be used as at Camp David, with the
letters being released on the same day. Boutros Ghali asked if it would
be legally binding and the President confirmed that it would be. On this
basis, the Egyptians agreed to the idea of the exchange of the letter.
The President then turned to page 6 concerning the priority of obli-
gations. He said that Israel wanted to be assured that if the Jordanians
or Palestinians refused to participate in the West Bank/Gaza negotia-
tions, this would not impede the implementation of the Egyptian-
Israeli treaty. Boutros Ghali initially hesitated to react to the new lan-
guage, but on reconsideration said that there would be no problem.
The President then turned to page 5a. This deals with the question
precedence. Some of Egypt’s mutual defense agreements are in conflict
with the terms of this treaty. We have tried to find words in our treaties,
such as the NATO treaty, which make it clear that the most recent
treaty takes precedence. El-Erian said that this was a legitimate Israeli
concern. According to the Egyptian constitution, a treaty requires that
domestic law be in conformity with the treaty. The treaty is self-
executing in that sense. Egypt has committed itself to end the boycott.
Many Egyptian laws will have to be abrogated. Everything that has
been based on the state of war will end. It is hard to say that in all cir-
cumstances this treaty will prevail. Therefore, Egypt preferred the first
American draft, which simply said that “there will be no conflict.” Only

the U.N. Charter, in Article 103, has such status of being superior to all
other commitments. The most difficult problem for Egypt are the secu-
rity pacts. Some have expired, but at least one from 1950 on joint de-
fense and economic cooperation embodies the idea of collective
self-defense against aggression. This would cause great difficulties for
Egypt and the Arab word if this treaty had to be renounced.
The President referred to the Israeli consultation with American ex-
perts on international law. They had agreed the American draft lan-
guage was not adequate. The President suggested that el-Erian and
Barak might get together with some international lawyers to work out
adequate language. El-Erian said that the problem was not entirely a
legal one. Egypt does not want to appear to be washing its hands of the
Arab league. Mr. Aaron said the reference to the U.N. Charter was met
to protect Egypt’s right to collective self-defense. El-Erian acknowl-
edged that this was helpful. Hansell added that in the event of Israeli
aggression, the reference to the U.N. Charter would allow Egypt to re-
spect its commitment under the mutual defense pacts. El-Erian said
that he recognized the validity of this point and this would make it
easier for Egypt to accept. Egypt would like, however, to avoid any ap-
pearance of referring specifically to domestic law. This is covered by
the Egyptian constitution. The President suggested that the reference to
internal law be deleted. El-Erian said that in that case, Egypt could live
with the language as drafted. El-Erian asked if the language “will pre-
vail” could also be removed. Egypt agrees on the concept, but would
like different words. The President said that he wanted to get this re-
solved now. He wants Barak to be able to say that these issues have
been resolved. The Israeli delegation should recommend the entire text
to the Cabinet. El-Erian said that this would be a major issue for them.
Hansell confirmed that the United States had used similar wording in
the NATO treaties, particularly that “there will be no conflict”. El-Erian
said that instead of “will prevail”, language such as “shall be honored”
might be used. The President urged him to try to work this out. We
would agree that the reference to internal law should be deleted. The
President also thought the words “shall be honored” could be used.
Boutros Ghali asked about the possibility of U.N. Security Council
endorsement, and the President said that this was already in the Camp
David agreements. He suggested that in the exchange of letters the
Egyptians might refer to this paragraph. Boutros Ghali said that would
be acceptable.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said the whole text of the Camp David agreement
should be appended in any case to the exchange of letters. It would be
better not to start selecting different parts of the agreement. The Presi-
dent said that he also suggested a letter on U.N. forces. There could be a
problem if the Soviets or the Chinese refused to approve the stationing
of U.N. forces in the demilitarized zones. The United States wants to in-
sure that the treaty would not fail on this account. The President would
be prepared to send the letter which he showed to the Egyptian delega-
tion. El-Erian said that the letter was acceptable.
The President said that there could be troops from many different
nations, provided they were mutually acceptable. If Begin accepts all of
these suggestions, we will have resolved all of the difficulties. We will
try to get the Israelis to drop any reference to Egyptian internal law. We
also talked to them about the missiles, and have said that only SA–7
missiles should be allowed across the canal. The other missiles could
move up the canal. This can be done as soon as the treaty is signed. This
is acceptable to Israel. Boutros Ghali said this would be all right.
Atherton said that three annexes remained to be completed. The
one7 dealing with diplomatic relations was most important. It needs to
be worked out in detail. Boutros Ghali said that he hoped to get answers
from Sadat. The question of the settlement is also unresolved. He did
not want to put the reference to one month for the exchange of ambas-
sadors in the treaty. He asked if this could be handled in a letter. Egypt
agrees and will do it. He will send a letter to Dayan if necessary.
The President said that he would try to work this out. If Sadat
agrees to do this within a month, perhaps he can refer to it in a letter
along with the letter that says negotiations will begin within one
month. The President said that he would try to get the Israelis to accept
the idea of referring to this in a letter rather than in the annex to the
treaty.
El-Erian said the Israelis are also asking for a guaranteed oil
supply. They want an advantageous position. They will already have a
de facto advantage because of their location. The President said that he
agreed with Egypt on this point. Atherton said the oil experts have not
yet begun meeting and the talks could be complicated. The President
said that he would not support the idea that Israel has any right to pref-
erential treatment on oil. Maybe they can negotiate a five-year supply
contract, but Israel cannot demand this of Egypt. This should not hold
up the signing of the treaty. Israel should not have to be given preferen-
tial treatment. Boutros Ghali said that he agreed this should not delay
the treaty. The President said that Israel already had some advantage
because of proximity, but they should not be given any other special
advantage. Boutros Ghali said that the Israelis can bid for the oil and this
would pose no problem.
In conclusion the President thanked the Egyptians for being very
forthcoming. He said he would support their position on oil and de-
leting the reference to internal law He said that the Israelis had also
tried to be forthcoming last night, and that he thought it was a good
step to have an agreed text of the letter on negotiations beginning on
the West Bank and Gaza in one month. This should help with the
Saudis.

99.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to President Carter

100.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the
Department of State
2892. From Saunders. Subj: Saunders Meeting With West Bank/
Gaza Palestinians, October 20.
Summary: Nine West Bank/Gaza Palestinians, including the
mayors of Bethlehem and Gaza, met with Saunders for four hours eve-
ning of October 20 to discuss possible Palestinian participation in peace
negotiations based on Camp David Accords (CDA). Consensus was
that Palestinians under occupation2 could not participate without sup-
cret; Immediate; Exdis Handle as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Amman,
Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, and Tel Aviv.

port from Arab world (Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Syria) and particu-
larly PLO. Several sought US guarantees on questions of Jerusalem,
sovereignty, self-determination and settlements. Saunders reiterated
US positions but said he could not guarantee that USG could bring Is-
rael to accept Arab or even US position on all these questions and cer-
tainly not now. He could guarantee the US would be a full partner in
negotiations and expressed his belief that Palestinians’ bargaining posi-
tion would improve with the maturing of a self-governing authority
(SGA). It was proposed that US issue statement recognizing that sover-
eignty lies with the people in West Bank and Gaza which could be used
by moderates to convene a national assembly to draft a constructive
counterproposal to CDA. Saunders did not reject idea, but urged that
any counterproposal take account of political realities. ConGen urged
that Palestinians rely upon themselves to act now or watch ever-
increasing Israeli consolidation on their land. End summary.
1. Saunders met nine Palestinians October 20 at Consulate General
in Jerusalem to discuss possible Palestinian participation in peace nego-
tiations based on CDA. Present were: Rashad Shawwa, Mayor of Gaza;
Mansur Shawwa, the Mayor’s son; Hatim Abu Ghazellah, a Gazan at-
torney; Elias Freij, Mayor of Bethlehem; Hikmat al-Masri of Nablus;
lawyer Aziz Shehadeh of Ramallah; Jerusalem UNRWA Director An-
tranig Bakerjian; Jerusalem business man Fa’iz Abdinnur and Mah-
moud Abu Zalaf, publisher of “Al Quds.” Also present along with
Consul General Newlin were DPO Kruse, PolOff Hull, PAO Smith, and
Embassy PolOff Blackwill, and NEA Officer Howell.
2. About an equal number of invitees from the West Bank declined
to come. Some of them specifically on grounds that the CDA “ignored
the (Palestinian) national movement and the PLO as its recognized
leadership.”
3. Consensus of those who did attend was that, aside from defi-
ciencies of CDA, Palestinians in West Bank/Gaza could not join negoti-
ations because they lacked support from Arab states (Jordan, Saudi
Arabia and Syria), and PLO.
4. “We in West Bank have no power to negotiate . . . my own expe-
rience from public meetings in the West Bank, sponsored by commu-
nists and blessed by Israelis, is that public opinion is dead. We can’t
reported on October 27 that Saunders’s comment prompted Begin to issue statements
calling for the expansion of Israeli settlements in Gaza and the West Bank and the transfer
of the Prime Minister’s Office and Ministry of Foreign Affairs to East Jerusalem. (Dial
Torgerson, “Begin Reasserts Right to Settle on West Bank,” Los Angeles Times, October 27,
p. B1)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
move an inch without the PLO, Jordan, Syria and Saudi Arabia,” Freij
said.
5. Mayor Shawwa noted that democratic principles insured rule of
majority, and most people in occupied territories supported the PLO.
“How could Israel force another representative on them?” he asked. He
mentioned that during recent meeting with Arafat he had proposed a
transition period followed by complete Israeli withdrawal and a link
with Jordan. Arafat had proposed this suggestion to executive com-
mittee and gained approval, Shawwa said.
6. Saunders said he was hearing same thing but in reverse from
Arab states. Saudis said they couldn’t move, but Jordan could. Jordan
said it couldn’t move, but West Bankers/Gazans could. Question was
who would take first step. As for PLO, a new situation had arisen. CDA
clearly recognized political character of Palestinian problem. In new
situation, should PLO decide it could accept 242, USG would talk with
it, but, he wondered, given Israeli attitudes whether that would much
advance peace.
7. Al-Masri concurred that PLO must be involved, but “with a new
formula; we could be the PLO.” The important thing, al-Masri con-
tinued, was to change the CDA to stipulate an end to settlements and
guarantee self-determination for Palestinians. With that, Palestinians
could go to PLO and Arab countries for support.
8. Saunders said he could guarantee continued US participation as
a full partner, but not the final outcome. USG would certainly consider
any reasonable counterproposal from a representative group of Pales-
tinians, but the CDA itself could not feasibly be changed. Any proposal
would have to take into consideration political realities. From his expe-
rience at Camp David, Israel had gone about as far as it could for the
moment. There was no way the Americans could simply dictate
sweeping alterations. Palestinians, he suggested, should consider tack-
ling their problems in a logical sequence, making progress where that
was possible, e.g. on powers of SGA, and use success at one stage to
open new possibilities at another. “I am amazed that you are telling me,
and I shall have to report to President Carter that you prefer continued
occupation to self-government,” Saunders said.
9. Abu Ghazallah protested that Saunders was thus asking an un-
fair question, but Bakerjian asked: “Do we all want to reject even this
modest step forward?”
10. Bakerjian asked whether USG could declare that sovereignty
lies with Palestinian people in West Bank/Gaza, but, for practical
reasons, there would have to be a transition period and an SGA. “In
situations like this where sovereignty is historically confused, the
USG holds that sovereignty resides with the people on the land
and that their will must be expressed through an agreed method of

self-determination,”
Saunders
replied.
He
explained
that
self-
determination does not mean automatically giving the Palestinians an
independent state. A review of acts of self-determination shows dif-
ferent methods have been used to suit the unique circumstances in each
case.
11. Shehadeh suggested that a national conference be convened on
the basis of such a public US declaration in order to formulate a con-
structive response to the CDA. Freij warned that such a conference
would only put a seal of rejection on it.
12. Saunders reiterated that the USG would listen to reasonable
proposal, but—he cautioned—it would have to be politically astute,
something which could move the Israelis.
13. The group asked Saunders what he thought would happen if
CDA were finally rejected by Palestinians. He said he believed Israelis
would implement some form of self-rule and Western world would
find it difficult to differentiate this from Camp David Accords and to
understand why this was not in the Palestinians’ interest.
14. The Consul General suggested that, as a result, the West Bank
and Gaza would be isolated and Israeli colonization would continue
apace. “The PLO can’t help; Syria, the Saudis and the King have their
own interest; you will have to help yourselves,” he urged.
15. Saunders comment: It becomes increasingly clear that advan-
tages of CDA are not understood and that it is politically safer to reject
CDA because it does not guarantee a clear-cut outcome. Palestinians
are sure from experience that they are too weak to negotiate success-
fully with Israelis. More fundamentally, one senses that serious dia-
logue is going on among them, but they need a little more time to sort
out their thoughts. Apart from the political difficulty of deciding who
can make decisions and represent them, the West Bankers also have
some tough technical problems to talk through on the powers of SGA
when they reach that stage. I will have recommendations on how we
might proceed when I return.
Newlin

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

101.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to President Carter
Washington, October 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Today’s Talks with the Egyptian Delegation
We met with the Egyptian Delegation this afternoon for four hours
to discuss Annex 3 which deals with normalization of relations.
Boutros Ghali had received reports from his Ambassadors in the Arab
world which caused him considerable concern over mounting Arab op-
position to the prospective Egyptian-Israeli Treaty. He was also embar-
rassed by reports out of Israel that the treaty is virtually in final form.
Boutros made one suggestion that he thought might help Egypt in
the Arab world. At the time of the signing of the treaty, Sadat would
write a letter to both you and Prime Minister Begin spelling out his
views on a comprehensive settlement and on the West Bank and Gaza
issues. The language of the letter would be taken from the Camp David
framework agreements. Boutros asked whether you could reply to
Sadat in a letter which would reaffirm our willingness to be a full
partner in future negotiations and to work for a comprehensive settle-

102.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
Tosec 120172/268679. Subject: Letter From President Carter to
Prime Minister Begin.
1. Please deliver2 following text of letter from President Carter to
Prime Minister Begin on Egyptian-Israeli peace negotiations:
2. Begin text.
Dear Mr. Prime Minister,
In the past few days, I have directed much of my time to the
Egyptian-Israeli peace negotiations. I am pleased to tell you that we
have made very good progress. Your delegation has shown a construc-
tive attitude throughout the talks and has succeeded in keeping the
Camp David spirit alive.
On Saturday, the two delegations were able to reach agreement
on the text4 of a draft treaty which they will recommend to their respec-
tive governments. In my judgment, it is a fair and balanced document
that protects the interests of both parties. After you have had the oppor-
tunity to study it carefully, I hope that your government will be able to
give it your full endorsement. I am making the same appeal5 to Presi-
dent Sadat.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
I have also suggested to your delegation that you and President
Sadat exchange letters agreeing to begin negotiations within one month
of signing the treaty to establish the self-governing authority. I consider
it particularly important that this letter be signed and announced on
the same day as the treaty is signed. As you will learn from your dele-
gation, I am also prepared to send you a letter that I will be prepared to
take the necessary steps to ensure that a UN or multinational force will
remain in Sinai on a permanent basis.
On three other issues of deep concern to you, I have made a per-
sonal appeal to President Sadat. I have asked him to accept an interim
withdrawal line which will leave Neot Sinai under Israeli control until
the final withdrawal is carried out. I have also urged him to accept a
limitation on his surface-to-air missiles whereby only SA–7s or their
equivalents would be allowed to accompany the mechanized division
in Sinai. Finally, I have strongly advised President Sadat to send an
Ambassador to Israel within one month of the completion of the in-
terim withdrawal. I have told him I would be prepared to record this
agreement in a letter which I would send to you, as Foreign Minister
Dayan suggested. President Sadat had not yet given me his answers,
but I am hopeful that he will adopt a positive attitude.
Important work remains to be done by the technical experts on
some of the issues dealt with in the annexes to the treaty, but it is my
belief that we are very close to having an acceptable treaty of peace be-
tween Egypt and Israel. This is an historic moment and you can take
well-deserved pride in having brought your people a long step toward
the goal they cherish—to live in peace with all their neighbors.
Mr. Prime Minister, it would be a great honor for me to join you to
witness the signing of the peace treaty.
You have my best personal wishes,
Sincerely, Jimmy Carter.
End text.
Christopher

103.
Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Inderfurth) to the
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)
Washington, October 24, 1978
SUBJECT
[text not declassified]
We received the attached CIA proposal2 on Monday. It was
staffed to Henze who has distributed it to SCC principals. Stan Turner
may want to discuss this on Wednesday, hence I am providing it to
you for your information.
[7½ lines not declassified]

104.
Memorandum of Conversation
Washington, October 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Israeli Position on Oil Negotiations
PARTICIPANTS
David Korn, Director, NEA/IAI
David E. Zweifel, NEA/EGY
John Craig, NEA/RA
Hanon Bar-On, Israeli Minister
Joseph Vardi, Director General, Ministry of Energy and Infrastructure
Elisha Ruih, V.P., Operations, Israeli National Oil Co., Ltd.
Ely Rubenstein, Secretary to Foreign Minister Dayan
Naftali Lavie, Press Spokesman, Israeli Foreign Ministry
Eitan Raff, Economic Counselor, Israeli Embassy
We called on members of the Israeli delegation at the Madison
Hotel to learn about the Israeli position on the oil issue and what may
have transpired during the course of October 23 Israeli-Egyptian dis-
cussions2 on this item.
Bar-On recapitulated the Egyptian position as having been as fol-
lows. There should be early Israeli withdrawal from the area, a transfer
of operating fields in good order, and cessation of exploration activity
upon signature of the agreement. Any subsequent cooperation with the
GOE (e.g. concessions in free areas) would be on the basis of interna-
tional bidding practices.
The same would apply to Israeli purchase of Egyptian petroleum
at competitive prices. The Egyptians did recognize that, by reason of
proximity, Israel would have a competitive advantage as a logical
market for Egyptian crude.
He then summed up the GOI position as follows. There is no ques-
tion about Egyptian sovereignty in the area. The Israelis are prepared
to lay aside previous legal argumentation during the current negotia-
tions. During the Egyptian-Israeli meeting on October 23, claims were
not discussed. Basic premises underlying the Israeli position are that
any economic cooperation is positive and “peace building” should be
encouraged. Under GOI auspices, considerable pioneering work has
taken place during the occupation. A shutting down of the fields would
imply an economic loss to the GOE. On the question of transfer of the
fields, there would be no problem if the present operator (Neptune)
continues. Under these circumstances it would be a simple matter to ar-
range for a redirection of revenue flow and that portion of production
accruing to the sovereign. Hence, the GOI believes it would be most ad-
vantageous to come to an agreement whereby Neptune3 would con-
tinue to operate the fields but would do so henceforth under Egyptian
aegis. The GOI also would like to arrange for the continuation of Israeli
commercial operators (sub-contractors) to work with any Egyptian
concessionaire.
Vardi elaborated on Bar-On’s presentation. He noted that petro-
leum exploration and exploitation is perhaps unique as an area
wherein international involvement is a norm. The proposed Israeli ar-
rangement would result not in a petroleum deal between the two gov-
ernments, but between the GOE and a commercial group. In this re-
gard, Vardi said Israel hopes that Egypt would agree to grant a
concession to Neptune and the Israeli National Oil Company (INOC).
Neptune and INOC would join together for this purpose, Vardi said.
Vardi acknowledged Egyptian sensitivity on sovereignty aspects,
noting that, apparently, any restriction on concession granting au-
thority (e.g. through a negotiated agreement specifying a role for Nep-
tune and/or INOC) would be interpreted by the GOE to be an infringe-
ment on that sovereignty. While the Israeli team recognizes the GOE
argument re responsibilities to AMOCO as a “very valid argument,”
they believe that the 1974 AMOCO concession4 was primarily a polit-
ical instrument. AMOCO “did not come with clean hands” into the
present negotiating matrix, since the company accepted with “eyes
open” a concession wherein access was not possible.
Vardi went on to state that the GOI has moral commitment to Nep-
tune. He opined that Neptune was entitled to USG help. He alluded to
extensive geological data developed for broader areas in the Sinai
which could be made available to the GOE in the context of an agree-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ment. He reported that the GOI is “very eager” to buy Egyptian petro-
leum at current market prices; this would serve GOE interests as much
as it does those of the GOI.
According to Vardi, the October 23 discussions touched on the Is-
raeli suggestion that at some future time a gas pipeline might be laid
from the Egyptian Delta and Northern Sinai into Israel. This was not
discussed at length.
Again on the issue of Israeli future purchases, Vardi stated GOI
willingness to accept the concept of international bidding (apart from
production from the Alma field where the principle of payment-in-
kind would apply). The latter would involve renegotiation of the
sharing arrangements between the Israeli proposed Neptune-INOC
consortium (as operators) and the GOE.
Mr. Korn asked how much oil the Israelis wanted to purchase from
Egypt. After some consultation amongst themselves, Vardi spoke for
the Israeli team, stating that they would hope for approximately 22,000
bpd during the second half of 1979; this amount might be doubled in
1980. He also volunteered that the GOI is prepared to help Egypt
market additional oil, including possible re-exportation.
When we sought clarification of Israeli thinking on the date of
transfer, Bar-On, seconded by Vardi, stated that the present negotiating
mandate for the team is to press for the transfer of the present operating
arrangement to Egyptian suzerainty. If this transpires, the transfer
could take place quickly. Contrarily, the Israelis hinted that Egyptian
refusal to accept this formula might cause extended negotiations
which, perforce, would delay the transfer.
At the conclusion of the discussion, Vardi and Bar-On argued that
AMOCO is a key actor in the considerations, and that that company, by
seeking to hold the GOE to legal obligations, might impede progress.
The thrust of this remark was that the USG should intervene to move
AMOCO towards a compromise along the lines proposed by the GOI
(Bar-On made this point to Korn again more specifically as the meeting
broke up). We pointed out that we do not feel in a position to tell either
of the two American companies what to do. Korn said Neptune’s
Counsel, Bill Rogers5 of Arnold & Porter, had called at the Department
earlier in the day and that we had suggested that he speak to the legal
counsel for AMOCO. Finally, we noted that USG responsibility to pri-
vate commercial firms is essentially to help protect such firms against
uncompensated expropriation action.

105.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Brzezinski)
Washington, October 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Recommendations for United States Assistance to Egypt
During the visit to Washington in mid-September [less than 1 line
not declassified] I asked him how he thought the United States Govern-
ment could be helpful to Egypt. He has made the following two sugges-
tions for the support of the military sector, which would have the
highly beneficial effect of ensuring the continued support of the Egyp-
tian military during the peace process:
A. The United States could aid in the retraining of Egyptian en-
listed personnel who will be released from the military in the up-
coming reduction of forces. U.S. assistance in providing training in the
skills that would enable military enlisted men to phase into civilian life
would be very beneficial.
B. A commodity support program would be helpful to the Egyp-
tian military who complain that their low salaries make it difficult for
them to buy supplies in their PX systems. The U.S. Defense Attache in
Cairo has arranged for a U.S. Air Force Exchange specialist to examine
the Egyptian PX system. As further assistance, a commodity support
program would place basic consumer goods produced outside Egypt
into the PX system. An initial input could start a self-generating system
that might eventually support itself financially.
Stansfield Turner
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

106.
Memorandum of Conversation
Jidda, undated
Participants
Crown Prince Fahd bin Abd al-Aziz Al-Saud
John C. West, American Ambassador
SUMMARY
Crown Prince Fahd, in a two hour late night session at his Jidda
home on October 24, outlined in detail the actions which he and SAG
are taking to provide all-out support for President Carter’s efforts to
implement the Camp David accords. Actions taken or underway in-
clude: (1) A message of “strong” support to Sadat including assurances
of continued economic and political support. Specific assurances in-
clude commitment to $108 million in aid for purchase of military ve-
hicles and a “set aside” of $350 million as down payment on purchase
of F–5s. On political side, Fahd has guaranteed that Egypt will not be
embarrassed at Baghdad Summit; (2) A message to King Hussein
urging him to support the Camp David accords by at least encouraging
Palestinians on the West Bank to join the process; (3) In communication
with Iraq, making plain that the Saudis will not tolerate any action at
Baghdad designed to embarrass or isolate Egypt; (4) To insure that
Baghdad Summit does not embarrass Egypt, a “time bomb” under-
standing with YAR to raise the abortive October 15 coup3 as issue with
consequent embarrassment to Libya and Iraq; (5) Visit by FonMin Saud
to each of Gulf states to make Saudi position clear and secure support
therefore.
Further, the Crown Prince said he was summoning Yasser Arafat
to Saudi Arabia and proposed to tell him in clear, unmistakable terms:
(1) that Saudi Arabia is supporting the Camp David accords and
strongly recommends that the PLO do likewise; (2) that if the PLO is
truly the leader of the Palestinians, its leadership can be affirmed and
strengthened by the political processes of the accords; (3) that SAG
thinks that the Camp David accords offer an unusual opportunity for
the Palestinians, one that they cannot afford to reject and SAG does not
want to share in the responsibility of a rejection as they see no feasible
alternative for the Palestinians in the future; (4) that SAG recognized
that Arafat may have political problems in an immediate, public ac-
ceptance and endorsement of the accords; therefore Fahd will under-
stand if he “froths” publicly for a while. However he (Fahd) will insist
that Arafat encourage quietly rank and file Palestinians including West
Bank PLO to join the political process immediately.
The meeting ended with Fahd reviewing the Russian threat and
making a plea for USG to take a firm stand to counter Soviet aggression
in the Gulf. END SUMMARY.
Isa Sabbagh and I met with Crown Prince Fahd at his home in
and lasted until nearly midnight. Only the three of us were present.
I opened the meeting by giving to Fahd three multi-colored maps
of the area which indicated the progress Russia was making in ex-
tending its influence in the area. He and Isa had discussed some weeks
ago the possibility of such maps to show visually the rapid extension of
Soviet influence in the area. Our USMTM group, headed by General
Cathey, working with our Embassy, had produced three maps which
the Crown Prince seemed to appreciate.
I next told Fahd that I had asked for the meeting even if it had to be
late at night as I was leaving for Washington early the next morning;
that I was terribly worried and concerned about the success of the Mid-
east peace process; that for the process to move forward, President
Carter desperately needed additional Arab support, especially from
Saudi Arabia. I told him that I recalled vividly the meeting I had with
him last April4 just before I returned to the United States for the final
round of the F–15 “battle”. At that time he had sent President Carter a
message of friendship, faith and encouragement, epitomized by the
words of his five year old son Abd al Aziz who said “Daddy Carter, we
love you.”
I said that I knew on this critical occasion President Carter would
truly appreciate any words of encouragement or support which Fahd
could send.
The Crown Prince interrupted at that point. “If you don’t mind,”
he said, “I’d like to tell you about some of my feelings and some of the
things I’ve been doing since I saw you last.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“First of all”, he said, “I firmly believe that President Carter was
sent by God to help us secure a just and lasting peace in the Mideast. I
have the utmost faith in his integrity and high motives. We cannot fail
to support him in this time of need. And I want you to take to him per-
sonally what I am about to say to you.” “I was terribly pained,” he said,
“Yes, actually in physical distress when I could not offer more support
at our last meeting (October 18) with the President’s representative, Mr.
Saunders. However, I could not tell him that I would do that which at
that time I was not certain that I could do. So I had to be frank and
honest although I’m sure he felt that I was negative and not giving the
support which he would have liked.”
“After that meeting”, he added, “I went into a period of deep
thought and concentration on what I and Saudi Arabia could do to give
the support to the President which he wanted, needed and deserved.
As a result of that period of concentrated thought and study I would
like to tell you what I have done, what I am doing, and what I am going
to do” he added with a smile.
“First of all” he said, “I sent a message to President Sadat that I
would like him to send here a trusted emissary. He immediately sent
his special advisor, Sayid Marii. I gave to Marii the strongest possible
message of support for Sadat and Egypt. The message should make
President Sadat feel strong, independent and good. I assured him that
Sadat could count on continued support, both economic and political
from Saudi Arabia. I told him that we would not allow any action to be
taken against him as a result of the Camp David meeting.” Marii said
that this strong message of Saudi support would definitely make Sadat
heave a big sigh of relief and resume breathing comfortably.
“Sayid told me that Egypt now needed badly some funds to pay
for some military equipment. He said $108 million was needed now to
pay for some military vehicles. I told him that this was no problem, and
he could get it anytime.”
“We then discussed the payment for the F–5s. I told him that we
had a cash problem; that our oil production was down from last year;
that the decline in the value of the dollar had substantially affected our
purchasing power. However, I told him that I was setting aside $350
million now to be applied on the F–5 purchase; that I would work with
them on the balance and it would be taken care of somehow. Perhaps
the U.S. would help.”
“I asked Marii to urge Sadat not to heed what he might hear or
read about Saudi frigidity towards him, or that Saudi Arabia does not

want to continue to support him. Sadat, I said, as well as the USG,
should by now realize that the attitudes we took and the statements we
made at both times (the Jerusalem visit and the Camp David announce-
ments) have proved to be very beneficial to him and Carter, both of
whom we decided to support in our own style based on refurbishing
our credibility with our effective brethren in the area. Our attitude at
the Baghdad Conference will be one further proof of our honest inten-
tions towards both Presidents, if one were needed! I then told Sayid
that Sadat must come to the Arab Summit, and I would see to it that no
action would be taken which would embarrass or hurt Egypt.”
“Let me tell you about the Baghdad Summit,” the Crown Prince
said. “Some weeks ago Saddam Hussein contacted me and discussed
the possibility of an Arab Summit meeting in Baghdad. I promised to
think about it. Down deep I thought it was good to have it especially in
Baghdad. We have been trying for some time to break the Iraqis away
from the Russian influence there and I have seen recently some positive
signs. I felt that if they arranged for the Summit to be held in Baghdad
they would feel, as the hosts, a special responsibility for its success.
Therefore, after a decent lapse of time, I agreed that there should be a
meeting of the Foreign Ministers on October 30–31, followed by the
Summit on November 1 and 2 if everything went well.”
“When I began to get indications that the Summit was going to be
used as a platform for the Rejectionists to condemn Egypt and isolate
them from the rest of the Arab world, I became concerned and deter-
mined that this could not be allowed to happen. I took the occasion of
the visit here of Foreign Minister Sadoum Hammadi to make plain
Saudi Arabia’s position. We have invited the Foreign Minister to
visit us in order to “discuss the arrangements” for the Baghdad
Conference.”
“I told him in blunt terms,” Fahd said, “that SAG would not tol-
erate or support any action to boycott or to isolate Egypt from the rest
of the Arab world. Saudi Arabia will oppose any condemnation of
Egypt because of its participation in the Camp David talks.”
Hammadi said, “Well there won’t be any, because without Saudi
support no action can be taken.”
“I replied that I didn’t know about that” and he answered, “Oh no,
don’t kid me: Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, Jordan, Oman, Abu Dhabi, YAR,
Sudan, Tunisia and Morocco will all follow you.”
“Later,” the Crown Prince said, “I talked by telephone to Saddam
Hussein and made plain to him our position. He agreed that the
Summit would deal only with lofty purposes (e.g., UN resolutions, Pal-
estinian rights, etc.) and not be an instrument of condemnation for
Egypt or a platform for the mouthings of the radicals of the Rejectionist
movement.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“But,” added the Crown Prince with a somewhat mischievous
grin, “Let me tell you what I have done to guarantee that the Summit
will not get out of hand and be used by the Iraqis and the Libyans to
condemn Egypt and the moderate Arabs.”
“Just after the attempted coup in North Yemen on October 19”,
Fahd said, “President Salih of North Yemen called and said he wanted
to break off relations with Iraq and Libya because they were behind the
attempted coup.”
“Salih told me that sometime ago one of the YAR ministers met
Qadhafi at a Libyan national celebration and that he (Qadhafi) said he
had been fearing disturbing things about a possible uprising or revolt
in YAR. He seemed to intend it as a friendly warning.”
“I told Salih”, Fahd said, “that Qadhafi reminded me of the old
Arab proverb of the man who commits the murder and then becomes a
pall-bearer at the victim’s funeral!”
“Salih sent FonMin Abdullah Asnaj to see me,” Fahd said, “and I
advised him not to break off relations with these two countries, but to
let them stew in their own juice for a while. I suggested, however, that
YAR come to the Baghdad Summit prepared to raise that issue if the
Rejectionists say anything nasty about Egypt.”
“Both Asnaj and Salih have agreed to this,” Fahd concluded, “and
what do you think of this as a political maneuver?” he asked.
“A masterpiece, literally a stroke of genius” I replied.
“I also have had a visit, at my request, from Abdul Hamid Sharaf,
Chief of the Royal Diwan of Jordan,” Fahd said. “I explained to him our
policy and told him to tell King Hussein that he should encourage the
West Bankers and Palestinians to join the peace process. Hussein
would thus exhibit his renowned courage and we would support him.
He should urge the “inside” (West Bank and Gaza) Palestinians to
agree to the Camp David agreements even if he (Hussein) could not yet
openly do the same. I asked Sharaf to impress on his King that I think
President Carter wants to see nothing but good happen to his Arab
friends. Now is the time to support this unique friend, Carter, I
concluded.”
“I sent Prince Saud to the Gulf countries (Tonight he is in Oman) in
order to explain our policy and urge them to take the right stand at the
Baghdad Summit.”
Fahd next turned to the question of the PLO. “I am inviting Arafat
to come to Saudi Arabia,” he said, “and I am going to talk plainly and

frankly to him. I am going to remind him that we have been and still are
his strong friends and supporters.”
“However, the time has now come,” Fahd said, “and I will tell Ar-
afat so—for the Palestinians to take advantage of the opportunity
which is now given them. If they don’t take what’s been offered them
now, I don’t see any alternative that provides any real hope at any time
in the future, and I will tell Arafat just that”, he added.
“I do not want to be a party to the Palestinians passing up this op-
portunity as they have others in the past,” Fahd said. “I will tell Arafat
that if the PLO truly represents the Palestinian people, they will
strengthen and solidify that leadership through the political process
that the Camp David accords provide and that he should encourage all
to go in and take part.”
“On the other hand,” the Crown Prince said, “I can understand if
Arafat finds it difficult or impossible to endorse openly the Camp
David results. It may take him some time, and I will tell him that we
will understand if he has to make public speeches, even if he has to
froth at the mouth in them. However, I want him to pass the word to
his followers, especially in the West Bank and Gaza, to join in the nego-
tiations and the peace process.”
“I will tell him to be reasonable,” Fahd said. “I will also add that I
know that a reasonable approach will ultimately appeal to President
Assad, and that’s important,” Fahd emphasized. The Crown Prince
added, “I will further tell Arafat that if the Palestinian self-rule entity
takes up its task seriously, then, in my opinion, within the first three
years the world, including the US, would be so favorably impressed
that everybody would turn to Israel and say ‘These are responsible
people, the Palestinians; what do you need to keep your armed forces
on their territory for?’ Obviously guarantees should be enough to con-
vince you of your security. In fact, by the end of the three years Israel
herself may come to this conclusion and start dealing with the Pales-
tinians in this new light.”
Fahd assured me he intends to be frank, indeed almost cruelly so,
with Arafat and would urge him not to heed the opinions of such ex-
tremists as Abu Iyad11 and the others who are trading on this “Pales-
tinian commodity”. The Crown Prince further promised to impress Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
afat with Saudi Arabia’s and the Crown Prince’s personal deep trust in
President Carter and his administration. “I will tell him,” said Fahd,
“that we did not rush to applaud or support Sadat’s Jerusalem visit or
the Camp David agreements. But after careful study of the latter we’ve
come to the conclusion that supporting Sadat’s and Carter’s efforts
would produce such worthwhile results as no other Arab, or group of
Arabs, could begin to bring about.”
At this point Fahd, almost plaintively, urged me to reassure
Saunders of his best wishes and appreciation. “I hope,” said the Crown
Prince, “that what I’ve managed to do, and will continue to do, will
make up for the stiff encounter last time with you and Saunders!”
Fahd then discussed the situation in South Yemen (PDRY). He re-
lated that the PDRY President was constantly sending him messages
seeking to patch up their relationship. He said he did not trust PDRY,
but wanted at least to keep the lines of communication open and to con-
tinue to coordinate with the USG and the YAR.
He then concluded with an emotional appeal to President Carter.
“Please tell the President,” he said, “that Saudi Arabia is the real,
true friend of the U.S. We have always been your friend, even in the
days of Nasser. It was then that the voice of Saudi Arabia, and Saudi
Arabia alone was raised in defense of the U.S. in the Arab world.”
“I hope we have shown you in times passed as well as now how
deep and meaningful that friendship is. It is not only a recognition of
our mutual self-interest but also the mutual admiration and respect
which has developed between our people as well as the leaders over
the years. It has now reached its brightest point under the magnificent
leadership of President Carter.”
“I now ask you to plead with him for the sake of both our countries
and our people to stop the Soviets from their expansion here. Draw the
line and don’t let them go any further.” The Crown Prince said with ob-
vious emphasis “Please tell the President that in us he has the most con-
stant friend in the region. In me he has a person who is proud of this
friendship. We therefore urge him not to lose sight of this friendship
but, instead, to examine it and see whether or not it deserves America’s
concern for our safety and security and her consequent determination
to strengthen Saudi Arabia. Thus we can be more readily and ade-
quately cooperative in driving away the Communist dangers encircling
your interests and ours: so obvious even by only looking at your very
clear maps!” concluded Crown Prince Fahd.
“I will certainly give that message to the President,” I replied, “and
while I cannot speak officially on this specific point for my government,
I feel that your support of the Camp David accords will be of major
assistance to our government in the formulation and implementation of
the kind of Mideast policy which would meet with your satisfaction. If

the Arab-Israeli controversy can be settled, then our government will
have more freedom and more flexibility to counter any threat by the So-
viet Union in this area.”
With tongue in cheek, Fahd brought up another topic which fur-
ther illustrated his untiring efforts in the right direction, this time in
Lebanon.
“We’ve been bending every effort,” he said, “to keep the lid down
in Lebanon. We’ve talked to all the leaders: Phalengists, Chamounists,
Muslims, Palestinians, Syrians, everybody! President Numeiri of the
Sudan wanted to withdraw his forces from the Arab Deterrent Forces
in Lebanon. When I heard this, I immediately ordered that 2–3 Saudi
battalions be made ready to go to Lebanon to replace the Sudanese. At
the same time I sent Abd al-Aziz Thunayyan (Deputy Foreign Minister)
to Khartoum to convince Numeiri to keep his forces in Lebanon. The
Sudanese President agreed. Now, when the Saudi forces replaced the
Syrians in certain areas of Beirut they were received with flowers. This
is our way of doing things,” asserted Fahd. “We decide where we want
to go and we go toward the goal, whenever possible without fanfare, or
rough stuff with anyone unless absolutely inescapable,” he concluded.
I next told Fahd that I was sure that the President would like to
know what his thoughts were about accepting the invitation to visit the
U.S. which had been extended at the time of Secretary Vance’s visit. I
added that in view of our conversation this evening it would probably
be even more important for him and the President to meet as soon as
possible.
Fahd replied that he would like to come to the U.S. as soon as pos-
sible after the King’s return to Saudi Arabia. He said in view of all of the
international developments, he thought it essential for him and the
President to meet periodically.
He then mentioned that he would like to suggest that the King not
be burdened with any substantive discussions during the luncheon on
Friday. I assured him that it was to be a social occasion and that we
would not impose on His Majesty to discuss any subject which might
cause a strain on his physical condition, and that I know the President
would be especially sensitive and solicitous in this regard.
Fahd replied that he was sure that such subjects as our “special re-
lationship” and the merits of hunting with falcons vs. quail shooting as
with King Khalid and Crown Prince Fahd. See Document 65.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
well as horses, agriculture, etc. would be enjoyable topics for the King
and the President.
I thanked the Crown Prince as profusely as I could and assured
him that I knew the President would be most happy and reassured at
my report of the evening’s meeting.
Fahd then requested again that we keep the matters discussed
completely confidential, as much of the Saudi strategy depended for its
success on there being no leaks.
Isa and I took our leave shortly before midnight.
Ambassador’s Comment
Had we attempted to write Fahd’s script for the meeting, I doubt
that we could have improved upon it. He gave back to us as the SAG
position the rationale and argument which all of us including Secretary
Vance and Assistant Secretary Saunders have been advancing for the
last month with only limited apparent success.
His actions including the messages to Sadat and Hussein are basic-
ally what we have wanted and asked him to do. His solution to the
problem posed by the Baghdad Summit is in my opinion (and his as
well!) a near genius political stroke. If he is as firm with Arafat as he in-
dicates, it should at least defuse the opposition of the PLO. (Fahd recog-
nizes and does not hesitate to use the leverage which money provides,
and he knows as well as we do that Arafat’s sustaining power comes
from the Saudis annual contribution of $40–50 million to him.)
In reviewing and trying to assess in realistic terms the meaning
and future results which should be forthcoming following this meet-
ing with Fahd, I would like to offer the following precautionary
observations:
Fahd was in a good, relaxed, even exuberant mood; he had no staff
or aides with him. From past experience, we know that he is far less re-
strained under those circumstances especially when talking only to Isa
or me, or the two of us. His enthusiasm for his subject noticeably
warmed as the evening progressed. As evidence of this, he asked at the
outset how much time we needed and I told him 30 to 45 minutes. He
said that would be fine as he did have some other visitors coming. The
meeting actually consumed over two hours and I had to take the initia-
tive to break it up.
Therefore, it is possible that he stated the Saudi support in stronger
terms than he might have done in a different setting. The ultimate test
now is how Sadat and Hussein are reacting to the message Fahd sent
them and if they interpret it as Fahd explained it to us. Of equal interest
and importance will be to observe the effect of Fahd’s moves on Arafat
and the Baghdad Summit.

107.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, October 25, 1978
SUBJECT
Letter from Foreign Minister Dayan
In his letter at Tab A, Dayan asks how we propose to discuss with
Israel the question of our “assurances as to the full implementation of
the Treaty of Peace between Egypt and Israel.”
I propose, and State concurs, that Secretary Vance should meet
with Dayan after his return on Friday3 to find out what he has in mind.
Insofar as Dayan wants us to commit the moral authority of the United
States to the good faith implementation by the parties of the peace
treaty, we can state this in a number of ways, including your signing
the treaty as a witness. It is hard to see how we can go further and guar-
antee the performance of Egypt or Israel.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Dayan may also have in mind getting commitments from us on aid
and codifying other bilateral assurances in a “memorandum of under-
standing.” In the first instance, I believe Secretary Vance should talk to
Dayan about these issues. We also have a military team going to Israel
on November 1 to survey the airbase problem. At some point, we may
want Secretary Brown to talk to Weizman, but the Israelis do not yet
have a very precise notion of what their military requirements will be
in conjunction with the relocation of their forces.
Before we commit ourselves, we should keep several points in
mind:
—The signing of the treaty should not4 become contingent upon
any specific new commitment on our part to increase aid levels.
—We should avoid tying ourselves to any specific project or item
of equipment at this point. It might make more sense to think of a
“peace package” for both Egypt and Israel which would commit us to a
certain level of aid during the period of implementation of the treaty,
but which would put the burden primarily on Egypt and Israel to de-
termine their own priorities in how they use the aid.
—In general, the simpler our commitment, the better. Eventually,
we want to think of cutting back on aid to the Middle East, not in-
creasing it indefinitely.

108.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Israel, Egypt, and Jordan, and the Consulate General in
Jerusalem
272326. Cherokee for Ambassador From Saunders. Subject: Mes-
sage for Begin From the President: Decision to Thicken Israeli Settle-
ments. Ref: Tel Aviv 15588.
1. Please deliver3 to Prime Minister Begin as soon as possible the
following message to him from the President.
2. Begin text. Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
I was encouraged by your message regarding the action4 which
your Cabinet has taken on the draft treaty between Egypt and Israel,
but I am deeply concerned by the reported decision that you plan in the
coming weeks to “thicken” Israeli settlements in the West Bank. At a
time when we are trying to organize the negotiations dealing with the

109.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
23648. Subject: Sadat Letter for President Carter. Ref: (A) Cairo
1. Met with PriMin Moustafa Khalil for two and a half hours this
evening. On instructions, he was busy preparing a letter from President
Sadat to President Carter. Khalil said the purpose of the letter is to em-
phasize to President Carter the importance of resolving satisfactorily
the three “major” points that Sadat needs in order to sign the treaty (ref
B) and to convey Sadat’s deep concern about Israeli statements on set-
tlement expansion and East Jerusalem. The letter had first to be typed
and then cleared with Sadat before it could be given to me.
2. Text of letter follows:
Quote:
Dear Mr. President:
I would like to thank you for your great personal efforts for the
progress which has thus far been achieved in the Egyptian-Israeli peace
negotiations. I appreciate very much what has been done concerning
solving many problems to make the signature of the peace treaty very
much anticipated in the near future.
There are essentially three main points that must be met before the
treaty is signed by Egypt, namely:
1—the duration of the treaty.
The nature of peace and peaceful relations may be of a lasting na-
ture. But the specific obligations contained in the treaty of the Egyptian
land should be limited in time.
Therefore, making the duration of the treaty 25 years pertains es-
sentially to the obligations contained in the treaty.
2—Egyptian sovereignty over the Sinai.
The treaty must emphasize the full sovereignty of Egypt over the
Sinai. The exercise of this sovereignty will be linked to the withdrawal
of Israeli forces in the two stages.
3—No preferential treatment should be accorded to Israel. There-
fore no priority of obligations should be stipulated in the treaty.
I would also like to bring to your attention my deep concern about
the statement made today by Minister Dayan about strengthening the
settlements on the West Bank, and equally so the statement made by
Prime Minister Begin about moving the Prime Minister’s office and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs to East Jerusalem. These statements are not
272016 to Cairo, October 26, Vance acknowledged that Carter received Sadat’s oral mes-
sage. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State
port before the former’s departure for Washington, that Begin was “seriously consid-
ering” moving the two Ministries to East Jerusalem. (Telegram 15650 from Tel Aviv, Oc-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
consistent with the spirit of Camp David and I know that you share my
concern.
I hope that the Government of Israel can be persuaded to desist
from such actions which only complicate the peace negotiations in
which we are all engaged in, and which we all want to succeed.
I would like to assure you that your own efforts in securing a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East are recognized by the whole world
and I look forward to welcoming you to attend the signing of the peace
treaty in the very near future.
Jehan joins me in extending our very best wishes to both Rossalyn
and yourself.
With warmest personal regards.
Yours sincerely
Mohamed Anwar el-Sadat
Unquote.
3. With respect to the point on the duration of the obligations,
Sadat asked that I convey orally rpt orally his suggestion that language
to the effect that the specific treaty obligations on Egyptian land be for
25 years could be included in a paragraph at the end of the document.
Khalil noted that there is at present no language on duration included
in the draft treaty.
4. Khalil indicated that Sadat wanted me to get the letter out right
away.
Eilts

110.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter
Washington, October 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Israeli Settlements Announcement
I would like to report a conversation which I had with Minister
Hanon Bar-on, who is second in the Israeli embassy to Ambassador
Dinitz. Mr. Bar-on had called me to discuss some economic issues.
During the course of our conversation I expressed concern about the Is-
raeli announcement on strengthening existing settlements. I indicated
to him that it was very poorly timed and not conducive to the peace
process. His reply is instructive and I thought you should have his
view. He stated that while the visit of Assistant Secretary Harold
Saunders to the Middle East was not widely reported in the United
States, that it caused an absolute furor in Israel. He indicated that Mr.
Saunders’ provocative statements2 stretch beyond any reasonable
meaning of the Camp David accords and that together with the United
States’ answers to King Hussein’s questions provoked an uproar in Is-
rael. He indicated that just as we felt the timing of the settlements was
ill-timed, so, too, did they feel that Saunders’ visit and statements and
the United States’ answers were ill-timed. He stated that all of this had
made the situation extremely difficult for Prime Minister Begin. The
Cabinet debate which resulted was very heated and Begin, Dayan and
Weizman did as much as possible to keep the situation together. He
said that the Cabinet statement was undoubtedly in response to the
above factors and would probably not have occurred otherwise.
Carter wrote: “Stu—Begin’s statements are endangering the peace treaty. He’s blaming
his displeasure on Saunders, who simply delivered our answers to Hussein’s questions.
J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

111.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting
Subject
Covert Action—Egyptian Proposal
Participants
State
NSC
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Paul B. Henze (Notetaker)
Defense
JCS
Secretary Harold Brown
General David C. Jones
White House
CIA
Zbigniew Brzezinski (Chairman)
Admiral Stansfield Turner, DCI
[name not declassified]

112.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter
Washington, October 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Preliminary Cost Estimates for Replicating Israeli Military Installations in the
Sinai
Set out below are our preliminary estimates for replicating Israel’s
military installations in the Sinai. Considerably higher costs have been
mentioned both within DOD and by the Israelis, but these have, I be-
lieve, been based on assumptions going beyond replication; we have
been careful to make clear both in the Pentagon and to the Israelis that
no commitment has been made except with respect to the airbases and
then only on a replication basis at most.
($ million)
Etam and Etzion airbases
$1,220
Ground force installations
Naval facility at Sharm-el-Sheikh
$1,435

113.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, October 27, 1978
SUBJECT
Israeli “Thickening” of Settlements
After seeing the President’s letter2 to Begin last night, Dayan in-
formed Roy Atherton that there is no chance of getting Begin to reverse
his decision. In brief, we will either have to back down or we are on a
collision course.

114.
Editorial Note
On October 27, 1978, President Jimmy Carter received King Khalid
bin Abdul Aziz Al-Saud, the King of Saudi Arabia, at the White House
for a luncheon meeting. According to the President’s Daily Diary,
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials) After an exchange of courtesies,
Carter discussed the Palestinian situation and the United States’ “need

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
to talk” with the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO). Carter “ex-
plained that we had given our word of honor not to do so unless the
PLO recognized Security Council Resolution 242. In the meantime, we
would like the help of Saudi Arabia and Jordan to be go-betweens.”
Khalid responded that “he and his government would be happy to be
helpful.” He added, “The trouble with the Palestinians is that they are
being pulled in every direction not only by the Communists, but also
by some Arab countries!” “King Hussein,” Khalid continued, “could
have his negotiating delegation made up of Palestinians. Egypt could
have Palestinians in its delegation. This together with the West Bank
and Gaza Palestinian delegation, could be a very good combination.”
In response, Carter commented that this “is why we would be happy to
have the influence of wise counsel such as that offered by Saudi Arabia
prevail.” (Memorandum of Conversation between President Carter
and King Khalid, October 27; Department of State, Bureau of Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs, NEA Front Office Subject File 1978–
Following a luncheon hosted by Carter for Khalid and other Saudi
Saudi party returned to Andrews Air Force Base in a helicopter with
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials,
President’s Daily Diary) During the trip, the Saudi Minister of Defense
and Aviation, Prince Sultan bin Abdul Aziz Al-Saud, commented to
Vance that the Saudis were “impressed with the quick U.S. response”
to Begin’s statement about Israeli settlements on the West Bank. Sultan
added that “this is the way to do it—strike while the iron is hot!” Vance
agreed with Sultan, stating that the U.S. response had to be “quick and
clear.” Following this exchange, Khalid repaired Vance’s eyeglasses,
which had broken, and commented, “Pressure, pressure. Sometimes
you can repair things with pressure.” (Memorandum of Conversation
in Helicopter Returning King Khalid to Andrews Air Force Base, Oc-
tober 27; Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian

115.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt
274418. Subject: Israeli Settlements Question and Next Steps in
Washington Negotiation.
Egyptian delegation advised us that Sadat and Khalil will meet at noon
October 28 to decide whether to recall three senior members of Egyp-
tian delegation for consultations in light of Israeli decision on settle-
ments. Simultaneously, we learned that CBS was running story to ef-
fect that delegation was being recalled, apparently based on Reuters
item attributed to Prime Minister Khalil, with authorization of Egyp-
tian delegation, we informed media that Egyptian delegation had au-
thorized us to say that question of whether they should return for con-
sultations would be decided in Cairo Saturday4 but as of now no repeat
no decision had been taken.
2. Secretary strongly urged delegation that it would be mistake for
President Sadat to call them back. If Sadat did decide to do so, Presi-
dent Carter would want to talk to him first to advise against such a
move. The Secretary also told Egyptians that at President’s lunch today
for King Khalid, Prince Sultan had agreed that delegation should re-
main in Washington. Egyptian delegation undertook to report fore-
going immediately to Cairo.
3. You should reinforce our views in this matter with President

116.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State and the White House
15996. Subject: Begin’s Reply to President’s Letter on Settlements.
1. Following is text of copy of letter from Prime Minister Begin to
President Carter dated October 29. Text received by Embassy at 1230
local time October 30.
2. Begin quote: Dear Mr. President, I acknowledge the receipt of
At Camp David, I informed you, Mr. President, that whilst undertaking
not to establish new settlements in Judea, Samaria and Gaza during the
next three months—the agreed period for our negotiations with
Egypt—we shall add several hundred families to the existing settle-
ments. In fulfillment of this, the Cabinet decided unanimously that the
addition of those several hundred families should be carried out in the
near future; in other words, we are fully complying with what I told
you and wrote to you at Camp David.
May I, Mr. President, also draw your attention to the following ex-
change3 that took place between Assistant Secretary Saunders, Ambas-
sador Lewis and the Director-General of our Foreign Ministry, Mr. Y.

117.
Letter from the Israeli Ambassador to the United States
(Dinitz) to President Carter
Washington, October 29, 1978

118.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State
16006. Eyes Only for Executive Secretary Tarnoff from the Ambas-
sador. No other distribution. Subject: U.S. Strategy Options on Settle-
ments Problem.
1. You will appreciate the extreme sensitivity of this message. I
suggest you personally distribute it to the Secretary, Roy Atherton, and
Hal Saunders only rpt only.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. The Begin government’s decision to thicken a number of settle-
ments on the West Bank has raised our ongoing test of wills with the
GOI on the settlements issue in the post-Camp David period from one
of words to one of deeds. While Begin’s domestic political vulnerabil-
ities, not to say his own deeply held convictions, make it nearly impos-
sible that we could bring about a formal revocation of the decision, nei-
ther can we allow it to go unchallenged or to become just another in an
ongoing series of steps toward unlimited expansion and proliferation
of Israeli settlements in occupied territories. There are already sugges-
tions by government sources that the U.S. is overreacting, that Wash-
ington will come to understand this and that the problem will fade
away, this despite the extraordinarily stiff phrases in the President’s
letter of October 26. Israelis, of course, have many examples in the his-
tory of our relationship which lead them to conclude that the U.S. will
eventually back down in order to avoid a bilateral crisis. Because of this
history, it will be especially difficult to convince Israel that on the settle-
ments issue, we are prepared for a long and, if necessary, public and
vehement disagreement. In the following paragraphs are set out what
we believe are the options for American policy and actions on this cru-
cial matter.
3. The problem:
To limit to the greatest extent possible the scope of implementation
of the GOI’s decision to augment existing settlements on the West
Bank, and to dissuade the GOI from inaugurating any new civilian set-
tlements, at least until negotiations over the establishment of the
self-governing authority are completed.
4. Background and analysis:
During the Knesset debate over the Camp David Accords, Begin
assured his critics that the decision to withdraw from the Sinai settle-
ments constituted no precedent for the settlements in the West Bank
and Golan Heights, which are far more important to Israelis for both se-
curity and emotional reasons. He promised that existing settlements in
those areas would be strengthened and new ones set up. Thereafter,
Begin ducked the issue for several weeks. During the Cabinet debate
over the draft Israel/Egypt treaty, and especially the linkage issue,
which was conducted under the shadow of an extremely emotional ov-
erreaction to the U.S. replies to Hussein and to tendentious press ac-
counts from Arab sources about the Saunders visit, Begin encountered
unexpectedly strong criticism. He apparently felt this ministerial re-
sistance could only be propitiated by an explicit decision to augment
the West Bank settlements. The overwhelming nature of the Cabinet
endorsement of the draft has been widely attributed, in part self-
servingly, to this decision. In reaction to the Cabinet pronouncement,
initial public and press reaction in Israel for the principle of expanding
the settlements has been almost universally favorable. At the same
time, the Labor opposition and some of the press have criticized the
public announcement of the decision as needlessly provocative of the
U.S. and the Egyptians, as well as its reported applicability to the Sama-
rian Highlands rather than to the “defense line” in the Jordan Valley.
Gush Emunim, on the other hand, has condemned it as being pitifully
inadequate.
5. Strategy:
We assume that Begin took this decision fully aware of the storm it
would trigger in the U.S. We are also certain that it will now be virtu-
ally impossible, for domestic Israeli political reasons, to get him to re-
scind the decision or to forego its implementation completely. If he re-
versed himself, he could precipitate several resignations from his
Cabinet, face a severe undermining of this parliamentary majority, and
shatter Herut. The personal effect of this on Begin would be enormous.
We therefore believe that our maximum objective in the short run is to
prevail upon him to limit implementation of the decision to the
smallest number of people in the fewest places over the longest period.
Further, we should try to extend this restraint into a de facto prolonga-
tion of the moratorium on new settlements beyond expiration of the
ninety-day freeze that Begin accepted.
6. No Israeli Government will under present circumstances re-
nounce its right to establish new settlements or to add families to ex-
isting ones. Indeed, we believe that a GOI decision even to defer new
settlements beyond three months will require that Begin be convinced
that such cessation is essential to avoid grave damage to the U.S.-Israeli
relationship. And even this may not be enough to deter him from im-
plementing life-long beliefs concerning Jewish rights to Eretz Yisrael,
especially since these views are shared by some of his closest associates
in the Cabinet.
7. If there is to be any hope of moving Begin, our policy on this
issue in the weeks ahead will have to generate virtually irresistible do-
mestic political pressure on the GOI to avoid a prolonged crisis in
U.S.-Israeli relations. Even then, the most we are likely to achieve
would be a personal and private commitment by Begin to the President
to slow down and minimize thickening of existing settlements and
postpone new settlements during negotiations to set up the self-
governing authority. Less desirable would be a de facto Begin decision
which would be acknowledged neither to us nor to the Israeli public,
but he would have great difficulty sustaining this for very long without
admitting to his Cabinet and the public at large that such a de facto

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
freeze was in effect. Neither of these possibilities can be realized unless
we are prepared through words and actions in Washington to prove
our steadfastness and seriousness to Israel on this issue. Suggested
below are two possible alternative strategies for achieving this
purpose.
8. The options:
A. Such an approach could include inter alia, the following
measures:
—Slow down or suspension of treaty negotiations with Egypt
—Delay of discussions concerning U.S. commitment to assist Israel
in building two Negev airfields
—Indefinite suspension of Matmon C consultations
—Conspicuous footdragging on already committed aid deliveries
—Publicized recall of the Ambassador to Washington to discuss
the settlements issue with the President
—Consideration of having the President not visit Israel (or Egypt)
in conjunction with the signing of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty
—Plus measures outlined in option B.
Pro
—Could shock Israeli body politic into realization that unlimited
continuation of settlement activity is incompatible with attainment of
peace, even with Egypt, and immediately jeopardizes Israel’s all-
important relationship with the United States
—Would demonstrate to the Arabs the seriousness of our commit-
ment to minimizing further Israeli settlement activity
—Recalling the Ambassador would be almost uniquely strong
demonstration of our displeasure with Israel (Note: we do not believe
this step has ever been taken during any previous confrontations with
Israeli Governments.)
Con
—Such a massive response is much more likely to trigger a back-
lash against the United States and Egypt and be seen as attacks on Israel
rather than as directed at the Begin government’s policies. Result could
be rallying of support behind Begin and further acts of defiance in the
settlement area, rather than the desired result of internal pressure on
Begin and his government to desist from such activities.
—Suspension of negotiations by Egypt because of the linkage issue
would convince many Israelis of Sadat’s bad faith, lead to renewed ac-
cusations of Egyptian-American collusion, and run grave risk of
aborting Israeli/Egyptian treaty, despite fact that agreed text is within
reach.

—Even suggestions of suspension of aid already committed to Is-
rael would invite charges of violation of U.S. commitments at the
highest levels not to use aid as a form of pressure and would trigger
outrage both here and among Israel’s supporters in the U.S.
—This package of pressures may be required at a later, much
tougher point in the negotiating process over the West Bank and Gaza;
if employed now, its effect will be weakened then.
B. Without triggering a uniformly defensive reaction in Israel, this
strategy would carry the clear message that both U.S.-Israeli relations
and the hard-won gains in the peace process are bound to suffer acutely
if the Begin government does not accept the necessity to suspend settle-
ment activity at least until the first phase of West Bank-Gaza negotia-
tions are completed, and that restraint can bring positive benefits. Ele-
ments of this strategy could include some of the following:
—Delivery of stern face-to-face message by the President to Begin
during the latter’s upcoming visit to the U.S., with a forthright public
acknowledgement, if necessary, of their deep disagreement
—Regular and frequent expressions of hope by high level U.S. offi-
cials that GOI will not take provocative actions concerning settlements
in occupied territories
—Explicit statements or calculated leak to press that U.S. will-
ingness to help GOI with costs of relocating infrastructure and materiel
from Sinai to Negev is directly linked to freeze on settlement activity
—Continuing delay of overall Matmon C discussions, while con-
tinuing approvals of essential military deliveries and authorization to
purchase a few selected priority new items.
—Mustering support of key Congressional figures and influential
private supporters of Israel for administration’s position on settlements
issue. This can be brought to bear when Begin is in the U.S. and during
the already planned visits of several important senators and congress-
men to Israel over the next few weeks
—Hint willingness to reconsider financial assistance for relocation
of Sinai settlers if Israel demonstrates prudence and restraint in the set-
tlement field
Pro
—Without reneging on our standing commitments to Israel’s secu-
rity requirements or undermining the negotiations with Egypt, force-
fully brings home the real cost of Israeli obduracy on the settlements
issue in terms of U.S.-Israel relations.
—Over time could assist moderate elements in Israel, including
members of the coalition, to isolate Begin on this issue, rather than
leaping to his defense. This type of approach seemed to produce such
an effect in the period following the breakdown of the Jerusalem talks

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
in January, after which almost no new settlements were set up, as well
as in the period following the GOI’s inadequate answers to the U.S.
questions in March, which were changed to a more favorable formula-
tion several weeks later
—Will permit congressional and private friends of Israel to sup-
port the administration’s opposition to Israeli policy on a specific crit-
ical issue about which many of them share our concern rather than trig-
gering an undiscriminating defensive reaction on their part as a more
heavy-handed approach might do
Con
—Could produce the same kind of defensive and defiant reaction
that option A would probably trigger
—Might not convince Israelis of our determination to see this
matter through.
9. Between these two options: I strongly recommend option B.
However, I must add that the odds of achieving our goal of a de facto
settlements freeze and great restraint on “thickening” are considerably
less than 50–50, under option A, they would approach zero.
10. Whatever package of measures we decide to employ, we
should begin immediately and proceed steadily. Each passing day may
lead Begin and Israel to conclude that this bilateral conflict, too, like so
many others, shall pass away.
Lewis

119.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Status Report on Egypt-Israel Treaty Negotiations
Secretary Vance met separately today with both the Israeli2 and
Egyptian3 delegations. Substantial differences still remain, and the Is-
raelis want to discuss with us a number of bilateral issues.
Israel
—Treaty Text. Problems with preamble, reference to Gaza, pro-
posed review clause, and “priority of obligations.” All other articles
have been agreed. Awaiting Israeli comments on Annex III (“normali-
zation”); trying to accelerate drafting of Annex I (security and with-
drawal); US proposal required to break deadlock in oil talks.
—Exchange of Letters. Israel will send a letter to Sadat agreeing to
begin negotiations with Egypt within one month of ratification of the
Egypt-Israel treaty on the modalities for establishing the self-governing
authority. Israel will not, however, discuss the “powers and responsi-
bilities” of the self-governing authority with Egypt alone. Israel will
also insist that Sadat commit himself in writing to an exchange of “resi-
dent ambassadors” within one month of the completion of the interim
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
withdrawal. This could take the form of a letter to you, and then you
would write to Begin.
—US Security Role. Israel will accept a US-manned early warning
station7 in central Sinai which would provide information for both Is-
rael and Egypt. Israel would also welcome a continuation of the US re-
connaissance role. Dayan would like to talk further about our “respon-
sibility” for the implementation of the treaty.
—Side Letters. Israel has asked for a letter from us confirming that
there is no “legal linkage” between the treaty and the West Bank/Gaza
negotiations. Weizman also wants a letter from us stating that the
timetable for Israeli withdrawal from Sinai will be contingent upon the
completion of the new airfields in the Negev.
—Memo of Understanding. Dayan wants to “review and update” all
of our previous memoranda of understanding.
—East Jerusalem. Secretary Vance has asked to see Begin in New
York on Thursday to discuss Israeli plans concerning east Jerusalem.
Egypt
—Priority of Obligations. The Egyptian delegation has agreed to
consider new draft language proposed by Secretary Vance. Their pre-
liminary response has been quite encouraging.
—Joint Letter. The Egyptians want some reference in the letter to a
target date for holding elections for the self-governing authority. They
also insist on making some reference to Egypt’s “special responsibil-
ities” in Gaza.
—Exchange of Ambassadors. The Egyptians will agree to the proce-
dure suggested by Dayan whereby Sadat will write to you, and you
will write to Begin concerning the exchange of ambassadors.
—Security Arrangements. The Egyptians no longer favor an American-
manned early warning station in Zone B. They prefer to have their own

120.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, October 31, 1978
SUBJECT
Status Report on Negotiations and West Bank/Gaza Issues
Today’s talks with the Egyptians and Israelis2 resulted in some
progress toward agreement on the treaty text and the exchange of
letters on West Bank/Gaza negotiations. Both delegations have under-
taken to recommend that their governments agree to our compromise
proposal on Article VI, on the “Priority of Obligations” (Tab A). In addi-
tion, we drafted the text of a joint letter that both parties will refer to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
their governments (Tab B). Dayan’s position throughout the talks was
to try to get the Secretary to deal directly with Begin on the remaining
hard issues.
I had a long talk with Dayan about the West Bank/Gaza issues. My
oversimplified conclusion is that there is very little real prospect for
getting agreement on the transitional regime for the West Bank/Gaza.
For example:
—Dayan claims that Israel did not agree at Camp David to abolish the
authority of the military governor. In extremis, Israel would have the right
to go back into the West Bank/Gaza.
—While agreeing that the military government would be with-
drawn, Israel has not agreed that this would happen immediately after elec-
tions. It might take several years to complete the withdrawal of the mili-
tary government.
—If the issues of future settlements, disposition of public lands, and the
right of the Arabs in east Jerusalem to vote in the elections are raised now,
the negotiations will drag on for two or three years. These questions
should not be addressed now, but should await the election of the
self-governing authority, after which they will be resolved in a practical
manner.
—Israel plans to establish about 18–20 new settlements in the Jordan
Valley in the next five years. Therefore, the self-governing authority
cannot dispose of all the public domain lands. Israel may need to keep
20% or so for itself.
My prediction is that the Egyptian-Israel treaty negotiations will
be concluded within ten days, depending largely on how Begin reacts.
On the basis of my understanding of the Israeli position, I doubt if we
will ever get very far with the West Bank/Gaza negotiations.

121.
Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of
State
8507. Subject: Letter to President.
1. There is below text of letter dated October 31 to President from
King Hussein which has just been received from palace. King told Am-
bassador earlier today he was sending letter on eve of Baghdad confer-
ence2 and as response to President’s answers3 which he regards as per-
sonal communication from President (signed original4 being pouched).
2. Quote: Dear Mr. President,
I wish to thank you for your letters5 which have kept me informed
regarding all the recent developments and your thinking thereon. I
wish also to take this opportunity to reaffirm our sincere appreciation
for the ceaseless efforts that you, Mr. President, and your top officials
are devoting in pursuing the goal of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East region.
As I prepare to travel to attend the Arab summit conference in
Baghdad. I feel I must communicate to you my thoughts on where we
stand and what questions and common responsibilities we face. We are
determined in Jordan to press for a positive summit conference. One
which would take responsible decisions and keep the doors open for a
just settlement of the Middle East conflict. We have been in touch with
other Arab countries which are close to us in thoughts and attitude to
cooperate in this effort. Allow me to summarize to you our views here
regarding the Camp David Agreements and what we regard as a viable
basis for future peace efforts. Some of these views were discussed with
you and relayed to Mr. Vance6 during his recent visit to Amman. I be-
lieve that we should share these views with frankness and openess
hoping this would lead to the clarification and understanding neces-
sary to reach positive conclusions.
From the very beginning there were some fundamental questions
in our minds regarding the results of the Camp David Agreements. I
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
have always recorded with satisfaction the repeated assurances and
statements by the United States Government that what it sought was a
comprehensive and just settlement. Despite this, one was led to believe
that what emerged from the Camp David meeting was essentially the
outline of a peace agreement between Egypt and Israel not connected in
any legal or binding way with a comprehensive settlement on other
fronts. If such a course is pursued, I fear that this might lead to a more
radical polarization in the area leading ultimately to the isolation of
Egypt and the causing of a major setback to the peace process on other
fronts.
Furthermore, there was a major difference between the two docu-
ments which emerged from Camp David regarding the question of the
future status of the occupied areas. While the Egyptian-Israeli Accord
was explicit on the question of Egyptian sovereignty over Sinai, the fu-
ture of the West Bank and Gaza had been left open to negotiations. I be-
lieve that there was no balance in this, particularly as the document
dealing with the West Bank and Gaza was very explicit in its provisions
regarding the transitional agreements and the Jordanian role and re-
sponsibilities in them. Jordan was invited to participate in arrange-
ments of administrative, legal, military and political character during a
“transitional” period before knowing the shape or outline of the future
settlement it is invited to conclude. We fear that at the end of the pro-
posed transitional period, the results reached might be totally unac-
ceptable. This particularly in view of the fact that Israel is repeating
continuously its categorical claims about the final annexation of Arab
Jerusalem, the expansion of the settlements in the occupied areas and
the rejection of Arab sovereignty in the occupied Arab lands. Jordan
was called upon to participate in security arrangements with Israel and
for Israel, against potentially Palestinian subversion. Without any as-
surances that, as a result of the transitional period, there would be a just
Palestinian solution based on self-determination and an end to the oc-
cupation. As I indicated to Secretary Vance, we feel in Jordan that the
Agreements have not provided clear answers regarding the four main
issues of a comprehensive settlement, namely withdrawal and future
borders, Palestinian self-determinations, the basis for the solution of
the problem of the Palestinian refugees and the future of Jerusalem. I
also indicated to him, to your other envoys and repeatedly in public
that Jordan will not close any doors which may lead to the termination
of the occupation and the emancipation of the people under occupation
in the context of a peaceful settlement. Our interest in the cause of
peace is genuine and it has for long been a cherished objective of ours.
In this spirit we formulated the questions that we addressed to your
government for the clarification of the unclear aspects of the Camp
David Agreements and the United States positions. I am very grateful
that your government responded quickly to these questions and that

you found it fit to sign the answers yourself and send them with a spe-
cial high-level envoy.
The answers to our questions have been most useful in clarifying
the issues and explaining your government’s policy. I am afraid, how-
ever, that they did not alter the situation in a major way. We still feel,
here in Jordan, that we are asked to participate in arrangements with
the Israelis in the occupied areas prior to a definite knowledge of the
outcome of such arrangements. We also still feel that there are no defi-
nite answers to our fundamental concerns, namely the ultimate total Is-
raeli withdrawal, self-determination for the Palestinians and the return
of Arab Jerusalem to Arab sovereignty.
Mr. President,
As I suggested to you in an earlier letter, I believe it may be time
for a return to a collective context for the peace efforts. In the meantime
I have announced that we in Jordan would not impose our views on the
people in the occupied areas and would encourage their collective ef-
fort to positively seek new avenues for the improvement of their condi-
tions [garble] the development of their national entity. We will give
them all our support. I am consulting with other Arab governments in
this direction.
In the forthcoming summit conference in Baghdad Jordan will re-
main, as always, a constructive force and a voice of peace. We have
been active in promoting a positive atmosphere for the conference and
will pursue this effort in the coming days.
I wish to assure you, finally, that Jordan will struggle to keep the
door to peace open. I am hopeful that the impulse of peace in our area is
stronger than the calls of war.
With my best wishes and regards. Your sincere friend, Hussein I.
End text.
3. Original being pouched to S/S.
Veliotes

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

122.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Israeli Requests for New Commitments

123.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
ISRAELI SIDE
Menachem Begin, Prime Minister
Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister
Ezer Weizman, Defense Minister
Aharaon Barak, Justice, Israeli Supreme Court
Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Simcha Dinitz, Israeli Ambassador to the United States
Yehuda Avner, Secretary to the Prime Minister
Reuven Hecht, Advisor to the Prime Minister
General Avraham Tamir, Chief of Military Planning
General Ephrain Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Nahil Kadeshai, Advisor to the Prime Minister
AMERICAN SIDE
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large
Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary, NEA
SUBJECT
Meeting Between Prime Minister Begin and Secretary Vance: Egyptian-Israeli
Negotiations, Bilateral U.S.-Israeli Issues
The Prime Minister opened by suggesting that the agenda for the
meeting should cover the treaty negotiations including the proposed
exchange of letters on what happens with respect to the West Bank and
Gaza after the treaty is in force, and U.S.-Israeli bilateral issues.
Turning first to the proposed exchange of letters, the Prime Min-
ister said he would have amendments to suggest. First, however, he
wanted to make the following point: the situation now was different
from Camp David. Then as Prime Minister he was empowered to take
decisions. Now everything was ad referendum and must be decided by
his Government. As Prime Minister, he had no powers to decide issues.
What emerged from this meeting would be referred to the Cabinet
Sunday2 and Acting Prime Minister Yadin would conduct the Cabinet
meeting in his absence.
The Secretary said that he had authority to take decisions on some
issues while others would be ad referendum to President Carter.
(At this point the Secretary was called to take a phone call from the
President. When he returned, he said the President was in New York
and asked if the Secretary could bring the Prime Minister to Arthur
hands and greet each other. The Prime Minister said he would be
pleased to do this.)
Returning to the subject at hand, Begin read a proposed Israeli ver-
sion of the side letter on the West Bank and Gaza (Attachment 1). The
Prime Minister said Israel wants to preserve its adherence to the Camp
David Framework and its proposed letter confirmed that Egypt and Is-
rael will do so. Theoretically, they should wait until Jordan joins the ne-
gotiations, but Israel wanted to proceed. The letter should therefore
make the point that although the Camp David Framework says there
will be three parties to the West Bank/Gaza negotiations, Egypt and Is-
rael will proceed on their own. It is indispensable to include this point
in order to be faithful to the Camp David Framework.
The Secretary said if this was important to Israel, he would in prin-
ciple go along and would try to get Egyptian agreement. His personal
view, however, was that in the interest of getting Hussein to join the ne-
gotiations, it would be better not to mention Jordan.
On the form of the letter, the Secretary suggested there be an iden-
tical note.
The Prime Minister said there could be either two papers with one
signature on each or one paper with two signatures, if the language
was identical. If there were differences, Egypt and Israel could write
different letters.
The Secretary asked if the Framework would be annexed to the
letter. The Prime Minister said no; he had signed the Framework and
did not want to create the impression that he had to again prove his ad-
herence to it. The Secretary said this was important to Egypt and not a
substantive issue; he urged the Prime Minister to agree. Begin said he
would refer this question to his Government.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The Prime Minister read the language in the Israeli draft about
Jordan. He then emphasized that the beginning of West Bank/Gaza ne-
gotiations must follow the exchange of instruments of ratification and
not simply follow the signing of the treaty. The Secretary said we
would need to see if this was possible under Egyptian procedures.
Begin said Israel wanted to add a reference to “related issues,”
since other matters (e.g., security) were also covered in the Camp
David Framework. Continuing, the Prime Minister said Israel was pre-
pared to say that elections should be held “at an early date.” It is impos-
sible to predict when they could be held; could take three months or
seven months.
The Secretary replied that he wanted to make the counter-
argument. The letter could say that negotiations would take place
“with the objective” of holding elections by a given date. This would
not fix a date but only set a target. It would demonstrate that all parties
were serious about carrying out the Camp David Framework. It would
have a positive effect on people in the West Bank and Gaza and en-
courage their participation which is important for success of the negoti-
ations. It would have an important psychological effect in the region
generally. President Carter had asked the Secretary to stress this point.
Begin said one cannot pick a date out of the blue; it may take six
months. The Secretary asked why not say six months. Begin replied
that the phrase “at an early date” means Israel is serious. The Secretary
responded that it could do no harm to have a target date.
The Prime Minister said that “an early date” means months, not
years, but it could take three months or ten months. It will be necessary
to decide the form of the elections, constituencies, perhaps political
parties. Specifying the number of months would mean nothing but if a
time period were included in the letter and then not met, Israel would
be accused of bad faith. There was no predicting, Begin said, whether
the people would agree. The PLO may threaten them and force a
boycott.
The Secretary said he would need to consult the President; he per-
sonally continued to think that naming the number of months was pref-
erable and urged the Prime Minister to think further about our
suggestion.
Barak suggested using the phrase “within a short period.” The
Prime Minister said Israel cannot accept specifying the number of
months but would consider any other phrase.
Barak said since we don’t know how long the talks will take, we
should think in terms of a period of time following the end of the talks
rather than from the beginning of the talks. The Secretary replied that
this would not help and that he would have to talk to the President.
Dayan said Israel would consider it if the Secretary thought the phrase

“within a short period” was better. The Secretary said this might be
better; he would need to discuss it with the Egyptians.
In response to Dayan’s comment that Israel cannot commit itself to
a number of months, the Secretary said it would be only a target. He
was puzzled about what was wrong in setting a target. Dayan said that
the date should be part of the modalities to be discussed in the negotia-
tions. If we set a date in advance, this would have a negative reaction
among the Palestinians who would see this as patronizing them; they
would say that these are our elections and others are trying to tell us
what to do.
The Secretary said let’s leave this subject; you reflect on it and I will
talk to the President. Dayan responded that it would be important if
agreement could be reached while the Prime Minister is here.
Barak commented that Israel would not want to say in a side letter
that negotiations would start one month after ratification of the treaty.
Israel did not want to give the impression that this matter is linked to
the treaty. We should speak of x months after Camp David or “within a
short period” after the exchange of letters, with the understanding that
this meant one month. The Secretary said no, we cannot change this.
Barak replied, let it stay as it is.
Turning to the treaty text, the Prime Minister read the third para-
graph of the preamble beginning “noting that the aforementioned
Framework . . .” The Israeli Government, he said, had decided unani-
mously to demand deletion of this paragraph. It took Camp David lan-
guage out of context. One could also quote other parts of the Camp
David Framework which were important to Israeli public opinion. Is-
rael had accepted paragraph one of the preamble from the start al-
though many of his friends had doubts about this. It is necessary, he
said, to show that an Israel-Egyptian agreement is only the first treaty.
Any addition out of context, however, is an insult to Israel. If the reason
is Arab opinion, Israel’s problems are more serious than Sadat’s. Is-
rael’s problems are internal. The Prime Minister therefore asked that
this paragraph be deleted as detrimental in Israeli opinion and unnec-
essary. The Prime Minister then noted that the United States’ replies to
King Hussein had been publicized in Ha’aretz; this was causing more
problems.
The Secretary interjected that he was deeply concerned about the
attacks on Mr. Saunders. He had spoken for the United States Govern-
ment and these attacks must stop.
With respect to paragraph three of the preamble, the Secretary had
two comments: without this paragraph there would be no treaty with
Egypt; and both the President and he believe it is fair; it only repeats
Camp David language and should be retained; we see no basis to
change it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The Prime Minister said he had never attacked Mr. Saunders per-
sonally. However, he wanted the Secretary to tell the President that the
replies to Hussein5 had been the gravest matter in Israeli public opinion
and in Israel’s future. If Saunders had said that Ambassador Yost’s
speech6 was still binding, that East Jerusalem is occupied territory, this
was a serious matter. The greatest wrong that had ever been done to a
nation had been done in this case. Why should united Jerusalem not be
recognized as the capital of Israel? The Prime Minister then recounted
Jordanian actions in East Jerusalem and Prime Minister Eshkol’s mes-
sage to Hussein in June 1967, despite which Hussein had attacked.
There was now free access to the holy shrines and Israel had rebuilt the
Jewish quarter, yet East Jerusalem was called occupied. This had been
said in the middle of negotiations with Sadat. It makes Israel’s position
difficult when Sadat hears what the United States says. The Prime Min-
ister said he had not attacked Mr. Saunders but had spoken of the posi-
tion of the United States which concerns Israel’s future. He had also
been attacked, the Prime Minister said, and called a traitor by his
friends, all because Israel wants peace. This hurt deeply.
Furthermore, the Prime Minister said, the phrase “whatever settle-
ments remain” as applied to the West Bank implies that the Camp
David Sinai Framework is a model for Judea and Samaria and for the
Golan. This is wrong.
Turning to the preambular language (at “noting”), the Prime Min-
ister expressed deep astonishment that this should be made a condition
for the treaty. He could not change the decision of the Israeli Govern-
ment, which must decide. Israel will consider this problem but he, the
Prime Minister, could do nothing without the Government. Perhaps he
could speak about it today to President Carter. The Secretary said he
had discussed this very issue with the President that morning.
Turning to the language on Gaza in Article II, the Prime Minister
said that the accepted forum is to say “without prejudice to the position
of either party.” This was a simple issue. The Secretary agreed it was
simple. Egypt wanted to remove some language and Israel wanted to
add language. The Secretary said let’s leave the present language as it
was agreed ad referendum. The Secretary said Israel’s additional lan-
guage does not change the substance. The words “the issue of the status
of the Gaza Strip” reflect Israel’s position. This is not worth arguing
about and should be solved by leaving the language as it is.

After consulting his colleagues in Hebrew, the Prime Minister sug-
gested leaving out the word “issue” and simply saying “without preju-
dice to the position of either party on the status of the Gaza Strip.” The
Secretary said this would be even more difficult and asked what is
wrong with the language as it stands.
Begin said that the phrase “without prejudice” always refers to the
positions of parties, not to issues. Egypt wants Gaza to be part of a Pal-
estinian State. The Prime Minister said that he believed after five years
Israel would seek sovereignty over Gaza. If this was not agreed, the au-
tonomy regime would continue. Brzezinski had thought this reason-
able. Israel wants to make clear that neither side’s position is preju-
diced. The Secretary said the present language accomplishes that. The
words “the issue of” were an Israeli proposal. Sadat wanted much
more about Gaza. We are trying to hold him to this single reference.
The Secretary said he was concerned what would happen if we opened
the language. Barak suggested dropping the word “issue.” The Secre-
tary replied that he would report this to the Egyptians; Begin said he
would report to his Cabinet. The Secretary said it was best to leave this
language alone; if the Egyptians sent it back to Cairo, this would open
the whole thing up. The Prime Minister replied that he had no choice
but to return it to the Cabinet. The Secretary said he was afraid this
would open the whole issue with the Egyptians. Statesmanship could
solve this problem and the Prime Minister is a statesman.
Turning to Article III, paragraph two, Barak noted that the word
“anywhere” had been omitted from the first sentence. Rosenne said Is-
rael had only included it in the second sentence but saw no problem
with the Egyptians in adding it to the first sentence as well. The Secre-
tary said, since it was not previously in the first sentence, if this agreed
language was re-opened there would be a problem. If we keep
changing agreed language, there will never be agreement. Begin said
Israel would accept this language as presently written. The Secretary
said “good.”
Turning to Article IV, Begin said the Cabinet had rejected the idea
of a five-year review period. While the Cabinet had not changed its de-
cision, he was prepared to accept the present wording and recommend
this to the Cabinet. He had talked to Yadin who would support him.
The Secretary again said “good.”
With respect to Article VI, Begin said the present title (The Rela-
tionship of Obligations) did not reflect the contents of the Article and
suggested substituting “precedence” for “relationship.” Begin also said
Israel still preferred its original text of this Article. The Secretary said he
would raise with the Egyptians the words “precedence” or “priority.”
Rosenne then read Israel’s original text which said that this treaty
would “prevail over” other obligations. Begin asked if we could con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
vince the Egyptians to accept the word “prevail.” The Secretary said no;
the Egyptians had not even accepted the present language but we
thought they could be persuaded to. Begin said he would recommend
that the Cabinet accept the present text as written while the United
States checked to see if the title could be changed. The Secretary re-
marked that we were making real progress.
Dayan noted that, in addition to the treaty text, we needed to com-
plete the annexes and the appendix to Annex I. The Secretary said the
Egyptians wanted an appendix, and we did not know if we could get
them to move off that position.
Begin then noted that the Israeli Minister of Energy had come to
the United States to deal with the oil problem. This was a serious
matter, and he hoped the United States could help; Israel needs Egyp-
tian oil at market prices. The Secretary said there would be no problem
about market prices.
Dayan then commented that, leaving the annex aside, there were
three problems which he thought could be worked out in Washington:
the preamble, the Gaza language and the side letter. The Secretary said
he thought the problem of the letter could be solved. Dayan said this
still leaves two points. Egypt cannot simply say that if Israel does not
agree to the present language, there will be no treaty. A further effort is
needed to overcome these problems. The Gaza problem is meaningless.
If the preamble is the only problem, we need to seek agreement on this.
On the whole, Dayan said, we are not doing badly if the gap is down to
one and one-half issues. The Secretary said this is real progress to
which Begin replied “I came to make progress.”
Begin then turned the conversation to bilateral issues.
Begin began by noting that we are at a turning point in the history
of the Middle East with the coming of the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty.
The parties will go on to the next stage in the peace process but never-
theless this is a turning point.
Israel must face what is going to happen with the evacuation of
tens of thousands of Israeli troops from the Sinai and the relocation of
installations in the Negev, Begin said. It is a matter of gravest concern if
Israel cannot deal with the financial aspects of this move. He noted that
he is not an economist, but he does understand the tremendous burden
which will fall upon Israel as a result of these moves. “We don’t want to
bring about a peace treaty which would be accompanied by complete
bankruptcy.” It is not an objective possibility for Israel to bear the full
costs of this move.
Israel has therefore decided to request from the United States a
loan to cover these costs. Israel is not seeking a grant; Israel’s record on
repaying its debts is perfect. In this case, Israel would seek a loan for 25

$800 million for the airfields and $300 million for resettling the settlers.
Begin apologized again to the President for mentioning that cost but
said Israel had to do something in developing new homes for the set-
tlers who will leave the Sinai. Parenthetically, he acknowledged that
President Carter had “never used any pressure” on Israel about the set-
tlers in the Sinai. Begin said he had weighed their continued presence
against the opportunity of peace and made his decision.
Begin suggested that “we agree today” that Israeli Finance Min-
ister Simcha Ehrlich meet with Secretary Blumenthal on November 6,
when Ehrlich could pass through Washington on his way to a speech in
California.
Secretary Vance said that he would have to discuss this with the
President. The President in turn would have to discuss the subject with
the Congressional leadership before responding to Prime Minister
Begin’s request. The Secretary noted that the President would not be
able to focus on this until he returns to Washington late November 4.
The Secretary said he would report to the President then. Meanwhile,
he said it would be a mistake to discuss this publicly at this point until
the President has a chance to mention it to the Congressional leader-
ship since the leadership could be offended by public discussion of an
issue of which they had not been informed.
Foreign Minister Dayan said he hoped that Secretary Vance could
at least agree that the Israeli Finance Minister should deal with this
matter so that he could get it off his own agenda.
Secretary Vance repeated that he did not want to make any com-
mitment until he had talked with the President. If we get to such a
point, he said, then we could agree that the Finance Minister would
handle the issue.
Defense Minister Weizman intervened to note that, when we sign
the treaty there will be other issues to discuss like MATMON C. Secre-
tary Vance suggested that we not try to solve that now.
Begin returned to the subject of the airfields, saying they would
have to be operational in three years. Secretary Vance responded by

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
reading the last sentences of Secretary Brown’s letter10 after Camp
David to Minister Weizman. Begin noted in passing that the letter in
the present negotiations on the exchange of ambassadors is satisfac-
tory, and then he returned to the airfields. What happens, he asked, if it
takes longer than three years to complete the airfields? He wanted an
agreement that Israel would operate the two remaining airfields in the
Sinai until the new ones could become operational. He felt this should
be written as a protocol to the treaty.
Secretary Vance responded that he could not at this point agree
that there will be such a protocol which would change the basic agree-
ment. The Secretary said he could tell the Prime Minister that the
United States will work with Israel and we have confidence that the air-
fields will be completed in time. The Prime Minister responded by
asking again, “But what do we do with our planes if the airfields are
not completed? Where will we put them?” Secretary Vance again
quoted from the Brown letter the portion that states U.S. understanding
for the special priority which Israel attaches to this and Israel’s position
that it cannot leave the Sinai until the new airfields are completed. The
Secretary said he could not commit the United States to any more at
this point. Weizman suggested that the problem might be helped if
Egypt were to acknowledge its understanding of the Brown-Weizman
letter. The Secretary noted that the Egyptians had already received a
copy.
Turning to the subject of aerial surveillance, Secretary Vance said
the United States is prepared to continue providing such surveillance
for three years. If there is to be any extension, it would be agreed by all
three parties. The Secretary said the United States side would take up
this subject with Egypt and noted that this was being done in response
to an Israeli request. He summarized by saying that the United States is
committed for three years. Beyond three years, the issue remains open.
The Secretary noted to the Prime Minister that the United States
had given the Israeli Delegation a draft letter relating to the UN Forces.
The Prime Minister said the letter is satisfactory and the Israeli Govern-
ment accepts it.
Secretary Vance indicated his desire to move ahead quickly to
complete Annex I to the treaty and suggested trying to do so in the next
48 hours.
Dayan reminded the Secretary that we had also agreed to review
commitments under the disengagement agreements. The Secretary
suggested that we wait until after completion of the work on the treaty.
Prime Minister Begin agreed with that approach, saying that we
needed to take our time to it.
The meeting ended about 12: p.m. with the Secretary and Prime
Minister agreeing that they would meet in the lobby of the hotel at 1:20
p.m. in order to call briefly on President Carter who would be spending
a few minutes at that time at the office of Mr. Arthur Krim.
Attachment
Israeli Draft of Side Letter on the West Bank and Gaza
November 6, 1978
The Governments of Egypt and Israel, having signed the Treaty of
Peace between them, will proceed with the implementation of the pro-
visions of the Framework for peace in the Middle East agreed at Camp
David.
In the aforementioned Framework both Governments invited the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to join them in the peacemaking
process; however, to date, there has been no acceptance by the Jorda-
nian Government.
Notwithstanding this fact, the Governments of Egypt and Israel
have agreed to start negotiations, within a month after the exchange of
the instruments of ratifications of the peace treaty between them, in
order to work out the modalities for establishing the elected self-
governing authority (administrative council), and subsequently, prior
to the election, to define and agree upon its powers and responsibilities
(as well as other related issues in accordance with the Framework) with
the objective of holding the election at an early date.

124.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 3, 1978
SUBJECT
Status Report on Egypt-Israel Negotiations
As you know, Boutros Ghali and Usama [al Baz] have left for
Cairo2 and will probably not return until Tuesday. Weizman is mean-
while in Israel trying to get support for his proposal on withdrawal in
phases to the interim line.
In our talks with Dayan today, he stuck to a tough line, even re-
opening some issues, perhaps in anticipation that the Egyptians will do
likewise after they return from Cairo. At present, several issues are still
not resolved.
1. Serious Issues:
—Preamble. Israel wants to delete language that notes that the
Camp David framework constitutes a basis for peace between Israel
and each of its neighbors. Dayan implied that the only way Israel could
agree to this language would be if we were to write a letter stating that
there is “no legal linkage” between the Treaty and the West Bank/Gaza
negotiations. We have said this is not necessary and that the preamble
cannot now be changed.
—Gaza. Israel will not accept our suggested language (originally
proposed by Barak) on “the issue of the status of Gaza.” Egypt will not
accept the Israeli draft. They are both adamant. We have said we will
stick with our draft.
—Letter on West Bank/Gaza. Israel does not want a joint letter, does
not want to refer to a target date for elections, and does not want to
annex the Camp David Framework to the letter. Egypt insists on a joint
letter, wants to set a target date, and wants to annex the Framework.
Otherwise Sadat will want to include arrangements for Gaza in the
treaty itself, which his delegation realizes is a non-starter.
—Oil. The two sides are far apart. The Egyptians have just re-
ceived new instructions which move away from our compromise draft.
They do not want to give Israel “right of first refusal” on oil purchases.
2. Medium Issues.
—Termination of Security Arrangements. Sadat wants to set a specific
date by which the security arrangements in Sinai will come to an end.
His delegation realizes that the Israelis will not accept this, and will try
to stick with a general review clause as is now in the draft.
—Navigation. The Israelis reopened this issue and suggested some
new language. The Egyptians have it under consideration.
—Obligations. The Israelis want to title this article “Priority of Obli-
gations”. The Israelis [Egyptians?] refuse. We suggested dropping the
title.
Finally, we still have a series of bilateral questions to work through
with the Israelis. On the whole, virtually no progress was made today
except on the military annex. There will be some talks over the
weekend, but we cannot expect much real progress until after the Is-
raeli Cabinet meets on Sunday and the Egyptian delegation returns.
Footnote: Dayan repeated today that the negotiations for the West
Bank/Gaza would be “ten times” as difficult as the Egypt-Israel peace
treaty talks. This is especially true, in his view, now that we are in-
sisting that the powers and responsibilities of the “self-governing au-
thority” should be defined before the elections (is provided for in the
Camp David Framework).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

125.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt
282012. Subject: Letter re Exchange of Ambassadors.
1. For your information, following is text of proposed letter which
Sadat would send President Carter with respect to exchange of ambas-
sadors between Egypt and Israel; draft was given to Egyptians for con-
sideration November 2.
2. Begin text: “Dear Mr. President;
In response to your request, I can confirm that, within one month
after the completion of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim line as pro-
vided for in the treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel, Egypt will
send a resident Ambassador to Israel and will receive a resident Israeli
Ambassador in Egypt.
Sincerely, Anwar Sadat.” End text.
3. Text of this draft letter has been shown to Egyptians but not as
yet to Israelis.
Vance

126.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
24571. Subject: Letter From President Sadat to President Carter.
1. PriMin Khalil telephoned this afternoon to say he was sending
over immediately a letter from President Sadat to President Carter on
the Washington negotiations. Khalil asked that I forward it to President
Carter as quickly as possible and before Boutros’ arrival in Washington
later this afternoon.
2. Text follows: Quote:
Dear President Carter:
I would like to express to you, once again, my profound apprecia-
tion of the role you have been playing relentlessly for the cause of
peace, which I have fully acknowledged in my recent speech in the
opening session of the Egyptian Peoples Assembly. As you know I am
following the Washington talks. It is obvious that certain problems re-
main to be solved. I am confident that you and your able assistants will
spare no effort to make the ends meet and promote agreement.
One of these problems which is of utmost importance and is cru-
cial to the ultimate success of our efforts is the Palestinian problem. I
firmly believe that we have to reach an unequivocal agreement on what
is to take place in the West Bank and Gaza in implementation of the
Camp David Framework. Thus, we should lay down the format for es-
tablishing the self-governing authority and the abolition of the Israeli
military government and its administration as provided for in the
“Framework.” This would be accompanied by withdrawal of Israeli
forces and redeployment of the remaining force in the specific security
locations. A target date should be set for all that if we expect all parties
to take the concept of transfer of authority seriously. This would re-
quire agreeing on the substantive aspects of the elections rather than
the procedural ones. Also, the transfer of authority requires a clear defi-
nition of the powers and authority of the self-governing authority. All
this requires a binding commitment from Israel to take these measures
in a specified time. The logical date for that is the completion of the in-
terim withdrawal in Sinai.
The implementation of these measures could proceed in the Gaza
Strip first, for a variety of reasons. First, we have a certain responsibility
cret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. A signed copy of this letter is in the Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
there as you know. Thus, an Egyptian presence is certain to facilitate
the process. Second, the political climate there is much more conducive
to prove to all Palestinians that the change we agreed upon in Camp
David, to bring about in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, is both gen-
uine and feasible. This formula is apt to whip up support in Jordan and
the West Bank for joining in with us before it becomes too late. It is also
certain to generate more enthusiasm among the Palestinians at large for
the Camp David Accord.
If I sign a peace treaty without having the agreement of the Israelis
on what to take place in Gaza and West Bank, I would be concluding a
separate agreement indeed.
This could be in contradiction not only with the basic line of our
policy, but also with what we agreed upon in Camp David. You will
undoubtedly recall that I told Prime Minister Begin in the clearest
terms during our tripartite meeting on September the 7th and the 8th
that I refuse to conclude a third disengagement agreement, a partial
peace settlement or a separate agreement.
Needless to say that what I am proposing is the only course of ac-
tion which serves the cause of peace. Postponement would lead to a
veritable crisis in the near future and may abort all our previous efforts,
and is apt to discourage and demoralize Palestinians who are willing to
cooperate, leading to a situation over which we will have no control.
Israel would also be expected to take certain measures in the
coming few weeks to improve the political climate in Gaza and West
Bank, and stimulate the interest of their inhabitants. Such measures in-
clude permitting political activities, granting amnesty to political pris-
oners and permitting the reuniting of families by the return of their dis-
placed members.
Dear President Carter,
In order to overcome the other problems, which have arisen in the
course of negotiations due to the insistence of Israel to have a privi-
leged position, the normalization of relations with Israel can only be re-
alized on treating her on equal footing with other nations within the
context of our laws, the international law and the United Nations
Charter. Friendship and cooperation would only grow if there is a
sense of fairness. For the treaty we are going to sign with Israel will be
an example and model for the others. I am sure that you agree with me
that such a model needs to be a solid and well founded one to stand any
test.
In conclusion, please accept my best wishes and warm regards.
Mohammed Anwar El Sadat. Unquote.
Eilts

127.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter
Washington, November 9, 1978
SUBJECT
Middle East Strategy
The Issue
As discussed in our meeting2 Wednesday, we need to decide
whether and, if so, how we relate our policies and actions in the Egypt-
Israel negotiations and in U.S.-Israeli bilateral relations so as to im-
prove chances of getting serious negotiations started on the West
Bank/Gaza promptly.
In the current negotiations an impasse may be shaping up, with
Sadat having sent his negotiators back with instructions to insist on
more explicit and far-reaching assurances from Israel concerning the
West Bank and Gaza. In the light of this we need to decide:
—whether we should press Sadat and Begin to conclude the treaty
as soon as possible, and to that end ask Sadat to drop his insistence on
most of the “linkage” points he has now raised, while asking Begin to
give a bit more in this respect; or
—whether we should support Egypt in attempting to achieve
more of the “linkage” Sadat wants, recognizing that if this succeeded it
could assist our own objective of getting West Bank/Gaza negotiations
off to a good start, but also that it could delay conclusion of the peace
treaty.
—We also need to decide how we manage our response to Israel’s
request for additional economic assistance so as to achieve our
objectives.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Egypt’s Objectives
The letter4 that has just come in from Sadat concentrates entirely
on the need for an “unequivocal commitment on what is to take place
in the West Bank and Gaza in implementation of the Camp David
Framework;” it does not mention any of the other issues over which the
two sides are bargaining. From my meeting Thursday with the Egyp-
tians, the West Bank/Gaza issue will clearly be the focus of the Egyp-
tian delegation’s negotiating efforts now that Boutros Ghali has re-
turned. How far they are prepared to push this remains a difficult
question to answer, but they are starting off with a long list—e.g., set-
ting dates not only for beginning West Bank/Gaza negotiations but
also for the establishment of the self-governing authority and the end of
the military government, plus a half dozen or so unilateral steps they
want Israel to agree to now. Undoubtedly the delegation itself would
be prepared to hold up progress on the treaty in order to achieve these
commitments. But you will recall that at Camp David we dropped the
paragraph on linkage when Sadat himself did not press very hard for it.
The same pattern could repeat itself in the present circumstances. Sadat
may be giving his advisors a license to achieve what they can for a pe-
riod of time figuring that he will settle for whatever he can get rather
than delay conclusion of the Treaty beyond a certain point.
On the other hand, Arab pressures may be registering more keenly
on Sadat in the wake of the Baghdad Summit7 than they were at Camp
David. Secret resolutions8 were apparently passed at Baghdad calling
for sanctions against Egypt if it proceeds to sign a peace treaty. We
cannot rule out the possibility that this time Sadat is more determined
to get what he is asking for, even at risk of delaying the Treaty. Israeli
backtracking on a commitment now to an accelerated schedule for
withdrawal to the interim line could further stiffen the Egyptian posi-
tion. If Sadat is more determined on this occasion, the issue for us will
be whether we wish to support him, or to bring pressure to dissuade
him because we decide it is not in our interest to see the Treaty delayed.
Israel’s Objectives
The mood in Israel is one of growing querulousness and suspicion
about the course the negotiations are taking. Weizman reports the Cab-
inet gave him a rough time, but summing up he told us Wednesday
that if we can wrap up the Treaty package as it presently stands, Begin
will be able to sell it to the Cabinet and Knesset. Even allowing for
Weizman’s propensity to optimism, we share that assessment. But
Weizman warns that if Egypt now attempts to achieve additional
linkage it will bring the whole Treaty seriously into question because of
the present mood in Israel. We do not have to accept this literally: the
question clearly is how much additional baggage can be placed on the
Treaty package before a serious risk of rejection of the whole package is
entailed.
The Israelis are unquestionably in a very tender mood about
having their hand forced any further on the West Bank/Gaza negotia-
tions. Begin is coming in for heavy criticism that he gave away too
much at Camp David. He clearly sees as a highly important objective
maintaining freedom to approach West Bank/Gaza negotiations, if at
all, in a manner and at a pace that will not cause political problems for
him. The Israelis have been brought to accept a great deal in the last
twelve months, and in terms of Israeli public opinion, it is possible that
not too much more can be forced on Israel too fast.
The Options for the U.S.
In these circumstances the options for the U.S. in our judgment boil
down to two:
—We can determine that we are best off getting the Treaty done
with as soon as possible—that the momentum created by this event, to-
gether with the realization on the part of the other Arabs that they are
being left out in the cold, is the process best suited to get negotiations
going on the West Bank/Gaza. If we choose this course we will need to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
devise a blend of pressure tactics and assurances which we would di-
rect at Sadat to get him to back off most of his present demands as re-
flected in his latest letter and in the instructions given his delegation.
We would at the same time need to insist on at least a bit more give
from the Israelis—e.g., to set a target date now for West Bank/Gaza
elections.
—Alternatively, we can determine that it is in our interest to face
up to and resolve at least some of the problems inherent in the West
Bank/Gaza negotiations in the context of the Egypt-Israel talks, even if
it means delaying the conclusion of a peace Treaty. If we do this it
would be on the grounds that to postpone tackling these problems
would make it even more difficult for us to get negotiations started and
going somewhere once the Egypt-Israel Treaty is signed.
The merits of these two strategies are finely balanced and we will
need to consider the pros and cons of each course very carefully in
making our decision.
The Pros and Cons
A case can be made that in getting Sadat to accept the ambiguities
in the Camp David Framework about the West Bank/Gaza process we
already issued a rather sizeable promissory note on the future in order
to pay for the present, and that we should not compound this by at-
tempting to postpone the tough issues any further. Our credibility in
Arab eyes is already at stake in having announced publicly that we dif-
fered with Begin’s understanding of what was agreed to at Camp
David about settlements and our inability thereafter to get him to stop
or even exercise restraint in continued settlement activity. In his public
statements Begin has taken the line that what he agreed to in the Camp
David Framework was really nothing more than the Begin self-rule
plan. This has fed the worst fears of the Arabs that the negotiations on
the West Bank/Gaza will not be able to produce any real relinquish-
ment of Israeli control over these areas. If we press Sadat now to
abandon his insistence on further “linkage,” he might, in order to ex-
plain to other Arabs, let it be known that it was we who pressed him to
drop his insistence on this matter. This will only deepen Arab suspi-
cions of our commitment to a comprehensive settlement, and could
make it very difficult if not virtually impossible to get either Jordan or
Palestinians to step forward to join the process envisioned at Camp
David, or to enlist Saudi support for that process.
The actual signing of an Egypt-Israel Treaty will produce shock
waves throughout the Arab world. So far Sadat’s course of action has
been seen as a potential threat to the other Arabs, but it will come as a

further disillusioning shock when he proceeds to an actual signing. The
Arabs will see the withdrawal of the most powerful Arab state from the
arena as destroying their leverage to get decent terms on the West
Bank/Gaza/Palestinian aspect. They will not be inclined to see U.S. as-
surances that we intend to deliver the goods in West Bank/Gaza nego-
tiations as an adequate substitute for Egypt’s retirement. While it is
possible that Egypt’s action might galvanize Jordan and West Bank/
Gaza Palestinians into coming into the negotiations so as to get at least
some kind of deal, we think it more likely that the Arabs in their
present mood will retreat into a condition of sullen negativism and
begin to turn their attention toward actions they can take against Sadat,
even though King Hussein and the Saudis will not feel comfortable
about being drawn into such a posture.
The problem is that we cannot be sure that the opposite course—
that of engaging in a struggle with Israel in the context of the present
negotiations to get better terms on the West Bank/Gaza aspect—will be
the decisive factor in bringing in Jordan or representative Palestinians.
And if we cannot be certain of this it can be argued that we may be
better off playing it in a way that minimizes our problems with Israel. If
we choose this option we would accept the fact that in the immediate
post-Treaty situation we might not be in a good position to push Israel
farther and for more than it chose to give on the West Bank/Gaza, but
that in the long term we will get more out of Israel by managing the
process in a way that is more acceptable to Israel.
On the Israeli side of the equation we need to assess whether we
will be in a better position to move Israel now or in a post-Treaty situa-
tion. One thesis is that by trying to drive a bargain now we make it par-
ticularly difficult for Israel because it comes in a context of condition-
ality on the Egypt-Israel Treaty, something the Israelis were assured
would not happen at Camp David. The opposing thesis is that once Is-
rael achieves its strategic objective of removing Egypt from the conflict,
it will see even less reason to give ground on its eastern front. Both
theses have an element of truth in them.
Finally, it needs to be noted that the option to delay if necessary the
present negotiations to achieve something more precise on the West
Bank and Gaza obviously presents us with public relations and Con-
gressional problems. The Israelis will argue that it is the U.S. rather
than Sadat that is holding up the Treaty. They will also mount a cam-
paign which will find receptivity in some quarters that it is unwar-
ranted for the U.S. to be using the additional assistance Israel has re-
quested to try to gain political concessions.
Conducting West Bank/Gaza Negotiations
In designing our strategy for extending the Camp David negotia-
tions to the West Bank/Gaza, we need to keep in mind that it may

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
prove impossible, whatever we do, to induce Jordan and representative
Palestinians to join the negotiations at the outset. That does not neces-
sarily mean, however, that these negotiations need be stymied. We
need to think in terms of a strategy of beginning the negotiations be-
tween Egypt and Israel while developing in support of those negotia-
tions a network of our own private consultations with Jordan, with
West Bank and Gaza Palestinians, and perhaps with some Americans
of Palestinian origin in order to build confidence in the seriousness of
the negotiations so that we might think of Palestinians either joining
the negotiations at a later stage or at least standing for elections when
they are called. Our ability to engage the Palestinians in this kind of di-
alogue concurrent with the formal Egypt-Israel negotiations, which
could eventually become a kind of once-removed negotiating process
in itself, will depend on the terms of reference we are able to develop on
West Bank/Gaza negotiations between now and when they start.
A Possible Course of Action
In my judgment there is a sufficient amount at stake for U.S. in-
terests to warrant using Sadat’s present posture to attempt to get more
from the Israelis than they are presently offering on West Bank/Gaza
linkage, though by no means all Sadat is asking. We need to calibrate
what we try for under this strategy carefully in order to ensure that the
risks are reasonable. We must obviously stop short of the point that we
believe entails a serious risk of placing the Treaty as a whole in jeop-
ardy. We will also want to keep sensitive antenna out to assess Sadat’s
position, since we cannot be in the position of pressing Israel for things
that the Egyptians themselves are not prepared to insist on.
With these considerations in mind we suggest a course of action
that will achieve something more for Sadat, but far less than he now
seeks, on West Bank/Gaza “linkage,” and will also ask a bit more of
Begin than he has indicated he is willing to give. If this course works,
we will have avoided a protracted delay and probable suspension of
the negotiations. If it does not work, we suggest a fallback we could go
to in an effort to get things moving again when we judge the time is
right. The fallback (see below) could also be viewed as an alternative to
pursue now if we wanted to try for more for Sadat.
The course of action I propose would be composed of the fol-
lowing components:
1. We would press both sides to try to wrap up all work on the
Treaty so that the West Bank/Gaza issue could be isolated as the sole
remaining obstacle before the Treaty can be signed.
2. We would tell the Israelis our understanding of what Sadat is
asking for and then describe what we believe the minimum will be that
we need to achieve if the Treaty process is not to be unreasonably de-

layed. If Israel will agree to this, we will endeavor to persuade Sadat to
agree.
—We would seek inclusion in the joint letter of a specific target
date for West Bank/Gaza elections. This could be either six months
from signing or we might suggest a specific date such as September 17,
recommend you phone and send written messages to both Sadat and
Begin, telling them what you believe is needed from each of them to re-
solve this issue, along the foregoing lines. Additionally, with Sadat we
will have to talk him out of his fixation about putting Gaza on a sepa-
rate track from the West Bank. This makes little sense even from the
standpoint of his own interests, and the Israelis in any case will not
agree to it.
A Possible Fallback
If the foregoing proves more than the Israelis can accept, or too
little for Sadat, or both, we may face a period during which negotia-
tions are suspended while both sides reflect on the consequences of a
stalemate. We would then need to reach a judgment on when and in
what way we should try to break the stalemate. We could try a different
kind of approach, which in effect constitutes a fallback to the one out-
lined above, as follows:
—We would take the position that the U.S. needs to have an un-
derstanding with Egypt and Israel on the agenda for the West Bank/
Gaza negotiations in order to complete the exchange of notes on this
subject. This need not be embodied in the joint note or be given formal
standing as a Treaty document but should be something that we can
convey to Sadat as an understanding we have reached with Israel on
how to proceed. In proposing a side understanding on the agenda, we
would be seeking enough that would be concrete so that Sadat could be
persuaded to step back from his most extreme demands, but that at the
same time would not commit Israel to substantive positions on the
agenda items. The purpose would be to make clear what issues will be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
negotiated. These will include questions of title to land, control over
land transfer, the responsibilities of the Palestinian police force, control
over water resources, control of the bridges, etc. Laying out these issues
would by itself demonstrate that a serious negotiation is ahead.
—In addition to the discussion on agenda, we would have a dis-
cussion with the Israelis particularly on how to handle the question of
the settlements during and in the negotiations. The purpose would be
to explore possible understandings. If the Israelis question why we are
doing this, the answer would be that President Carter made a promise
to President Sadat on this subject at Camp David, and it was on that
basis that Sadat agreed. Therefore, something must be done to clear up
this misunderstanding. However, we would go beyond simply trying
to sort out the Camp David misunderstanding and put the issue in the
context of how settlements might be handled in the upcoming negotia-
tions, but looking to the future, we might assure Israel that we are
prepared to work for the right of Israelis to live in the West Bank, pro-
vided their living there is not part of a program of continuing land
annexation.
Aid Strategy and Public Posture
On the question of aid, we would continue our consultations with
the Israelis on the two airfields but would not respond otherwise to Is-
raeli requests for additional aid for Sinai redeployment costs while our
efforts go forward to get the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty completed and an
agreed basis for West Bank/Gaza negotiations. Our position would be
that the Administration will be delivering to Congress in January a
message proposing authorization for a fund to support the peace effort.
This would include everything from possible U.S. help with the costs of
Israeli redeployment to assistance with a refugee solution, assistance
for development in the West Bank and Gaza, and support for regional
projects. We would tell the Israelis that we are not prepared to discuss
the cost of evacuation from Sinai now. We would have the option of
saying explicitly that we will not discuss this until it is clear how the
West Bank/Gaza negotiations will be organized, or we could leave this
implicit. When we are satisfied that Israel is working in good faith for
implementation of the Camp David general framework, we could
begin listening to the Israeli presentation on this subject, but we would
hold off a response until sometime next year when we are satisfied with
the progress in those negotiations.
Publicly, we would try to seize the high ground, starting immedi-
ately making the following points:

—The Treaty negotiations are virtually completed. It is a good
Treaty, meeting the legitimate interests of both parties. It has demon-
strated that a negotiation can produce peace between Israel and its
neighbors.
—During these negotiations, each party has committed itself to
begin promptly the next round of negotiations envisioned at Camp
David, those on the West Bank/Gaza.
—The Administration is developing for submission to Congress
early next year a plan for a U.S. financial contribution to the several ele-
ments of the peace process. In that context, we will have to consider
special programs and needs generated by implementation of the peace
agreements and to seize opportunities offered by the new environment
in the Middle East.
—We will, of course, continue our ongoing programs to support
the economic and military security of Israel and the efforts of President
Sadat to improve the lives of the people of Egypt.
—We do not see our financial support as in any way payment to
one side or the other for concluding this Treaty. They have done that in
their own interest. The United States, however, will want to play a con-
structive role in building on the foundation which they have laid.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

128.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 9, 1978
SUBJECT
Negotiating Strategy
In a strategy session at State this morning, two views were argued:
—We should basically reject Sadat’s new demands as going be-
yond Camp David. The President should tell him that the Treaty text as
it now stands must be accepted. In other words, we would not try to
pin the Israelis down on any of the West Bank/Gaza issues prior to the
conclusion of the treaty negotiations. It was generally recognized that
this would reduce Israel’s incentives for moving seriously on the West
Bank/Gaza, although we would continue to have some leverage in the
form of aid.
—We should meet Sadat part way in trying to clarify West Bank/

129.
Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L.
Atherton, Jr. to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, November 9, 1978
MR. SECRETARY:
Boutros Ghali called tonight to report on his and Ghorbal’s three-
hour meeting2 with Dayan, Weizman and Rubenstein. I record below in
some detail what he reported because it is clearly relevant to your
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
breakfast discussion3 with the President. In passing this on, Boutros
said he emphasized that he was raising nothing new; all the points he
made to the Israelis he has been making since the Washington talks
began. What is new, he said, is President Sadat’s insistence that these
are prerequisites for signing the peace treaty. He said the Israelis had
seen a “new Boutros” tonight.
Exchange of Letters
There must be a timetable as follows:
—Negotiations begin one month after ratification.
—Elections five to six months after that.
—Military government withdrawn one month after elections.
—Redeployment of troops one month after the military gov-
ernment is withdrawn (this could be in an Israeli letter to the U.S.).
Boutros said Dayan agreed to everything except fixing the date for
the election but without that date, the others which follow are mean-
ingless. Sadat insists on a timetable which makes clear that all of the
above will be completed by the end of the interim withdrawal period.
Boutros also asked for Gaza elections to be held first, which Dayan
adamantly refused.
Boutros said he heard for the first time tonight that Israel’s inter-
pretation of Camp David is that the Military Governor will be trans-
ferred but not abolished. This obviously came as a disquieting revela-
tion to him.
Unilateral Israeli Moves
Boutros said Dayan agreed on moving military government head-
quarters, an amnesty for political prisoners, and an end to restrictions
on political activity but rejected any unilateral steps to permit the re-
turn of displaced persons for family reunification purposes.
Boutros says he did not suggest it to Dayan, but would be pre-
pared for these unilateral steps to be recorded in an Israeli letter to us.
Gaza
Boutros said Sadat is adamant on the need for an Egyptian pres-
ence; what he really wants is a military presence but Boutros knows
this is not possible. He suggested a resident Egyptian Mission which
the Israelis could describe as a consulate. Dayan said this might be pos-
sible after the interim withdrawal, with visiting, non-permanent mis-
sions prior to that time.
Settlements
Dayan raised this, saying that Israel planned new settlements after
three months. Boutros says that he responded that if Israel does this,
even though they conclude a peace treaty, it would quickly begin to
crumble. There has to be a gentleman’s agreement at least that new set-
tlements will stop.
Finally, Boutros said when he finished the Israelis argued that all
of these details went beyond Camp David. He replied that all of the de-
tails on normalization in Annex III also went beyond Camp David, in-
cluding in particular the exchange of Ambassadors after one month. If
Egypt had agreed to such detail in its bilateral treaty, why should Israel
not agree to comparable details which were important to Egypt on the
West Bank/Gaza issues.
Boutros said the Egyptians would be drafting a letter or letters
which would incorporate their foregoing requirements. He looks for-
ward to hearing the results of my talk tomorrow with Dayan, which I
have set for 10:00AM. Boutros says Dayan and Weizman told him they
would be going to Canada to see Begin tomorrow to report all of this.
I suggest we not make any firm decisions on what we will do and
when until we can assess the results of this interaction between the
Egyptians and the Israelis.
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

130.
Letter From President Carter to Israeli Prime Minister Begin
Washington, November 11, 1978
To Prime Minister Begin,
The successful conclusion of an Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty is in
doubt.

131.
Editorial Note
On November 11, 1978, two meetings took place in Washington
between the U.S. and Israeli delegations on the outstanding issues of
the proposed West Bank/Gaza negotiations letter, the proposed Israeli
letter to Secretary of State Cyrus Vance covering the list of unilateral ac-
tions Israel would take in its relations with the Palestinians prior to the
opening of autonomy talks, and the time-phasing of the Israeli with-
drawal to the agreed interim line. No memoranda of conversation for
these meetings have been found. However, the Department of State
sent a summary of the talks written by Assistant Secretary of State for
Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold H. Saunders in telegram
287424 to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem, November 13. (National Ar-
Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Moshe Dayan provided an account
of the meetings in his memoirs. (Dayan, Breakthrough, pages 238–243)
The first meeting, lasting approximately three and a half hours,
among Vance (who was involved only for the first two hours),
Saunders, and Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., on the U.S.
side and Dayan and his negotiating team on the Israeli side, produced
“essentially sterile discussion.” (Telegram 287424 to Cairo, Tel Aviv,
and Jerusalem, November 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P840153–2234) In his memoirs, Dayan noted that Ath-
erton provided him with a U.S. draft of the letter on unilateral Israeli
moves vis-a`-vis the Palestinians. Intended for Dayan’s signature, this
draft committed Israel to lift restrictions on “the freedom of political ex-
pression” of the Palestinians and “their freedom to engage in political
activities,” to relocate the Israeli military government headquarters
from Gaza and Bet El to “new locations outside of the Arab municipal-
ities,” to grant “amnesty for certain prisoners and detainees” in the
West Bank and Gaza, and to agree to the establishment of an Egyptian
Liaison Office in Gaza. A copy of this draft letter is in the Department of
State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—
text, Dayan promised only to forward the draft letter to Begin and to Je-
rusalem, informing Atherton that he believed its terms were “not ac-
ceptable.” (Dayan, Breakthrough, page 239)
The second meeting, involving Vance, Atherton, Dayan, Israeli ad-
viser Aharon Barak, Department of State Legal Adviser Herbert J. Han-
sell, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South
Asian Affairs Michael E. Sterner, and Israeli Attorney General Meir
Rosenne, lasted until 1: a.m. the following morning. This meeting,
however, produced agreement to revise the West Bank/Gaza letter,
converting the format to a letter from President Jimmy Carter to Egyp-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tian President Anwar al-Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem
Begin. (Ibid.) The Department sent a copy of this revised draft in tele-
gram 287408 to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem, November 12. (Na-
November 13, the Department sent a revised copy of the letter that had
a clause that referred to a negotiation deadline of December 17 re-
moved. This point was one the United States had not discussed with ei-
ther the Egyptians or Israelis. (Telegram 287766 to Cairo and Tel Aviv,
November 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P840153–2250) The meeting also produced a new proposal on the
phasing of the Israeli withdrawal in Sinai to the interim line. The draft
appendix to Article I, Annex I of the peace treaty stipulated detailed
sub-phases for the Israeli withdrawal from Sinai; the Israeli delegation
suggested that the sub-phases should be left for “later discussions
among military representatives.” The Department sent the revised
draft of Article I and the appendix in telegram 287387 to Tel Aviv and
Cairo, November 12; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezin-
The following afternoon, November 12, Atherton and Hansell pre-
sented the drafts of the West Bank/Gaza letter and the Article I ap-
pendix on withdrawal phasing to the Egyptian delegation for their con-
sideration. The Egyptian delegation’s reaction was “largely negative.”
Vance noted: “On West Bank/Gaza letter, principal objections were
that it has been watered down in form (from joint letter directly com-
mitting Begin to letter from President Carter) and in substance (elec-
tions in six months to target date of end of 1979).” On phasing, the
Egyptians stated that “anything less” than “accelerated phasing with
specific times specified is unacceptable.” (Telegram 287424 to Cairo,
Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem, November 13; National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, P840153–2234)
The Department cabled a full draft copy of the peace treaty, in-
cluding annexes and letters, in a series of telegrams to the Embassies in
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State De-
text to the press prompted the government to publish the documents. A
copy of this published version is in Israel’s Foreign Relations: Selected

132.
Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Egyptian President Sadat
Washington, November 12, 1978
SUBJECT
Telephone Conversation between President Carter and President Sadat,
November 12, 1978
President Carter: I am going to send you a personal message2 later
on today which will have the most recent documents on the Israeli-
Egyptian peace treaty and will be delivered to you by Ambassador
Eilts. I think the negotiations have gone as far as we can go. As you
know, I have put in literally hundreds of hours into this matter. Secre-
tary Vance has almost abandoned his other duties. We have worked
out an agreement which is fair and which is balanced. I don’t think it’s
possible to get any substantial changes made in it by the Israelis or by
you. I would like your assurance in backing me in my final decisions. I
am going to call Prime Minister Begin3 after I talk to you. Tonight Secre-
tary Vance will be going to New York to meet with Begin4 and to de-
liver to him the same draft treaty and the same documents. My belief is
that the outcome of the entire negotiations for peace will depend upon
your willingness and Prime Minister Begin’s willingness to accept the
present draft.
President Sadat: When will I receive the documents from Ambas-
sador Eilts?
President Carter: We will get the documents to Ambassador Eilts
this afternoon, Washington time.
President Sadat: I will study it very carefully.
President Carter: I understand that. If there are a few things that you
still do not like, I would like for you to accept the document as it is
rather than to demand additional changes.
[Missing text?]
President Carter: Yes, of course, I have.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Sadat: Very good, because it will be a bad thing for both of
us here in the area if we don’t make the peace at least with Gaza.
President Carter: At least with Gaza?
President Sadat: Yes. It will be detrimental for both of us.
President Carter: The part about having a separate language on
Gaza creates problems because it tends to separate Gaza from the West
Bank.
President Sadat: Gaza was taken from Egypt. I am asking them to
return Sinai and leave Gaza. This is difficult. Those who were in
Baghdad5 must not get the upper hand.
President Carter: What specifically do you want with Gaza, Mr.
President?
President Sadat: I want Gaza to go on the line that we have agreed
upon in Camp David and in the timing of the withdrawal.
President Carter: We have in the document the fact that negotia-
tions will begin in one month.
President Sadat: It is very essential to know when the first phase of
the evacuation will take place. This is the most of Sinai that we will be
receiving and will be celebrating. We shouldn’t do this without Gaza.
President Carter: Suppose the Israelis agree to move their military
headquarters from Gaza as a unilateral step?
President Sadat: The full autonomy still remains.
President Carter: We agree that the full autonomy will be returned
to Gaza and West Bank, and that elections will be held before the end of
next year. But, I hate to separate Gaza from the West Bank as a separate
case.
President Sadat: Gaza has been taken, as I told, with Sinai. It will not
be that this is a separate agreement. We should be upset, you and me.
President Carter: I don’t quite understand why you want to sepa-
rate Gaza, because this was not the agreement at Camp David.
President Sadat: I don’t agree with the West Bank and Gaza being
separated. Gaza was taken from Egypt. I cannot accept Sinai and leave
Gaza.
President Carter: Mr. President, I am not specifically sure what you
want them to agree to on Gaza.
President Sadat: This Gaza land was taken from Egypt along with
the Sinai land.
President Carter: What I have in mind on that is to have the Israelis
agree, whether as a unilateral step to permit political campaigning; po-

litical meeting without restraint, as long as they are peaceful; to with-
draw their military headquarters from Gaza, without any reciprocal ac-
tion on the part of Egypt; to commence the negotiations on the West
Bank and Gaza within a month; and to agree that the elections for the
autonomous self-government would be completed next year. All of
those things would apply to the West Bank and Gaza, except the mili-
tary government would be removed, the headquarters would be re-
moved from Gaza without regard to anything else.
President Sadat: When will the first phase of withdrawal be, Mr.
President, in Sinai? We can finish the whole thing about Gaza and the
West Bank by keeping them together.
President Carter: The first phase of withdrawal has to be within
nine months. Is that correct?
President Sadat: Right.
President Carter: And complete withdrawal within three years.
President Sadat: From two to three years.
President Carter: Yes, from two to three years. What I am saying
is that we will have the elections actually conducted for the self-
government in 1979 which would be just next year.
President Sadat: When you say from six to nine months, it will be
next year.
President Carter: Mr. President, I understand that. I don’t care what
you and the Israelis do, but I don’t think that this is reasonable request
of you. I don’t think it is right to separate Gaza and make it a special
case.
President Sadat: This I can’t do, because it is detrimental for both of
us. I am trying to make it easy for them and find some point to agree on
the timing and the West Bank. It is because of the West Bank. If it takes
six to nine months, this will mean June 1979. This may mean separate
agreements. I want Sinai and nothing after six or seven months and
nothing about Gaza, except negotiations. After June this will take more
than one year in the negotiations.
President Carter: I think they will agree to have elections by the end
of 1979, so there would not be a delay.
President Sadat: By the end of 1979?
President Carter: That is correct.
President Sadat: Quite frankly, I have found that in seven, eight, or
even nine months to accomplish the first phase of withdrawal on Sinai
without anything in the West Bank and Gaza. The West Bank could be
at the end of the year. This is okay, but without Gaza, it is a separate
agreement and this is detrimental for both of us.
President Carter: President Sadat, I don’t agree with you because
the final withdrawal from the Sinai is two or three years. There would

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
be a self-government set up in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank before
you give the entire Sinai back. It would not be a separate agreement.
President Sadat: It would be a separate agreement without anything
in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. The difficulty is that Gaza is some-
thing that they have already taken from Egypt. Our European friends
are behind the idea of Gaza—Callaghan, Schmidt, and all the others.
This I cannot accept.
President Carter: What do you see as an alternative, Mr. President?
President Sadat: If they agree about 1979, it is okay for me. The first
phase of withdrawal in Sinai can be nine or ten months, but with it let
there be Gaza and the West Bank. The West Bank can be at the end of
the year, but Gaza should be linked with our timetable, Mr. President.
President Carter: It would be hard for me to explain why we treat
Gaza better than we treat the West Bank because the Palestinians move
back and forth between the two. I thought that you and I had always
agreed that we should not separate the Gaza Strip from the West Bank.
President Sadat: I don’t agree with the first phase of withdrawal
without at least Gaza. If it is Gaza and the West Bank, it is okay. I can
wait until October for Gaza and the West Bank to come together with
the first phase of withdrawal in Sinai.
President Carter: When you say Gaza and the West Bank, you are
talking about the self-government elections, correct?
President Sadat: I am talking about the start of full autonomy with
the first phase of withdrawal in Sinai.
President Carter: In other words, you want the first phase of with-
drawal in the Sinai to be the same time as the elections for the self-
government and autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza.
President Sadat: Not the elections, but the start which will mean
nine months from now. In one month we can sit down and discuss and
then make the election, but in nine months the first phase of with-
drawal will take place at the same time the autonomy starts. We should
complete it before the elections.
President Carter: The autonomy will start at the time of the elec-
tions. It is going to be a complicated matter, as you know, to arrange for
the elections because its a long tedious process to get people registered
to vote. As you know, women have never voted in those elections. I just
believe that if you insist upon this it is going to delay the first phase of
withdrawal from the Sinai even if everybody works as eagerly as pos-
sible to get the elections completed. I don’t believe that we can do it,
Mr. President, before the end of 1979.
President Sadat: No, this process will not take more than one
month: but I am giving nine months from the first phase of withdrawal
and the start of autonomy. I can’t take the first phase of withdrawal and

leave anything in Gaza and the West Bank. I am trying to make Gaza a
compromise. Let the withdrawal from Sinai be postponed, instead of
nine months let it be ten months. I am ready to accept this.
President Carter: I see. Mr. President, I am not sure what this is
going to do to the negotiations. There is a limit to how much time I can
spend on it.
President Sadat: I know the effort that you have given to this.
Frankly, I cannot do anything detrimental for both of us. Even with the
Baghdad meeting and what is happening, I am in full control. But such
a step like the first phase of withdrawal without anything happening in
Gaza and the West Bank, it would be detrimental. It would be a sepa-
rate agreement. As I told you, Mr. President, I don’t want this first
phase of withdrawal from Sinai so early. We can postpone it. I have
given the Israelis the biggest concession they could want in starting the
normal relations after the first phase of withdrawal while they are still
occupying my country. I have been blamed all over the Arab world and
even by the critics of my country. Wherever I have given you my word,
I will stick to it. Let’s look to anything that will damage this.
President Carter: Not having discussed this particular point with
you, what you specifically want to occur in Gaza is . . .
President Sadat: The first phase of withdrawal in Sinai will take
place the same day the Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank start au-
tonomy. This will mean that before the first phase of withdrawal is
completed we shall work together with the Israelis and you on this. The
day withdrawal is completed the same day autonomy begins in the
West Bank and Gaza or Gaza and postpone the West Bank. I don’t want
to do it alone in Sinai.
President Carter: Let me ask you in the worst case suppose it takes
two years to do that?
President Sadat: Two years for the elections.
President Carter: Yes.
President Sadat: In this case they don’t want peace. They want any-
thing to wait until the next election in your country. You know the
weight of this.
President Carter: Suppose you, the Israelis and I work as hard as we
can and we cannot get the Palestinians to cooperate; we cannot get the
Jordanians to cooperate; we have difficulty getting people to register to
vote; and elections may not be held inspite of our best efforts. This is
what I fear might happen. I am not predicting that it will happen and I
hope it will not, but to tie the two things together may mean that there
will be a great delay in the whole process even if the Israelis and you
work in good faith. It is a very complicated thing to arrange for the first

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
time, complete elections and the establishment of a new government
where people have never voted before.
President Sadat: Mr. President, the first phase of withdrawal in
Gaza is my responsibility. Gaza was taken from Egypt. I am ready to
force this issue and I have given you my word that I am ready to pro-
ceed in both places, Gaza and the West Bank, if King Hussein is not
going to do it.
President Carter: Let me ask you this question then, Mr. President.
What will be the reaction in the Arab world if Gaza is given special
treatment and the process takes place in Gaza and does not take place
in the West Bank?
President Sadat: This will be a victory for both of us, because it is not
a separate agreement in Sinai only. I have declared already that I [am]
ready to force this on Gaza because I am responsible for Gaza. What-
ever delays there are in the West Bank it will be done to their position
with King Hussein.
President Carter: I understand your position and we will do the best
we can.
President Sadat: Please, Mr. President.
President Carter: I will try.
President Sadat: You know I am ready to take any risk since you
have known me. This time this will be detrimental for both of us.
President Carter: Let me talk about a couple more things before we
hang up. It is very important that you do two things, if you can. One is
to emphasize in your public statements the positive aspects of the nego-
tiations and the peace treaties to prepare not only your own people, but
the rest of the world for the benefits of peace. I think there is an inclina-
tion on the part, and I am going to tell Begin the same thing, of Israel
and Egypt to point out the problems with the negotiations because that
is what we are trying to discuss at this point. People tend to lose sight of
all the many advantages that will accrue to Egypt, the Arab world and
the Middle East, if peace can be brought between you and Israel. Let it
be possible for us to defend the Middle East against the Soviets, it
would make it possible for you to turn your tremendous political and
military support to Sudan and the Saudis and others. I hope that you
will emphasize the positive result that will be achieved if and when a
peace treaty is concluded. Please do that for me.
President Sadat: Sure, Mr. President.
President Carter: The other thing is that I need to have you to be as
flexible as you possibly can on these individual points. I am perfectly
willing to come over there to talk to Fahd and to talk to Hussein or to
have them come over here to meet with me to try to encourage them to
participate in the West Bank negotiations. I need for you to do the same

thing to try to do what is possible to encourage the Saudis and the Jor-
danians to support the West Bank discussions. If you can do that, I
would be very grateful.
President Sadat: I shall do this and you have my word. If the Israelis
agree on my point, everything will be easy for both of us. They will see
the results in the end. They will see that real autonomy in Gaza will
move the hold [whole] thing, Mr. President.
President Carter: I understand that. Is it possible for you to meet
personally with Fahd and/or Hussein?
President Sadat: Not yet. I am punishing them for what happened
in Baghdad. I am in full control. Nothing makes me waver. There are
forty million Egyptians, the supreme of the Arab world, behind me.
There are more than 90 percent of the Arab world behind me.
President Carter: I don’t disagree with that. I think you are abso-
lutely right. But how soon do you think you might be able to meet the
Saudis or Hussein?
President Sadat: Give me Gaza. With the first phase of withdrawal
and I am responsible to continue the whole thing. With that I make my
whole proposal. The West Bank is a bit hard and I know their schemes
for the West Bank. It is hard, but let us do in Gaza with the Sinai. As I
tell you, it will be very easy after that. There should be something on
the ground so their eyes see it. But the Israelis are considering now that
they have much to do with the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, this
makes the other camp think that this is a separate agreement.
President Carter: I will try to work on the how the Gaza Strip issues
impact on the others because there is a real limit to how much more
time I can put on this effort and everytime we negotiate a final draft
over here with the negotiators, including Israelis and Egyptians, they
go back home and we have to do it all over again because new points
are raised and new disputes arise. I just hope that if you’ll let me try to
work on this Gaza question that you have just raised, that you will
really try to be flexible on the other points. We have negotiated a good
document, and I hope that you will go over it with Ambassador Eilts
and be as flexible as possible on it and back me as you did at Camp
David.
President Sadat: I shall always respect you, Mr. President, but let me
in all candor tell you. I must tell you the truth because we are saying to-
gether the same thing.
President Carter: Well, you know we never have let the Iraqis and
the Syrians negotiate for us before, and I think that the benefits of
peace, as supported by you and me, will be obvious to all. I have very
good hopes that the Saudis will give us support. I think Hussein will
come later on. But, I don’t think that you and I can hope to please the
more radical Arabs, no matter what we do.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(Temporary Disconnection.)
President Sadat: We are ready to treat them according to the United
Nations Charter like any other people in the world—like you, like the
United States. But they want preferable positions. We don’t agree to
this principle. These are small points, but believe me, it is very hard. At
the same time I will be ready. I shall be telling all of them. As I have
agreed with you, even the normal relations part before the Israeli with-
drawal, I have done all I can, Mr. President. They are already greedy.
They won’t buy everything?
President Carter: Mr. President, they feel the same way about you
and I think both of you are wrong. I think both sides need more peace.
President Sadat: That is my oil. They think that it is theirs.
President Carter: They want to have a chance to buy it, not take it,
Mr. President.
President Sadat: We are ready, Mr. President. We are ready to sell
them. And in the future the difficulty with them is that they need
nothing for the future. Well, I don’t agree to this at all. You know, Mr.
President, I have seen other schemes in [missing text] and so and so.
Well, they don’t give me any opportunity to do this. Opportunity for
agreement. No Egyptian will agree to this. Imposing their conditions
on us. I am ready for full recognition, normal relations, good neighbor-
hood, a joint committee between us and them to put the whole thing to-
gether. I am sure in six months everything will be judged. [missing text]
agree to put in the treaty such things like they ask for, because this im-
poses conditions.
President Carter: I understand. When you go over the document
with Ambassador Eilts . . . it’s one that I think is a sound document and
fair and please go as far as you can, even though there are some parts in
it that you may not like to accept, because there are parts in it that the
Israelis do not like and I am trying to get them to accept it too—both of
you in the spirit of compromise.
President Sadat: I shall do, Mr. Carter, as I have always done with
you. I shall work very close and I shall tell you on every point why I
don’t like.
President Carter: I understand. Make those differences as few as
possible, Mr. President.
President Sadat: [missing text]
President Carter: Good luck to you.
President Sadat: [missing text]
President Carter: Thank you, sir.
President Sadat: Good-bye.

133.
Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin
Washington, November 12, 1978
SUBJECT
Telephone Conversation between President Carter and Prime Minister Begin,
November 12, 1978
President Carter: I have sent you a personal letter today by Secre-
tary Vance.
Prime Minister Begin: He will give it to me at the airport?
President Carter: Yes, as soon as he sees you. The essence of it is, in
my own opinion in spite of all of the efforts that Vance and the negoti-
ators have made, the prospects at this point of approving an agreement
are quite remote. My own belief is that the deep feeling and demands
on Israel on one side and Egypt on the other, without substantial
courage and flexibility, are incompatible. We have tried to explore, as
best we could, language that would be a reasonable compromise, and
that would be fair to both nations and would carry out the commit-
ments made at Camp David. We also realize very clearly that to trans-
late the general language at Camp David into specific agreements is a
major step forward and also very difficult. Secretary Vance met last
night until about one-thirty this morning with your negotiators4 and I
suggested yesterday that he bring them up with him to save your own
time and to let you know what the tentative agreements are.
Prime Minister Begin: I don’t know yet what they discussed.
President Carter: I realize that you don’t. He’ll bring along the Is-
raeli negotiators with him. We have just about reached the end of our
ability, because on several occasions, as you know, including about
three weeks ago when I personally met with both negotiators, once we
reach an agreement here and it goes back to either you, the Israeli Cab-
inet, or President Sadat, the negotiated agreement is thrown aside and
additional demands are made. I don’t criticize anyone for it, but it has
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
been increasingly obvious that the divisions, instead of becoming re-
solved, are becoming deeper. My hope is that, within the bounds of
your own principles and beliefs of what is best for Israel, that you look
with favor on the present draft6 of the treaty and the other documents
attached. They are not exactly as you would prefer, or President Sadat
would prefer, but I hope that you, along with President Sadat will be as
flexible as possible. I talked with President Sadat this afternoon7 just be-
fore calling you.
Prime Minister Begin: I will, of course, read with great attention
your letter, but as I don’t know yet any news about the decisions that
took place during the night. I can only say, Mr. President, that you
didn’t tell me that the draft presented to me is, in my opinion, a devia-
tion from the Camp David conference. I have told my friends that we
hold true and faithful to the Camp David framework. We shall not de-
viate from it whatsoever. The demands brought by Mr. Ghali from
Egypt are a deviation from the Camp David agreements. It is absolutely
clear. I had heard that if the Government of Israel does not agree to set
up a timetable corresponding to the time of withdrawal to the Ras Mu-
hammad and al-Arish line, then the Egyptians will not fulfill their com-
mitment to exchange resident ambassadors.
Ezer Weizman might have said something to General Ali, which
was his right, but he does not decide the issues, as none of your repre-
sentatives do, Mr. President. The Government of Israel decides. If the
decision of the Government of Israel goes against any hints given by
Ezer Weizman, then that decision stands. The Egyptians cannot say
you broke your promise. We didn’t break any promises. The decisions
are, in a Parliamentary regime, with the Government of Israel, not even
with the Prime Minister. I am also one of the Cabinet.
At Camp David, the Israeli delegation had full powers of the Cab-
inet to decide. This is not the case. If the Egyptians threaten us with not
sending ambassadors, then we shall ask them to agree that ambas-
sadors will be sent before we start any withdrawal, after the documents
of ratification come into force and the peace treaty itself comes into
force, as actually it should be. The peace treaty is signed, confirmed,
and ratified, then we should have normal relations as written at Camp
David. We agreed to postpone it actually for ten months. This was a
very great concession. Now we are threatened that there won’t be any
ambassadors whatsoever if we don’t comply with their demands. So
that is not the way to negotiate in good faith. We do negotiate in good
faith. The draft letters about the changes that will take place with Egypt
only, because Jordan does not join them, without the administrative
council, is not in conformity with the Camp David agreements. We
never talked about a timetable of five or six months. We cannot say be-
cause there is the PLO.
The people, Mr. President, who met your friend, Mr. Atherton, are
threatened with their lives. We have to give them our protection. We
are prepared, although Jordan does not join, to negotiate with Egypt
alone the modalities, the responsibilities, and the powers. But we
cannot sign a document in which it is plainly said the elections will take
place in six months. They may take place in three months, and they not
take place in nine months. We cannot say. We don’t have candidates.
So, how can we sign such a document? I wrote a draft which was fair to
everybody, although Jordan does not join. Notwithstanding this fact,
we are prepared to negotiate within a month after the exchange of
letters of ratification, everything which is written at Camp David, but
do not ask us to sign a document that the elections will take place for
the administrative council between five or six months. That is abso-
lutely impossible. This I am going to explain to Secretary Vance.
Then, Mr. President, may I say a word about the financial issue. I
had the broad idea that we should not ask for a grant at this time, but
for a loan for twenty-five years. I was almost stoned in my country be-
cause of it. I do not make any exaggeration. Then there is the question
of the two air fields. I read the last draft sent by Secretary Vance—just
absolutely non-concrete. I don’t know what is the plan. Secretary Vance
said he would talk to you and then you will talk to Congressional
leaders. I also wanted to talk to Congress. They are my friends. Secre-
tary Vance advised me not to talk to the Senate. Until now we don’t ac-
tually know anything. What can we do? The evacuation of an army of
tens of thousands and installations which were built for eleven years is
connected with a very serious expenditure. I didn’t want to ask for a
grant, I asked for a loan. We shall repay it. But, we have no reply yet;
and we don’t know.
Mr. Atherton made a very grave remark to Dayan during their talk
that the question is being raised that we combine peace with money. I
take exception to such a remark. We don’t combine any money with
anything; but we put the facts before the Secretary. Without any an-
swers, we are walking through darkness. We are not beggars, Mr. Pres-
ident. I go into the city of Jerusalem and look at the walls and read
“Begin traitor”. I have a debate with my own friends all the time. We
have to care for the security and the future of our people. We have
made great sacrifices, Mr. President. You know very well that at Camp
David I did not promise to remove the settlements from Sinai. I did it
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
later for the sake of peace. I brought it to Parliament. My old friends
were in revolt against it. I don’t think that the peace talks should be sus-
pended. For every draft I will give another draft. This is the nature of
negotiations.
President Carter: I think it is important that Secretary Vance explain
to you personally at some length because some of the matters that con-
cern you are not compatible with President Sadat’s position. He has
never intended to reverse his commitment once it was made, as far as I
know, on any issue. Although I went to him on the ambassadors, at the
request of your own negotiators, who told me they would withdraw
from al-Arish and the central part of the Sinai early, and on that basis I
went to President Sadat and asked him for a one-month commitment
on the ambassadorship exchange and that’s why he gave it to me.
Prime Minister Begin: Mr. President, may I interrupt you for a mo-
ment. But everything was ad referendum. The Government makes the
decisions, not our negotiators.
President Carter: I understand, Mr. Prime Minister, but that proviso
was not mentioned at the time that Dayan and Weizman and Barak all
told me there would be an early withdrawal from el-Arish. But in spite
of that, President Sadat told me this afternoon that he was not going
back on his commitment to me to exchange ambassadors within one
month.
Prime Minister Begin: I got this information from my own friends
yesterday on the phone.
President Carter: Mr. Prime Minister, I just talked to President Sadat
on the telephone. I think the time schedule for the elections and the es-
tablishment of the self-government are very important to President
Sadat. I think here again Secretary Vance can explain what President
Sadat’s position is. I think that he is not as interested in an exact
number of months as he is in the certainty of the elections being held.
But I think that he has one advantage. Once he tells me something
through his negotiators, that it is a final and definite commitment, I
don’t have to worry about it. I live in a democracy also in which I know
that I have to refer agreements made to the Senate if they are in the
treaty form. It is very difficult to negotiate over and over with the Is-
raeli Government on the same issues once we thought it had been
concluded.
Prime Minister Begin: No, sir, we don’t negotiate over and over. We
found two points on which we did not agree. We proposed compro-
mise proposals which were not acceptable by the other side. The Gov-
ernment has to take decisions. We don’t negotiate over and over again
anything as far as we are concerned. When we got the draft letter,
which was unacceptable to us, which Dayan told the Egyptian negoti-
ating team, then again those five or six months are uncertain. We

cannot accept. We have another draft. So, why should our draft letter
be thrown into the basket and the other letter be the document? Be-
cause President Sadat wants it—you know I am his friend and I wish
him well. How can we say that the elections will take place in five or six
months? If the PLO comes with its pistols—we shall do our best to talk
to them, to convince them. We invited Jordan. But we cannot force any-
body either to join our peace-making process, or to come into our elec-
tion process. We can only convince people. This is the point. I don’t
think that we read about renegotiations of points. We have our point of
view in the Cabinet. We have a real objection to including those words,
“Noting, etc . . .”, taking them out of context. If that is taken from Camp
David, why shouldn’t other sentences be taken. This is one of our objec-
tions. There was a decision by the Cabinet. The majority of the Cabinet
decided not to make a precipate withdrawal. I wasn’t even there. We
must obey by these decisions. What Ezer said wasn’t binding.
President Carter: I am not trying to reopen that discussion. It was
not only Weizman; it was Dayan and Barak. But, that is not the main
concern that I have. There is a limit to how much longer we can go on
with the negotiations and I hope that you will read my letter very care-
fully within the bounds of your own commitment.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, sir. Surely I will.
President Carter: I hope you will be as flexible as possible.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, I think I will write to you from Jeru-
salem, answering your letter.
President Carter: I think the answers can be accomplished in your
discussions with Secretary Vance.
Prime Minister Begin: I will get back home on Monday9 in the after-
noon. I will convene a session of the Cabinet on Tuesday or perhaps on
Wednesday. During the week I will answer you. Believe me, Mr. Presi-
dent, we will do our best to have peace. We have done all our best.
Sometimes we are not understood by some members of your Adminis-
tration, Mr. President, with all due respect.
President Carter: I will tell Secretary Vance to discuss this again
with you tonight and to explain the present draft document—by the
way, which your negotiators have agreed to this. I hope you will also
agree.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, sir.
President Carter: Good.
Prime Minister Begin: Thank you very much, Mr. President.

134.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
ISRAELI SIDE
Menachem Begin, Prime Minister
Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister
Ezer Weizman, Defense Minister
Simcha Ehrlich, Finance Minister
Yitzhak Modai, Petroleum and Infrastructure Minister
Aharon Barak, Justice, Israeli Supreme Court
Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Simcha Dinitz, Israeli Ambassador to the United States
General Ephrain Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Colonel Shatila, Aide to Minister Weizman
AMERICAN SIDE
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador at Large
Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary, NEA
SUBJECT
Egyptian-Israeli Peace Negotiations
Prime Minister Begin opened the discussion by suggesting that the
agenda should include the draft exchange of letters on the West Bank/
Gaza, financial issues and the draft peace treaty. Noting that certain
drafts were discussed between the Secretary and Dayan the previous
night, he asked what are the latest Egyptian demands.
Secretary Vance summarized the status of negotiations as follows:
—Treaty text—each side still had some questions; we believe it
should be considered complete.
—Annex I and its Appendix—complete except for the question of
the sub-phasing of withdrawal.
—Annex III—complete.
—Maps—complete.
—West Bank/Gaza letter—unresolved.
Begin interrupted to ask if Egypt had rejected the letter. The Secre-
tary said the Egyptians were studying it; Sadat had not yet seen it but
we had given the text to the Egyptian Delegation this afternoon.
The Secretary continued his status report as follows:
—U.S. commitments letter—okay.
—Airfields letter—complete.
—Interpretive minute—Egyptians still have a question about the
second paragraph.
—The minute to Annex I—okay.
—Letter on unilateral Israeli steps in the West Bank/Gaza—dis-
cussed among the parties but not resolved.
—Oil—discussed between the parties but not resolved.
The Prime Minister then turned to financial issues. He had origi-
nally spoken of a U.S. loan, for which he had almost been stoned in Is-
rael. He had subsequently corrected his mistake. Israel’s needs should
have been clearer from Camp David, although the discussion there had
singled out the issue of the airfields. The Minister of Finance has a
memorandum on this subject. Israel’s problem is that, if it is to evacuate
Sinai in three years, moving army installations and civilian settlements
will involve great costs which Israel has no way of covering.
Begin recalled that the Secretary had told him at the Regency Hotel
(November 2) that he would discuss this question with the President
who would consult Congress. Begin said he had read our letter on the
airfields which also hints at other financial issues. It is so general that
Israel still knows nothing. The letter contains no pledge. Israel does not
want peace with bankruptcy. Israel needs to know before the next Cab-
inet meeting—today or tomorrow—what the President will suggest to
Congress. The Finance Minister had wanted to see high U.S. Treasury
officials; he had been told he would be welcome but could not discuss
this subject. The Finance Minister will see Blumenthal on Tuesday, and
the Prime Minister wanted to know if he could now discuss the ques-
tion of financial assistance.
The Secretary said we are studying Israel’s request as part of our
regular budgetary process covering economic assistance for FY ’80. We
must proceed in a constitutional way. We need to complete the budget
by December. In arriving at a figure, we always take into account Israeli
security requirements.
There are two new items, the Secretary said:
1. The airfields on which Secretary Brown had written what we
were prepared to do. We need information in order to decide what we
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
can do. We have sent a team to Israel which will report the facts. Then
we can make a decision.
2. In New York the Prime Minister had raised a new issue, namely,
the loan request. We need to study this, the President needs to make a
decision and then we need to consult Congress before informing Israel
of our decision. We do not yet have the facts and cannot give an answer
at this time. We must follow the regular budgetary process as does Is-
rael. We are far along on the FY ’80 military and economic assistance
question. We need time to give answers on these new items.
The Prime Minister said he understood U.S. procedures but what
would he tell his people. He hoped the treaty would be signed; then Is-
rael would start to withdraw. He wanted to know tomorrow what the
President would suggest. The Secretary said he could not promise a
reply by a given date, but we would be glad to receive the memo-
randum from the Finance Minister. Dinitz interjected that it covers the
airfields, special assistance, and regular FY ’80 assistance.
The Secretary said we would need to study it to see if it contains
sufficient facts for us to make a basic judgment. He could not give a de-
cision now on whether we would provide further assistance or how
much. The President has talked to Congress but needs more informa-
tion about what is involved. The Prime Minister said there will obvi-
ously be additional expenses for Israel, and it is strange that the U.S.
cannot say it will view Israel’s request favorably. The Secretary replied
that we do not have the necessary information.
Weizman suggested that the “second mission” be expedited to
look at the other parts of the problem. The Secretary responded that he
had not understood Israel expected a second mission. (Comment:
Weizman’s reference was apparently to the postponed McGiffert trip.)
The Secretary said we are awaiting data from Israel. Begin said this
was logical. The Finance Minister would discuss the matter with Blu-
menthal, who would need instructions from the President. The Secre-
tary responded that, if Finance Minister Ehrlich has the figures, he
would ask Blumenthal to listen to them. We could not now, however,
make a commitment on a grant or loan in any given amount. Begin con-
cluded this subject by saying at least we were agreed there should be a
meeting between Ehrlich and Blumenthal.
Turning to the treaty text, Begin said he understood we considered
it closed, but this could not be the case until it was initialed. Israel did
not reject Egyptian proposals. Israel, however, has objected from the
beginning to the “noting” paragraph in the preamble and to the lan-
guage on Gaza. Israel wants to solve these two issues but the Israeli
Government had taken the position that the present language is not
satisfactory.
Barak then read proposed Israeli compromise language on the pre-
amble and Gaza. The Secretary replied that these suggestions had been
considered and opposed by Egypt. Egypt had made proposals on Ar-
ticles IV and VI which Israel opposed. If we opened up any of these
issues, we would open up all kinds of issues. In our best judgment, the
present draft is fair for both sides.
Begin said he had instructions from the Cabinet. This does not
mean re-opening the treaty but making another attempt to find a solu-
tion. The Prime Minister said he understood that the Secretary said he
could not accept opening the text, but the Israeli Cabinet had not ac-
cepted this. He had suggested an idea for balancing the language in the
preamble but Atherton had said it was a non-starter. Why did the U.S.
say this and yet consider Egyptian proposals. The Secretary said the
latter were also non-starters. We think it would be a mistake to open
the treaty; it would then begin to unravel.
Rosenne interjected that the interpretive note on the treaty had
been agreed, yet now the Egyptians want to reconsider it. The Secretary
said the Egyptians could not do this and he would speak to them.
Begin said the Israeli Delegation and he could not do anything in
view of the Cabinet decision. The Secretary replied that he hoped the
Cabinet would reconsider in light of the present situation.
Begin asked whether it was premature to discuss the exchange of
letters on the West Bank and Gaza. In response to Dayan’s query, the
Secretary said we expected an Egyptian reply Tuesday at the earliest
but could not be certain. Begin said should we discuss it or wait. Dayan
said he preferred to wait; if the Egyptians turned it down, there was no
use discussing it.
The Secretary commented that he thought his discussions with
Dayan the previous night on the letter had led to a constructive result.
President Carter had approved it and agreed to recommend it. Dayan
then said it was perhaps better for the Prime Minister to give his views
to the Secretary.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Begin said he would try, noting that he had strong message from
the Cabinet to the contrary. He then asked if the idea was that President
Carter would send this letter to him and Sadat.
The Secretary said the suggestion had been made that it would be
better for President Carter to write the letter if this would be easier than
a joint letter or an exchange of notes. The President was prepared to do
this if it would help the parties, but he preferred an exchange of letters
between them. Begin said he agreed with President Carter. He asked
what is the rationale for a third country to write about the views of two
other countries. The Secretary said the idea would be to record views
we had heard from those countries, if this would help. Barak interjected
that this had been the Israeli Delegation’s idea. Begin reiterated his
question: why should the President of the United States write his views
about elections in a third country? The Secretary recalled that at Camp
David it had sometimes been easier and moved things forward when
the President wrote on behalf of the other two. Begin said there was a
difference. At Camp David they had dealt with specific issues—e.g., Je-
rusalem, Palestinian people or Palestinian Arabs of Judea and Samaria.
Those were concrete problems different from the present issue.
Begin said he had heard the first draft8 of the letter included a
clause saying the treaty would be carried out independently of the
West Bank/Gaza negotiations, but this had been deleted. The Secretary
responded that this point was already in the treaty. Begin said that the
“noting” paragraph in the preamble was already in the Camp David
Framework but had not been deleted; therefore why delete the “inde-
pendently” phrase. The Secretary replied that this was President
Carter’s letter, and he preferred simpler language. But the parties must
accept it, Begin said. The Secretary replied that he agreed it was up to
the parties. Begin commented that he understood that Israel should
change things when Egypt demanded it. The Secretary responded that
the language deleted from the letter had never been seen by the Egyp-
tians. Begin responded that he had never said that; he had made a gen-
eral comment that, when Egypt demands something be taken out, it is
taken out.

135.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
24770. Subject: Meeting With Sadat. Ref: A) Cairo 24767, B) Cairo
Summary. Sadat somewhat disturbed about his telecon with Presi-
dent Carter of last night. He wished confirm to President Carter
various positions that he had stated in telecon. Specifically, in absence
some kind of specific linkage between first phase of Sinai withdrawal
and full autonomy for the Palestinians, at least in Gaza, he cannot agree
sign Sinai treaty. Doing so would be a separate peace. Such separate
peace would be detrimental to him and to President Carter in area. He
insisted that his position is consistent with Camp David Accords and
that he is not seeking introduce any new element. If West Bank/Gaza
settlement cannot be obtained at this time, linkage should at least in-
clude Gaza. He does not at this time wish contact Hussein and Saudis,
but plans “punish” them. Hussein, in his view, will not join negotia-
tions until after he sees successful effort in Gaza. If Israelis insist they
will not be ready before end of 1979 to establish autonomous self-
governing body in West Bank/Gaza, Egypt can wait and delay first in-
terim withdrawal in Sinai by several months in order permit some syn-
chronization. Israelis are seeking to stall in West Bank/Gaza. Exchange
of ambassadors, if it takes place without anything having happened in
West Bank/Gaza, will be bad. He professed to have been “hurt” by
charge that he is now demanding more than Camp David Agreements.
He stands by everything he promised, but contended that there are
limits to what he can do. He asked that President Carter reconsider
various points mentioned in telecon; otherwise he cannot sign treaty. I
sought to explain to Sadat what President Carter had in mind in his
comments. Sadat asked that I report on our talk so that President Carter
can take it into account before sending promised follow-up message.
Sadat’s back is up. This is partly a negotiating ploy, but we should not
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
underestimate importance he attaches to meaningful linkage formula.
He wants withdrawal in Sinai to begin, but has come to realize need for
some sort of synchronization of Sinai and West Bank/Gaza activities if
his tarnished Arab credentials are to be maintained. End summary.
1. Met this afternoon with Sadat, at his request, in Ismailia.
Meeting lasted hour and a half. VP Mubarak and PriMin Khalil were
also present.
2. Sadat recounted his half hour telecon of last night with President
Carter. He was somewhat disturbed about some of the things that had
been mentioned and said that he had summoned me to confirm to Pres-
ident Carter the positions that he had stated in telecon. He asked that I
convey following to President Carter:
A. President Carter had told him of a new American draft, which I
would hand to Sadat. The President had asked that Sadat not make any
alterations so that the existing gaps between the parties can be bridged
and the text accepted as the final treaty. Sadat said he has no objection,
but if there is no specific linkage between the first phase of Sinai with-
drawal and full autonomy for the Palestinians, at least in Gaza, he
cannot agree. President Carter, according to Sadat, had seemed per-
plexed at Sadat’s position. The President had noted that there is no
legal connection between the Sinai and West Bank/Gaza problems.
Sadat claimed that he made it clear that there is such a connection in the
Camp David framework document. (PriMin Khalil then cited para B–2
of the “Framework for Peace,” which invites the other parties to pro-
ceed simultaneously to negotiate and conclude similar peace treaties
with a view to achieving comprehensive peace. The “other parties,”
Sadat and Khalil contended, include the Palestinians.) Sadat insisted
that, contrary to Israeli charges, he has not sought to introduce any new
element. Egypt’s position has always been clear on this point. GOE in-
sists on timetable for Israeli actions re West Bank/Gaza. As President
Carter aware, the Israelis want no fixed dates synchronizing Sinai and
West Bank/Gaza activities. If such a linkage does not exist in precise
form and with dates, Sadat said, it will in effect mean that the Sinai
treaty is a separate peace. Such a situation will be exploited by the
USSR and the rejectionists, the latter, he noted, are trying to win the
Saudis over. He had made it very clear, both in his speech to the
Knesset6 and in the Camp David tripartite talks, that he will never sign
a separate agreement. Unless the Palestinian question is resolved, there
cannot be peace.
B. If linkage cannot at this time include the West Bank, Sadat said,
it should at least include Gaza. President Carter had noted that a sepa-
rate Gaza arrangement had not been discussed at Camp David. Sadat
claimed that he tried to make clear that in suggesting a linkage time-
table in Gaza, he had sought to make a “concession.” He emphasized
that Gaza is part of the area seized by the Israelis from Egypt and is also
part of the Palestinian question. GOE would prefer joint West Bank/
Gaza negotiations, but if there is difficulty in getting West Bank talks
underway, a start should be made with Gaza. This idea, he claimed,
had commended itself to Callaghan, Schmidt and Giscard. Sadat
wanted President Carter to know that if USG and Egypt give way to Is-
rael on this point, i.e., without fixing early dates for negotiations on
West Bank/Gaza or at least on Gaza, this will be detrimental both for
Sadat and for President Carter in the area. He will not agree to sign a
Sinai treaty, he repeatedly stated, without some such linkage. If that is
to be the breaking point, so be it. He repeatedly stressed that in sug-
gesting beginning negotiations with Gaza he was not introducing a
new element. He was simply seeking to “facilitate” President Carter’s
task. The Israelis, as President Carter is fully aware, do not want to go
ahead. Bowing to their unwillingness, Sadat reiterated, will be “very
grave” for him and for President Carter in the area. It will mean that the
Sinai treaty is in effect a separate agreement.
C. President Carter had also asked that Sadat contact King Hussein
and the Saudis. Sadat had refused to do so at the present time. He had
told President Carter that Prince Fahd had sent him a message, but that
he had refused to receive it. He is trying to “punish” Hussein and the
Saudis for “putting themselves in the other camp.” He intends to put
all kind of “pressure” on Hussein and the Saudis so that they can “re-
gain their reason.”
D. He wished to emphasize to President Carter that Hussein will
not join the negotiations, at least not for now. Perhaps after Hussein
sees a successful effort in Gaza, he may do so. At the moment, in
Sadat’s view, it is simply too profitable for Hussein to stay out. At one
and the same time Hussein gets Baghdad Conference money7 and asks
more questions of the U.S.
E. Sadat said President Carter told him that the Israelis will not be
ready before the end of 1979 to establish an autonomous self-governing
body in the West Bank/Gaza. He, Sadat, had responded that if the Is-
raelis are not ready, Egypt can wait. He could not envisage Sinai with-
drawal steps in the absence of some similar West Bank/Gaza, or at least
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Gaza, steps. He had sought to explain to President Carter his idea. On
the day that the interim withdrawal is completed in Sinai, there should
also be full autonomy celebrated in Gaza. This means that one month
after signature of a Sinai agreement, Israel and Egypt should sit to-
gether to agree on a date for elections, Israeli troop deployment, aboli-
tion of military government, etc. President Carter had said the Israelis
will not be ready before the end of 1979 for elections. Advance prepara-
tions are needed. Sadat reiterated that his response had been that he is
not in a hurry to have the first interim withdrawal in Sinai. The linkage
issue with West Bank/Gaza should first be settled. If it takes 10 or 11
months instead of the 9 months stipulated in the Sinai framework, this
is agreeable. The peace process, he contended, should not be damaged
through actions like completing a Sinai agreement without defining
what happens when in West Bank/Gaza. President Carter had noted
that two years after the establishment of a self-governing authority, the
parties will sit down to work out modalities for (as Sadat put it) self-
determination. Sadat had responded that in two years time, the USG
will be in the midst of presidential elections. The Israelis, he charged,
are deliberately seeking to stall in order to ease President Carter’s pres-
sure on them. They are playing for time. Begin was in effect forced to
sign the Camp David Agreements. It had never been his intention to do
so. Begin is now trying to redress what he failed to achieve at Camp
David. If Begin succeeds, this may indeed help him in the short run, but
in the long run it will be against Israeli interests.
F. Sadat also asked that I emphasize to President Carter the conces-
sions that he, Sadat, had made in agreeing to normalization after the
first withdrawal. He had done so even though the Egyptian/Israeli
framework document says nothing about exchanging ambassadors so
soon. He had given President Carter his word regarding ambassadorial
exchanges and he will not go back on this. It will be difficult enough to
have this happen when part of the Sinai is still occupied by the Israelis,
but his people are behind him. However, if this takes place with
nothing having happened re West Bank/Gaza, this will be bad.
G. Sadat contended that he had been “hurt” when President Carter
said that the Israelis claimed that he, Sadat, is now demanding more
than the Camp David Agreements. He insisted that he is not doing so.
He had always made it clear, including at Camp David, that a firm
linkage was an absolute prerequisite to a Sinai agreement. With some
show of testiness, he said that he did not like to be compared to the
Israelis.
H. PriMin Khalil interjected that the Israelis also object to a mean-
ingful Egyptian presence in Gaza. Sadat said the Israelis will accept
only a nominal Egyptian presence, but Egypt will not agree to this.

I. In conclusion, Sadat asked that I convey the following to “my
dear friend, President Carter”: “if you choose these Israeli claims, either
in opposing specific linkage between the Sinai treaty and West Bank/
Gaza arrangements or on priority of obligations or on other demands
such as oil, our entire treaty negotiations will collapse. As a friend of
yours and of the United States, and not as President of Egypt, I want to
say that we will in that case lose everything that has been built to-
gether.” He, Sadat, would not agree. He had, in fact, made most of the
concessions, the Israelis had made hardly any. “If the Egyptian and
American positions differ on these matters, it will not be my fault,”
Sadat said. He wanted President Carter to know that he stands by ev-
erything that he promised, but President Carter should also know that
there are limits to what Sadat can do. He asked that President Carter re-
consider the above points as they had been conveyed to him in last
night’s telecon and in what he was telling me; otherwise he cannot sign
the treaty.
3. After he had finished, I told Sadat that I was sure that President
Carter had no desire to offend him. As he knew, President Carter has
worked long and hard to try to bridge the gap between the parties
(Sadat readily agreed). In making the points that he did to Sadat, Presi-
dent Carter was acting in good faith. I reminded Sadat that he had spe-
cifically told President Carter at Camp David that no linkage was nec-
essary between the two framework documents. Sadat intervened to
deny this; he claimed that he had never made any such statements;
perhaps there was a misunderstanding based on his agreement to sepa-
rate the two framework documents. I allowed that perhaps there had
been a misunderstanding on this point, but I thought Sadat was asking
more than the traffic will bear. There is already reference in the pre-
amble and the accompanying note to the general framework document.
The Israelis do not like this and contend that it is contrary to Camp
David. Nevertheless, President Carter and the Secretary have pressed
hard to retain that degree of linkage. To be specific in terms of time-
table, is hardly feasible. Sadat insisted that in view of Israeli statements
and actions regarding settlements, some specificity in timetable is
needed; otherwise Egypt will find itself with a separate peace on its
hands.
4. On separating Gaza, I recalled that when VP Mubarak had first
mentioned this idea, I had told him that I thought it was a non-starter.
The objective should be to get West Bank/Gaza negotiations underway
as soon as feasible. Gaza by itself is hardly enough to serve as a model.
Sadat insisted that if a Gaza self-governing body is negotiated, this will
put pressure on Hussein to join the negotiations. He was not seeking to
separate Gaza from the West Bank, but simply to begin with Gaza if cir-
cumstances in the West Bank militate against an early negotiation

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
there. As soon as the West Bank is ready to participate, whatever ar-
rangements are worked out for Gaza could be expanded. I told him that
I would report his comments, but reiterated that I thought this was a
non-starter.
5. On Hussein and the Saudis, I said I could understand his sense
of annoyance, but suggested that it is in GOE’s own interest to take
steps to improve relations. Sadat said he is not prepared to do so now.
“Let Hussein and the Saudis stew in their own juice awhile.”
6. Sadat had a bad cold and was by then showing signs of wea-
riness. He asked that I get back to Cairo quickly to pass on his message
without delay. I undertook to do so.
7. Comment: Sadat’s back is up. Whether this is due to the
Baghdad Conference, various Israeli statements made publicly and to
the Egyptian delegation suggesting a no-hurry approach on the West
Bank/Gaza, the apparent Israeli reneging on a Sinai interim with-
drawal timetable, the unresolved West Bank settlements issue, or a
combination of all these, I cannot say. I suspect that all these factors
have played a role. Of his several points, I believe Sadat’s principal one
is achieving some kind of specific linkage between the Sinai treaty and
West Bank/Gaza agreement. He insists that it was his understanding
throughout the Camp David talks that, even though the two frame-
work documents were separate, they would be linked in terms of im-
plementation. He is concerned at what he believes will be an effort on
our part to press him on outstanding issues rather than the Israelis. He
fears he is being asked to compromise further on what is already a com-
promise. He is once again bitter about the Israelis and speaks of Israeli
“arrogance.” Some of this is doubtless tactical bargaining, but he is gen-
uinely concerned that he not appear to be concluding a separate peace
with Israel. Hence, he is likely to continue to insist on some sort of im-
plementation linkage, including if necessary delaying the initial in-
terim withdrawal arrangements in Sinai by a few months. He wants
withdrawal in Sinai to begin, but he has come to realize that some sort
of specific synchronization of Sinai and West Bank/Gaza activities is
needed if his already tarnished Arab credentials are somehow to be
maintained.
Eilts

136.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt
287747. Subject: Letter to Sadat.
1. We want to pre-position the message below from President
Carter to President Sadat, even though we have not yet received your
detailed report on your conversation with Sadat this morning. We will
read that as soon as it comes in and send you any changes it suggests in
this text along with talking points designed to be responsive to points
made to you by Sadat this morning.
2. Start text: Dear President Sadat:
I enjoyed talking to you on the telephone Sunday3 and am sending
this letter to expand further on what I said then. Secretary Vance has
reported to me after meeting with Foreign Minister Dayan on Sat-
urday5 and with Prime Minister Begin Sunday evening. These discus-
sions were at times difficult but in the end I believe Cy made some
headway. The negotiations have clearly reached a decisive stage, and I
want to give you my best judgment of how we should now proceed to
bring them to a rapid and successful conclusion.
After four weeks of continuous effort during which your delega-
tion has demonstrated persistence and skill in support of your posi-
tions, I believe, except on the oil issue which is still under discussion be-
tween your delegation and the Israelis, we have arrived at the text of a
treaty, its annexes and accompanying side letters and notes, which rep-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
resents a fair balance of interests. While the Israelis still wish to delete
the references to the Camp David framework from the treaty preamble,
we have told them that the present language is an irreducible min-
imum and that we will not support changes. I personally reemphasized
this point to Prime Minister Begin. I strongly urge that, for your part,
you not seek further changes in texts of the treaty and its annexes that
have been worked out by our delegations. To do so would, in my view,
lead the Israelis to re-open other issues of importance to you on which
we have with great difficulty obtained their agreement.
Secretary Vance’s meetings Saturday and Sunday focused on the
two remaining major unresolved issues other than oil. They are, first,
the question of what will be said in a side document about the manner
and timing of the steps envisaged in the Camp David Framework for
the West Bank and Gaza, and, secondly, the question of the phasing of
Israel’s withdrawal to the interim line.
As you know, the Israelis have resisted any specific timetable for
next steps in the West Bank and Gaza, taking the position that there
should be no linkage between these negotiations and the subsequent
process in the West Bank and Gaza. They have been particularly op-
posed to mentioning a specific target date for the holding of elections.
We have supported your position and we have finally persuaded
Dayan to accept as a target date that elections should be held not later
than the end of 1979.
I propose that these assurances be embodied in a letter8 which I
would write to you and Prime Minister Begin, if this procedure is ac-
ceptable to you. I am asking Hermann to go over with you9 the precise
text of this letter. I believe a letter will be the quickest way to get agree-
ment on the best possible language. It will be written to record the
agreement of both sides in a way that will be no less binding than an
exchange of notes. In addition, it gives me a chance to demonstrate the
United States commitment to continued progress on the West Bank and
Gaza.
On the issue of phasing of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim line,
Dayan and Weizman will support in the Cabinet debate the language
which we have sent to you. Weizman and Dayan cannot guarantee ac-
ceptance by the Cabinet but consider it of the utmost importance that
they succeed in winning Cabinet approval.
Finally, we have asked the Israelis for a letter which they would
address to us detailing certain unilateral steps they would take in the
West Bank and Gaza to improve the political atmosphere for negotia-
tions such as allowing freedom of political expression for the Pales-
tinians during the negotiating period, moving Israel’s military gov-
ernment from their present locations in Gaza and Nablus outside the
Arab municipalities and granting amnesty to certain prisoners and de-
tainees who are inhabitants of the two areas. Dayan and Weizman said
they would support such steps personally but would have to discuss
them with the Cabinet first.
I am keenly aware of the importance—to Egypt, to the United
States, and to the peace process—of moving promptly to achieve con-
crete progress for the Palestinians in both the West Bank and Gaza. I
firmly believe that the best way to do this is to move promptly into the
negotiations dealing with both of these Palestinian areas. Progress in
those negotiations is the best way to ensure the earliest feasible elec-
tions. We can make our best effort to hold those elections before the in-
terim Israeli withdrawal from Sinai. However, I do not believe it will be
possible to establish a commitment now to the exact date. The Israeli
agreement which we now have is to the objective of completing the ne-
gotiations and holding the elections as soon as feasible but in any case
no later than the end of 1979.
I believe what has been achieved in these negotiations with respect
to both the West Bank and Gaza can be regarded as an important ac-
complishment for Egypt as a realistic promise of progress for the Pales-
tinians. The language firmly establishes that this treaty is the first step
toward a comprehensive peace and that such a peace cannot be com-
plete unless [missing text] solves the Palestinian problem. The letter
which Ambassador Eilts will show you sets a firm date for the begin-
ning of negotiations and a realistic timeframe for the subsequent steps
envisioned in the Camp David framework. In those negotiations, we
will be defining powers and responsibilities for the Palestinian
self-governing body that will make it autonomous and indeed worthy
of the name of self-government. As soon as we complete those negotia-
tions, you can be justifiably proud that the first Palestinian self-gov-
erning body would be brought into existence well before the full exer-
cise of Egyptian authority is restored in the Sinai. Your government
will be able to stand by this achievement in the eyes of the world with
pride.
I know from our talk, Mr. President, that you feel strongly that the
interim withdrawal should not be completed before the establishment
of the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza, or at least in
Gaza. I also want to see parallel progress on the Palestinian issues. By
continuing our efforts in the next phase of negotiations, we can estab-
lish a practical linkage between stages of withdrawal and steps on the
West Bank and Gaza, but to modify the texts of the agreement now

137.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
24816. Subject: Sadat’s Reaction to President Carter’s Letter. Ref:
Summary. Gave Sadat President Carter’s letter and supplemented
this with approved talking points. Sadat’s reaction was one of disap-
pointment. His first reaction was that we are “speaking different lan-
guages.” He would not sign a treaty with Israel and put himself at the
Israelis’ “mercy” with respect to West Bank/Gaza, regardless of what
the extent of USG involvement may be. Israelis will simply stall. Min-
imum GOE will accept, Sadat stated, is arrangement whereby self-
government in Gaza will be established during first phase of Israeli
withdrawal from Sinai, even if completion of first phase has to be de-
layed for several months. GOE will also not agree to priority of obliga-
tions language in present treaty draft. Sadat plans meet later today
with VP Mubarak and PriMin Khalil to study Carter letter and draft
West Bank/Gaza letter. He will then instruct Mubarak, who leaves for
Washington tomorrow, to carry an answer6 to President Carter. Mu-
barak authorized spend as much time in Washington as he deems nec-
essary to work with President Carter “to search for a way out of this sit-
uation.” Sadat professed to believe that a USG confrontation with
Begin is needed. Mubarak will have considerable discretionary au-
thority, but will have Sadat’s instructions very much in mind. End
summary.
1. I met with Sadat and VP Mubarak early this afternoon in Is-
mailia. I presented President Carter’s letter to Sadat with addition au-
thorized paragraph 1, ref B. I then read him, slowly, the text of Presi-
dent Carter’s letter. Several times during my reading of the letter, Sadat
shook his head in obvious disagreement. I also read him revised text of
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
letter re West Bank/Gaza minus clause re December 17, 1978 date
2. I then went through the talking points provided ref B in some
detail, noting West Bank/Gaza letter which I had read to him does con-
tain timetable for moving to self-government and redeployment of Is-
raeli forces. We recognize that period envisaged in draft letter is longer
than Sadat or we desired, but emphasized that it does not preclude
elections before end of interim withdrawal. Much as we appreciate
Sadat’s desire for precise timetable, I pointed out that this is objectively
not possible. Camp David frameworks underscore relationship be-
tween Egyptian/Israeli Treaty and West Bank/Gaza negotiations, but
as I was sure he would agree, they establish no requirement re timing
of specific steps. To delay interim withdrawal, as Sadat proposed,
would simply mean Israel will insist that West Bank/Gaza elections be
delayed beyond end of 1979. I reminded him of how much has in fact
been achieved in establishing a practical relationship between the two
sets of negotiations, pointing out that this is more than we had thought
possible. While many Israelis may want to go slow on West Bank/
Gaza, treaty package creates built-in process which will require early
negotiations. As he knew, USG from President Carter on down have in-
terest in moving expeditiously and Sadat has our commitment to re-
main involved as full party. USG intends to make major effort, as it did
after Camp David, to support treaty package and Egypt throughout
Arab world. I pointed out that actual progress which will follow ratifi-
cation of Egyptian/Israeli peace treaty will have more impact on Camp
David critics than any treaty language.
3. Re Sadat’s proposal on Gaza, we understand it and appreciate
his desire for Egyptian presence. As he knew, however, Camp David
Framework has no specific provision for Gaza and we do not want to
appear to be attempting to split the Palestinians by handling Gaza sep-
arately from West Bank. Possibility that Sadat can achieve what he
wants re Gaza once negotiating process starts, I noted, cannot be ruled
out. Re timing of phases of withdrawal, I pointed out that early begin-
ning of normalization, including exchange of ambassadors, will be an
incentive to Israel to accelerate withdrawal. I also gave him view of De-
partment’s legal advisor that proposed letter from President Carter re
West Bank/Gaza has same binding effect as an exchange of letters be-
tween Sadat and Begin. All things considered, therefore, I hoped that
Sadat could accede to President Carter’s request to accept the treaty
package as it stands.
4. Sadat heard me out, but was clearly unhappy with the substance
of President Carter’s letter and my supplementary comments on it. (He
had just come from speaking to a labor group, was tired and was still
suffering from a bad cold.) Rather wearily, he said his first reaction is
that we are “speaking different languages.” It is out of the question,
Sadat said with some show of emotion, that he would sign a treaty with
Israel and put himself at the Israelis “mercy” with respect to the West
Bank/Gaza, regardless of what the extent of USG involvement may be.
He asked rhetorically how Egyptians and Arabs will receive his ex-
changing ambassadors with Israel one month after the Israeli interim
withdrawal is completed when part of the Sinai remains occupied and
no meaningful negotiations have yet been begun re West Bank/Gaza. I
reminded him that the parties are commited under the West Bank/
Gaza letter to begin negotiations within one month of ratification of an
Egyptian/Israeli treaty. Sadat responded that this does not mean
much, especially since the Israelis have made it very clear that they are
in no hurry to specify when elections will be held, troop redeployment
dates, etc., in West Bank/Gaza. They will simply spin out talks. The Is-
raelis are up to their old tricks and he was not prepared to mortgage his
position to Begin’s good intentions. Such a development would hurt
not only him, but President Carter in the area. As a “friend and a
partner,” he wanted President Carter to know his view that “we must
play it fair.” I said that this is precisely what we want and are trying to
do. Sadat would have none of it. He did not question President Carter’s
desire to be fair, but insisted that the present treaty package amounts to
a separate Egyptian/Israeli agreement. He could not take the Israelis
on faith re their West Bank/Gaza intentions.
5. The minimum that GOE will accept, Sadat stated, is a Gaza ar-
rangement. There should be self-government in Gaza during the first
phase of Israeli withdrawal from Sinai even if completion of that phase
has to be delayed for several months—perhaps to November of next
year. VP Mubarak interjected to note Egypt also still objects to item 5 of
article 6 re priority of obligations. Sadat firmly endorsed Mubarak’s
comment and said Egypt will not, under any circumstances, agree to
giving priority to the Egyptian/Israeli treaty obligations.
6. Sadat reiterated that his preliminary reaction is negative. He
said that he will meet with VP Mubarak and PriMin Khalil later today
to study President Carter’s letter and the proposed draft West Bank/
Gaza letter (which he insisted that I give him). He would then instruct
VP Mubarak, who leaves for Washington tomorrow, to carry an answer
to President Carter. In my presence, he instructed Mubarak to give all
the time necessary to President Carter in order, as Sadat put it, “to
search for a way out of this situation.” Mubarak would explain the
whole thing to President Carter and could decide to remain in Wash-
ington as long as the Vice President desired. Mubarak’s future move-
ments should be agreed upon by President Carter and Mubarak. Mu-
barak could also decide what other actions might be necessary.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
7. Sadat closed by recalling that he had told Secretary Vance that a
confrontation with Begin is needed. He had asked the Secretary
whether the USG is prepared for “brinkmanship” and the Secretary
had replied in the affirmative. What is now needed, Sadat said, is a con-
frontation between President Carter and Begin, if the latter remains ad-
amant, in order to obtain the necessary Israeli concessions. I told Sadat
that in a sense there is already a confrontation between President
Carter and Begin. This is evident by the negative Israeli reaction to
some elements of the treaty package. Begin is under no illusions as to
President Carter’s view. I pointed out, however, that it is necessary to
take one thing at a time. To escalate the confrontation with Begin to
public dimensions would only rally public support for the Israeli Prime
Minister. It would not achieve what both Sadat and President Carter
want. What is needed is to conclude the Egyptian/Israeli peace treaty
and then proceed with equal vigor on moving ahead with West Bank/
Gaza matters. Sadat said he disagreed. A confrontation with Begin is
needed, as he saw it, if the outstanding issues are to be satisfactorily re-
solved. VP Mubarak, he reiterated, would amplify on his views.
8. As I was leaving, I noted that the treaty package is being deliber-
ated in the Israeli Cabinet and Knesset. Many things will be said pub-
licly which may seem outrageous. We urge that Sadat continue to avoid
being drawn into public debate until the process is completed in Israel
otherwise he will only weaken supporters of the treaty and give ammu-
nition to critics. I said we would urge Israel to act in the same way.
Sadat said he has no desire to engage in a rhetorical battle with the Is-
raelis, but much would depend upon what comes out of Israel during
the treaty debate. He recalled that GOE had made no public statement
when Israel announced settlements expansion. Subsequently, Begin
had pointed to Egyptian silence, claiming that this showed GOE has no
objection to such expansion. This is clearly not correct and GOE will
have to make a judgment on whether the protection of its interests re-
quires answering the Israelis lest silence again be taken by Begin as
acquiescence.
9. Comment: Sadat’s tough line continues. He was clearly disap-
pointed in the President’s letter and unusually emotional in his com-
ments. Sadat is a consummate actor and his performance was doubtless
partly show. However, despite our efforts, he does feel that the treaty
package, as presently constituted, is inequitable to him. He professes to
believe that it will hurt him and, as he likes to point out, also President
Carter in the Arab world. He is himself engaging in a game of brink-
manship, but I believe he will as a minimum insist on some change in
the draft package if he is to sign it. I sense some unhappiness that
Boutros Ghali may not have been tough enough in the negotiations.
Hence, the dispatch of Mubarak at the very time Ghali is being recalled

138.
Memorandum From the White House Counsel (Lipshutz) to
President Carter
Washington, November 14, 1978
RE
My conversations today with Leon Charney, American attorney for Ezer
Weizman
This memorandum supplements the oral report which I gave to
Dr. Brzezinski late this afternoon, and a copy of this memorandum has
been given to him also.
At Weizman’s request Charney came to Washington late yes-
terday, and he has talked with me here at the White House several
times during the past 24 hours, and between his visits with me he has
been with Weizman. This report reflects Weizman’s observations.
The meeting of the Israeli Cabinet later this week obviously is
quite important, and Weizman feels that it will be most helpful for the
peace process if he is able to attend. However, since Prime Minister
Begin had left him here to continue the negotiations, he was having a
difficult time figuring out a basis upon which he could return for the
meeting. He also has the personal interest in being at the Brist of his
new grandson on Friday.
Apparently he has felt the need of some significant message to take
back to the Cabinet meeting, in order to justify his returning at this par-
ticular time.
In addition to the linkage question, about which I received very
little information, the thrust of the message which he sent related to fi-
nancial matters. Weizman apparently believes that the total financial
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
package which has been presented of about $3. Billion is a great deal
higher than is really needed to carry out the essential elements of the
peace process relative to the Egyptian agreement. He has suggested
that the sum of approximately $1. Billion spread out over three to four
years, would be sufficient to take care of the essential elements such as
the construction of the two new airfields, the building of roads and in-
frastructures in the Negev, and additional electronic surveillance
equipment. Little mention was made of the form of such financial
assistance but I get the impression that long term, low interest loans
would suffice.
(As a personal observation from me, it is my understanding that
whereas direct loans by the federal government would constitute ex-
penditures under the budgetary process, loans from other sources with
federal government guarantees might only cause a budgetary impact of
the differential between total interest costs and the interest charged on
such loans.)
Weizman had expressed some concern as no contact had been
made with him during these current negotiations by our Defense De-
partment, but I understand that this evening he is meeting with some
representatives from the Pentagon.
Concerning the type of expression of financial support which
Weizman thinks would be adequate for the purpose of getting the Is-
raeli Cabinet to overcome a sufficient amount of its concern about this
factor is a message which includes language such as: “the United States
Government will consider”, or “the United States Government will
look into”, or “the United States Government acknowledges this finan-
cial need”, along with a caveat such as “subject to the review by the
United States of the actual needs, and subject, of course, to Congres-
sional approval”. Along with such language, some indication of your
understanding and general support for such financial assistance
should be sufficient.
Weizman also indicated that he as Defense Minister is prepared to
reassess Israel’s military requirements and would expect to have signif-
icant reductions in the projected needs as presently presented.
Charney came back this evening after having been with Weizman
following Weizman’s meeting here at the White House. Weizman ap-
parently is anxious to be here to meet with the Egyptian Vice President
when he comes on Wednesday. Presumably Secretary Vance called
Weizman and urged him again to go back to Jerusalem in time to attend

139.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
President’s Meeting with Vice President Mubarak
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Hon. Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Hon. Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Hon. Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State (NEA)
Mr. Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President
Mr. Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President
Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff
H.E. Muhammad Husni Mubarak, Vice President of Egypt
H.E. Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the U.S.
The President: It is an honor to have you here. Please extend to Pres-
ident Sadat my best greetings and remind him of the personal friend-
ship I feel for him. The Camp David agreements were an interim step in
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the fulfillment of President Sadat’s dream when he went to Jerusalem.
It would [be] a tragedy if his effort were not to result in peace. It will
help us for you to present the Egyptian position clearly.
Your negotiating team in Washington has done a superb job. They
are competent, tough negotiators. It is hard for the delegations from
Egypt or Israel to negotiate when the leaders of their countries are not
present. At Camp David, Begin or Sadat could make final decisions.
This resulted in hundreds of compromises. This is more difficult for the
negotiators to do since they are uncertain of what the reactions will be
back home. General Ali and Minister Ghali have done a great job and
they deserve credit and appreciation for that. I am concerned about the
future of the negotiations. Our most serious problem is that public
statements are made in Egypt and Israel which can become a source of
diplomatic incidents. This did not take place at Camp David. Now all
the proposals that are made are in the international news and this
causes serious problems.
We have tried to find common ground between the parties, and
later Egypt or Israel rejects the agreements that have been reached by
the negotiators. This has been frustrating for us but we will continue as
a negotiating partner. Both Secretary Vance and I have many other re-
sponsibilities which we have been neglecting to some extent. We
thought that the treaty negotiations could [be] done in a few days. We
have other problems, such as with the Soviet Union, in Africa, Cyprus,
NATO, and Nicaragua. We need a commitment now to succeed, and
this requires understanding of the other side’s political problems, and
there is a need for flexibility on both sides. No ultimatum can help. That
would aggravate the already difficult problems.
Your presence here will be constructive and we know that you
speak for President Sadat. There have been some recent statements that
have added a new dimension and I am sure that you will want to
discuss them. We believe that to separate Gaza from the West Bank is a
new development, if the news reports are accurate, and I am eager to
hear directly from you on the Egyptian position. I hope your position
will open the door quickly to a peace treaty.
Vice President Mubarak: Thank you for your warm welcome. I met
with Secretary Vance last night2 and bring you greetings from Presi-
dent Sadat. We want to thank you for the effort you made at Camp
David. Ninety percent of the problems were solved there. The Egyptian
people are aware of your efforts and appreciate them.

There are two main points I want to make: the first deals with the
West Bank and Gaza; the second deals with the priority of obligations. I
want to explain both of these issues to you.
Since the negotiations began, we believe that there should be a link
between our peace treaty and the comprehensive solution. If there is
just an Egyptian-Israeli treaty without a solution to the Palestinian
problem, this will not lead to peace. It will complicate matters. So Presi-
dent Sadat hopes that you will understand that there should be more
done for the West Bank and Gaza, there should be a guarantee of the
negotiations there. This does not mean that we want to divide the West
Bank from Gaza at all. We are very keen to keep both tied together. But
Gaza was under our administration in 1967 and may be easier to deal
with. We could build a good model there to start. We have influence,
and there are many Palestinians from Gaza in Egypt. We can start on
the West Bank and Gaza, but Gaza will be easier. It can serve as a model
for Hussein and others. We don’t want to separate the West Bank and
Gaza at all.
Sadat wants to start with the timetable for the West Bank and Gaza
both, but he knows that the West Bank will be more complex. Gaza may
be easier. We don’t want to separate the two, but if there is a timetable
for negotiating on both, this will be all right. But we think it will take
time for the West Bank and we want to stimulate King Hussein to join
the negotiations. He has to see real action taking place. I have met King
Hussein several times. He is afraid of the Baath Party in Iraq and Syria,
as well as of the PLO. He wants peace, but he is in a difficult situation.
He won’t join the negotiations unless he sees something at least hap-
pening in Gaza and if possible in the West Bank too. If we neglect Gaza
and the West Bank, the whole Arab world will attack—you saw what
happened in Baghdad—and they will accuse Sadat and President
Carter. They will raise hell. They will say that Egypt has gone for a sep-
arate agreement.
The President: They are already saying that.
Vice President Mubarak: We hear this everywhere, even in Europe.
They are all pushing the Palestinian problem. They all say that if only
an agreement is reached on Sinai this will amount to a separate peace.
So President Sadat insists that we push the Palestinian problem along
with Sinai, even if we must postpone the withdrawal in Sinai. Things
will be easier in Gaza. It can be a good model to the Palestinians and
King Hussein. This is the main point. It does not mean separation. Pres-
ident Sadat sees this as a concession. He wants both the West Bank and
Gaza, but offers Gaza alone as a concession. He expects you to see that
Gaza will make things easier.
The President: We have a wonderful relationship with Egypt. We
also have an equally good relationship with Saudi Arabia, and a fairly

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
good relationship with Jordan. For there to be divisions among Egypt,
Saudi Arabia, and Jordan causes us deep concerns. It makes the
achievement of our common purposes more difficult, especially when
Egypt and Saudi Arabia are in disagreement.
My feeling is that President Sadat has not consulted enough with
Saudi Arabia, and this makes my job more difficult. I asked President
Sadat to talk with Crown Prince Fahd. Sadat said that he is punishing
Saudi Arabia. I understand his concern, but I hope that you can keep in
mind the concept that we have of the United States cooperating closely
with Morocco, Sudan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iran, and perhaps Jordan.
This could form a strong, continuing alliance of friendly countries
which would present a common front. We have very good relations
with each of these nations, as do you. Divisions among these countries
could weaken our cause. Beyond this, we believe that all of the Arab na-
tions and Israel need protection against the Soviet Union and their
hired help in North Africa and the Middle East. In the past, the priority
among the Arabs was to fight Israel. Their secondary concerns were
with the Soviet Union. President Sadat has helped me to understand
that the stability of the entire Middle East and North Africa could de-
pend upon the achievement of an Arab-Israeli peace. Your five divi-
sions in the Suez Canal area could be relieved and they could help to
balance threats elsewhere. So much has already been accomplished,
and there is now a feeling of common purpose between Egypt and Is-
rael. You can’t expect to get the approval now of Syria, Iraq, and Libya.
Vice President Mubarak: Not even of Jordan.
The President: Jordan is weak, but we can’t get the Iraqis, the
Syrians, and the PLO to approve what we are doing. President Sadat
has shown great courage. There is no way that I could violate my com-
mitments to President Sadat, and to others, by approving a separate
treaty between Egypt and Israel. We didn’t need to go to Camp David if
we were just seeking a separate agreement. If we had been willing to
abandon the West Bank and Gaza and the Palestinians, then we had no
need of Camp David. We don’t want a separate peace treaty. We cannot
abandon the West Bank and Gaza and the Palestinian question.
The Israelis have already made great concessions. It is hard for you
and President Sadat to know how difficult these decisions are for Prime
Minister Begin. He gave more in Sinai than the Labor Party would have
given. They wanted to keep a corridor to Sharm el-Sheik, and they
wanted to keep the settlements. They would not recognize the Pales-
tinians’ right to self-government. Begin has made tremendous conces-
sions, and President Sadat has also made generous concessions, but
there is a tendency in Egypt not to see how far Begin has come. In the
Camp David agreements, linkage is clearly spelled out. Camp David
dealt not only with Sinai, but also with the West Bank, Gaza, and

Golan. This is just as binding an agreement as the peace treaty that is
now being negotiated. Israel wanted no linkage at all in the documents.
They have good reason, although I don’t agree with them, but if there is
linkage in the letters, in the annexes, then in the future, in three months
or in three years, they are afraid that if there is no movement on the
West Bank and Gaza, in setting up the self-government, and if Egypt
does not approve of this, this could give President Sadat a reason to say
the peace treaty with Israel is null and void. Once the treaty is signed,
Prime Minister Begin, President Sadat, and I all want it to be perma-
nent, just as Camp David is permanent. There should be no change
unless both sides agree to it. The linkage is already there. After hours,
after weeks, we have Israeli agreement on linkage. This is done both in
the treaty and in other documents. Nothing could be clearer than the
commitment to begin negotiations within one month of the ratification
of the treaty on the West Bank and Gaza. This is tangible and clear. We
have gotten that commitment from the Israelis. This will take place
before anything else has happened in terms of implementing the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty. This is a very clear linkage. In the preamble,
there is also a specified linkage. This is more than Israel wants, but it is
less than you want.
I feel very concerned about any inclination to separate Gaza from
the West Bank. I am reassured by what you say. President Sadat told
me on Sunday that he was making this suggestion in a positive way in
order to make things easier for Israel. But the mistrust between Presi-
dent Sadat and Prime Minister Begin is still very strong. It should not
be there. I have confidence in President Sadat, but the Israelis do not
share that feeling. So we have tried to reduce distrust by proven ac-
tions. The treaty text and its annexes, and all of the letters, will be per-
manent. If I sign a letter to both of you, the honor of the United States is
at stake. I won’t sign such a letter unless I am sure that it will be hon-
ored. I won’t mislead either party. The treaty and the annexes and the
letters are all equally binding. We cannot make more of a commitment
in the treaty than was made at Camp David, and at Camp David there
was already a complete linkage guaranteed and approved by Begin
and Sadat.
We have a target date for beginning the negotiations and a date for
the establishment of the self-government. I can see your concern. I have
concerns myself, and I know that this is a very doubtful procedure even
if Israel, Egypt, and the United States are ready to move. There has
never been a registration of all the Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza to vote. There is no accurate census. We don’t know whether
women will vote, or whether eighteen year olds or twenty-one year
olds, will vote. Just to register everyone will be difficult. The PLO may
threaten them. There is a question of Hussein’s attitude. To say that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
elections will definitely be held in five months would be difficult at
best. If the elections can be completed in nine or ten or eleven or twelve
months, this will be a notable step. The Israelis think that it can be done.
Foreign Minister Dayan is getting to the end of his career, but he per-
sonally wants to carry out the elections and oversee the withdrawal of
the military government. This is one of his great ambitions, to end the
occupation. But to tie this together with a specific date could cast doubt
on the treaty. If Israel agrees, that would suit me fine. Anything you
agree to is all right. But I am afraid of what will happen if you set a co-
terminous date. The Israelis fear that even if they do their best, but if
things fail, this could jeopardize the Egypt-Israel treaty. The entire
process if very difficult. We have asked the Israelis for unilateral com-
mitments to show good faith by allowing political meetings and the re-
lease of some political prisoners. They have said that they will do this
as a unilateral gesture. I believe that we can be successful, and I hope
that you will understand the special problems in Israel.
I see the peace treaty as being signed, and then within one month,
there would be negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza. There would
be a registration of voters, elections would be held and the self-
government would be established. The first thing on the agenda would
be to define the duties and responsibilities of the self-governing body.
If the negotiations go well, which I anticipate, then there will be an in-
crease in trust, despite some difficulties. I assume that you saw our an-
swers to King Hussein. I assume that these satisfied you, although
the Israelis do not like them. We will take these views into those
negotiations.
My preference is that Egypt and Israel will accept the treaty as it
now is. If Israel is willing to link the elections in the West Bank and
Gaza to the interim withdrawal date, I have no objections. I see Sadat’s
offer to wait on withdrawal until there is proof of progress in the West
Bank and Gaza as a generous step. But it could make the whole peace
treaty tentative instead of final. The Israelis say they are prepared to ne-
gotiate in good faith. President Sadat doubts that. There are some
doubts in Israel that President Sadat can prevail over the PLO. I have
no assurance that the Israeli Cabinet will accept the present document.
Secretary Vance: On linkage, there is now language in the preamble
that is basically derived from an Egyptian draft.
Vice President Mubarak: That’s okay.
The President: I met with Weizman recently, and I have met with
Dayan. They see that linkage is there. They are prepared to begin ne-
gotiations in one month, and this is not in the Camp David agreement.
They will go this far. If they were to violate this agreement or to act in
bad faith, the whole world would see it.
Secretary Vance: The Israelis have now agreed to “continuous nego-
tiations”, and to negotiate in good faith with the objective of holding
elections by the end of 1979. This will lead to an end of the military gov-
ernment, and they will repeat their agreement to a withdrawal of Israeli
forces as called for in Camp David.
Vice President Mubarak: The question is when.
The President: It says within a year. President Sadat is concerned by
world reaction and especially reaction in the Arab world. He can either
describe the language that we now have as establishing linkage, and he
can point to this and remind people that at Camp David we had a
solemn agreement on this. This will convince people around the world
that there is linkage. If he takes the same language and says that it is not
adequate, world opinion will be negative. It is important how we inter-
pret the words. Many facets of Camp David were not entirely accept-
able to either Egypt or Israel, but all of us could point to the benefits of
the agreements. Lately, both sides have begun to emphasize the differ-
ences rather than the advantages.
Vice President Mubarak: Camp David already achieved ninety per-
cent of what is needed.
The President: Now we have solved ninety-five percent of the re-
maining ten percent! But we still have obstacles.
Vice President Mubarak: We are anxious about when the full au-
tonomy will begin. We want something tangible, even if we have to
postpone withdrawal. That would be better in the Arab world. No one
now believes that Israel will give full autonomy. If full autonomy and
withdrawal of the military government can take place by January 1980,
this will give us satisfaction.
The President: Suppose you sign an agreement and then Arafat and
his supporters might try to prevent the holding of the elections which
would then put an end to the Egyptian-Israeli treaty. They could mount
tremendous pressures to block the elections. The United States, Israel,
and Egypt might not be able to do anything about that. I can assure you
that Dayan and Weizman are completely committed to rapid move-
ment toward self-government and autonomy, and they will agree to
the withdrawal of Israeli forces to designated areas. I can’t speak as
clearly for Begin.
Vice President Mubarak: The point is that we want to show the
world that we are just not taking Sinai without something in the West
Bank and Gaza. We know the West Bank will be more difficult. This is
the reason we want Gaza to be a model. We have connections to the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
people there. The PLO can make trouble in the West Bank, and that is
why it will take more time. This is why we want to give a model. We
want to be able to defend our agreement in front of the entire world.
The President: The idea is generous, but it could create new
problems. Israel distrusts Egypt and when you say that Gaza should go
first, Israel sees Egypt as wanting Gaza back. We hope that you can
consult with the Saudis and the Jordanians if possible. I don’t know
what their reactions would be. I would guess that they would resent
any unilateral move in Gaza. Let me clarify my understanding of your
position. You want to sign the peace treaty, and as soon as it is ratified
Israel will be able to use the Suez Canal and to enjoy free passage in the
Gulf of Aqaba. Within one month, negotiations will begin on the West
Bank and Gaza, and the Egyptian delegation will include some Pales-
tinians from Gaza, and maybe some from the West Bank also. The ne-
gotiations will define the duties and responsibilities of the new gov-
ernment, and will establish modalities for the elections—how voters
should be registered, and how the elections should be carried out. Then
voters will be registered, and the election will take place and the self-
government will be established. The self-government might not be
completely representative. Some people may boycott the election.
Maybe only ten percent of the voters will vote in the West Bank and
fifty percent in Gaza. We hope that Hussein will join and the Saudis
will support this process. But if all of this is done in good time and in
good faith, whenever those elections are completed, you want to have
the self-government established, and then simultaneously you want
the interim withdrawal in Sinai to take place. One month after the in-
terim withdrawal, you are prepared to exchange ambassadors with Is-
rael. Then there would be another two or three years before full with-
drawal in Sinai—the earlier the better from our point of view—and
then within five years of the establishment of the self-governing au-
thority, the final status of the West Bank and Gaza will be determined
in negotiations. You prefer to see the West Bank and Gaza kept to-
gether, but if Hussein and the PLO prevent the establishment of self-
government in the West Bank, then you favor progress in Gaza because
of Egyptian influence there. If there is no progress in the West Bank, but
there is some in Gaza, this would be adequate for your to conclude the
interim withdrawal and to exchange ambassadors. Is this correct?
Vice President Mubarak: Yes.
Secretary Vance: When the peace treaty is signed, will the Suez
Canal be opened to Israeli ships immediately?
Vice President Mubarak: Yes, there is no problem. The only point is
the full autonomy in Gaza.
The President: I am trying to minimize what you demand from the
Israelis. In the Camp David Agreement, it says that the military gov-

ernment will be withdrawn “as soon as” the self-governing authority is
established. It would be easier if you were to set the interim date at the
time of elections, not tied to the withdrawal of Israeli forces.
Vice President Mubarak: We want the self-government to start func-
tioning at the time the interim withdrawal is completed.
Secretary Vance: After one month, negotiations will begin. Do you
see two sets of negotiations? One dealing with Israel, Egypt, and Gaza
and the second involving Israel, Jordan, with the West Bank issue?
Vice President Mubarak: We want to start with the West Bank and
Gaza together.
The President: This is your preference?
Vice President Mubarak: Yes. We are sure that the West Bank will be
delayed. It would be very good if they were ready. It would be ideal for
both to go together.
Secretary Vance: Gazans would be in the Egyptian delegation, and
this would be a sign of your positive relationship.
The President: There is nothing to prevent West Bank Palestinians
from joining your delegation, if they have someone to speak for them.
Vice President Mubarak: We are making contacts with them. Khalid
al-Hassan is coming in one week. I’ll meet with him secretly. He is very
moderate. Even Arafat is moderate, but he has a problem with the
Syrians. They once put him in jail. The Palestinians in Kuwait are also
in contact with us. Some Palestinians are totally opposed to any solu-
tion, but not all.
The President: You will be pleasantly surprised to know the quiet
support for this process that the Saudis are giving. King Hassan has the
same attitude, as does Numeiri. They expressed this support quietly.
Vice President Mubarak: I have been in touch with the Saudis.
The President: Good. This places a responsibility on us not to take
any action or make any statements that will make it difficult for the
Saudis. They want unity and moderation in the Arab world and they
want to have some influence over the Iraqis and others. We shouldn’t
make it hard for them to keep one foot in that camp. President Sadat
should recognize their constructive role. It hurts the Saudis to be pub-
licly criticized, and Fahd particularly feels this. The Saudis tried at
Baghdad, and perhaps they made too many compromises, but I would
like to see close cooperation between Sadat and Fahd.
Vice President Mubarak: We have contacts, but we keep them quiet.
I saw Fahd before Camp David for four hours. He was very convinced.
He approved the trip of President Sadat to Camp David. President

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Sadat is in full control of the relationship with Saudi Arabia, we are in
touch, but neither of us talks about it.
The President: I am glad to hear this.
Secretary Vance: I still don’t see clearly how you will explain to the
Arab world that you are prepared to complete the process with Gaza,
while leaving the West Bank out.
The President: Let me try to answer. The world will see that Egypt
prefers to move in both the West Bank and Gaza, and only if there are
uncontrollable factors which prevent movement in the West Bank,
Egypt would then continue with Gaza regardless.
Vice President Mubarak: When Sadat gives his word, he never de-
viates. If it is only going to be in Gaza, we will tell you. If we say both,
we mean both and as quickly as possible.
The President: If you had the choice between getting progress in the
West Bank and Gaza by next October or just in Gaza by next April,
would you prefer October?
Vice President Mubarak: Yes. We would prefer to finish with both,
even if it takes three or four or five months longer.
Secretary Vance: We still have the problem of how to explain this in
public.
The President: Only President Sadat can do this. He needs to em-
phasize the importance of keeping the West Bank and Gaza together.
Otherwise he gives the impression of wanting to separate Gaza.
Vice President Mubarak: I said there would be no separation.
The President: I hope you won’t raise the question of the priority of
obligations. I understand the problem and we have had tedious negoti-
ations on this. We understand the problem posed by some earlier
agreements with Arab nations. It is clear that the present treaty is in
conflict with those obligations. We have looked at our own agreements,
and we have contacted international lawyers, and we have tried to put
in common internationally accepted language of what is necessary in
cases of this sort. Secretary Vance can explain it to you.
Vice President Mubarak: What is mentioned in the treaty will not do
anything, but it will hurt us internally and the Communists and ex-
tremists will use it against us. They will say that Egypt and Israel are
allies.
The President: We can’t satisfy the Iraqis and the Syrians ever.
Secretary Vance: If Syria is attacked by Israel, you can still help
Syria.
The President: And President Sadat can say that. Egypt has the ad-
vantage of being able to explain this in a positive way. He can defend
his Arab brothers in Syria and Jordan if they are attacked by Israel. But

if President Sadat remains silent, then others may make criticisms. We
think that this language allows Sadat to make a statement dealing with
the self-defense. I understand your problem.
Vice President Mubarak: President Sadat is very annoyed on this
point. We don’t want to add to your problems. Article VI, paragraph 2,
adds nothing, nor does paragraph 5.
The President: We spent so much time on this.
Secretary Vance: If you open it up, Israel will go back to the pre-
amble, and that is where you have the linkage, and they will reopen the
language on Gaza.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll talk to Weizman, but I’ll be going back
to Sadat to explain this to him.
The President: When the treaty is signed, Sadat can say that his obli-
gation to defend other Arabs from an Israeli attack is still binding. He
can say this. He can even quote me that this is the U.S. interpretation.
Vice President Mubarak: I won’t argue over these two points. But I’ll
tell Weizman that we do not agree to the letter and we do not agree to
Article VI. I will be very vehement with him.
The President: (To Secretary Vance.) What will the Israeli reactions
be?
Secretary Vance: The Israelis want to talk with us before the Cabinet
meeting on Sunday. On linkage, there will be problems with Begin and
Dayan. They will see this as an effort to split off Gaza and they are very
sensitive and suspicious on this point.
The President: When you see Weizman, I hope you won’t separate
Gaza from the West Bank in his mind.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll talk about the Palestinian problem and
the West Bank and Gaza together. I will take one line and I’ll pursue
this. It will be easiest for me to proceed this way.
The President: That seems to be your preference.
Vice President Mubarak: I will speak of the West Bank and Gaza and
the Palestinian question. I will let any separation between the West
Bank and Gaza be a concession only if you request it and it is needed.
The President: That is better.
Vice President Mubarak: I will leave Gaza as a concession for you.
The President: Don’t make it an Egyptian proposal.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll talk about the West Bank and Gaza and
the Palestinian question. I will not talk about Gaza alone. I will leave
that for the President.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President: That is very helpful. I am glad to get to know you. I
have heard fine things about you. I know President Sadat has confi-
dence in you. We should try to minimize our public demands and
statements. They have a way of becoming matters of national honor.
The Israelis also do this, and we hope that neither side will talk so much
to the press.
Vice President Mubarak: We were very upset about the Israeli settle-
ments. When we decided to keep quiet, they said that we approved of
what they were doing.
The President: They say that Egypt doesn’t care and that this is just a
U.S.-Israeli problem.
Ambassador Ghorbal: When we talked to Weizman and Dayan, we
took a very strong position on the settlements.
Secretary Vance: One issue which you have been pressing has been
an Egyptian presence in Gaza, especially the presence of Egyptian po-
lice. This is a very explosive issue with the Israelis. Are you still in-
sisting on it?
Vice President Mubarak: We are only interested in a symbolic pres-
ence. I’ll speak to Weizman. We don’t want police there to fight Israel.
We know the situation in Gaza. We just want to send some police and
have a presence.
Secretary Vance: I hope you can get this cleared up.
Vice President Mubarak: We mentioned it before.
The President: This is an additional problem. Even if there are only
fifteen police, it opens up a new area. One possibility might be that
when negotiations take place, when there is a registration of voters,
when the elections are held, there would be some kind of international
monitoring. This could involve the U.N., or perhaps a joint Israeli-
Egyptian presence. They could attest to the fairness of the elections.
This would be the best way for there to be an Egyptian presence.
Vice President Mubarak: We could think of an Egyptian-Israeli
presence.
The President: Why don’t you explore this with Weizman?
Secretary Vance: The fear is that you want to take over the Gaza
Strip.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll explain to him. We want to finish with
this problem. We don’t want Gaza.
The President: Try to make this clear to the Israelis.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll talk about the priority of obligations
with him. I won’t tell the Israelis that we agree yet. Mr. President, if you
want to see me while I am here, I will be available.
Secretary Vance: There is only one other major issue and that is oil.
There should be some way to work this through.

140.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Secretary Vance’s Meeting with Minister Weizman
PARTICIPANTS
Hon. Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Hon. Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff
H.E. Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense
H.E. Simcha Dinitz, Israeli Ambassador to U.S.
Colonel Ilan Tehila
Minister Weizman began by describing his meeting with Egyptian
Vice President Mubarak. He said that it had not been very enlightening.
The Egyptians did, however, promise to provide some written com-
ments on the two main problems: the West Bank and Gaza linkage
issue, and Article VI of the treaty on the priority of obligations.
Weizman made it clear to the Egyptians that Israel does not want to re-
open Article VI. Ambassador Dinitz explained that Minister Weizman
had told Mubarak that his purpose was to understand what the Egyp-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tians want. Mubarak explained that the Egyptians want a redraft of
what they call the American letter, or the Israeli letter, and some slight
changes in Article VI, paragraphs 2 and 5.
Weizman told the Egyptians that he was not in a position to nego-
tiate, but that he could report to the Cabinet on what was agreed and on
what were the differences. He asked the Egyptians to put their posi-
tions in writing, and they said they would do so. Weizman feels that
there are important differences, but they should not be exaggerated or
distorted. Weizman said that he had the strong impression that the
Egyptians do not want to break off the talks. Mubarak said that he
would even [be] prepared to come back to Washington, if necessary.
He was reluctant, however, to accept the idea of meeting with Prime
Minister Begin or other Israeli leaders in Jerusalem. In brief, Weizman
believes that there will be no break in the talks; Article VI is a problem;
and the West Bank and Gaza issue remains to be solved. On the West
Bank and Gaza problem, they want a time period that is somewhat less
than the end of 1979. They did not raise the question of substages of
withdrawal in Sinai. In private, Mubarak told Weizman that Egypt will
not go to war again. Weizman said that he believed that, but it was not
so easy to convince his government.
The Secretary said that he agreed that the Egyptians want to con-
tinue the talks. He asked Weizman what issues he would take back to
the Cabinet. Weizman said that he would have to raise the question of
the letter, but that he would not reopen the question of the preamble.
He would also report that the Egyptians want to change Article VI,
paragraph 5. He also understands from the Egyptians that if the West
Bank does not go as expected, the Egyptians are prepared to proceed
with Gaza alone. Secretary Vance asked if the Egyptians would give
them a written statement on Article VI and on the joint letter. Weizman
confirmed that they would. He also expressed some question con-
cerning Mubarak’s basic message to him. He did not seem sure what
the Egyptian position was. The Secretary asked Weizman when he
would return. The Minister said he would wait until Sunday. The Sec-
retary said that he hoped that it would be clear that Weizman was only
returning on a temporary basis for the Cabinet meeting and that he
would be coming back to Washington. Weizman said that he would be
seeing Mubarak again at three-thirty. Ambassador Dinitz explained
that this would not be for the purpose of negotiations, but rather to get
an idea of [what] the Egyptians really want. Weizman said that Mu-
barak had made it clear that he does not want Gaza as a part of Egypt,
but that he does have to face the Arab world. Therefore, he wants a spe-
cific date and an Egyptian police presence in Gaza. Weizman said that

the Egyptians want a fixed date, whereas it would be better to stick
with the idea of a target date. This seemed to be acceptable to al-Baz.
Weizman also said that al-Baz had raised the difference between the
abolition of the military government and its withdrawal. He wants to
include language on the abolition of the government; Israel will insist
on sticking with the language of Camp David. Weizman said that he had
explained to Mubarak that the Israelis want to stay in the West Bank
and Gaza and share responsibility there, and that they do no intend to
leave completely. They expect to have some settlements there.
Secretary Vance said that anything the two parties could agree
upon would be fine with us. He did not think it was wise, however, to
reopen the treaty text. This would pose lots of problems. Weizman said
that his understanding of the Egyptian position is that they want the
full autonomy implemented by the end of 1979. Weizman added that he
had told Mubarak that it might be time for Sadat and Begin to meet
again, or perhaps to have the Vice President come Israel.
Weizman asked what remained to be done if he were to come back
to Washington. Secretary Vance said that we had proposed a package
and we will stick with it. Weizman said that he understood that the
treaty should be considered as it is. Annex I is virtually finished except
for some language on subphasing. Weizman said that he would do his
best with the Israeli Cabinet. Ambassador Dinitz noted that Minister of
Finance Ehrlich had had a good talk with OMB Director McIntyre and
that this represented a serious professional analysis of the economic
issues. Weizman added that he was concerned by the mood back in Is-
rael. People should be happy at the prospect of peace, but instead there
is a heavy feeling and Weizman has spoken of the “peace calamity”. He
then said to the Secretary that despite the differences that we have with
Israel over the West Bank and the question of settlements, we should
understand that the key to success is still in Begin’s hands. He is not
now in a positive mood, but he does want peace and he did invent the
concept of autonomy. The Central Committee of the Herut Party will be
meeting on Sunday. Weizman said that he wanted to be there. He had
had his differences with Begin. Weizman still believes that he is the key
to a solution. He needs to have some encouragement. He needs to see
that everything is not collapsing around him. Weizman said that his
talk4 with the President had been helpful, and that we now need to
draw Prime Minister Begin back to the point of wanting to reach an
agreement.
In closing, Secretary Vance said that he would like to talk with Min-
ister Weizman at some point about UNIFIL. He said that he was wor-
ried about its renewal.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
141.
Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin
Washington, November 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Telephone Conversation between President Carter and Prime Minister Begin,
November 21, 1978
President Carter: Good morning.
Prime Minister Begin: Good afternoon or good morning to you.
President Carter: I hope you had a nice . . .
Prime Minister Begin: Today our Cabinet votes2 on a tremendous
issue—namely, that we are prepared to sign the peace treaty with
Egypt, if Egypt is prepared to do so. In other words, we give up our
reservations.
President Carter: Mr. Prime Minister, that is very good news. We
are very pleased to hear it.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, sir.
President Carter: We will encourage President Sadat as we have in
the past to accept the treaty text without change.
Prime Minister Begin: The text alone.
President Carter: I understand and we will also encourage him to
not insist upon any change in Article VI of the treaty. I think you know
that there will still remain one outstanding issue that needs to be re-
solved and that is the commitment by the parties to negotiate on the
West Bank and Gaza.
Prime Minister Begin: This is what I want to explain. We also de-
cided that the latest proposal by Secretary Vance3 and agreed by Egypt
are inconsistent with the Camp David Agreements. As far as the nego-
tiations about the autonomy, we have decided that we want after the
signing and ratification of the peace treaty with Egypt to start negotia-
tions in order to reach an agreement on Judea, Samaria and Gaza in ac-
cordance with the Camp David agreement. What we did not accept is a
timetable. We cannot agree. If you agree, Mr. President, I will tell you
something. It is very bad for us in order to really justify this timetable.
We cannot accept. Yesterday was the horrible terrorist attack4 of which
your spokesman, Mr. President, apologized to us. We are grateful. But
we are aware that there are people who want to build on the bodies of
the Israeli people, they want only the destruction of the Israeli race.
And this is why we cannot go. Of course, nobody can force it upon us.
We want an early agreement, a real agreement. Therefore, we cannot
accept the timetable. There was not a timetable. As far as this goes, we
are prepared to say that in three weeks or five weeks, that doesn’t
matter, after the signing and the ratification of the peace treaty, we are
prepared to start the negotiations with Egypt. What we cannot accept is
a timetable for the elections, for finishing the negotiations. There are
many problems to arrange after the timetable with Egypt. We want to
find out if Egypt intends to start. After a while, the negotiations with
Egypt alone or with Jordan should take place. We should sit around the
table and negotiate. If we reach an agreement, then there will be even-
tually established the autonomy.
Mr. President, you know there are two different problems. One is
about the oil. This is the most serious problem for us. Therefore, we
would like to have a document as an annex to the peace treaty. You can
be sure that we will pay for the oil. The second point, and believe me,
Mr. President, is very unpleasant for me to mention it, but I have to ful-
fill my duty. After all the inquiries I have made personally, it is now
clear that we cannot bear all the burden of moving all the armies from
Sinai to the Negev without help. We will have bankruptcy. I am not an

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
economist, but it was absolutely made clear to me. The people should
rejoice in the peace. It will be for them disaster. So, I ask the Secretary of
State about the financial assistance, if it should be a grant. This is what I
actually meant, although it was my mistake at first. Then we need a
loan for a longer period of time which we shall repay. This is the form
of help. Of course, I can only present it to you as a most serious problem
not connected with the peace treaty. It will not be a linkage or condi-
tion. But I present to you with respect. These are the problems that we
have still. Mr. President, thank you for listening to me. Now I would
like to hear you.
President Carter: All right, sir. Let me say again that the instruction
by the Israeli Cabinet in approving the text of the treaty is very much
appreciated, I know, by myself and the world. We will proceed to en-
courage President Sadat to accept the treaty text also without change,
including, of course, Article VI which has been so troubling concerning
the priority of obligations. I have no idea whether we will be successful,
but we will be very eager to seek his approval of the treaty text. I don’t
want to mislead you, however. I think that there is still one outstanding
issue that needs to be resolved and that is concerning some assurance
to President Sadat about the West Bank and Gaza, the elections, and the
establishment of the autonomous self-government. President Sadat has
expressed to me by telephone and also through Vice President Mu-
barak, who I also think met with Defense Minister Weizman, that he
would prefer not to have the interim withdrawal from the Sinai until
the election process has been completed. In our side-letter6 which was
worked out, as you know, by your own negotiators, including Foreign
Minister Dayan, there was a target date—I think the words used were a
goal—of the end of 1979 for the conclusion of these elections. I have no
particular views to put forward except that I think our draft of this
letter is a fairly good compromise. We will, of course, continue our ef-
forts to get President Sadat to agree with your views and vice versa. I
will now be in touch with President Sadat to report to him on your
communication to me by telephone this morning and also to encourage
him to accept the draft of the treaty. I think that is very important that
the negotiations continue and my expectation is that President Sadat
will want some clear understanding with you, not through the treaty
text, but through a separate letter that there be some definite commit-
ment on the West Bank and Gaza.
need not be concerned about any transient or temporary problems with
your energy supplies. We will assure that you have access to enough oil
to take care of any temporary absence of oil supplies caused by the
problems in Iran.
Prime Minister Begin: I am very grateful.
President Carter: Overall the situation has moved forward substan-
tially, but we still have the same basic question not resolved yet con-
cerning the West Bank and Gaza elections as it relates to the schedule
for implementing the Sinai agreement. This is very important, as you
know, to President Sadat. I hope he will be as flexible as possible on this
issue and I think obviously the Israeli decision to adopt the treaty text is
a step in the right direction. As we have contact with the Egyptians, we
will let you know what President Sadat’s response is. Mr. Prime Min-
ister, let me ask you about your plans concerning Dayan and Weizman
coming back to Washington. Do they have plans to come back to con-
tinue the negotiations concerning oil and other matters.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, sir.
President Carter: All right. I will get in touch with President Sadat
as quickly as possible. I’ll be meeting with Secretary Vance8 in about
ten or fifteen minutes on another matter. I’ll discuss my conversation
with you to him.
Prime Minister Begin: The financial help, what I discussed with
you?
President Carter: Yes, I’ll discuss it with my advisors, too. Obvi-
ously we recognize that Israel has special financial obligations. We
have been reluctant, as you know, to make any specific commitments
on this until we see the prospects for having a peace treaty between you
and Egypt. But we recognize your special difficulties, Mr. Prime Min-
ister, and we have historically been willing to give to Israel and we will
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
be prepared to discuss this in more definite terms as the negotiations
progress.
Prime Minister Begin: Thank you very much, Mr. President. Now,
Mr. President, I only want to say that there shouldn’t be any doubt in
your mind or with President Sadat that we want to implement the au-
tonomy. The two delegations must meet and reach an agreement on the
autonomy. It will take some time. As it happened yesterday, four
people were killed. The PLO is around. You will not wish and Presi-
dent Sadat will not want it, if the PLO should take over. We are in com-
plete agreement. There will be two delegations. Then when we have the
agreement, then there is the question of the elections, and it will not
present any difficulty. Then the people wish either to elect or to be
elected. Therefore, this is the reason why we took that decision. Indeed,
on a timetable we cannot accept. What we want to do is to start the ne-
gotiations quickly, a few weeks after the signing. I think it is very rea-
sonable. It is absolutely appropriate to take the first draft written by
Ambassador Atherton on your behalf, Mr. President. This [is] the
whole difference now. I hope it is reasonable, because this is an objec-
tive situation. We have the PLO with their submachine guns. We have
made great progress. We want peace and the peace treaty, so let us sign
the text.
President Carter: Mr. Prime Minister, let me ask you if you are op-
posed to agreeing that the negotiations themselves would start within a
month?
Prime Minister Begin: No, we are not opposed to it.
President Carter: Let me ask you a key question. This is the key
question in President Sadat’s mind. If we do not establish a definite
date for the elections and autonomous government in the West Bank,
would you be willing to delay the interim withdrawal without any date
being specified until those elections can be held? If the peace treaty is
signed without delay, and if Israel has access to the Suez Canal, and so
forth, as is intended in the treaty agreements?
Prime Minister Begin: I must admit, Mr. President, that I would hes-
itate to state my point of view. I need to consult with my colleagues.
President Carter: This is just a possibility for resolving the differ-
ence and I am not trying to speak for President Sadat. I am not trying to
speak officially on that.
Prime Minister Begin: If the interim withdrawal does not start and is
not completed, we don’t have the normal relations. I understand that as
we are now that the peace treaty would only be signed and ratified.
President Carter: But you would have the free use of the Suez Canal,
and then you would have the commencement of relations. This is
something that we need to explore. I think that President Sadat is per-
fectly willing.
Prime Minister Begin: I have to consult with my colleagues.
President Carter: We need not put it to them as an official proposal,
because I need to talk to President Sadat. This is just a thought. We will
be in touch with you as soon as we get President Sadat’s response back.
Secretary Vance will let you know when it’s appropriate for Dayan and
Weizman and others to return. Is that okay?
Prime Minister Begin: They are prepared to return whenever you
tell me.
President Carter: Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister. It is
always a pleasure to talk to you. Good luck, good-bye.

142.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, November 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Eilts’ Meeting with Sadat
Ambassador Eilts met with President Sadat early today to urge
him to accept the peace treaty and its annexes. President Sadat’s con-
sidered reply was that he was not ready to give us an answer until he
consulted with his advisers. Eilts estimates that it may be two or three
more days before we have Sadat’s final answer.

144.
Editorial Note
On November 29, 1978, Senate Majority Leader Robert C. Byrd met
with Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat in Cairo. Appointed as a pres-
idential emissary by President Jimmy Carter on November 15, Byrd
stopped in Egypt as part of a 16-day trip to the Middle East. (Public
Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, page 2059) A full report of Byrd’s mission,
which included talks in Israel, Jordan, Syria, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey
and submitted to Carter upon the completion of the trip, is in the Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
Sadat to accept the draft treaty as it was written “with the condition
that this is contingent upon reaching an acceptable resolution of the
West Bank/Gaza linkage issue,” noting that he “had never seen Presi-
dent Carter as determined as he is on this issue.” Moreover, he noted,
Carter was “fully committed to continue working with Sadat” to re-
solve the remaining issues, including Egyptian problems with other
Arab states. Sadat replied that he “saw no purpose in accepting a treaty
which would be overturned within a year by the weight of Arab
opinion,” observing the treaty “can not stand because it is not accepted
at all.” Sadat rejected Byrd’s suggestion that Egypt had allowed Israel a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“public relations advantage” by refusing to accept the draft treaty. “Is-
rael,” Sadat stated, “is asking for concessions in Egypt unparalleled by
any other state;” Egypt, he felt, had “given Israel everything.” Simi-
larly, Sadat countered Byrd’s argument that reopening negotiations on
treaty language posed “danger” by stating that “he would prefer to see
the text unravel than accept a treaty which heavily damaged his posi-
tion or President Carter.” As currently drafted, the treaty for Sadat was
“against the aspirations of the Egyptian people” and he could not agree
to it. The Embassy transmitted a full summary of this meeting in tele-
tral Foreign Policy File, D780492–1036) Analyzing the meeting later on
November 29, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt Hermann F. Eilts observed
that he had “never” seen Sadat “as emotional or upset as he was
today.” “Sadat,” Eilts continued, “is clearly disturbed about what he
considers as unfair pressure on him to accede to our request” to agree
to the treaty. To explain Sadat’s resistance, Eilts proposed eight expla-
nations: realization of Egyptian “isolation” following Baghdad, the
“vacillating” Saudi role, “total distrust” of Begin, a “conviction” that
the Israelis “ have no intention of moving expeditiously on West Bank/
Gaza” and intend to “interpret Camp David Framework as requiring
no more than Begin[‘s] self-rule plan,” “annoyance” at “unhelpful
statements,” annoyance at settlement issues, “frustration” that the
United States “does not really understand his problems in the Arab
World,” and annoyance that the United States “seems to consider him
to be line of least resistance whenever Israelis take hard stance.” (Tele-
tral Foreign Policy File, D780492–1029)
The following day, November 30, Byrd met with Israeli Prime
Minister Menachem Begin for 90 minutes in Jerusalem. He conveyed to
Begin Sadat’s reservations with the draft treaty text, especially his ob-
jection to Articles IV and VI. Prefacing his remarks by stating that he
understood Begin’s domestic political situation, Byrd emphasized the
need for Egypt and Israel to “avoid public statements that poisoned
[the] atmosphere” and continue their dialogue. “The U.S. could not ac-
cept a take it or leave it attitude on the part of either side.” Byrd empha-
sized that “there must be a target date for elections and there must be a
resolution to the West Bank/Gaza problem.” In response, Begin stated
that the Israeli Cabinet had rejected the idea of a timetable for elections
“because Israel did not have the power to make that come to pass itself,
and because it presented a ready-made excuse for Egypt to abrogate the
treaty.” Begin, however, agreed with Byrd’s suggestion that the re-
maining differences between Egypt and Israel could be resolved by
“reasonable men.” In a separate meeting with Byrd, November 30, Is-
raeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Moshe Dayan (who was “clearly dis-
comfited” by the idea of reopening text negotiations according to the

145.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
25990. Subject: President Sadat’s Letter to President Carter. Ref:
1. During Codel Byrd’s meeting3 with Sadat this morning, VP Mu-
barak whispered to me that he wanted to see me this evening, after
PriMin Khalil had left. I met with him at 2000 at NDP headquarters. He
said that Khalil will be presenting a written message from Sadat to
President Carter during upcoming Friday meeting. He claimed to
have persuaded Sadat to give me an advance text of that message for
President Carter’s information. He asked, however, that we not rpt not
give any indication to PriMin Khalil that an advance text has been pro-
vided to [us?].
2. Text of Sadat’s letter to President Carter follows: Quote: Dear
President Carter,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Pursuant to our telephone conversation, I would like to share with
you some thoughts on the present state of the negotiations and how
best to proceed in the days ahead. I am doing so in the spirit of friend-
ship that binds us together and in all appreciation of your relentless ef-
fort in the pursuit of peace. I am also undertaking this exchange of
views with full awareness of the historic significance of the task we
have assumed for the good of our two nations and that of mankind.
I believe that the negotiations held in Washington have reached a
crossroads. Much has been accomplished with your help and determi-
nation. However, what remains to be finalized could affect the outcome
of our endeavor at present and in the future. I also believe that this
could be achieved without any undue delay.
As I stated before, most of the task was done in Camp David.
There, we laid down the foundations of a comprehensive peace that ad-
dresses itself to all aspects of the conflict. Special emphasis was placed
on the Palestinian problem as it was agreed that it remains the heart
and core of the dispute.
Thus, it was only logical that we made it crystal clear that any at-
tempt to work for a separate agreement must be rejected. You would
recall that I told Prime Minister Begin that it is absolutely unacceptable
to us to conclude a separate agreement, a partial agreement or a third
disengagement. This was the overriding theme in the Camp David
talks. Hence, it should be clearly reflected in the outcome of the current
negotiations which are held under the umbrella8 of the “Framework for
Peace in the Middle East”. This should be achieved, not by the insertion
of a few words, but by reaching agreement on specific measures to be
taken on certain dates in the direction of transferring authority to the
inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza.
In all candor, I find the Israeli attitude in the Washington negotia-
tions and the statements issued by members of the Israeli Cabinet
rather alarming. Apparently, they are still thinking and behaving with
the old mentality and complexes. The pre-initiative spirit persists, even
though the Israeli people left no doubt that their yearning for peace is
the paramount factor in their life. They received my message with en-
thusiasm and hope. To me, their response was gratifying. Nonetheless,
the Israeli delegation remained seized by the worn-out concepts and
the old suspicion. They fail to conceive the process as one of peace
building for this generation and the generations to come. Their attitude
toward the Camp David Accords is very telling. They want to pick and
choose from it whatever they deem to be in their interest while evading
as much as possible what they conceive of as being in the interest of the
cause of peace. They cite it to support their exaggerated claims, and
forget it when they are confronted with a decision they think is painful.
You have done your best to moderate their demands and attitude. But I
believe that much remains to be done, for I am determined to make the
peace we are working for a solid and lasting structure. I want to leave it
as a legacy for our grandchildren as well as the history of mankind.
In view of this situation, I decided to take the step of addressing a
message to Prime Minister Begin to draw his attention to the real nature
of what we are doing and ask him and his colleagues in the Israeli Cab-
inet to view the matter in a different light. I believe that such a step is a
necessary and needed supplement to my initiative. In a nut shell, I
want them to wake up, look beyond mere words and rise to the level of
the great events we are creating. In addition to that, I do not want you
to carry all the burden. You have been most understanding and patient.
You kept your pledge to be a full and honest partner.
I trust that you agree with me on the futility of any attempt to con-
clude a separate agreement between Egypt and Israel. This is both mor-
ally wrong and practically not workable. Nevertheless, the Israeli Gov-
ernment seems to be aiming at that. From their tactics and maneuvers
throughout the negotiations, it appears that they are determined to
bring the treaty as close as possible to a separate agreement. They
misrepresented, and even distorted, the linkage issue. Consequently,
they approached it from a negative angle. But as I told you before, I
am determined to prevent this from happening. To me, working for a
genuinely comprehensive peace is a conscientious commitment not a
matter of political expediency.
Our delegation left for Washington with clear instructions to em-
phasize the comprehensive character of the peace we are making. To
this end, we demanded, on October 13, the insertion of the following
article into the text of the peace treaty:
—“Egypt and Israel pledge theirselves to work for the solution of
the Palestinian question in all its aspects on the basis of the realization
of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.”
On the same day, our delegation submitted to you a memorandum
on measures to be taken towards improving the political conditions in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the West Bank and Gaza with a view to facilitate the implementation of
the Camp David “Framework”.
As the Israelis balked and insisted on omitting any reference in the
treaty to the Palestinian problem, you proposed dealing with the issue
as follows:
A) Emphasizing the comprehensive nature of the peace settlement
in the preamble;13
B) Spelling out the steps which must be taken for the implementa-
tion of the provisions of the “Framework” in the West Bank and Gaza
in a letter to be exchanged between Egypt and Israel and signed simul-
taneously with the treaty. The content of that letter as inunciated (sic)
by you was to include taking certain steps on specified dates, namely
the entering into negotiation and the holding of elections for the estab-
lishment of the self-governing authority, in implementation of the
Camp David plan for full autonomy.
C) Obtaining a letter from Israel to the United States on measures
to be taken unilaterally for the purpose of improving the political situa-
tion in the West Bank and Gaza, such as lifting the ban on political ac-
tivities, freeing political prisoners and allowing the return of some dis-
placed persons for the unification of families.
Although the idea of an exchange of letters was at variance with
our concept, we cooperated with it and submitted several drafts for the
letter. Discussions of these drafts, together with the U.S. draft, revealed
an Israeli reluctance to be committed to any step beyond beginning the
negotiations. With this Israeli attitude, the proposed date for holding
the elections kept moving backward, from three to six months and fi-
nally to a full year. After being conceived as a fixed time, it was wa-
tered down to a target date which might and might not be met. Fur-
thermore, the form of the document was changed from a letter to be
exchanged between Egypt and Israel to a note issued by the United
States. This was done despite the fact that Israel has accepted for sev-
eral weeks the form of an exchanged letter. I honestly believe that this

trend is likely to complicate rather than facilitate our task when we
start negotiating with them on the West Bank and Gaza in the weeks
and months ahead. They are likely to think that they can go back on
what they consented to and water it down systematically as we pro-
ceed from one stage to the other. This would be quite a regressive de-
velopment as it would confront us with a situation no one would ben-
efit from even though the Israelis do not seem to be aware of that.
Our common experience has thought (sic) us to be very specific on
every point if we are to guarantee any real movement. We should do
all what (sic) we can to eliminate the causes of controversy or misun-
derstanding in the future as we are engaged in a continuous process
which is likely to reach full fruition within a few years. Therefore, I sug-
gest that we stick to your original idea of an exchanged letter between
Egypt and Israel witnessed by the United States as our full partner.
The letter can be meaningful and significant only if it includes a time-
table22 for the basic steps:
A) Beginning the negotiations for establishing the elected self-
governing authority (not the administrative autonomy the Israeli Gov-
ernment is talking about these days) as well as defining the powers and
responsibilities of that authority;23
B) Holding the elections for the self-governing authority;24
C) Inaugurating that authority, abolishing the Israeli military gov-
ernment together with its civilian administration, and effecting the
withdrawal of Israeli forces and the redeployment of the remaining
forces into specified security locations.
An Egyptian presence in the Gaza strip is vital to the success of our
plan, not only in the strip but also in the West Bank. It is only fair to
deduce that the Israelis are not acting in good faith when they oppose
the presence of some Egyptian police units or frontier guards in Gaza
during the interim period. First of all, they had previously consented to
this very idea as they realized that it would be quite useful. In a reversal
of their position, they contend that such presence would be inconsist-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ent with the “Framework for Peace27 in the Middle East” signed in
Camp David. Nothing could be further from the truth, for the “Frame-
work” does not contain one word that could weigh against such pres-
ence. The framework provided that the local police force will main-
tain a continuous liaison with Israeli, Jordanian and Egyptian officers.
Furthermore, there is a provision concerning the participation of Jorda-
nian forces in joint patrols and in the manning of control posts. There is
another provision which allows the recruitment of Jordanian citizens in
the local police.
By analogy, the some (sic) concept could apply to the Egyptian
presence in the Gaza Strip. Our responsibility with respect to Gaza is
more sanctioned in legal and political terms than the Jordanian role in
the West Bank. We have never claimed sovereignty over Gaza. No one
questions our intentions there. In fact, a tangible Egyptian presence
would reassure the Palestinian population, a factor which is certain to
generate enthusiasm for the Camp David formula. Thus, we would be
building a model which would be envied by Jordan and the West Bank
inhabitants. In short, our presence in Gaza would facilitate the imple-
mentation of the Camp David formula.
If we are to require an explicit mention of every detail in the Camp
David Accord, why, then, is Israel insisting on many points which were
never mentioned directly or indirectly in the “Framework”? Such
points include the priority of obligations, the exchange of ambassadors
one month after the completion of the interim withdrawal, setting a
specific date for the conclusion of an agreement on trade and com-
merce, the conclusion of a cultural agreement following the interim
withdrawal and the preservation of war memorials.
Dear Friend,
I have given careful consideration to your idea of treating the
present draft of the treaty as final. I fully understand the reasons be-
hind that, namely putting an end to limitless controversy that could go
on indefinitely. However, I must confide to you that we have serious
problems with certain provisions. It was for this reason that our delega-
tion requested your assistants not to state that you considered the text

as final until we work out together a formula that would meet our min-
imum. We realized that the closure of negotiations on the text could
confront us with an undesirable prospect, namely the prospect of
having to oppose something which was proposed by you. For these
reasons I would like to seek your help in solving the main problems
and I am quite willing to forego the less important ones.
As it stands now, the provision of Article 6 remains explosive and
detrimental. As the negotiations evolved with respect to that issue,
the successive proposed drafts tended to be harsher and more difficult
to accept. Your fifth draft, presented on October 19, carried the fol-
lowing text for paragraph 2 of that article:
—“The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under the present treaty”. The seventh draft, submitted on October 21
added a phrase to that text as follows:
—The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under this treaty without regard to action or inaction of any other
party.
The latest draft went further to state that:
—“The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under this treaty without regard to action or inaction of any other party
and independently of any existing instrument external to this treaty”.
Such a sweeping provision which came at the last minute cannot
be taken lightly. It could be used by Israel or any other party to prove
that the treaty is in fact and by law a separate agreement. If one
stretches the argument further, it could be alleged that the treaty is in-
dependent even of the “Framework” of Camp David, for it is merely
“another instrument external to the treaty”. If it becomes plausible that
the treaty constitutes a separate peace agreement, then it would be a vi-
olation of the “Framework”.
You can imagine the devastating impact of such a provision.
Suffice it to refer to a statement made by the Israeli Foreign Minister on
November 23 in which he said in effect that Egypt’s commitments to Is-
rael have acquired priority over her Arab commitments. This trend is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
apt to continue and escalate in the future as we all know, thus creating a
most unfavorable atmosphere.
On the other hand, we find the provision of paragraph 5 of the
same article extremely difficult to accept. Like that of paragraph 2, it is
both harmful and unnecessary. It gives rise to future controversy and
contention.
As you certainly know, we proposed a solution to the problem
which the Israelis raised with respect to the conflict of obligations. Fol-
lowing your conversation with Vice President Mubarak on November
15, I instructed our delegation to prepare a new draft41 which was
submitted to Secretary Vance and subsequently discussed with De-
fense Minister Weizman before being forwarded to the Israeli Cabinet.
We proposed deleting paragraph 5 and amending paragraph 4 to read
as follows:42
—“The parties undertake not to enter into any obligation or take
any action in conflict with this treaty.”
I trust that you agree with me that this formula meets the concerns
of the Israelis if they are genuine. It covers all obligations so long as the
parties are undertaking not to take any action which is inconsistent
with their obligations under the treaty. Why should Israel insist on the
present offensive language?
Is it not significant that they reversed their acceptance of certain
provisions and concepts after they had secured certain benefits in re-
turn for their acceptance? A case in point is their sudden reversal of
their position on the sub-phases of the interim withdrawal. This was
done 26 days after informing both of us of their willingness to with-
draw from El-Arish in two months and from the oil fields area on the
Gulf of Suez in 4 months. This was also done after obtaining your sup-
port for their request of exchanging ambassadors within one month
from the completion of the interim withdrawal. When you met with
our delegates on October 17, you used two arguments in order to per-
suade us to accept such a demand. The first was that Israel accepted to
reduce the time for completing the interim withdrawal from nine to six
months. The second argument was that Israel has offered to withdraw
from El-Arish within two months. In other words, their previous posi-
tion was used to extract some benefits for them. By legal norms, a
on specificity when it comes to their benefit and ambiguity as to any of
their obligations.
They do not seem to appreciate our flexibility and willingness to be
responsive. It might be revealing to review the situation since we went
to Camp David last September. If we examine the “Framework of a
Comprehensive Settlement of the Problem of the Middle East” which
I submitted to you and Premier Begin on the opening of conference and
compare it with the document we signed, we will find that we went a
long way to make both ends meet.
We responded positively to their need to feel secure and we re-
flected this in the security arrangements we agreed to. Reciprocity was
applied in a liberal rather than a literal sense. In addition to that, I ac-
cepted to start the process of normalization, including diplomatic, eco-
nomic and cultural relations after the completion of the interim with-
drawal. Legally speaking, we had every right to defer that until the
completion of the final withdrawal. We accepted your concept of
solving the Palestinian problem including Arab Jerusalem in stages
while leaving certain points to be settled in future negotiations.
The Israelis did not commit themselves to adhere to the treaty on
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Nor did they accept the com-
pulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice with respect to
disputes which emanate from the application or the interpretation of
the parties’ contractual arrangements. Nevertheless, I decided to pro-
ceed in the hope that these shortcomings will be remedied in the future
with the progressive development of peace, as I have believed and still
believe that the real peace process starts only after the signing. Despite
the risks involved, I took the decision to go ahead. I did this mainly for
you and on account of my full faith that you are committed with us to
work for a comprehensive peace which safeguards the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people.

146.
Letter From Egyptian President Sadat to Israeli Prime
Minister Begin
Cairo, November 30, 1978
Dear Prime Minister Begin,
I am addressing this letter to you with full awareness of the his-
toric responsibility we both share before our peoples who gave us a
solemn mandate to build a solid structure for peace. We owe it to this
generation and the generations to come in both countries not to leave a
stone unturned in our pursuit of peace. The ideal is the greatest one in
the history of man and we have accepted the challenge to translate it
from a cherished hope into a living reality.
You will recall that when I addressed the Israeli people from the
rostrum of the Knesset more than a year ago, I said “In the history of
nations and peoples, there come up certain moments when it becomes
imperative for those who are endowed with wisdom and vision to
penetrate beyond the past with all its complications and residue to
usher in an undaunted elan toward new horizons”. I believe that we
are now witnessing one of these moments. It is a moment of truth
which requires each one of us to take a new look at the situation and
reexamine his thinking and calculations. I trust that you all know that
when I undertook my sacred mission to Jerusalem against all odds and
in the face of the most formidable complications, I was not trying to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
strike a deal. I was and I am still determined to make peace. If our com-
mitment to that great cause is profound and unwavering, then our task
should transcend words and legal formulations. Then also, the chal-
lenge before us ceases to be a contest of oratory and scoring points here
and there. It becomes converted irreversably to one of winning the
hearts and minds of our peoples and enabling them to look beyond the
unhappy past.
It was in this spirit that we entered into direct negotiations with
you in a sincere attempt to build new bridges for the future. These ne-
gotiations reached their high and low points as we went deeper into the
core of our complex problem. We have achieved some progress. How-
ever, I feel that valuable time has frittered away in futile arguments and
discussions about issues of little or no real significance. Apparently,
some are still seized with the notion that the solution could be reached
at the expense of the other party. Still others remain captives to con-
cepts like that of David and Goliath instead of being inspired by the
brotherhood of Ismail and Isaac. Evidently, some old barriers do exist
and it is our joint responsibility to break them. A few days ago, one of
your colleagues chose to speak of the present state of affairs in terms
which are in clear contradiction with the new spirit of peace. He said
that Egypt must not forget that part of its territory is occupied and
could remain occupied. We reject that logic and I am sure that the vast
majority of the Israeli people shares our view.
It might be appropriate to remind you of what we have offered to
enable you to make the necessary decision for the establishment of
peace. First and foremost, we proved our willingness to look seriously
and sympathetically to your need to feel secure. Of course the need for
security is mutual and not confined to you alone. Still, we lent an atten-
tive ear to your concern for security in view of certain historical and
psychological factors. This must not go unappreciated. Nor should it be
misinterpreted or abused.
We offered you full recognition, not as a mere formality but as a
dynamic process of coexistence that includes diplomatic relations, eco-
nomic and cultural exchange for the mutual benefit of our two peoples
and infact for the good of the entire region. By conventional norms, this
process can take place only after the completion of withdrawal. How-
ever, I accepted the request of our good friend President Carter to start
the process after the completion of the interim withdrawal. I did so as a
token of my full confidence in the future as well my faith in our peoples
who are going to be the final arbiter.
We said, and still maintain, that we are most willing to establish
with you normal relations that exist between good-neighbors. No dis-
criminatory barriers shall stand in the way of free movement of people

or goods. Individuals and groups will have an opportunity to know
more about one another and learn to live together in peace and amity.
You shall enjoy the benefits of the freedom of passage5 through the
Suez Canal and the Gulf of Aqaba. Boycotts will be terminated. All of
this is conceived with the understanding that neither party is to seek
any special advantages or ask for the position of a favored nation. This
can not be forced upon two sides which are terminating a state of war
that lasted for over thirty years. It could not be achieved by ignoring the
facts of our contemporary life. Only the natural development and
growth of our relations in the future can lead to the intensification of
exchange in the areas where the interests of both parties meet. It is
much better to start on a solid basis and then proceed to add to the
structure a brick every day. This operation of peace building will not be
viewed or judged today or tomorrow, but several years after. It is still
my conviction that the real peace process starts only after the signing.
Thus, what is important is to start now and on the right foot. Once we
started, the door will be wide open. We have not asked for any privi-
leged position7 and I assume that this is reciprocated on your part.
Let me make another point crystal clear to you in this respect.
When we express our readiness to offer you all what I just mentioned,
we are not doing so in return for your commitment to withdraw from
our territory. We think that this is an obligation you bear under all ac-
cepted norms of international law and contemporary international rela-
tions. While we are changing the course of history, we must not at-
tempt to tamper with the law of nations. I think I made it abundantly
clear on every occasion that we do not accept any bargaining over our
sovereignty or territory. Sooner or later, our land will be liberated.
The proper return here must be a genuine acceptance on your part
to coexist with your Arab neighbors. Your relations with them should
not be viewed in terms of conquest or exploitation. Rather, it should be
founded on mutual respect and a firm belief in the equality among na-
tions. Coexistence with your Arab neighbors starts with coexistence
with the Palestinian people. This is the message I have been trying to
deliver to you since I arrived in Jerusalem on November 19, 1977. In
Camp David, we reached agreement on a formula which we think can
bring about an equitable solution to the Palestinian problem. If we
value the ideal of peace highly, then we should not at all detract from

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
that formula. On the contrary, we should add to it and give it every
chance for success. In my view, you should not attempt, or appear to at-
tempt, to evade your obligations under the Camp David “Framework”.
Since we agreed that certain steps shall take place in the immediate fu-
ture to effect a transfer of authority to the inhabitants of West Bank and
Gaza, I frankly see no reason why we should not agree on a timetable
for these steps. You have asked for a timetable for such steps as the ex-
change of diplomatic relations, the conclusion of an agreement on
trade and commerce, the conclusion of another agreement on cultural
exchange and the conclusion of a civil aviation agreement. Is it not
equally, if not more, important to fix a timetable for the envisaged
transformation in the West Bank and Gaza?
An argument has been advanced in this respect which we do not
find convincing. It is said that you do not want to be bound to produce
certain results which require the cooperation of a reluctant party. My
answer is that one should not assume the worse if we really believe in
the necessity and wisdom of the course we are taking. If the implemen-
tation of any of these steps is hindered because of reasons beyond your
control, you will not be held responsible for that. There is always an
assumption of rationality. Furthermore, I must tell you in all candor
that you are not doing much to encourage the moderate elements
among the Palestinians to cooperate. On the contrary, much of your
acts and words seem to be designed to dissuade them from joining in
with us. I need not list to you any examples of these deeds and words
for you are quite aware of them. If the Palestinians are left with the im-
pression that the self-government plan, and not the administrative au-
tonomy as you call it, is a sham, they will remain embittered and the
voice of reason will be drowned among them. As you well know,
peoples never abandon their cause in the face of neglect or force. You
might recall that your predecessor Ben Gurion14 once said: “forgive . . .
but never forget”. This admonition applies to the Palestinians too.
The issue of “linkage” underwent much distortion and confusion.
Let me tell you that we are not seeking that linkage as a means of
shirking our commitments or breaking our promises. If we make a
commitment, we intend to honor it fully regardless of the cost. Our

record speaks for itself in this respect. If we have any doubt that we can
honor a certain commitment, we shall not make it in the first place.
We are talking about linkage because we are both committed to
work for a comprehensive peace settlement not a separate agreement.
If you go back to the days of Camp David, you will remember that I
told you on September 7 that I am for permanent peace and not for a
separate agreement, a partial arrangement or another disengagement.
This attitude was clearly reflected in my address to the Israeli people
through the Knesset last year, exactly as it is reflected in the outcome of
our deliberations. The “Framework for peace in the Middle East” bears
ample evidence to the nature of the peace we are working for. If this is
the case, Why should it not be spelled out and reaffirmed.
Dear Prime Minister Begin,
Parties often make mistakes in the course of negotiations which is
an arduous process. They think that their task is to insist on their de-
mands rightly or wrongly, justly or unjustly. But if this attitude is toler-
ated in negotiations for an armistice agreement, it should not at all be
adopted when nations are making peace. I am not stating that to point a
finger of accusation at you. I am merely referring to two unfortunate
developments:
First: Your Delegation insisted on certain unreasonable provisions
that serve no useful purpose. Certain concepts were blown out of pro-
portions or stretched beyond the tolerable limit. This was the case with
respect to the proposed draft of Article 6. What you are entitled to is a
commitment from us to discharge our obligations in good faith as we
hold you responsible to do the same. It is inappropriate for any of us to
attempt to interfere with the way the other party conducts its relations
with third countries. It is the responsibility of each party to reconcile its
commitments to various partners.
Much of the language used in your proposed text in this respect is
meaningless and self-contradictory. One way of dealing with it could
be challenging the relevance of a certain provision in application. But
you know that this is not my style. I always like to be clear and decisive
for I believe that I am doing the right thing for my people and yours. I
would like to set a model for others to follow.
Second: Your delegation retracted its acceptance of certain provi-
sions or concepts after this acceptance had been acted upon. It is not my
intention to get into a detailed account of what happened in this re-
spect. Suffice it to cite a few examples:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
a—withdrawing your proposal on the sub-phases of the interim
withdrawal;17
b—Going back on your offer to reduce the period of the interim
withdrawal to six months;18
c—Opposing, after consenting to, the formula of an exchange of
letters on the West Bank and Gaza;19
d—Opposing a tangible Egyptian presence in the Gaza Strip.
e—Reversing your previous position on the elimination of the
arms race;21
f—Insisting on deleting a paragraph from the preamble after
having accepted it. That paragraph spoke of the necessity for main-
taining the balanced and reciprocal implementation of the Parties’ cor-
responding obligations.
Again, I am not stating the abovementioned for the purpose of
chastizing your Government or attributing malice to anyone. I am
simply urging you and your colleagues to reconsider your position and
take a new look at recent events as well as ways and means for breaking
the present impasse. I do not want to see a resurgence of suspicion and
ill-feeling as I am mainly concerned for the future. I hope you will find
it possible to respond to this new initiative in the same spirit which
prompted me to write to you.
With best wishes,
Mohammed Anwar El-Sadat

147.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, November 30, 1978
SUBJECT
Initial Reaction to the Latest Middle East Difficulty

148.
Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter met with Egyptian Prime Minister Mus-
tafa Khalil at the White House on December 1, 1978. According to the
President’s Daily Diary, Carter met privately with Khalil in the Oval

Prime Minister to the Cabinet Room where they were joined by Vice
President Walter Mondale, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, Assistant to
the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski, and
White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan. The meeting continued
formal record of this meeting has been found, though three sets of
handwritten notes from the meeting were made by Carter; two sets are
in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Policy
2/79. William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff subse-
quently wrote that during the meeting Khalil “pressed hard on the im-
portance of the simultaneity of Israeli withdrawal to the interim line
and the establishment of the [Palestinian] self-governing authority.”
Moreover, Quandt wrote, Khalil wanted to “revise article 6 of the
treaty. Carter objected to the idea of revising the treaty, but did suggest
that interpretive notes could be appended to it.” (Quandt, Camp David,
page 285)
Following the meeting, Vance announced to reporters that “[i]t
was emphasized [in the meeting] that the negotiations will continue in
fulfillment of the accords reached at Camp David.” Moreover, Vance
acknowledged Khalil had given Carter a letter with Egyptian President
Anwar al-Sadat’s latest proposals. (See Document 145) On continued
Israeli participation in negotiations, the Secretary of State stated that Is-
rael had informed the United States that it would resume the negotia-
tions “at such time as will be useful.” (Bernard Gwertzman, “Egypt and
Israelis Will Resume Talks, U.S. Aides Disclose,” The New York Times,
December 2, page 1) The Department transmitted a full, unofficial tran-
script of the remarks Vance and Khalil made to the press in telegram
304945 to Cairo, Tel Aviv, Amman, Jidda, Jerusalem, and Damascus,
December 2. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Khalil again met with Vance and Mondale on the morning of De-
cember 2, joined by Quandt, Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton,
Jr. and Egyptian Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs Osama al-Baz. Ac-
cording to a summary of the meeting transmitted in telegram 305342 to
Tel Aviv and Cairo, December 3, the meeting focused “largely” on
Egypt’s proposed changes to Article VI of the draft peace treaty and the
Egyptian “desire” for a side letter on the “relationship between [the]
Egyptian-Israeli treaty and West Bank/Gaza steps.” On Article VI, de-
spite the U.S. delegation’s continued urging of the Egyptians not to re-
open negotiations on treaty language, it was “clear” from the “strength
and tenacity of Khalil’s instructions that Sadat has serious problems
with paras 2 and 5 of Article VI—not so much with the concepts under-

149.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
New Egyptian Proposal (U)
On instructions from President Sadat, Prime Minister Khalil gave
us this morning2 a new Egyptian proposal (Tab A). Simultaneously,
Ambassador Eilts has reported from Cairo3 that Sadat did not accept
our suggested variation of the proposal for delaying the interim with-
drawal so that it could coincide with the establishment of the self-
governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza. Instead, Sadat still in-
sists on carrying out the interim withdrawal within nine months, and
simultaneously establishing a Palestinian self-government at least in
Prime Minister Khalil suggested that Secretary Vance or you
should meet directly with President Sadat before formally answering
his letter. He clearly feels that he has done as much as he can to per-
suade Sadat to change his views and wants to leave the remaining task
With reference to Articles IV and VI of the treaty, the Prime Min-
ister expressed his view that Sadat might eventually accept the idea of
leaving the text of these Articles intact, while accommodating Egyptian
concerns in interpretive notes. Nonetheless, the Egyptian proposal now
contains language concerning the need for amendments in both of
those Articles. The Egyptians also have left out of their proposal the
idea of not holding the Israelis responsible if elections cannot be held
because of Jordanian or Palestinian obstruction. Khalil maintains that
this has already been conveyed to the Israelis in Sadat’s letter4 and they
do not want to include it in any of the documents related to the peace
negotiations. (S)
In brief, the Egyptians have come back to the idea of a target date
for elections which coincides with the interim withdrawal. Compared
to their earlier position, however, they are most insistent that the
interim withdrawal and the establishment of a self-governing au-
thority must occur simultaneously, unless otherwise agreed by both
parties. As you know, this will be extremely difficult for the Israelis to
In a meeting this afternoon with Secretary Vance, Khalil strongly
urged the Secretary to come to Cairo to see Sadat as early as this coming
Sunday. He also informed the Secretary that he will be meeting, at
Weizman’s suggestion, both Weizman and Dayan somewhere in Eu-
rope later this week.
eign Policy File, P850067–1725)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Tab A
Egyptian Proposal
December 4, 1978
1. The peace treaty between Egypt and Israel will be signed after
multaneously, identical letters will be exchanged between Egypt and
Israel (witnessed by the US) providing for the election and inaugura-
tion of a self-governing authority on the West Bank and Gaza. The
letters will provide for the holding of the elections not later than Sep-
tember 1979 and the establishment and inauguration of the self-gov-
erning authority within one month thereafter. The military government
and civilian administration will be withdrawn from the West Bank and
Gaza as specified in the Camp David Framework. The letters will also
state that a withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will take place and there
will be a redeployment of Israel’s remaining forces into specified loca-
tions, as provided in the Camp David Framework. Simultaneously
with the signing of the peace treaty and the exchange of letters, Israel
will sign a letter addressed to the United States on measures it will take
for the purpose of improving the political situation in the West Bank
and Gaza.
2. Within one month after the exchange of instruments of ratifica-
tion of the peace treaty, the parties agree to start negotiations to work
out the modalities for establishing the elected self-governing authority
and to define and agree upon its powers and responsibilities as well as
related issues, prior to the elections, in accordance with the Camp
David Framework. The parties will agree to negotiate continuously and
in good faith.
3. Unless otherwise agreed, the interim withdrawal in the Sinai
shall take place as provided for in the Camp David Framework
simultaneously with the establishment and inauguration of the self-
governing authority, possibly starting in Gaza. In order to facilitate the
transfer of power to the self-governing authority in Gaza, Egypt will
maintain a police force and a liaison office there.
4. One month after the interim withdrawal is completed, resident
ambassadors will be exchanged. This will be covered in a separate ex-
change of letters and not in the letter referred to above.

150.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State and the Embassy in Egypt
18708. Subject: Begin Letter to Sadat.
Begin letter to Sadat delivered to Embassy in unsealed envelope.
Text follows:
Begin text;
Dear Mr. President:
I thank you for your kind communication delivered to me on No-
vember 30 by the United States Ambassador in Israel. I read its con-
tents with deep attention.
The biblical reference you cite concerning the kinship and brother-
hood between our peoples is very moving. I share its sentiment. May I
say, however, that the comparison between David and Goliath does not
apply in our time. We believe in the brotherhood and equality of all
nations.
Let us now turn from ancient to contemporary history. To con-
clude, to sign, to ratify the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel; to
reach, if possible, appropriate peace treaties with the other neighbors—
Jordan, Syria and Lebanon; to resolve the problem of the Palestinian
Arabs through the full autonomy of the Arab inhabitants of Judea, Sa-
maria and Gaza, together with genuine security for Israel and her cit-
izens—this, truly, is history in the making. We wrote a page of it at
Camp David with the great and unforgettable assistance of our good
friend President Carter. Surely, we must persist together to bring our
efforts to fruition.
First, we should and can finalize the peace treaty between our two
countries. In the Camp David Framework we agreed that:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“In order to achieve peace between them, the parties agree to nego-
tiate in good faith with a goal of concluding within three months from
the signing of this framework a peace treaty between them, while in-
viting the other parties to the conflict to proceed simultaneously to ne-
gotiate and conclude similar peace treaties with a view to achieving a
comprehensive peace in the area.”
This is our commitment. With respect to the peace treaty between
Egypt and Israel, it is an absolute commitment. It is not predicated on
any other factor, including acceptance of the invitation as quoted
above. Certainly, we both seek a comprehensive peace settlement in the
Middle East. As you know, I have never suggested to you to conclude a
separate peace with Israel. The envisaged peace treaty between our
countries constitutes the first indispensable step towards the broader
settlement we seek.
In order to make this momentous prospect possible, the Govern-
ment of Israel a fortnight ago took the decision that it was ready to sign
the draft Egyptian-Israel peace treaty as it stands. In so doing, the gov-
ernment expressed its willingness to forego two amendments to the
draft which it had held to throughout the negotiations. Those amend-
ments are important, but I will not dwell on their significance now be-
cause of the action we took in favor of what we hoped would lead to the
immediate achievement of our common goal.
As far as the text of the peace treaty is concerned, it seems that the
obstacle in the way of our two governments putting our signatures to
it—a turning point, indeed, not only in our mutual relations but for the
whole region—is your insistance on changing or deleting sections of
Article VI and, I am informed, also Article IV. These articles, as they
read, were negotiated and renegotiated by our delegations. They are
vital and indispensable.
In this context may I comment on your remark about “legal formu-
lations.” To put it simply, everyone tends to display a preference for his
own formulation while showing little sympathy for that of his partner.
Beginning with the paper you read to President Carter and myself at
Camp David4 and continuing through all the other Egyptian draft doc-
uments, I have found numerous “legal formulations.” I say this
without any recrimination. We should both agree, surely, that this is in
the nature of things, for after all, we are dealing with political docu-
ments that should have proper international standing. Hence, by defi-
nition, they are formulated in judicial language. The “legal formula-
tion” to which you address yourself in seeking to change both the letter
and substance of Article VI of the draft peace treaty is an immediate

case in point. May I tell you that a number of the greatest authorities in
international law share our view that under the circumstances this Ar-
ticle VI is absolutely vital to make our document a treaty of peace.
Therefore, should you, Mr. President, now give your approval to
the text5 of the draft peace treaty as elaborated by our delegations, then
no obstacle whatsoever exists to its signing within the specified three
months, before the 17th of December 1978. This is the positive sugges-
tion I make to you today.
On page nine of your letter you enumerated six points about
which you express criticism of the attitudes of the Israeli delegation
and government. May I respond:
A) and B): It is true that your delegates and our delegates talked
about the possibility of sub-phases in the interim withdrawal and the
feasibility of reducing this withdrawal period to six months. Never did
they reach an agreed protocol on these two subjects. In the natural
course of discussion it was mentioned by the Israeli representatives as
an idea, as a concept, or a possibility to be looked at. And, indeed, as the
negotiations proceeded, the Government of Israel considered the issue
and decided that we could not undertake to reduce the interim with-
drawal period to six months. We will fulfill completely our commit-
ment under the Camp David Framework of the interim withdrawal
within three to nine months. On the other hand, sub-phases will be con-
sidered, in accordance with the decisions of the government, within the
framework of a joint Egyptian-Israeli commission.
C): We have not objected to the concept of an exchange of letters
concerning Judea, Samaria and Gaza.
D): We do, indeed, reject what you call “a tangible Egyptian pres-
ence in the Gaza Strip.” Such a tangible or any other presence in Gaza is
nowhere mentioned in the Camp David Accord.
E) and F): In the course of the negotiations we objected to several of
your proposals as you did to ours. Certain of our objections were ap-
proved by your delegation and vice versa. Such is the nature of free
negotiations.
Respectfully, I must take exception to the sentence in your letter
that reads:
“In my view you should not attempt, or appear to attempt, to
evade your obligations under the Camp David ‘Framework’”.
We shall carry out our commitments fully under the Camp David
Agreement. We signed the framework. Our signature is the commit-
ment. We live by the famous rule: pacta sunt servanda.
Permit me to illustrate this truth by referring to the matter of the
autonomy in Judea, Samaria and Gaza. The Camp David Framework
states:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“Egypt, Israel and Jordan will agree on the modalities for estab-
lishing the elected self-governing authority in the West Bank and
Gaza.”
Had Israel sought to resort to “evasion” we could have declared
that since Jordan—as one of the three above-mentioned parties—does
not join now the negotiations, they should be held in abeyance. We
have not said so, on the contrary, we have agreed that, notwithstanding
the absence of Jordan, Egypt and Israel will conduct the negotiations
with the aim of achieving an agreement. No further proof is necessary,
if any, of Israel’s sincere intentions towards its commitments. Else-
where in your letter you employ the phrase, “what you call administra-
tive autonomy.” You put it as a negation. This is unjustified.
At Camp David we agreed on autonomy, on full autonomy for the
inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and Gaza. We did not agree on sover-
eignty. We did not agree on a “Palestinian state,” nor on a nucleus for
such a “state.” As the text declares, we both clearly agreed on a freely
elected “self-governing authority (administrative council)”. This is the
commitment we have both underwritten.
As far as a timetable is concerned, it is of course not indicated at all
in the Camp David Agreement. Moreover, as I have already men-
tioned, we have to negotiate freely together with the aim of reaching an
agreement in accordance with the Camp David Framework on the mo-
dalities, the powers, the responsibilities and other related matters con-
cerning the administrative council and its election.
We, perforce, object to a timetable in connection with this matter.
The example you give in your letter to determine the timetable for the
exchange of diplomatic relations, for the conclusion of an agreement on
trade and commerce, for the conclusion of another agreement on cul-
tural exchange, or of a civil aviation accord—all these are proof of my
thesis that a timetable cannot be applied to the matter of autonomy
under the given circumstances. Each of the elements you mentioned
are under the absolute control of the two sovereign states concerned,
the states that sign the peace treaty and its specified annexes.
This is not the case with regard to the issues concerning the au-
tonomy. As matters presently stand very many, if not all the elements
are beyond our control. To hold an election one needs an electorate and
candidates. At present, we have neither and they cannot be forced. I
could send you a collection of original, exact quotations by PLO men
threatening every Palestinian Arab with death if he dares support or
cooperate with the autonomy scheme in any way. Recently, in Judea
and Samaria, three meetings were held in which thousands partici-
pated. Words of incitement of the worst kind were voiced. We reacted
with restraint although in other countries such inflammable incitement
is either not tolerated or is punished. To my deep regret you, too, Mr.

President, were violently attacked by, among others, the Mayor of Ra-
mallah whose insulting words were uproariously applauded. Out of
respect, I will not put his words into writing.
Suffice it to say, it is not a matter, as you put it to me, of Israel not
being held responsible if developments beyond our control prevent
certain desired results being realized. I am speaking of simple reason.
All of us must learn from experience. Unwarranted charges may be
made. It is our perfect right, a priori, to be in a position whereby we will
not be required “to justify” ourselves.
Very soon, let me say one month, as agreed, after the exchange of
the instruments of ratification of a peace treaty, it is Israel’s desire to
enter into negotiations with you (even without Jordan’s participation)
on all the issues relating to the election of the administrative council.
We want the elections to be held as early as possible and we shall, of
course, do all that we can to facilitate the necessary preparations. How-
ever, any attempt to fix a date before such preparations are made
would not only be unreasonable but could also be very detrimental.
Dear President Sadat,
I entirely agree that both of us have taken upon ourselves an his-
toric responsibility. In the course of our meetings and negotiations
there have been good hours as well as some difficult ones. Were not the
days in Jerusalem days of friendship and understanding? Did you not
tell me that we should put our “cards” openly on the table, to speak
with each other in complete candor? Did we not understand after our
respective speeches6 from the rostrum of the Knesset that we have dif-
ferences of opinion? Did I not tell you of my unshakeable faith in our
people’s right to return to the land of our forefathers and to live in it
with our Arab neighbors together in peace and in understanding? Did I
not sincerely suggest to you to put behind us, all the memories of the
past—and each one of us can speak about his memories—and then
together we declared: no more war, no more bloodshed—we shall
negotiate?
In Ismailiya we brought you a peace plan. We reached several se-
rious understandings just as we agreed, as is the nature of things, to
differ on several issues. But we found common language and, again,
we pledged to each other to continue the negotiations.
Then, suddenly, and I will admit I was taken totally by surprise,
there came a turning point towards a non-desirable direction. I will not
go into details because—and this is the all important thing—there came

151.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Special
Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to
President Carter
Washington, December 5, 1978
SUBJECT
Financial Support of Israeli and Egyptian Security Measures Implementing the
Peace Treaty
This memorandum describes one Middle East aid issue, not
treated in the OMB papers, that may need to be resolved by the time of
the treaty signing. We have worked with OMB on this matter, but in
line with your instruction no copy of this memorandum is being made.
Discussion
billion as being needed to pay for the costs of Israeli military redeploy-
ment and establishment of new bases, and asked us to pay the entire
amount with a $700 million grant and the balance as concessional
loans. On November 16, Finance Minister Ehrlich and associates pro-
vided some particulars: $750 million for replication of the Etam and Et-
zion air bases on a three-year schedule, $140 million for related air con-
trol facilities, $715 million for army redeployment, $655 million for
infrastructure to support redeployed air and ground forces, $70 million
for replication in Israeli territory of their Sinai naval base, $740 million
for additional defense equipment and $300 million for resettlement of
1,550 families from Sinai. The Israelis are pressing for detailed bilateral
discussions of this request.
As you know, we have never undertaken to do more than “con-
sult” with Israel on the costs of the two replacement air bases. A De-
fense Department survey team’s on-site estimates of air base replica-
tion costs is to be completed by December 8 and submitted after DOD
review about December 15.
Egypt will incur much smaller costs, probably limited to estab-
lishing an early-warning system in the Suez area. We have not yet re-
ceived an Egyptian request for help in meeting these costs.
The scale of any US contribution turns on three variables:
—Inclusion or exclusion of redeployment costs, apart from the air
bases.
—Inclusion or exclusion of local costs of projects.
—Inclusion or exclusion of marginally related Egyptian items in
the interests of political balance in the US support package.
Options
These considerations are summarized in two cost options. Each is
additional to annual US aid currently totalling $1,785 million for Israel
and $950 million for Egypt. We favor the lower, Option A. We suggest
deferring a decision, if the treaty negotiating process permits, until re-
fined cost estimates are known in mid-December.
We do not see how a US guarantee of private foreign lending to Is-
rael would help meet these airfield costs, since Israel’s debt servicing
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
capacity is already fully mortgaged and movement of these airfields
would not enhance that capacity.
Option A is to make incremental grants to Israel and Egypt in FY
replicating the two Israeli air bases, including essential associated air
control and communications systems and other directly required logis-
tical support facilities, and of establishing the Egyptian early warning
system, both on a construction schedule within three years. In both
countries, “foreign exchange costs” would be defined to permit substi-
tution of imported goods and services for domestic ones when neces-
sary in our judgment to avoid extreme dislocations of their domestic
economies. We would refer the Israeli request for military equipment
not essential to the air base relocation to the regular process of US-
Israeli consultation on annual FMS credit assistance, without indication
of predisposition to increase regular aid levels. As to the economic im-
pact of other military redeployments or civilian resettlement, we would
point out that our regular economic assistance provides generous relief
of these burdens, to the extent that dollars can help. Our present rough
estimate is that this approach would cost the US about $220–$250 mil-
lion a year (additional to current aid levels) for three years; at least 85%
of this would be for Israel.
Option B would offer full-cost financing of the same facilities as in
Option A, thus releasing more Israeli budget funds for the other pur-
poses. We would insist on US control of the construction schedule and
take this program into account in responding to Israel’s annual aid re-
quests. Our rough estimate is that this approach would cost the US
lion per year (additional to current aid levels), 90% for Israel.
Legislation
We recommend that any US contribution toward costs of imple-
menting the treaty be sought from the Congress in special legislation,
which would authorize appropriations in annual installments. Keeping
this aid out of our regular foreign aid program would help to avoid
building in radically heightened annual aid levels to either country.
Offsetting Congressional cuts in your other aid programs could prob-
ably still be expected, however.

152.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, December 6, 1978
SUBJECT
Strategy for the Vance Trip to the Middle East (U)
My approach (unpoutful) would be as follows:
Key Objective (U)
—Signing of the Egypt-Israel peace treaty and a letter on West
Bank/Gaza negotiations by December 17. The failure to meet the dead-
line will be seen as an erosion of the Camp David agreement. (TS)
—Alternatively, position ourselves so that our links to Egypt and
moderate Arabs will be preserved even if the negotiations reach an
impasse. (S)
Substance (U)
—Urge Sadat to accept treaty text as it now stands. (Fallback of
minor change in Article VI, paragraph 2). (C)
—Rely on interpretive letters to explain that Egypt can honor
collective defense commitments, or a strong unilateral Egyptian
statement. (U)
—Side-letter on West Bank/Gaza negotiations with target date for
elections by end of 1979. (Some variants may be possible; e.g., objective
of concluding negotiations within nine months of ratification—to coin-
cide with interim withdrawal—and holding of elections within three
months thereof.) (S)
Tactics for Egypt (U)
—Prospect of expanding cooperation with U.S. as part of regional
strategy. Would entail greater military assistance. (C)
—Our willingness to press Israel hard on target date and on settle-
ments issue. (C)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Forthcoming Presidential statement on Palestinians at outset of
West Bank/Gaza negotiations. (We could repeat most of our previous
statements and hint at willingness to expand direct contacts with Pales-
tinians of various persuasions.) (S)
—Our willingness to lean on the Saudis now, and eventually the
Jordanians, to gain their support for the peace process. (S)
—We should frankly explain that U.S.-Egyptian relations will
be hurt if Sadat is seen in our public opinion as responsible for fail-
ure of negotiations. This is a political reality, not a threat nor a wild
reaction. (S)
Tactics for Israel (U)
Our short-term problem is with Sadat, but our more fundamental
problem is likely to be Israel’s unwillingness to agree to real powers for
the self-governing authority. Begin needs to understand: (S)
—Whatever the treaty may say, the quality of the peace between
Egypt and Israel, as well as our relations with Israel, will be influ-
enced by how the full range of commitments at Camp David are car-
ried out. (TS)
—We will oppose future settlement activity by reducing our aid
budget by whatever amounts the Israeli government allocates to sup-
port of the settlements. We do not intend to subsidize illegal settle-
ments and we will so inform Congress. We will also vote against them
in the U.N. (S)
—A positive Israeli response on the target date will be followed by
early agreement on bilateral economic assistance10 issues. Until this
issue is resolved, we cannot make decisions on aid. Disbursal of aid
will be conditional on actual progress on the West Bank/Gaza. (S)
—If Israel is seen as responsible for the deadlock in negotiations
because of a failure to honor the spirit of the Camp David agreements,
U.S.-Israeli relations will be adversely and tangibly affected. We would
not be able to continue our intermediary role and the U.N. Security
Council might be seized of the Middle East issue. (TS)
Summitry? (U)
In my judgment, Vance may be able to persuade Sadat to accept
our proposal, but I am not optimistic. In any event, Begin is likely to

153.
Memorandum for the Record
SUBJECT
Summary of President’s Meeting with Ambassador Dinitz, December 7, 1978,
Ambassador Dinitz commented on the two substantive problems
in the negotiations: Article VI and the timetable. On Article VI he em-
phasized the importance of keeping the text of the treaty intact. Any
reopening of the text would encourage some members of the Israeli
Cabinet to ask for review of other articles, including the preamble.
Dinitz warned against an interpretive side letter to the effect that Egypt
would be able to exercise the right of collective self-defense. Since any
Arab war with Israel is defined by the Arabs as a defensible war, this
interpretation would dilute the meaning of Article VI. (S)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said that we prefer to keep the text of the treaty as it
now is. But if there is a difference between having no treaty at all and a
treaty with an interpretive letter, would Israel be better off with no
treaty? Dinitz said no; it would be better to have the treaty. The ques-
tion of collective self-defense is already covered by reference to the
U.N. Charter in Article VI. The President repeated that our preference is
to accept the treaty text as it is. If Sadat is adamant, he has the right to
reopen this issue for negotiations. (S)
Ambassador Dinitz said that Israel had agreed to a form of political
linkage by accepting four references in the preamble to the Camp
David agreements. While opposing any mention of a target date for
elections, Dinitz said that if a target must be set, he would make two
personal suggestions. The target date should be after the period when
normalization of relations should have begun, for example, 12 months
after ratification. Second, there should be no conditionality between the
successful conclusion of the negotiations to establish the self-governing
authority and the completion of the interim withdrawal and the begin-
ning of normalization of relations. (S)
The President said that this would be difficult for Sadat to accept. If
there is a normalization of relations at the end of nine months, an ex-
change of ambassadors, and if Israel and Egypt cannot agree on the mo-
dalities for elections and for the powers of the self-governing authority,
this would put Sadat in an indefensible position with the other Arabs.
He would have taken his own land back and not achieved any agree-
ment on the West Bank and Gaza. The President said he feared that in
those circumstances the treaty might then be abrogated by Egypt, along
with claims of Israeli bad faith. Sadat does not feel that Begin is sincere
in his determination to carry out the Camp David agreements on the
West Bank and Gaza. He needs assurance that there will be some time
constraint working on Israel. (S)
The President said that we have considered a proposal to remove
the nine-month deadline for the interim withdrawal and to tie the with-
drawal to the establishment of the self-governing authority, while
maintaining the three years deadline for the full implementation of the
Egypt-Israel treaty. In any event, the President said that he was worried
that the whole discussion of target dates might become moot if agree-
ment were not reached by December 17th. This would set a horrible
precedent. (S)
Ambassador Dinitz said that he agreed that it was important to
reach an agreement by December 17th, but the difficulty of doing so
demonstrated why a target date for the West Bank/Gaza elections was
unwise. The President said that the alternative to setting a target date
may be that there will be no treaty and there might then be a possible
rapid deterioration in relations between the two parties. Egypt and Is-

rael can agree to sign the treaty, to carry out the interim withdrawal, to
exchange ambassadors, to start negotiations on the West Bank and
Gaza, to set a goal for reaching agreement on the holding of elections,
combined with a clear exclusion of any responsibility on Israel’s part if
the Palestinians and Jordanians are the obstacles to progress. If Egypt
tried to hold Israel responsible in an unwarranted manner, then our
opinion and world public opinion will be important. Sadat considers
his letter to Begin to be significant. He said that he would not hold Is-
rael responsible if other parties block progress. We would be prepared
to make statements to Sadat and Begin and to assign a high-level nego-
tiator to help carry out the Camp David agreements. The President
again repeated that he attaches importance to December 17th. (S)
The President added that Israel is demanding too much in Article
VI. In his view, Article VI should say no more than that the present
treaty is not contradictory to any other obligations and that no actions
will be taken in the future which are contradictory to the treaty. Am-
bassador Dinitz pointed out that there are Egyptian commitments that
are contradictory to this treaty. The President replied the Egypt-Israel
treaty would take precedence since it is the most recent and it would be
understood to prevail, even if it is in conflict with previously signed
documents. This is hard for Sadat to say publicly. (S)
The President concluded by saying that he did not see why it would
be difficult for Israel to set a goal of concluding the negotiations by the
end of 1979 and for Sadat to say that Israel will not be held responsible
if other parties prevented the elections. This should be an adequate
compromise. The President said that he is not recommending any posi-
tion of his own and that anything Egypt and Israel can agree upon we
will support. (S)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

154.
Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat
Washington, December 8, 1978
To President Sadat
I extend to you my warm friendship and best personal wishes—to
you and your family.
Secretary Vance will deliver this brief letter to you as he comes to
pursue with you the historic peace which your courageous initiative
has made possible. We must not fail. The triumph of radical elements
who have attacked you would indeed bring the prospects of a dismal
future to the entire Middle East.
With the threat of disarray in Iran and further intrusion of Com-
munism among your friends, the success of your noble effort has now
become of even more importance.
We are close to a settlement and a treaty of peace between Egypt
and Israel, based on the vital harmony between your country and mine
which was so effective at Camp David.
It is extremely important that you and I present to Israel and to the
world a proposal which is obviously generous and fair and which ful-
fills the letter and spirit of the Camp David accords. A crucial element
of those accords is a time limit on the current negotiations of three
months. As you know, only a few days remain. A violation of this time-
table by the two principals would set a very bad precedent and would
cast doubt on any future time agreements of the new treaty.
You know that we are committed with you to a comprehensive
peace settlement. We have proven this in every negotiating session.

155.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State and the White House
Secto 14022. White House for Dr. Brzezinski. State for Christopher
1. I had a very good 1½ hour meeting alone with President Sadat
this afternoon. We have come close to reaching agreement with him on
the major outstanding issues, although he wants a bit more time to con-
sult with his advisors and to reflect further. They, of course, may un-
wind some of what we agreed on this evening. Nonetheless, based on
our first discussion, I believe that Sadat will accept the treaty text as it
is, with interpretive notes on Articles 4 and 6, and that he will accept a
revised side letter along the lines that we discussed in Washington on
Friday.
2. We began our talk with a broad discussion of regional problems
and of the need for us to have a common strategy in the area. I also gave
President Sadat your letter, which he read with interest and which he
agreed with virtually in its entirety. Our strategic overview discussion
laid a good basis of common understanding, and I think it is fair to say
that we see problems in Iran, the Arabian Peninsula, Sudan, Turkey,
and elsewhere in very similar terms.
3. Turning to specifics, I emphasized the need to find a satisfactory
solution for the West Bank/Gaza linkage question in the side letter. I
indicated that we could also discuss additional steps that would rein-
force whatever is in the letter. I gave Sadat a copy of a revised side
letter, and his only immediate concern was the reference to including
Palestinians in the Egyptian delegation. He said that he would not
want to promise more than he could deliver, and that we might try to
revise that language. He also wants some reference to Egypt’s special
responsibility to Gaza. He was pleased that our reference to a target
date for elections by the end of the year included the phrase “at least in
Gaza.”
4. Sadat returned to his own idea that the interim withdrawal
should be coterminous with the establishment of the self-governing au-
thority. I told him this was not possible in our judgment, but that we
cret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Vance arrived in Cairo on December 10.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
had thought of an alternative. I then read to him the revised note on the
exchange of ambassadors, the key element of which was the exchange
of resident ambassadors one month after the establishment of the self-
governing authority. I explained that we felt this change was justifiable,
particularly in light of the fact that the Israelis had withdrawn their pre-
vious agreement to withdraw in sub-phases. Sadat reflected for a mo-
ment and said, “I think that solves my problem. You can consider it
agreed.” In brief, as of this evening, he feels that we have found an ade-
quate solution to the linkage problem. We will have to explore with
his advisors tomorrow to make sure that they understand fully that
Egypt would still be obliged to establish diplomatic relations after the
interim withdrawal, but that the actual exchange of resident ambas-
sadors could be delayed until the self-governing authority had been
inaugurated.
5. Turning to Article 4 of the treaty, I read him our interpretive
note, including an additional sentence which states that a review will
be held after five years. He said that this was acceptable and that we
could consider this issue closed.
6. On Article 6, I gave him a copy of our draft letter and our legal
opinion. I explained that Article 6 does not mean that the Egyptian-
Israeli treaty “prevails over” his other treaty obligations. I expressed
my opinion that we should only send this letter to Egypt, and that he
should confirm this as his interpretation. He said that he would have to
consider this further, but that it helped meet some of his concerns. I also
urged him to leave paragraph 2 of Article 6 as it now stands. Once
again, he seemed to understand my reasoning, but said that he would
need to discuss this with his advisors.
7. In conclusion, I urged him to leave the treaty text as it now
stands, relying on the interpretations of Articles 4 and 6 that we had
discussed. We could then focus all of our attention on the side letter. I
told him that this would help change public opinion, which has put
him on the defensive for not having agreed to the treaty. Sadat men-
tioned that he still hoped for some reference to Egyptian police in Gaza,
which I termed a non-starter. He asked me to raise it with the Israelis
again, but indicated that he would drop this if it does not work. He
clearly does, however, want some Egyptian presence in Gaza. He then
said that he thought we had the basis for an agreement, but that we
were in for a period of confrontation with Israel and we should be
ready for it. He said he wants to wind things up before the 17th, but we

156.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State and the White House
Secto 14043. White House for Dr. Brzezinski only. State for
Christopher Only. Subject: Secretary’s Negotiations With Egyptians—
Dec. 12.
1. Following my return2 from Israel today, I had two hours of fur-
ther meetings with the Egyptians this evening, first with the Prime
Minister and Boutros Ghali and subsequently with Sadat and his ad-
visors at the Barrages. In the earlier meeting, we again had a tough time
with the Prime Minister over the problem of Article VI, but at the end of
our meeting with Sadat, after the President had given his advisors a full
opportunity to express their views, Sadat overruled the Prime Minister
and agreed to accept our approach to handling the Article VI problem
through the letter and legal memorandum previously proposed. To-
cret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Vance arrived in Cairo on December 10.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
gether with the other texts which we worked out yesterday3 and today
with the Prime Minister, we now have U.S.-Egyptian agreement on a
package which is along the lines of the one we hoped for and which
will enable us to demonstrate in Israel that Sadat has shown consider-
able flexibility.
2. Sadat’s advisors fought the Article VI question to the very end,
arguing that we should insist on an interpretive note that would be an-
nexed to the treaty, therefore requiring Israeli concurrence. In over-
ruling his advisors, Sadat stressed to me that he was doing so in order
to create a “package deal” that would have to be put to the Israelis on a
this-is-as-far-as-I-can go basis. He said candidly that the Egyptian con-
cern was that the Israelis would put his concession on Article VI in their
pocket and then bargain for further concessions on the other issues, by
which he means primarily the approach we have worked out on the
West Bank/Gaza side letter and exchange of ambassadors issue. Sadat
said, “I must make it clear Cy, this is a final position and there is no
room for further compromise.”
3. After Sadat made this decision, Khalil asked what we would do
if the Israelis refused the package. Before I could answer, Sadat com-
mented he was prepared to wait “a month or two” if necessary to get
Israeli agreement. Addressing the Prime Minister, Sadat said the im-
portant thing was that he would be fighting “this last round” with the
U.S. at his side. He said it had taken us nine months to get Begin to
ized by Sadat’s comment at one point as he brushed an el-Baz comment aside: ‘I don’t
want to make things more difficult for my friend, Cy.’” (Telegram Secto 14032 from
Jerusalem, December 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

157.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State and the White House
Secto 14053. White House for Dr. Brzezinski. Department for
Christopher. Subject: Discussions With PM and Cabinet Members.
Secret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Vance arrived in Israel from Egypt on Decem-
ber 13.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1. Secret Nodis Cherokee entire text.
2. I had two meetings with the Prime Minister today, the first with
his small negotiating group, and the second with about one half of the
Cabinet present. Dayan and Weizman were present on both occasions.
We will be meeting privately tomorrow morning before another large
meeting. I may also pay a farewell call on the Prime Minister later in
the day before heading back to Cairo to report to Sadat that evening.
3. At this point the results at this end are about what we might
have expected. The Israelis reacted negatively and argumentatively to
most of the elements of the package that we brought from Cairo. To
what extent this is an initial reaction that may to some extent soften
over time is difficult to judge at this point. Toward the end of our
second meeting there seemed to be one or two glimmers, particularly
from Dayan, to suggest that the Israelis may become somewhat more
flexible when they have had a chance to think about the proposition.
4. I started out by stressing the strategic objectives we shared in
shoring up the forces of stability and moderation in the region, and said
an Egypt-Israel peace would be an important component of this. I fol-
lowed by outlining the degree to which the Egyptians had made con-
cessions from their previous positions, and then explained the rationale
for each document which had been developed.
5. They were most disappointed, as we might have expected, about
the proposal to link the exchange of resident ambassadors to the inau-
guration of the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza.
Dayan at one point said that he would rather go back to the wording of
the Camp David Accords for Annex III without any mention of ambas-
sadors than to accept the concept that an element of this treaty is condi-
tional on steps in the West Bank/Gaza. Begin argued strenuously that
such a proposition was totally outside of, and contrary to, the Camp
David Framework. They tried to depict Sadat’s withdrawal of his offer
to exchange ambassadors one month after completion of withdrawal to
the interim line as a violation of faith, and I had repeatedly to remind
them that Sadat had originally offered this in return for subphasing,
and when the Israelis withdrew that, Sadat, felt free to withdraw his
offer as well. I pointed out that Sadat was making only one aspect of
normalization of relations out of many contingent upon West Bank/
Gaza developments, but Begin insisted that to establish conditionality
on one point would set a precedent for the other aspects of normaliza-
tion as well.
6. Almost as troubling to the Israelis was our proposed treatment
of Article VI (2) and (5). Most of their comments focused on the Egyp-
tian interpretive note on Article IV (2) which they saw as fundamen-
tally altering the meaning of paragraph 2. I pointed out that the Egyp-
tians thought the present wording in the article could be interpreted to
negate the preambular language, but the Israelis insisted that the effect
of this note would enable the Egyptians to delay implementation of the
treaty provision because of anything that was not congenial to them on
the West Bank/Gaza.
7. On the West Bank/Gaza side letter Begin said, several times that
the Israelis could not accept a target date, emphasizing that this concept
had been rejected by the Cabinet by unanimous vote. He said if a Cab-
inet date could be avoided, there were several possibilities along the
lines of more general language such as “as soon as possible,” etc. In
general, however, the Israelis seemed somewhat less upset by the West
Bank/Gaza letter than by the linkage and Article VI questions. Dayan
at one point said that if we could resolve the question of interpretive
note and of linkage between this treaty and West Bank/Gaza steps, he
thought a solution could be found for the question of a side letter on the
West Bank and Gaza, suggesting that in these circumstances even a
target date might be acceptable. We had the feeling that on this issue
we were beginning to get into an area which the Israelis even at this
point saw as negotiable.
8. They also did not like the proposed Egyptian note on the review
clause in Article IV, but this I think should prove to be solvable. The Is-
raelis were sympathetic to strengthening the present language in the
article to make review obligatory if requested by either side but they
are opposed to the second paragraph which called for both sides to
make a review five years after signing.
9. I should report that in the small meeting held earlier this
morning, Begin criticized us for having sprung these proposals on him
without adequate consultations as provided for in our undertaking to
them. I told him that I did not think this charge was even remotely justi-
fiable. We had been in the closest consultations with the Israelis
throughout this treaty process and I told him that what we were
bringing from Cairo were Egyptian proposals which the Egyptians
themselves asked us to present to the Israelis.
10. We also provided the Israelis with the text of our legal memo-
randum on the subject of Article VI (5) but they made no extended com-
ment on this subject in today’s meetings.
11. After dinner tonight I met privately with Yadin, Dayan and
Weizman and told them very bluntly just where things stand with us

158.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State and the White House
Secto 14061. State for Christopher only. White House for Brze-
zinski. Subject: Secretary’s Meetings With the Israelis December 14.
1. I met this morning with Begin alone for about one-half hour and
conveyed the message2 you and I discussed yesterday evening. We had
a very frank talk. His response was tinged with sorrow. I suggest that
no statements be issued by us until I return tomorrow afternoon and
have a chance to look at them.
2. Following this we joined our groups which on the Israeli side
consisted of the same large group of Israeli Ministers that were present
yesterday. Begin led off by saying that he would call a special Cabinet
meeting tomorrow morning in order to discuss the issues that we had
brought with us from Cairo. He then asked Dayan to sum up the Israeli
position at this point which Dayan did in these terms:
(A) The Egyptian proposed interpretative note on Article VI (2),
and the proposed linking between the exchange of ambassadors and
West Bank/Gaza autonomy are unacceptable rpt unacceptable.
(B) On Article IV, the GOI feels that Sadat is putting the wrong
construction on the present language. GOI fully accepts that each party
should have the right to initiate a review of the provisions covered on
this article. While the GOI does not accept Sadat’s proposal for a man-
datory review in five years, it believes that the problem presented by
this article can be resolved. (It is worth noting that Dayan said nothing
about the Article VI (5) issue.)
(C) On the West Bank/Gaza letter, Israel believes this too can be
resolved and is prepared to continue negotiations in an effort to find a
formulation that is mutually acceptable.
3. The rest of the meeting was taken up by Begin allowing his Min-
isters to express their views. Burg and Sharon made statements, the
latter being predictably negative and critical of the U.S. for “unfairly
pressuring” Israel to make concessions.
4. I did get the feeling, however, that the Israelis were taking a
somewhat less gloomy and totally negative view of the situation this
morning. They are still adamantly opposed to linkage and the Egyptian
note on Article VI, but there was more stress today on the areas that
might be resolved.
Vance

159.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter
Washington, December 16, 1978
SUBJECT
Relocating Israeli Airbases from the Sinai to the Negev
At Camp David you indicated that, subject to Congressional ap-
proval of the necessary funds, that the United States would help in the
relocation to the Negev of Israel’s two Sinai airbases at Eitam and Et-
zion. In pursuance of this agreement, on September 28, 1978, I sent a
letter to Israel’s defense minister2 proposing that our two governments
consult on the scope and costs of the two new airbases. In November
1978, I sent a survey team to Israel to begin these consultations. A sum-
mary of the team’s report is attached.
Eitam and Etzion presently accommodate up to four aircraft
squadrons (120 planes). Israeli plans had called for expansion to five
squadrons in 1979 with subsequent further expansion to an eventual 8
squadrons. Israel is asking for U.S. assistance in building airbases to ac-
commodate 5 squadrons within three years. This would require con-
structing three bases, given the available land in the Negev. The cost
would be about $1. billion.
I recommend we confine any assistance on our part to no more
than the basing of the 4 squadrons now at Eitam and Etzion, and leave
to Israel the full expense of any expansion. This would entail construc-
tion at two sites in the Negev (Ovda and Matred) rather than three. The
cost for construction of the two bases, accommodating two squadrons
each, would be $988 million for operational facilities and $57 million for
necessary (family housing and recreational facilities for example) but
non-mission essential facilities, for a total of $1. billion. This does
not include costs for off-base infrastructure and related expenses such
as road construction and maintenance, utilities, port and terminal ex-
penses, and the like, which we have assumed Israel would bear. One
way we could reduce the U.S. contribution (alternative forms of which
are discussed later in this memo) below $1 billion would be by agreeing
to fund only the operationally essential facilities ($988 million). These
costs include inflation based on the assumption of construction over
the three year period CY 1979–81.
If the two new airbases are to be operationally ready in three years
it will be necessary for DoD to undertake overall management respon-
sibility and to use accelerated construction techniques; Israel lacks the
management experience to complete the task in three years. Also, a
non-Israeli construction firm will be required to do the work because
Israeli firms lack both experience and capacity. Almost all the essential
ingredients—management, equipment, manpower, materials—will
have to be imported. If a U.S. contractor is awarded the contract, the
bulk of the money will be spent in the United States.
The requirement to have operationally-ready bases in three years
is a substantial task having important budget and legislative implica-
tions. If a treaty were signed in December 1978, funds would be re-
quired as follows: $5 million immediately for site investigation and
money for the first year must be from FY 1979 funds and available in
March 1979, if the peace treaty is signed this month. A delay in signing
obviously would allow a corresponding delay in funding.
There are, of course, various ways of reducing the cost to the
United States either by cutting back on the scope of the assistance or by
the method of financing. The former is connected with broad political
questions. As to the latter, there are at least three ways the costs could
be funded:
1. Direct grant for the full amount. This is the simplest and most con-
venient way to assure the construction is funded adequately and on
time, and therefore holds open the best prospect that the work would
be completed on schedule.
This could be increased (or perhaps in part reprogrammed) for FY
1979–1981 to cover the U.S. share of the airbase costs, i.e., of the total
U.S. share of about $1 billion, Israel would receive $500 million as grant
and the remainder as a long term loan on current FMS terms (no pay-
ment on principal for 10 years, payback over the next 20 years, pre-
vailing interest rates).
3. Long term loan for the full amount. The terms might correspond
with the FMS loan arrangements, or be separately negotiated.
The extent and method of assistance are matters that will require
your decision, and you may want to reexamine them in the light of re-
cent events. I am undertaking on a close-hold basis the necessary pre-
paratory work so that we are ready when you decide, and when a
peace treaty is in hand, to complete negotiations with Israel and to pre-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
pare and support legislation before the Congress. DoD personnel have
been instructed to make no commitments to the Israelis on amount,
or nature of assistance, and I believe they have observed those
instructions.
Harold Brown

160.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
White Paper on Middle East? (C)
Secretary Vance has sent you the draft of a “White Paper” on the
Egypt-Israel peace negotiations, (Tab A). We have several choices in
handling this: (S)
—Release the White Paper (with any appropriate revisions). The
paper itself will then become the target of debate, possibly obscuring
the issues in the negotiations. (S)
—Release the documents. This would force attention to the is-
sues directly, but would be viewed by some as inappropriate for a
mediator. (S)
—Systematic backgrounding of press. This should be done in any
event, but may be adequate without actually releasing documents. The
draft “White Paper” would become the basis for the backgrounding. (S)
Secretary Vance is not in favor of releasing the White Paper or the
documents. The more I think about it, the more I think we could accom-
plish our purposes by extensive press backgrounding. (S)
RECOMMENDATION: That we not release the White Paper2 or
the documents, but that we draw on them for extensive background-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Tab A
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter
Washington, December 18, 1978
Attached is a draft of white paper which was completed over the
weekend. When you have had a chance to go over it, I would appre-
ciate the chance to talk to you about it. I have reservations as to how
much this really advances the debate. Perhaps it might be better simply
to release the documents, which speak for themselves, and handle the
questions and amplification either by on-the-record or background ses-
sions with the press.
Cyrus Vance
Attachment
White Paper Prepared in the Department of State
undated
EGYPTIAN-ISRAELI PEACE NEGOTIATIONS
Where They Stand on December 17
On September 17, 1978, at the end of the historic meetings at Camp
David, President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin set for themselves a
goal of concluding a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel within three
months. Since October 12, difficult but productive negotiations have
taken place between their delegations at Blair House in Washington
with the help of the United States. While it has not been possible to
meet their goal, these negotiations have produced the main elements of
a treaty package. But several issues remain to be resolved. Some reflect
basic differences. Others are less important. In the United States’ view,
these few remaining gaps can be closed. The United States, as a friend
and partner of both parties, remains committed to helping Egypt and
Israel resolve these issues in a continuing negotiation.
The purpose of this paper is to explain what has been achieved, the
role the United States has played, and the issues that remain. While
much information has been made public about the negotiations, pre-
serving the integrity of the negotiating process has required that the
talks be conducted confidentially. In such a situation and when issues
of a highly technical nature are involved, some confusion and misap-
prehension are bound to arise.
The United States has been a full partner in this process, as at
Camp David, because peace in the Middle East is crucial to its national
interests and to the peace and security of its friends there. We are in-
volved in the Middle East because of our permanent historic and moral
commitment to the State of Israel, because of our friendships and im-
portant interests in the Arab world, because of the strategic importance
of moderate government there, and because renewed tension or war-
fare in the area carries the risk of confrontation between the major
powers, severe global economic dislocation, and strains in relations
with our friends and allies. We have been able to participate in the
process and to play the role of partner because we enjoy the confidence
of both sides.
Where the Treaty Package Stands
Two Framework Agreements were signed by President Sadat and
Prime Minister Begin, and witnessed by President Carter, on Sep-
tember 17: A Framework for Peace in the Middle East, and A Frame-
work for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel.
The first sets out broad guidelines for peace between Egypt and Israel
and between Israel and its other neighbors including the Palestinians,
with the objective of achieving a comprehensive peace; it describes in
some detail a framework for the West Bank and Gaza; it enunciates
general principles governing negotiations between Egypt and Israel;
and it sets out associated principles that should apply to peace treaties
between Israel and each of its neighbors. In the Framework for the Con-
clusion of a Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel, the Parties set out
the broad outlines for this peace treaty.
As a result of the negotiations that began on October 12, the frame-
work agreed upon at Camp David has been translated into a set of de-
tailed documents which comprise a treaty package. Agreement has
been reached on most of these documents. But as of December 17, nei-
ther Party is prepared to agree on all of the elements of the treaty
package. Until there is agreement on the complete package, there
cannot be a peace treaty.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The complete treaty package now before the Governments of
Egypt and Israel contains the following documents:
—a Protocol concerning Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai and ac-
companying security arrangements;
—maps delineating the line for an interim Israeli withdrawal and
the security zones to be established in the Sinai and the Negev after Is-
rael’s final withdrawal;
—a Protocol concerning the normalization of relations between the
Parties under conditions of peace;
—a set of letters and interpretive notes.
In those documents, the two Parties have reached agreement on:
the basic text of a peace treaty, the Annex on withdrawal and security
arrangements, the maps, virtually all of the Annex on the normaliza-
tion of relations, the beginning of the next round of negotiations on the
West Bank and Gaza one month after ratification of the Egyptian-Israeli
Treaty.
There are three principle outstanding issues:
—How to express the relationship between the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty
and the political process in the West Bank/Gaza which both sides agreed at
Camp David should be negotiated and set in motion. Egypt wants assur-
ances that the sequence of steps leading to Palestinian autonomy will
take place within a specific timeframe. Israel agrees to start negotia-
tions promptly, but takes the position that it is impossible to determine
when those negotiations can be concluded. Israel does not want imple-
mentation of the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty conditioned on other negotia-
tions. Egypt has insisted since President Sadat’s visit to Israel in No-
vember, 1977, that Egypt can make peace with Israel only in the context
of progress toward peace between Israel and its other Arab neighbors.
This issue is touched on in two proposed letters—one specifying the
time period within which these negotiations would be concluded and
another in which Egypt relates the exchange of ambassadors to inaugu-
ration of a Palestinian self-governing authority.
—How to define the relationship between the obligations under this
Treaty and those under other international obligations. Israel wants the obli-
gations under this Treaty to have priority over Egypt’s commitments
to other Arab nations. Egypt has insisted on the right, under the UN
Charter, to honor the several mutual defense pacts it has with other
Arab States in the event of armed attack against them. These issues are
dealt with in Article VI of the Treaty.
—Both sides agree to the principle of a review in Article IV of the
Treaty and that any changes must be by mutual agreement. Egypt
wants it made explicit that review is mandatory upon the request of ei-
ther side and has suggested a fixed date for review. Israel agrees that
review should be mandatory if either side requets a review but does
not accept the mention of a review in 5 years.

How these issues are dealt with in the documents of the treaty
package is discussed in greater detail below.
How the Negotiations Have Been Conducted
To understand where the negotiations stand as of December 17, it
is important to understand several points about how the negotiations
have been conducted.
First, it is essential to understand the process by which agreement is
reached in a negotiation of this kind. The Egyptian and Israeli Govern-
ments sent to Washington highly qualified negotiating teams headed
by Cabinet Ministers. These two teams came empowered to negotiate
but not to give final approval. Each could and did frequently accept
certain provisions ad referendum—that is, subject to later approval by
their governments. In a few instances provisions that were agreed to by
each of the negotiating teams were disapproved when referred to the
home government. This is a normal and accepted part of the negotia-
ting process. When the recommendations of the negotiators are over-
ruled, the solution is further negotiation to settle the unresolved issues.
Second, it is important to understand the U.S. role in these negotia-
tions. As at Camp David, we have worked separately and together with
the negotiating Parties. We have served as communicators between
them, helping each to understand the other’s positions. We have
helped them to crystallize and write down the positions that evolved
from their discussions. At the beginning of each phase in the negotia-
tions at Blair House, we put to the Parties draft texts to be used as a
basis for negotiation. These texts were not intended to be binding upon
anyone; their aim was simply to give the Parties a point from which to
start. In later instances, when the Parties had negotiated for some time
but found themselves unable to reach agreement, we proposed drafts
that we thought represented fair and reasonable compromises which
would advance the negotiations without prejudicing the fundamental
interests of either Party. In short, most of the documents now in the
Treaty package have resulted from a combination of all of these
methods and from intensive discussion of the issues after a prolonged
period.
Third, it may be useful to have in mind a simple chronology of events
during the period of these negotiations:
October 12:
Negotiations begin at Blair House.
October 20–21:
Intensive sessions with President Carter.
October 22:
Ministers Dayan and Weizman return to Is-
rael to consult the Cabinet.
November 11–12:
U.S. effort to present a complete text of the
Treaty, of Annex III, and of a letter on the
West Bank/Gaza negotiations.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
November 13:
Egyptian Acting Foreign Minister Boutros
Ghali returned to Egypt to consult with Presi-
dent Sadat. Egypt did not agree to two Treaty
articles and the West Bank/Gaza letter.
November 15–18:
Egyptian Vice President Mubarak visited
Washington.
November 21:
The Israeli Cabinet approved the Treaty text
and Annexes while rejecting an Egyptian
draft of a West Bank/Gaza letter and not ap-
proving a U.S. draft.
November 30–
Egyptian Prime Minister Khalil visited
December 4:
Washington.
December 8:
Secretary Vance left for Egypt and Israel.
The Outstanding Issues
The differences between Egypt and Israel have been reduced to
very few. Both Parties are now prepared to accept the Treaty text, sub-
ject to Egyptian request for two clarifications, Annex I on withdrawal
and security arrangements, the maps, and Annex III with the exception
of disagreement on one sentence.
Side understandings relating to Annex I had been agreed, and ex-
tensive work had been done on a letter which would deal with the West
Bank/Gaza negotiations. Because of the sharply divergent positions
taken by Egypt and Israel on this last issue, the United States had put
forward a compromise draft calling for negotiations on the West Bank
and Gaza to begin one month after the ratification of the Egypt-Israeli
Peace Treaty with a goal of concluding those negotiations and holding
elections not later than the end of 1979. After extensive discussions on
November 11–12, the Israeli negotiators accepted the U.S. proposal
subject to approval by the Israeli Cabinet. The Cabinet on November 21
did not approve the U.S. draft. The Egyptians initially rejected the U.S.
draft, but accepted it during Secretary Vance’s talks in Egypt December

tions on Annex III, dealing with normalization of relations between the
two Parties. Early in the Blair House talks, agreement ad referendum was
reached between the negotiators that in return for Israel’s willingness
to detail a sector-by-sector timetable for accelerating its interim with-
drawal in the Sinai, Egypt would agree to maintain the momentum of
rapid implementation of the Treaty by agreeing to exchange ambas-
sadors one month after the completion of Israel’s withdrawal to the in-
terim line. Neither of these understandings had been agreed at Camp
David; both were reached in an atmosphere of trying to show quick re-
sults from the signing of the Treaty. Subsequently, the Israeli Cabinet
disapproved detailing the phases for an early withdrawal. The Egyp-
tian Government then withdrew its reciprocal agreement for an early
exchange of ambassadors. The issues that remain following Secretary
Vance’s December 10–15 talks in Egypt and Israel are the following:
Treaty Text
—Article IV of the Treaty, paragraph 4, which provises that: “The
security arrangements provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Ar-
ticle may at the request of either Party be reviewed and amended by
mutual agreement of the Parties.” President Sadat has agreed to accept
this paragraph but wanted an interpretive note which would make
clear that a review would be mandatory if requested by either Party.
Egypt has proposed the following note:
“Paragraph 4 of Article IV shall be construed to mean that review
provided for in that Article shall be undertaken promptly on the re-
quest of either Party, and that an amendment can be made only with
the mutual agreement of the two Parties.
“It is understood that such a review will occur when the Treaty has
been in force for five years.”
—Article VI of the Treaty, which concerns the obligations of the
Parties toward each other under this Treaty and toward third parties to
whom they also have commitments. President Sadat was concerned
mainly over paragraphs 2 and 5 of this Article:
—Paragraph 2 states: “The Parties undertake to fulfill in good faith
their obligations under this Treaty, without regard to action or inaction
of any other party and independently of any instrument external to this
Treaty.” President Sadat wanted clarification that this language did not
contradict the fact that the Treaty is concluded in the context of a com-
prehensive peace in accordance with provisions of the Camp David
Framework. He prepared the following interpretive note:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“The provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article VI of this Treaty shall not
be construed in contradiction with the fact that this Treaty is concluded
in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement in accordance with
the provisions of the Framework for Peace in the Middle East agreed at
Camp David.” Israel has not yet responded formally to this proposal.
—Paragraph 5 states that in the event of conflict between the obliga-
tions under the Treaty and those stemming from other international
undertakings “. . . .the obligations under the Treaty will be binding and
implemented.” President Sadat was troubled that the Article might be
seen as abrogating legitimate defense commitments undertaken by
Egypt pursuant to the Arab League Charter. Egypt has indicated will-
ingness to accept a U.S. legal opinion “. . . . that the obligations which
Egypt assumes under the proposed Treaty text would not prevent
Egypt from legally coming to the assistance of any state with which it
has a collective security or mutual defense agreement in the event that
state is the victim of armed attack by a third state.” It is also true that
Egypt would have no duty or right to assist an Arab country in initi-
ating an attack on Israel.
It seems to the United States that each of these problems with the
Treaty text has a solution that is consistent with the agreements
reached at Camp David and with the interests of each Party.
The Letters
—The letter concerns the establishment of a self-governing authority on
the West Bank/Gaza. President Sadat agreed that negotiations for the
West Bank/Gaza agreement should begin one month after the ratifica-
tion of the peace Treaty but was concerned over having no assurance
that they would progress satisfactorily. Rather than a good faith target
date, he wanted a firm date set for the establishment of Palestinian au-
tonomy in the West Bank and Gaza; furthermore, he wanted this date
to coincide with the date of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim with-
drawal line in Sinai, which was the starting point, under the Camp
David Framework Agreements, for beginning normal relations, in-
cluding diplomatic, economic and cultural relations, and the termina-
tion of economic boycotts and barriers to the free movement of goods
and people. During Secretary Vance’s recent trip to Egypt, however,
President Sadat accepted the idea of a target date to be stated as “not
later than the end of 1979.” No part of the implementation of Annex III,
except the exchange of ambassadors, would be coupled with that date.
—The letter concerning exchange of ambassadors. As described above,
Egypt had earlier agreed that, in order to maintain the momentum of
rapid implementation of the Treaty, ambassadors would be exchanged
within one month after completion of the interim withdrawal. Egyp-
tian negotiators regarded this as a significant concession while Israel

would continue to occupy a substantial portion of the Sinai. Egypt has
now proposed to send the following letter to President Carter: “In re-
sponse to your request, I can confirm that within one month after the
self-governing authority is inaugurated, which may take place in Gaza
first as a step towards full implementation of the Camp David Frame-
work, Egypt will send a resident Ambassador to Israel and will receive
a resident Israeli Ambassador in Egypt.” Egypt regards the decision to
exchange ambassadors as the prerogative of the President of Egypt, not
an appropriate subject for inclusion in a peace Treaty. They regard the
exchange of ambassadors as an element in the normalization of rela-
tions between Egypt and Israel which will in part depend—in a polit-
ical though not in a legal sense—on the progress in the negotiations es-
tablishing peace between Israel and its other neighbors.

161.
Letter From Israeli Charge´ d’Affaires Bar-On to
President Carter
Washington, December 25, 1978

162.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, December 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Status Report on Egypt-Israel Negotiations (U)
As Secretary Vance has no doubt informed you, the talks with
Dayan and Khalil in Brussels went surprisingly well. The two men
seemed to respect each other and for the first time there was a highly
sophisticated discussion of broad regional strategic concerns. (S)
Khalil took the lead in arguing that events in Iran and elsewhere
increased the importance of concluding an Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty that would not isolate Egypt from the other Arabs. As he sees it,
Egypt should be in a position to play a stabilizing role in Sudan, North
Yemen, and Saudi Arabia. Egypt is better suited to take action in sup-
port of moderate forces there than is Israel, and he implied that Israel
would profit from peace with an Egypt which has influence in the sur-
rounding area. The Soviet threat to the region was also discussed in
some detail. In brief, compared to anything that could have been talked
about between an Egyptian and an Israeli leader just a year ago, this
was a remarkable performance. (S)
On the specific issues in the negotiations, Dayan made useful sugges-
tions on how to handle the less controversial items: (S)
—Article 4. Dayan agreed to an interpretive note saying that there
will be a review of security arrangements at the request of either party,
but he urged deletion of reference to a mandatory review after five
years. Khalil agreed.
—Article 6. Dayan proposed dropping the interpretive note to
paragraph 2, but said that a US legal opinion on the entire Article could
be provided to both parties which would include the language of the
interpretive note. Israel would probably also ask us for some additions
to our legal opinion. Khalil seemed to think this procedure would be
acceptable. We may find that Begin will be unwilling to proceed in this
manner, but it does seem to be a reasonable approach.
—Joint Letter on West Bank/Gaza Negotiations. Dayan now agrees
that there should be such a letter signed by both parties. He still op-
poses any mention of a target date, but did suggest that the letter could
be strengthened in other ways to make it more attractive to Sadat. This
remains a major problem.
—Exchange of Ambassadors. This is the most difficult issue for both
parties. Dayan offered to strengthen the joint letter if Egypt would
agree to return to the original formulation on exchanging Ambassadors
one month after the completion of the interim withdrawal. Both sides
are pretty well dug in on this and we are in a weak position to urge
Sadat to reconsider.
Procedurally, both Dayan and Khalil agreed that further talks at
their level, with our participation, would be useful. After they have re-
Quandt, who was present for the meetings, later wrote that though Dayan and Khalil
“appeared to get along well,” the Brussels talks made “no real headway.” For his account
of the meetings, see Camp David, pp. 292–293.

163.
Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of
State and the White House
9618. Subject: Message to President From King Hussein.
(S-entire text)
1. Embassy has been requested to forward following letter to Presi-
dent Carter from King Hussein.
2. Begin text: Dear Mr. President, you were kind enough, some
time ago now, to ask me to keep in touch with you on developments in
the Middle East. I am writing to you once again in the spirit of friend-
ship that has grown between us, on the Arab-Israeli problem which is
the core of instability in this entire area.
Mr. President, I do not belittle the genuine desire you have shown
and the continuing and relentless efforts you have made for a solution
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. I recall that in our meetings2 you have been
gracious enough to give me more of your valuable time on this subject
than any of your distinguished predecessors.
It is indeed unfortunate that the concerted efforts, which began
shortly after you assumed the responsibilities of your high office, of
bringing together to the Geneva peace conference, on the one hand, all
the Arab parties to the conflict particularly the Palestinians, without
whose participation no solution to the Palestinian problem is logically
possible or meaningful, and Israel, on the other hand, were overtaken
by events and prematurely abandoned. It had been our fervent hope
that the Geneva peace conference would have made headway with the
assistance of its co-chairmen, the United States and the Soviet Union,
and under the auspices of the United Nations would have elaborated
the details of a durable peace based on the eleven year old Security
Council Resolution 242 and Security Council Resolution 338. Sadly,
when such a process appeared almost within reach, an unexpected
series of events limited the scope of possibilities and subsequently led
to Camp David.
Most Arab parties, including Jordan, see the Resolutions drawn
up by the United States, Egypt and Israel as successfully achieving the
well-known Israeli objective of isolating Egypt from the Arab camp,
and thus weakening it further, which is one of the reasons for our
finding them unacceptable. Despite the inherent justice in the Arab
cause, the Arab position has been weakened by Israel’s superior might,
bolstered mainly by the United States championing Israel’s cause and
generously accommodating her demands. Furthermore, there is a real
imbalance between a process which leads Egypt to restoring her sover-
eignty over all her occupied lands, and the vagueness that shrouds the
future of all the other occupied territories, including Arab Jerusalem.
The rights of the Palestinians on their national soil have been neglected,
while Israel continues to create new facts, altering the character of the
entire area.
It is not difficult for any impartial body to understand the Arab at-
titude towards the Camp David Agreements. Evidently if any Egyptian-
Israeli peace is forthcoming, it will not mean a comprehensive solution
to the principal issues which are left outstanding. Nor can auton-
omous self-rule for the inhabitants of the Palestinian occupied terri-
tories, whichever categories are included in it, be a solution to the
problem, when the end of any process is unclear and Israeli intentions
are infinitely more clear to us all.
I believe the heart of the problem to be sadly clear, despite our
fullest confidence in your sincerity, Mr. President, the United States,
where the Zionist lobby is so strong, cannot be the champion of Israel,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
committed at all times to supporting the said state with her material
needs and almost unlimited military strength, and concurrently be the
sole impartial and objective mediator with Israel’s opponents. That is
why, sir, I suggested to you in my letter just before the Camp David
meetings, that it may be wise, in the face of possible Israeli intransi-
gence, to consider returning to the United Nations Security Council
which sponsored Resolutions 242 and 338, from which the Geneva con-
ference emerged, to seek guidance and to regain the momentum for a
comprehensive lasting peace.
The Arab Summit at Baghdad7 affirmed the Arabs’ objective of
seeking a just and comprehensive peace based on total Israeli with-
drawal from all Arab territories occupied in June of 1967. The summit
placed great emphasis on the essential Israeli withdrawal from Arab Je-
rusalem, which is of equal importance to hundreds of millions of be-
lievers in God. It emphasized the resolution of all aspects of the Pales-
tinian problem in accordance with United Nations Resolutions, and the
granting of the unconditional rights of self-determination to the people
of Palestine. Following all these developments, I suggest again that this
troubled Middle East, which threatens the interests and lives of many
in the world, and even world peace, can only be saved by regaining the
momentum for peace, in accordance with my earlier suggestion, re-
gardless of what has or may transpire between Egypt and Israel. I see
no other option or possibility. We must maintain the search for a com-
prehensive settlement of all the issues, with all parties concerned in the
area, including the Palestinians. Initially with the help and direct in-
volvement of the Security Council, and then with the help of the United
States and the Soviet Union, and possibly some of our European
friends, including France and the United Kingdom. I have written to
you, sir, most frankly and candidly, which is, I believe, the only way I
could as a friend. I am happy to contribute all I can for a better future
for this area, and for the people I am honoured and proud to serve, as
did my forefathers throughout Arab history. I hope to hear from you,
and look forward to meeting you whenever you deem the time and cir-
cumstances appropriate for me to visit you. I wish you good health
and every good fortune in the new year.

164.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
328036. Subject: Presidential Message to Prime Minister Begin.
(S) entire text
1. Please deliver the following message from the President to
Prime Minister Begin before Sunday’s2 Cabinet meeting.
2. Begin text. Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
I received on Christmas Day your message3 of good wishes for the
holidays and your hope that the new year we are about to enter will be
a year of peace. I want to tell you how much I share that hope and that
prayer with you.

165.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Adviser for
Middle East Affairs (Sanders) to President Carter
Washington, January 3, 1979
SUBJECT
Observations on Where We Stand.
I have returned on January 1st from a week on the West Coast, and
would like to take this opportunity, as we begin the New Year, to relate
how the Jewish community views our actions, our policies and the cur-
rent status of the peace process.

166.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
358. For the Secretary from Ambassador. Subject: Egyptian Re-
sponse—PriMin Khalil’s Letter to Secretary Vance. Ref: Cairo 0357.
(S-entire text)
1. Set forth below is the text of Prime Minister Moustafa Khalil’s
letter to Secretary Vance giving the Egyptian response to how negotia-
tions should be resumed. Although it is undated, it was completed last
night (January 6) and given to me at midnight. Attached to Khalil’s
letter is a statement which he made on January 3 after the Egyptian
Cabinet discussions of the results of the Brussels meeting. Khalil tells
me that GOE does not intend to publish the letter, but that he would be
willing to consider doing so if you think there might be some advan-
tage in publication. He wants a copy given to Israelis.
2. Quote: It is with great pleasure that I express our deep apprecia-
tion for the untiring efforts exerted by the Government of the United
States of America in the cause of peace.
cret; Niact Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to Tel Aviv.
1910)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
I believe that our discussions3 in Brussels have been very beneficial
in defining the points of difference, and in explaining the logic behind
our points of view concerning these differences.
The meeting also gave us the opportunity to discuss the latest
world developments in the Middle East, with special emphasis on Iran,
Turkey, Afghanistan and various Arab and African countries. I have
fully explained to you and to Mr. Dayan, the utmost importance of
achieving a comprehensive peace between Israel and its neighbours, as
a factor for ensuring the Arab world against foreign aggression or in-
ternal destabilisation. I also stressed the importance of linking the ques-
tion of the settlement in the West Bank and Gaza with the signing of the
peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. Moreover, I made it clear that it
would not be in the interest of peace in the world, and particularly in
the Middle East, if Egypt were isolated from the other Arab and African
countries, as a result of concluding the peace treaty with Israel. Such a
situation would be against the interest of security in the whole area. It
would also make it more difficult for Egypt to assume its natural and
essential role as the defender of other Arab countries when threatened
by aggression or destabilisation attempts.
During our meeting, I also pointed out the fact that all the other
Arab countries, even the hardliners among them, have not rejected the
principle of solving the Arab-Israeli confrontation by peaceful means. It
is also worth noting that the pact of the Arab League, signed in 1945
before Israel was created, does not contain any provision that may
be construed as being directed against Israel. Furthermore, the Arab
League Common Defense Treaty, which was signed in 1950 and came
into force in 1952, does not contain a single word against Israel. Thus, if
peace is established, this treaty cannot be interpreted as directed
against Israel. Rather, it will be the instrument enabling Egypt to coop-
erate with the other Arab countries for mutual defense, and for the
maintenance of peace and stability throughout the region.
I also stressed that the treaty between Egypt and Israel, along with
the solution of the Palestinian question in all its aspects according to the
Camp David Framework, must be of such a nature as to attract the Pal-
estinians and the other Arab countries to accept it and participate in the
peace process, not to isolate Egypt, force even the moderate Arab coun-
tries to take a harder line and reflect negatively on the constructive role
of the United States in the peace process.

I would also like to state the fact that the Israeli insistence on in-
serting religious concepts as a pretext for its expansionist designs in
Gaza and the West Bank has encouraged extremist Moslem movement
in Iran and Turkey, and will no doubt give momentum to similar ex-
tremist movements in other Arab and Moslem countries if we fail to
reach a comprehensive peace settlement. Unfortunately, the recent
statement of the Israeli Cabinet does not conform with the optimistic
remarks and suggestions of Mr. Dayan. Moreover it did not reflect
enough progress, a fact that sheds serious doubts as to the value of
molding new meetings similar to the Brussels meeting, since the Israeli
in their totality, and completely rejects the American interpretation of
Article 6 of the peace treaty. Israel also refuses the setting of a target
date for the realisation of full autonomy in Gaza and in the West Bank
as it had previously agreed in Washington.
Dear Secretary Vance,
I will now try to explain the Egyptian position as expressed in the
communique issued by our Council of Ministers on January 3, 1979
which I attach to this letter, and then I will suggest a procedure to be
followed for future steps, subject to your acceptance or modifications.
A. Concerning the Israeli refusal to set a date, or even a target date,
for the establishment and inauguration of the self-governing authority
in the West Bank and Gaza, we are of the opinion that the Egyptian-
American agreement reached, in this regard, during your last visit to
Cairo, is the correct way to solve this problem, for the following
reasons:
1. It is the only way that will make the peace treaty between Egypt
and Israel fall within the context of a comprehensive peaceful settle-
ment according to the Camp David Framework.
2. It was mentioned in the Framework that ‘the parties express
their determination to reach a just comprehensive and durable settle-
ment of the Middle East conflict through the conclusion of peace
treaties . . . etc; . . . for peace to endure it must involve all those who
have been most deeply affected by the conflict’. This clearly refers to
the Palestinians. Furthermore, the Camp David Framework is divided
into three major parts: a. West Bank and Gaza. b. Egypt and Israel.
c. associated principles.
In our opinion, this order of priority is a strong indication of the
importance attributed by the Framework to the solution concerning the
West Bank and Gaza, which must be solved before the question of
peace between Egypt and Israel.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
You will also notice that all important elements of the settlement
mentioned in the Framework, had been included in the last Egyptian
American proposal.
The Framework also mentions that the transitional arrangement
will be for a period not to exceed five years, and that it begins when the
self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza is established and
inaugurated. The Framework also mentions that negotiations to deter-
mine the final status of the West Bank and Gaza, will take place not
later than three years after the beginning of the transitional period.
Thus, fixing a date for the establishment and inauguration of the
self-governing authority is of utmost importance, it completes the
time-table adopted by the Camp David Agreement, because, if such a
date is not mentioned, then the inauguration of this authority will be
left to the unilateral will of Israel. It will also mean that it may start after
an unlimited number of years, which would practically make the treaty
between Egypt and Israel a separate solution. In such a case, it will nei-
ther attract the Palestinians nor the other Arab countries, to accept it
and participate in it. It will also cast great doubts about the real Israeli
intentions concerning the future of the West Bank and Gaza. Such
doubts are reinforced daily by official statements coming from Israel.
The Israeli contentions that they will be held responsible in case of
the refusal of the other parties concerned to participate, is not really
valid. Such a matter has been taken care of in paragraph 2 of Article 6 of
the draft treaty which stipulates:
‘The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under this treaty without regard to actions or inactions of other parties’.
The same point is stipulated in the Camp David Framework under
paragraph C of the associated principles. Article 5 states ‘the United
States shall be invited to participate in the talks on matters related to
the modalities of the implementation of the agreements, and working
out the time-table for carrying out the obligations of the parties’.
B. Concerning the interpretative note attached to the treaty:
As you are aware, the Egyptian position concerning Articles 4 and
6 of the draft peace treaty was consistently unchanged. Egypt has ac-
cepted the American proposal of the interpretative note as a means to
bridge the differences between Egypt and Israel. We still believe that
they represent the most reasonable compromise, and that your support
in this respect is the only way to convince Israel to accept such an
interpretation.
In Brussels, Mr. Dayan proposed as a solution, that each party
would forward his questions to the United States, who in turn would
put down answers that are acceptable to both parties and will be at-
tached to the treaty and constitute an integral part of it. To our great

disappointment the Israeli Cabinet refused any interpretation of Arti-
cle 6.
Our point of view concerning paragraph 2 of Article 6 is well
known to you. We accept your interpretation that the provisions of this
paragraph shall not be construed in a way to contradict the fact that this
treaty is concluded in the context of the comprehensive settlement in
accordance with the provisions of the Framework for Peace in the
Middle East agreed upon in Camp David.
We firmly believe that this interpretation is the only correct one
and conforms with what President Carter confirmed in my meeting
with him. The Israeli refusal to accept this, reinforces the allegations
that what is intended is a separate peace treaty. When Israel says that
the treaty with Egypt should stand on its own feet, this must not be in-
terpreted that the treaty must be a separate one. Rather, it means that
the obligations of the two parties must be respected and honoured
within the context of a comprehensive peace settlement.
For all the above mentioned reasons, a mutually accepted interpre-
tation of this paragraph, along the lines which the United States and
Egypt agreed upon, is of utmost importance.
As to paragraph 5 of Article 6, our point of view is also well known
to you. If Israel really wants peace, it must not try to prevent us from
meeting our obligations to defend the other Arab countries against for-
eign aggression. As I told Mr. Dayan in Brussels, the Arab countries
never started war against Israel, and will not accept to see Israel launch
a side war with Syria in Lebanon.
Egypt cannot accept any compromise in this respect, otherwise we
would be acting against our own interest, against the security of the
Arab world, and indeed, against the interest of the whole world.
Dear Mr. Secretary,
Concerning paragraph 4 of Article 4, it seems to us that the Israelis
have accepted in principal our interpretation agreed upon during your
last visit to Egypt. Their only reservation is that they do not want to set
a fixed date for the revision of the security arrangements. In our
opinion, a solution can be found in this regard.
C. Concerning exchange of ambassadors:
The recent Israeli Cabinet statement did not mention this point at
all. We consider that the text of the letter9 agreed upon between you
and us during your last visit to Egypt is still valid.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Dear Secretary Vance,
I will now attempt to suggest a future course of action in order to
overcome the present situation.
In this regard, you will agree with me that it is very difficult to
enter into any negotiations with all the preconditions set by the Israeli
Government. If we accept to start negotiations in these circumstances, it
will relieve Israel from its responsibility for not accepting the interpre-
tative notes and the joint letter of December 17, 1978, and Israel will
seize this opportunity to try to convince the whole world into believing
that Egypt will be responsible if the negotiations fail.
Your support is essential to overcome the present stalemate, for
the benefit of world peace. Israel must realise the dangers that its posi-
tion creates for the whole world. The special relations between the
United States and Israel should be directed towards establishing peace,
security and stability in the Middle East. We do not ask you to put pres-
sure on Israel, but rather to open Israel’s eyes to the serious dangers
which would result from a situation where Egypt would be isolated
and unable to assume its role in the defense and stability of the Arab
world.
The Americans, as full partners in the peace process, should also
convince Israel that the insistence of the extremist religious groups to
build new settlements or reinforce the existing ones, is a very serious
matter which has already had its impact in the Islamic countries,
feeding the animosity of extremist governments hostile to Israel and to
the United States.
In our opinion, the two sides must agree on the main principles
concerning the solution of the points of differences. This can be
achieved through you, either by holding a meeting with Mr. Dayan
alone, or a meeting between the three of us. I do not think that a
meeting on the technical level would be beneficial. On the contrary it
might further complicate matters.
Another suggestion would be for you to resume shuttle diplo-
macy. I very well know your responsibilities, and very tight schedules
but I also know that you are the only one who can assume such a deli-
cate mission.
You could also think of inviting the parties to forward their sug-
gestions to you, or, as Mr. Dayan suggested, to submit questions con-
cerning the points of disagreement, the answers to which would be
agreed upon by the two sides.
I believe that we would then be ready for a new round of
negotiations.
I would very much appreciate hearing from you on the above
mentioned suggestions. I wish to express the confidence of my gov-
ernment that the United States shall be able to help overcome the last
difficulties. We are also confident in your sense of objectivity and good
judgment.
Yours very truly
Dr. Moustapha Khalil. Unquote.
Attachment: Quote:
January 3rd, 1979.
Statement by Prime Minister, Dr. Moustapha Khalil
Prime Minister, Dr. Moustapha Khalil presented a report to the
Cabinet today about the results of his talks in Brussels, December 23–
24, with the American Secretary of State and Israeli Foreign Minister.
The Cabinet reviewed developments of the situation in the light of
Egypt’s continuous efforts to realize a just, comprehensive and perma-
nent settlement in the Middle East.
The Cabinet, reaffirmed Egypt’s continued interest in working for
a stable peace in the Middle East area, especially in the light of recent
world developments and variables.
The Cabinet reiterates what Egypt has always emphasized; that
for peace in the Middle East, to be durable and permanent, it must be
comprehensive and just. Therefore Egypt will never sign any separate
agreement, as this would constitute a deviation from the spirit of the
Camp David Agreements which embodied the framework of a global
settlement.
To achieve that, Egypt insists on linking the signing of an agree-
ment regarding procedures for holding elections and establishing Pal-
estinian full autonomy in Gaza and the West Bank with the signing of
the agreement between Egypt and Israel, so that the establishment of
Palestinians’ full autonomy and the abolition of Israeli military rule
will be accomplished according to a time table agreed upon by the two
parties in exchanged identical letters signed by the two parties and wit-
nessed by the U.S.A. and annexed to the peace treaty.
The Cabinet stressed also that the peace treaty between Egypt and
Israel should lead to the establishment between them of normal rela-
tions similar to their relations with other countries and on equal
footing, giving neither party any privileged or preferential status in this
respect. Thus it is not acceptable that this treaty should have any pri-
ority over other treaties.
The Cabinet also expressed its appreciation for the United States
role as a full partner in the peace process. It also noted with satisfaction
the worldwide support for Egypt’s stand and efforts, a support which
will have its bearing in paving the way towards the just and compre-

167.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
760. For the Secretary from Ambassador. Subject: Next Steps in
Peace Process. Ref: State 008958.
cret; Immediate; Exdis Distribute as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Tel Aviv
and the White House.
of Iran, thanking him for his account of his recent meetings with Sadat and the Saudi

Summary: Conveyed to PriMin Khalil this morning our ideas on
how to proceed. He was generally agreeable, but asked that Atherton/
Hansell come to Cairo January 17–183 since he is scheduled make
second trip to Khartoum January 19 and will stay there for two days.
He wants to conduct Article IV and VI talks with Atherton/Hansell
and does not want Boutros Ghali to do so. Khalil emphasized that it is
not only para 5 of Article VI that needs to be covered by interpretative
note, but also para 2. Latter, he stressed, is of great importance to GOE
in connection with linkage letter. Whole exercise, Khalil said, must be
in context of Camp David Accords, not as Dayan had just put it, “stand
on its own feet.” He understands that Israelis have not yet been ap-
proached and that our concept should for time being be kept in strict
confidence. In subsequent telecom with VP Mubarak it developed that
Khalil had informed him. VP was also agreeable to our proposed proce-
dure. End Summary.
(S-entire text)
1. I was able contact PriMin Khalil this morning in order to tell him
of our tentative thinking on how to proceed. After telling him that Is-
raelis share his preference for moving directly to Ministerial-level talks,
I also gave our view on importance of first laying careful groundwork.
He agreed. I then told him that we would first like to try to resolve the
Articles IV and VI problems. Of these, Article VI is the more difficult
and, as we see it, requires in first instance further discussions between
ourselves and Israelis in order to ascertain if we can clairfy for them the
kinds of questions about our legal interpretative note that I understood
Dayan had raised with Khalil in Brussels. Khalil recalled that the sub-
ject had been discussed there.
2. I then told him about proposed Atherton/Hansell visit to Tel
Aviv and Cairo next week. Their mission will be to explore possibility
of resolving Articles IV and VI problems and thereafter returning to
Washington to report to the Secretary. Depending upon results, the
Secretary would then be in better position to make a judgment on
sell’s proposed visit to Tel Aviv and Cairo, beginning January 16, in order to explore
ways of resolving outstanding issues related to Articles IV and VI of the peace treaty.
arrival of the Atherton/Hansell Mission, Atherton observed that in addition to their
work on Articles IV and VI, they might also “be able to do some useful work on the oil
problem. With Israel now very likely cut off from Iranian supply, it is already clear that
the Gulf of Suez oil issue is going to assume a substantially more important place in the
peace negotiations.” Atherton noted that their objective should not be to achieve a final
resolution on oil, but rather to build on the “considerable work that has already been
done in this area.” (Telegram 11571 to Cairo and Tel Aviv, January 16; Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State Department Out, Box 115,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
utility and timing of Ministerial talks designed grapple with West
Bank/Gaza side letter problem.
3. Khalil thought our concept makes sense and said Atherton/
Hansell will be welcome. He wondered, however, whether Dayan and
Begin will be prepared try to work out issue at Atherton/Hansell level.
I said that we have not yet sounded out the Israelis on the subject, but
we believe they will be receptive. We wished first to get preliminary
Egyptian reactions prior to Khalil’s departure for Khartoum later to-
day. As I had earlier said to him, our present thinking is tentative and
we will not be in a position to make formal proposals for another day or
two, i.e. until after we have also sounded out Israelis.
4. Assuming Israelis agree, Khalil asked that Atherton/Hansell
come to Cairo January 17–18. His reason is that he will again go to
Khartoum on January 19 and will remain there for Sadat’s speech the
following day. Thus, he will not be available at the end of next week.
He made point that Atherton/Hansell discussions will be with him and
not with Boutros Ghali.
5. Alluding to the Article VI problem, Khalil emphasized that it is
not only para 5 of that Article that needs be covered in legal interpreta-
tion, but also para 2. The latter, he stated, is “very important to Egypt”
in connection with the proposed side letter on West Bank/Gaza. The Is-
raelis must not be able to claim that para 2 of Article VI vitiates the
binding nature of any linkage letter. He recalled that he had told Presi-
dent Carter that USG had added para 2 of Article VI. President Carter
had explained that the USG purpose had been to meet Israeli concerns
with respect to possible Palestinian refusal to cooperate. The final
clause of para 2, however, President Carter had said had never been in-
tended to call for an independent Egyptian/Israeli peace treaty. The
Secretary had even expressed a willingness to delete the final clause, al-
though this idea had been overtaken by our decision close text. Hence,
USG had decided on interpretative note route. This is agreeable to
GOE, but Khalil reiterated such an interpretative note must cover paras
2 and 5. The whole exercise, he contended, must be in the context of the
Camp David Accords, not as Dayan had just put it, “stand on its own
feet.”
6. Khalil said that he will wait to hear from us upon his return from
Khartoum, probably on Monday, January 15. He understands that we
have not yet approached the Israelis and that our tentative idea should
for the time being be kept in strict confidence.
7. About an hour later VP Mubarak telephoned on another matter.
It transpired that Khalil had told him about our idea. Mubarak also in-
dicated his agreement and his understanding that for the time being it
should be treated in strict confidence.
Eilts

168.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the
Department of State
174. For the Secretary from Atherton. Subj: Meetings January 17
With Dayan and Begin.
1. In addition to morning and afternoon sessions with Israeli nego-
tiating team January 17 (septel), Sam Lewis and I had tete-a-tete lunch
with Dayan and Ciechanover and, at Dayan’s initiative, Sam, Herb
Hansell and I met privately for hour and three-quarters at the end of
day with Begin and Dayan at Prime Minister’s residence.
2. At lunch, Dayan spent considerable time probing our view of
events in Iran, their significance for area situation, and reasons for
Sadat’s invitation to the Shah to visit Aswan. I used occasion to make
point that, in our view, Iranian developments only underline impor-
tance of completing Egyptian-Israeli negotiations. In response to Day-
an’s question whether Sadat still wants to complete treaty, I said we be-
lieve he does and that he sees Egyptian-Israeli settlement as necessary
element in dealing with overall strategic situation with Egypt playing
stabilizing and moderating role in area.
3. I stressed to Dayan that the President and you continue to be
committed to helping achieve Egyptian-Israeli settlement. Having said
that, I emphasized the importance you attach to having some better evi-
dence than we now have that your personal involvement in resumed
Ministerial talks would have reasonable prospect of producing suc-
cessful outcome. I said we realize issues relating to West Bank/Gaza
side letter and ambassadorial exchange would have to be dealt with at
a higher level than Hansell and me, but that you did not want to re-
enter the talks only to get bogged down in haggling over Articles IV
and VI legalisms. It was therefore important to be able to demonstrate
that these issues could be cleared away. This could not be accom-
plished by simply rejecting Egyptian proposals now on the table. We
needed to start from common acceptance of fact that we are where we
are and look for ways to deal with those proposals which meet Israeli
concerns while retaining substance of what Sadat believes he needs.
cret; Immediate; Exdis Distribute as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo and
Tel Aviv.
first two discussions with the Israeli team on Articles IV and VI, held from 10 a.m. to
File, P840171–0498)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
4. Dayan agreed fully on importance of resolving remaining treaty
text issues and gave his personal opinion that this was achievable. He
agreed it was important to show results from Hansell’s and my visit. To
achieve this, he said, it was important to persuade Begin of the points I
had made to him, so that Israeli negotiating team would be given the
right instructions. In response to Lewis’ question as to whether Begin
would have problems with the Cabinet even if he agreed to some varia-
tions on Sadat’s proposals, Dayan replied that, if Begin were con-
vinced, he could carry the Cabinet. He urged that we have several ses-
sions with Begin while in Jerusalem and arranged on the spot for an
initial meeting at the end of day.
5. Dayan showed no interest in getting into details of treaty article
problems but came back several times to problem of how to resolve
problem of West Bank/Gaza side letter. He is clearly increasingly at-
tracted by the idea of concentrating on getting agreement with Egypt
for establishing autonomy regime in Gaza and felt that in Brussels
Khalil was more receptive to this idea, even if no parallel results were
achievable on West Bank, than he had expected. He thought Egyptian-
Israeli negotiations could well lead to agreement on West Bank/Gaza
autonomy regime in nine months so that Sadat would not have to send
ambassador to Israel before autonomy regime was in place in Gaza. It
would simply not work, however, for Sadat to make ambassadorial ex-
change conditional on this; Sadat would have to drop this idea, Dayan
said.
6. Meeting with Begin was relaxed, serious and free of polemics. At
Dayan’s suggestion, I went over much of the same ground with Begin
that I had covered with Dayan at lunch. I stressed the President’s and
your commitment to finish the Egyptian-Israeli negotiations. Both
Lewis and I made clear that your inability to respond at this time to his
desire that you come to the area reflected no diminution of your com-
mitment to help complete the negotiations. I noted other urgent foreign
policy demands on your time and your desire to have a better sense of
the prospects for success than was now the case. Begin listened
thoughtfully to my presentation and at no time engaged in recrimina-
tions about your December visit.
7. In his comments, Begin dwelt at some length on overall trends in
the area which clearly weigh on his mind. He cited concerns that Iran
would be lost to the West if Khomeini takes over there, current Pales-
tinian National Council meeting in Damascus, talks about Syrian-Iraqi
union and King Hussein’s recent statements6 and visit to Damascus.

8. Revolutionary changes in Iran, Begin said, had made it impera-
tive that oil issue be resolved in Egyptian-Israeli negotiations in a way
which gives Israel guaranteed supply of oil from Egypt of 2. million
tons annually. Dayan added that, without such guarantee, Knesset
would say that Israel was “committing suicide” and would not ap-
prove peace treaty involving relinquishment of Gulf of Suez oil fields. I
told Begin and Dayan that we were sensitive to their heightened con-
cerns about secure oil supply in light of Iranian developments, that I
had already met with Energy Minister Modai Wednesday afternoon
(septel), and that I would be discussing this issue also in Cairo.
9. Both Begin and Dayan expressed considerable unhappiness over
recent statements by Boutros Ghali that Camp David Framework
would lead to independent Palestinian state; this greatly complicated
their job of selling peace treaty to Israeli public. They both also raised
statement by Khalil in Khartoum, reported in yesterday’s press, that
Egypt could not stand idly by if Israel attacked Syrian forces in Leb-
anon. Dayan said that this statement, which had been made in context
of latest Israeli military retaliation against PLO in Lebanon, was in com-
plete contradiction to assurances Khalil had given him in conversation
between them in your presence in Brussels.
10. In course of conversation, Begin also made strong pitch that re-
cent trends in area underline strategic importance to the US of a strong
and stable Israel. US should be strengthening Israel, not weakening it.
In this context, Begin referred to, but did not press, Israel’s request for
increased US economic assistance.
11. At the end of our talk with Begin, I reemphasized our judgment
that it was important in current round of talks here to deal with Egyp-
tian proposals on treaty articles as a reality and look for ways to make
them acceptable to Israel while preserving essential elements of polit-
ical importance to Sadat. I said that if Israel simply took the position
that the interpretations and legal opinion now on the table should be
eliminated, we would get nowhere. Begin did not say he agreed, but
Sam Lewis believes the fact that Begin did not argue the point may
be an encouraging sign. Dayan suggested and Begin agreed that we
meet with Begin again on Friday8 morning to assess progress on
negotiations.
Newlin
(Christopher S. Wren, “Hussein Appears to Oppose Israel-Egypt Dealings,” The New York
0040)
tween the U.S. delegation and Begin. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P840171–0612.

169.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the Vice President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Clift)
Washington, January 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Status of Egypt-Israel Peace Negotiations (U)
The negotiations have been stuck for the past month over two sets
of issues:
—Minor points associated with the text of the treaty: an interpretive
note to Article IV dealing with the right to review security arrange-
ments; an interpretive note to Article VI (2) on the relationship of the
treaty to the Camp David agreements; our legal opinion on the relation-
ship of this treaty to other treaties as defined in Article VI (5).
—The “linkage” issues: the text of a letter on West Bank/Gaza nego-
tiations, including the question of a “target date”; the timing of the ex-
change of ambassadors to coincide with the establishment of the self-
governing authority in the West Bank/Gaza. These will be the most
difficult problems to resolve. (S)
Atherton has been able to make only modest progress in his talks
with the Israelis. He has been told that Article IV can be settled if the
Egyptians drop their insistence on a mandatory review of security ar-
rangements after five years. In addition, the Israelis have proposed the
text of a draft letter which would clarify some of the legal controversy
over Article VI (5). It includes language that would amount to a blank
check endorsement of any Israeli retaliatory military action and goes
considerably beyond what we had proposed. Nonetheless, it appears
as if we are coming closer to agreement on how to settle this issue. Un-
fortunately, the Israelis have been adamant in insisting that the inter-
pretive note to Article VI (2) must be dropped altogether. (S)
We can anticipate that the Egyptians will not be much impressed
with what Atherton brings from Jerusalem. At best we will still con-
front the hard linkage issues, as well as Article VI (2) after Roy’s trip. In
assessing our next move, we will then have to take the following points
into consideration:
—The time factor. Time is working against accommodation. It also
means that the debate over West Bank/Gaza issues is being pushed
into 1980, which will not make it easier for us to use our influence.
—Israeli hawkishness. Sharon is rising in influence; Weizman is
lying low; Dayan is cautious. Begin is under attack from left and right.
Virtually no one supports the “autonomy” approach to the West Bank/
Gaza. Settlement activity is picking up.
—Arab realignments. Iraq and Syria are moving closer, drawing
Jordan into their sphere of influence; Jordan and the PLO are going
ahead with their dialogue; West Bankers are thoroughly demoralized;
the Saudis are afraid and therefore cautious; Egypt is still snubbing the
Saudis and Jordanians.
—Israeli concerns. The Shah’s departure5 has increased Israeli anx-
iety over regional instability and over oil supply. Israel is demanding
50,000 bpd of oil from Egypt, which may be more than Egypt is willing
to sell. Israel is also upset that we have been unresponsive to aid re-
quests associated with Sinai withdrawal. (S)
Secretary Vance has taken the position that he would be prepared
to invite Dayan and Khalil to Washington if Atherton makes some
these revisions, discussed in three separate meetings with the Israelis January 20–22, in

170.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, January 30, 1979
SUBJECT
Middle East Strategy (U)
Secretary Vance has sent you a report on the results of the Ath-
erton mission (Tab A). In brief, the only promising result was the possi-
bility that both Egypt and Israel might agree to drop the idea of asking
for our legal interpretation of Article VI (5). Otherwise, no real sub-
stantive progress was made in twelve days of talks. Atherton’s conclu-
sion is that the remaining issues cannot be solved in isolation and must
be settled at the political level as a package. (S)
Before we take any new initiative, we need to ask ourselves some
hard questions about the developments surrounding the negotiations:
—Time is working against the Camp David approach. The longer
the negotiations go on, the greater the likelihood that any agreement
reached will only be a separate Egyptian-Israeli treaty. Our own polit-
ical realities must be taken into account.
—Neither party wants to appear overly anxious to conclude the
talks. They both know that we will be tempted to ask further conces-
sions from the more eager party. Sadat in particular fears that we will
turn to him as the more pliant of the two parties.
—Talk of a summit may have the effect of precluding progress at
any other level. Both Sadat and Begin may prefer not to play any cards
until they deal directly with you.
—Our refusal to discuss aid questions has not had the effect of
softening the Israeli stand. At some point we will have to decide how to
respond to Israeli aid requests. The more we commit now, the less we
will have to work with when the West Bank/Gaza negotiation gets
underway.
—The situation in Iran has produced a greater degree of caution in
both Israel and Egypt. (S)
Within the very near future we will need to make fundamental de-
cisions on the substance, procedure and timing of another round of ne-
gotiations. (C)
Tab A
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter
Washington, January 29, 1979
SUBJECT
Status of Middle East Negotiations Following Atherton Trip
We are preparing a paper4 on the options we have for pursuing the
Middle East negotiations, for discussion with you later in the week.
Meanwhile, I want to give you this assessment of where things stand
following Atherton’s talks with the Israelis and Egyptians.
It is our judgment that Begin and Sadat both still want to conclude
the Treaty negotiations and have the political strength to sell domest-
ically whatever they may agree to, even though both are under
mounting pressures from elements of their respective political constit-
uencies who feel they have already gone too far. The more time that
passes, however, the greater is the danger that growing second
thoughts in Israel about Camp David will undermine Begin’s ability to
have his way with the Cabinet and the Knesset.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
While both leaders want to proceed to wrap up the Treaty, both are
having trouble with their respective political constituencies and this
fact has increased the perceived advantages for both in bargaining hard
over the remaining issues. In addition, events in Iran have probably
caused both sides to stiffen as they have perceived increased risks in
concluding a peace Treaty, resulting from potential area repercussions
of what is happening in Iran. Israel is more concerned than ever about
giving up Gulf of Suez oil fields without ironclad Egyptian supply
commitments. It is also more determined than ever to ensure that
Egypt will be firmly committed to peace and normalization regardless
of developments elsewhere in the area, before giving up the security of
its position in Sinai. The Egyptians for their part stress increasingly that
the peace Treaty must not isolate Egypt and thus weaken its ability to
play a leading role for stability in the area. They therefore want the
Treaty package to include credible evidence that they are not making a
separate peace.
As a result of these perceptions, the “linkage” issue has taken on
even greater importance for both sides, with Egypt determined to max-
imize, and Israel to minimize the linkage between their bilateral Treaty
and implementation of the Camp David Framework for the West Bank
and Gaza.
Following Atherton’s trip, it is clear that both sides see all of the
remaining issues, and not just the West Bank/Gaza side letter and
ambassadorial-exchange question, as “linkage” issues which can only
be dealt with and resolved together, if they are to be resolved at all.
This, more than the intrinsic difficulty of any one of the three Treaty
text issues Atherton tried to resolve, probably accounts for their unwill-
ingness to make significant headway during his trip. The linkage ques-
tion is fundamental to both sides, and they want to see how all of its
parts will be dealt with before trying to resolve any aspect of it. It is also
clear that, if these issues are to be discussed with any hope of success,
this must be done at the political level. Begin must be intimately in-
volved on the Israeli side, either through moving the talks back to the
summit or through ministerial-level talks in the area where Dayan can
have frequent direct access to him.
It is also clear from Atherton’s talks that the Israeli Government is
so locked into its rejection of the proposals5 I took to Jerusalem from
Cairo last month that it cannot agree to any of them in their present
form. It is equally clear, however, that Sadat cannot agree to any major
departures from the substances of those proposals. The issues we con-
front, therefore, are twofold: (1) whether we can find new ways to

package an overall proposal for a solution of the remaining issues that
will still meet Sadat’s needs and yet be acceptable to Israel, and (2) what
negotiating format has the best chance of bringing both Sadat and
Begin along. The paper we are preparing for your consideration later
this week will focus on these two issues. As background for your re-
view of our future options, the following summarizes where matters
stand on the three paragraphs in the Treaty and on the oil question
which Atherton discussed during his visit (he did not, as you know, get
into the West Bank/Gaza side letter and ambassadorial-exchange
issues or the aid questions pending with the Israelis and Egyptians).
Article IV—The Egyptians still insist on specifying that a review of
Sinai security arrangements must be undertaken “promptly” when re-
quested by either side and must in any case occur within a specified
number of years. They are willing, however, to use a synonym for
“promptly” (e.g., “without delay”) and to specify a six-year rather than
a five-year review period. The Israelis remain opposed to either con-
cept, however expressed. I still feel this is the least difficult question to
resolve, but both sides clearly want to hold off on any compromise
until they see what they can get on the other outstanding issues.
Article VI (2)—There does not seem to be any way the Israelis can
accept an interpretive note to this paragraph of the Treaty, which the
Egyptians want in order to make clear that the phrase “independently
of any instrument external to this Treaty” does not mean they are
making a separate peace. Both Begin and Dayan acknowledged to Ath-
erton, however, that this issue would have to be dealt with, and Dayan
suggested that this might be done in the context of the West Bank/Gaza
side letter.
Article VI (5)—At the end of Atherton’s trip, as you know, we were
close to agreement with the Israelis on an ad referendum text of a letter
to them responding to questions they raised, as a result of the legal
opinion we offered the Egyptians, dealing with the circumstances
under which Egypt would and would not be justified in joining hostil-
ities against Israel under the Arab mutual security and collective de-
fense pacts. The Egyptians, however, have reacted sharply to the idea
of such a letter. This has raised the question of whether, in the process
of overcoming Israeli objections to the legal opinion, we risk losing the
Egyptians. Khalil suggested to Atherton that a way out of this dilemma
would be to drop from the Treaty package both the legal opinion and
the letter to the Israelis and to seek a brief statement agreed to by both
parties which would make clear that Article VI (5) does not define any
priority of obligations one way or the other between the Egyptian-
Israeli Treaty and other obligations of the parties. Begin did not reject
this alternative approach when it was described to him by Atherton, al-

171.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, February 1, 1979
SUBJECT
Secretary Vance’s Middle East Strategy Paper (U)
The paper at Tab A2 describes the essential substantive problem in
the negotiations concerning the “linkage” issue. It recommends that we
try to repackage the outstanding issues by persuading Sadat to drop
the direct conditionality between the exchange of ambassadors and the
holding of West Bank/Gaza elections in return for a stronger letter on
the Palestinian issue. (S)
Secretary Vance also suggests two procedural steps: a ministerial
meeting in the area and a summit. I understand that he is increasingly
leaning toward the idea of a summit without a prior ministerial
meeting. (S)
What I find lacking in this discussion is a sense of broader regional
strategy and the importance of time. We have a window, I believe, of
about two months within which to conclude the Egypt-Israel negotia-
tions. It is becoming more difficult, not less, to bring about accommoda-
tion on the remaining issues. In order to do so, we need to convince
both parties that we view the Egypt-Israel treaty as a step toward
building a more secure regional environment in which we are prepared
to play an increasingly important role. (S)
As things now stand, we have been talking of the treaty primarily
as a step toward further negotiations on the Palestinian question. But
equally important, the treaty could be the take-off point for a more co-
herent approach to regional security problems. Secretary Brown’s up-
coming visit3 to the area provides the opportunity to begin to empha-
size this theme. Increasingly, we need to relate the peace negotiations
to a broader strategic framework which takes into account the develop-
ments in Iran, the weakness of Saudi Arabia, the assertiveness of the
Soviets, and the new alignments in the Arab world. (S)

172.
Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting
SUBJECT
Secretary Brown’s Trip to the Middle East (U)
PARTICIPANTS
State
JCS
Warren Christopher, Deputy
Gen. David Jones
Secretary
LTG William Smith, Assistant to
Harold Saunders, Assistant
CJCS
Secretary of State (NEA)
CIA
Treasury
Adm. Stansfield Turner
Anthony Solomon, Under
Robert Bowie, Deputy Director for
Secretary for Monetary
National Foreign Assessment
Affairs
Robert Ames, NIO for Near East
Fred Bergsten, Assistant Secretary
and South Asia
for International Affairs
Vice President Mondale
Denis Clift, National Security
Defense
Affairs Adviser
Harold Brown
Charles Duncan, Deputy Secretary
White House
David McGiffert, Assistant
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Secretary for International
David Aaron
Security Affairs
NSC
Robert Murray, Deputy Assistant
Gary Sick
Secretary for International
Fritz Ermarth
Security Affairs
OMB
James McIntyre
John White, Deputy Director
Secretary Brown opened the meeting by noting that he had prom-
ised to make a visit to the Middle East when he had met with various
Middle East leaders a long time ago. Many things had happened in the
meantime. The Camp David meeting had occurred with its initial
agreement and the subsequent slowing of the negotiation process.
There had been the evolution of the Iranian political process and fall of
Iran as a major regional security contributor at least with respect to U.S.
advantage. It was now time to realign our security relations in the re-
gion and the trip provided a timely opportunity to discuss security
issues with the nations of the region. The purpose of the meeting was to
seek answers to three basic questions. First of all, should we seek closer
relations with these nations in some cases? That question on the trip
was at best preliminary. However, it could set the stage for further ac-
tion later on. Secondly, what sort of security cooperation do we want
with these nations? In the case of Israel and Jordan, we have had a close
cooperation for a long time. However, it should be possible to draw at-
tention to the fact that the threat emanates not from each other, but
from the outside. This might be hard to do, but on the other hand these
nations are not likely to do it for themselves. Thirdly, if we wish to
pursue this path, what is the state of U.S. willingness to carry out its
end of the agreement? This turns on questions of public attitudes, con-
gressional attitudes, and economic capacity. In addressing these issues
Secretary Brown proposed to use the general outline which had been
distributed to members of the PRC the previous day entitled, “Secre-
tary of Defense Trip to the Middle East, PRC Discussion Paper.” He
proposed dividing this into a series of five questions. First of all, are the
general objectives as spelled out in the first page of the paper satisfac-
tory? Secondly, are the proposed initiatives for each country accept-
able? Three, how should we treat the linkage between oil and security
of financial aspects and security issues? Four, what financial support is
available on our side to meet some of these requirements in the various
areas? And, fifth, what sort of public posture should be adopted, specif-
ically with regard to the press who will be accompanying on the trip?
He then turned to the question of the general objectives spelled out in
the paper and asked for comments around the table. (S)
[Omitted here is discussion of Middle East regional security
issues.]
Secretary Brown then turned to Egypt. He wondered whether we
should encourage Sadat to play a role outside his own country in line
with his own idea of providing an intervention force for Africa and
other regions. He said that if you examine the whole region, looking for
a replacement for Iran except for money, Egypt came the closest.
Mr. Duncan said that he thought the list of initiatives presented for
Egypt were very good, especially the fourth one which called for the
initiation of FMS credits.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Brown thought that FMS credits to Egypt were more sal-
able in Congress than arms sales to Saudia Arabia, although the former
required US funding and the latter did not.
Mr. Christopher felt that until a peace treaty had been signed, we
should not plan on large-scale consultations even on a survey team to
Egypt.
Secretary Brown said we could take the line that we want to do it,
but we can wait until after a treaty is signed.
Mr. Christopher agreed.
Mr. Mcgiffert wondered if that applied to all five items on the list.
Mr. Christopher said that there could be talks about what the Egyp-
tians might want from us. The first point was certainly alright. They
need to know that it is a good thing to diversify their sources of supply.
Secretary Brown said that when we tell countries to go elsewhere
for their source of arms, they take it as a lack of interest from us.
Mr. Christopher said we should not hold out the hope that we will
be the sole source of arms for Egypt and also provide money.
Secretary Brown said that may be difficult, since the Egyptians just
came out of that kind of relationship. We need to talk to the Saudis
about the level of support for Egypt.
Admiral Turner said that it will be difficult to turn Sadat away from
his concept of being a Middle East policeman, but there are real
dangers in our encouraging that role. There is a danger that he will ig-
nore his domestic problems, ignore the military dissatisfaction with
such a policy, and that he could end up generating the same kind of
problems that we have just seen in Iran.
Secretary Brown said perhaps our position should be that he would
be in a better position to play that role after a peace treaty was
concluded.
Mr. Christopher said he hoped we would not divert Sadat from the
hard problems of a peace treaty and domestic problems.
Mr. McGiffert said he thought it would be bad if Secretary Brown
goes to Egypt and offers only a few contingency possibilities. That
would have a negative effect.
Mr. Christopher said that some APCs could be offered after the
treaty is signed with the numbers to be determined later.
Mr. McIntyre noted we already provide $750M in SSA to Egypt.
Secretary Brown then turned to Israel. He noted that the specific
proposals called for security consultations on a regional basis. This
would be something new in our security discussions with the Israelis.
He would also need to talk about the relocation of the air bases. Our

commitment to assist on air base relocation is ill defined. The President
must discuss this with the Israelis, but he could lead the way.
Mr. McIntyre said that opposition [our position?] should be that we
will make no cash commitments, but after a settlement is reached we
will assess the request and make recommendations. That is the line he
has been taking on the hill—it implies some additional funding, but
that is all. How would we rationalize that position if we now go for-
ward with new commitments as a result of this visit?
Secretary Brown said he was only talking about 1981. Obviously,
this would not apply before that budget year.
Mr. McIntyre said that there are general totals that we are oper-
ating on with regard to 1981, and that we have to tread very carefully
on that.
Mr. Christopher said that the air base and other issues of that sort
should be discussed under the general context of the peace process.
Mr. McGiffert noted that the $1B figure in the paper is new. We
have never given that to Israel before, although that is in the air base
study.
Secretary Brown said we have never talked about $3B in total aid,
even if that is understood to include air bases and other factors.
Mr. Christopher said it would not be desirable now to make a com-
mitment for $1B for air base relocation. There are already big numbers
there as far as the Israelis are concerned.
Secretary Brown said he had not intended to make a commitment
on this, rather he intended to discuss the study and the estimated costs
that came out of it. It would be a mistake to say that we would provide
loans or grants of money to Israel for that purpose.
Mr. Christopher said that the words of the Secretary of Defense are
heard as a commitment whether it is 81, 82 or any other time. Any dis-
cussion of the study should be prefaced with a clear statement that this
would involve no commitment as to when or how we would provide
funds.
Mr. McIntyre said he would want to [talk?] to the President to see
how he would deal with the question of budget levels.
Secretary Brown said that he had told Weizman on several occa-
sions that there would be $1B in FMS credits and $750M in SSA, and not
more than that on an annual basis.
Mr. McIntyre said that we should not leave the impression that that
level will continue in perpetuity; however, that is a subject that is prob-
ably left unsaid at this point.
Secretary Brown said he was worried about talking security with
these countries without something to offer his own.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Mr. McGiffert wondered how he could possibly be quiet on the en-
tire list.
Mr. Saunders said that there were certain items that they had re-
quested that certainly could be granted which didn’t cost money and
could be incorporated within the current aid levels.
Secretary Brown said he was afraid that such discussion would not
send a positive signal. However, he thought he could avoid making
new financial commitment.
Mr. Saunders said he didn’t think it would be so negative. He
thought the general objectives spelled out in the paper were excellent
and provided a good basis for talking seriously with them about secu-
rity needs. We could also discuss their specific needs and relate those to
the situation in Oman and Yemen and elsewhere in the region.
Secretary Brown said that that was true as far as the Saudis, and that
it was easier since there were no financial problems there; however, on
the Saudi case there were Congressional problems.
Mr. Christopher wondered what you could say to the Israelis on any
of these subjects without making a commitment.
Secretary Brown said there are some things on the list that could be
discussed without any new financial commitments. By discussing the
study, we could show we have done something on the airfield situa-
tion. We can assure them that some work can be done on the airfields
without an impact on the Israeli economy; however, no decision can be
taken at this time. He felt that what was required was a decision memo
for the President which had to be done immediately for him to examine
some of the critical specific issues.

173.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, February 5, 1979
SUBJECT
Gaza First? (U)
Since Sadat first started pushing this line, I have been amazed that
the Israelis have not tried to make something of it. Dayan seems
tempted, but Begin is wary. My personal assessment is that this is a me-
diocre idea, but that it may well catch on nonetheless. (S)
Sadat sees the “Gaza first” approach as putting pressure on Hussein and
moderate Palestinians to join the peace negotiations. He assumes that what-
ever is worked out for Gaza will be a model for the West Bank. What he
does not appear to understand is the predictably negative response to a
further fragmentation of the Palestinian issue into manageable (digest-
ible?) bits. Camp David was largely rejected by other Arabs for di-
viding the one-third of the Palestinians under occupation from those in
the diaspora. The “Gaza first” approach will be seen as dividing the
one-third of those under occupation in Gaza from the remaining
two-thirds in the West Bank. (S)
For the Israelis, the idea of trying to set up the “autonomy” regime in
Gaza should be attractive. It avoids awkward questions concerning Jeru-
salem’s status; there are relatively few settlements in Gaza; and the
emotional and historical ties of Israelis to Gaza are minimal. If Gaza is
enough of a fig leaf for Sadat, the Israelis should be interested. Their
fear, of course, is that anything they accept in Gaza will be a model for the West
Bank. After all, the Camp David agreements make no provision for
treating Gaza and the West Bank differently. Thus, if Israel agrees, for
example, to turn over state-owned lands in Gaza to the local author-
ities, it will be difficult to argue against doing so in the West Bank as
well. This is no doubt one of the reasons that Begin has been cautious
about proceeding with Gaza first. (S)
Since Sadat seems hooked on his idea, there is probably no way of
avoiding dealing with it. The question seems to be how to make some-
thing worthwhile out of a basically weak proposal. I suggest the fol-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Egypt and Israel will negotiate the modalities for elections and
the powers and responsibilities for the self-governing authority in both
the West Bank and Gaza.
—Egypt and Israel will state that they favor the establishment of a
self-governing authority in both the West Bank and Gaza, as provided
for in the Camp David frameworks, but are prepared to begin imple-
mentation in Gaza first if that proves to be easier.
—In practical terms, this would mean electing a Gaza regional
council, which would presumably later merge with a comparable body
in the West Bank. It is hard to know how administrative functions
would be carried out—presumably a Gaza regional branch of each ad-
ministrative unit would be formed.
—To the degree that Gaza can genuinely be treated as a model for
the West Bank, the greater the chances that other Arabs will not con-
demn it merely as a “separate” Palestinian agreement designed to
cover for a “separate” Egyptian-Israeli treaty. (S)
Even if the “Gaza first” approach is followed, several sticking points will
arise:
—The status of present Israeli settlements and future settlement
activity.
—The nature of any Egyptian presence. (Sadat wants police, and
we have spoken of “liaison officers”. The Israelis oppose anything that
suggests a special Egyptian responsibility for Gaza.)
—The status of public lands and control over water resources.
—Likely opposition on the part of the large refugee population
which has had close ties in the past to the PLO.
In brief, if the responsibilities of the Gaza self-government are ex-
tensive, there will eventually be support for whatever is proposed. We
cannot, however, expect active Gazan participation in the negotiations.
Instead, we will end up doing most of the negotiating with Israel, with
Sadat making occasional suggestions, and with Gazans discreetly
hinting at their preferences through indirect channels. (S)
We should not place much stock in the idea that the “Gaza first”
approach will lead to early agreement. Nor will Sadat and Begin work
this out directly. We will be stuck with the unwelcome job of moving
the negotiations forward. It will not be an easy task. In light of this, I
would prefer to make the marginal extra effort to treat the West Bank
and Gaza together, at least at the outset. I really believe that it is illusory
to think that we are significantly simplifying our problems by trying to
split off Gaza. (S)

174.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
31592. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Subject: (S) Mes-
sage From President Carter to Prime Minister Begin on Resuming
Middle East Negotiations.
1. (S entire text).
2. Please deliver following message from President Carter to Prime
Minister Begin at the earliest opportunity.
3. Begin text:
Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
I want to thank you for making Foreign Minister Dayan available
for the useful talks with Prime Minister Khalil and Secretary Vance in
Brussels, and for the time you spent with Ambassador Atherton
during his recent visit to Jerusalem. Their reports have been helpful to
me as I have reflected on how we can help President Sadat and you
move forward in the peace negotiations. I want to share with you my
thoughts on this critical question.
I am deeply concerned that the more time that passes, the less fa-
vorable will be the prospects for success. I believe we should now make
a major, determined effort to complete the task we started with such
high hopes at Camp David in September.
Secretary Brown will soon be in Israel, and I have asked him to
discuss with you, among other things, our perception of the strategic
cret; Niact Immediate, Nodis. Drafted by Atherton; cleared by Quandt, Sterner, Hansell,
and Stanislaus R.P. Valerga (S/S–O); approved by Vance. Sent for information Imme-
diate to Cairo and the White House. A draft version of this letter, bearing Carter’s hand-
written amendments, and an attached, undated covering memorandum from Brzezinski
to Carter upon which Carter initialed his approval is in the Carter Library, Brzezinski Do-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
situation in your region. Recent trends make clear there is a tide run-
ning against the kind of stable and moderate Middle East we both seek.
Developments in Iran have contributed to this trend. I know they are of
great concern to you, not only because of their immediate impact on the
supply of oil to Israel, but also because of their broader implications for
the region and for Israel’s security. As I told Ambassador Evron re-
cently, we attach great value to the contribution a stable, strong and
democratic Israel can make to security in your region. It seems to me
self-evident that the single greatest contribution to stability in the
Middle East would be the early successful conclusion of the Egyptian-
Israeli peace negotiations. This would create a new reality with which
those forces that have been hostile to the Camp David Frameworks
would have to reckon. In the absence of early progress in the negotia-
tions, I fear this opportunity may be lost and the security of our friends
in the region as a whole will become more vulnerable.
Despite the difficulties that have prevented completion of the
Israeli-Egyptian negotiations, I continue to believe that we can achieve
the objectives we set for ourselves at Camp David. It is clear to me that
all of the remaining issues are closely interrelated and need to be dealt
with and resolved together. It is also clear that we must address our-
selves to this task as a matter of some urgency, before time begins to
work against us and in order to free our energies to deal with our
common strategic concerns in your region. The question is how best to
proceed. As you know, Mr. Prime Minister, I recently said that I would,
if necessary, be prepared to meet again with you and President Sadat. I
do not believe, however, that we have sufficiently tested whether such
a meeting is necessary or would be fruitful.
I want to suggest for your consideration, therefore, that the negoti-
ations be resumed at the Ministerial level in Washington among Prime
Minister Khalil, Foreign Minister Dayan and Secretary Vance. I would
be happy to make Camp David available for these talks, so that the
three Ministers and their aides would be able to work in private,
without interruption, and away from the pressures and glare of the
news media. If it is convenient, I suggest that the Ministerial talks begin
soon after Secretary Vance and I return from our forthcoming visit to
Mexico, specifically, on Wednesday, February 21. I am also communi-
cating this suggestion to President Sadat.
I recognize that Foreign Minister Dayan and Prime Minister Khalil
would need to consult closely with you and with President Sadat, re-
spectively, as the talks progress. For this reason, I would anticipate
Lopez Portillo and addressed the Mexican Congress.

that, after several days of intensive discussions, the Ministers might
then wish to return home to consult with their governments.
In making this suggestion, Mr. Prime Minister, I want to assure
you of my continued personal commitment to the implementation of
the Camp David Agreements, beginning with the successful conclusion
of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. I also want to assure you
that I recognize and appreciate how fully you share this commitment. I
am convinced that President Sadat also remains fully committed to a
successful conclusion of the negotiations. The differences remaining
between you touch upon matters of vital importance to the national in-
terests and security of your two nations. I do not underestimate their
importance. To resolve them will require difficult decisions. I believe,
however, that they are not insurmountable. We have travelled most of
the road already, and it would be a tragedy if we failed to complete the
journey which began with President Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem7 and the
statesmanship and vision with which you responded to that visit.
I look forward to hearing from you at your earliest convenience,
Mr. Prime Minister, and meanwhile send to you my warm personal re-
gards and continued high respect.
Sincerely yours, Jimmy Carter. End text.
4. We believe it would be desirable to announce8 that Ministerial-
level talks will resume at Camp David as soon as this has been agreed
by both sides—hopefully in the course of this week. Our intention
would be to issue a brief statement along the following lines: Quote: At
President Carter’s invitation, President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin
have agreed that negotiations between Egypt and Israel should be re-
sumed at Ministerial level. Prime Minister Khalil, Foreign Minister
Dayan and Secretary Vance will participate in these talks, which will
begin at Camp David on February 21. In agreeing to these talks, all
sides have affirmed their commitment to the Camp David Accords and
their determination that these negotiations be completed as quickly as
possible. Unquote. Please ascertain GOI reaction to an announcement
along foregoing lines.
5. I would like you and Hermann Eilts to return to participate in
these talks. You should plan to arrive in Washington by Sunday, Feb-
ruary 18, which would give us a chance for in-house discussions with
you and Hermann before talks with Khalil and Dayan begin.
Vance

175.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt
31594. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Subject: (S) Mes-
sage From President Carter to President Sadat on Resuming Middle
East Negotiations.
1. (S-entire text).
2. Please deliver following message from President Carter to Presi-
dent Sadat at the earliest opportunity.
3. Begin text:
Dear Mr. President:
I have been giving much attention to how [we] can move forward
in the peace negotiations and want to share my thoughts with you. In
my judgment, the more time that passes, the less favorable will be the
prospects for success. I believe we should now make a major, deter-
mined effort to complete the task we started with such high hopes at
Camp David in September.
As you have clearly perceived, forces hostile to peace in the
Middle East are active in your area. Developments in Iran have drama-
tized the need for a strong common front to achieve peace and security
in the region. Secretary Brown will soon be in Cairo3 to discuss with
you, among other things, the strategic situation we face together in this
period of challenge to stability and moderation. I am sure you will
agree that the achievement of peace between Egypt and Israel would
eliminate one important source of uncertainty and insecurity, and
would in the long run have a stabilizing effect in the area as a whole.
I am convinced that Prime Minister Begin still wants to complete
the treaty and move on to the next stage of negotiations. I know that
you also want to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
Despite the difficulties which have prevented completion of the
negotiations so far, I believe that we can achieve the objectives we set
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Atherton; cleared by Quandt, Sterner, Hansell,
and Stanislaus R.P. Valerga (S/S–O); approved by Vance. Sent for information Imme-
diate to Tel Aviv and the White House. A draft version of this letter, bearing Carter’s
handwritten amendments, and an attached, undated covering memorandum from Brze-
zinski to Carter upon which Carter initialed his approval is in the Carter Library, Brze-
sary, be prepared to meet again with you and Prime Minister Begin. I
do not believe, however, that we have sufficiently tested whether such
a meeting is necessary or would be fruitful, and we both recognize the
risks inherent in a summit meeting that failed to result in final
agreement.
I want to suggest for your consideration, therefore, that the negoti-
ations be resumed at the Ministerial level in Washington among Prime
Minister Khalil, Foreign Minister Dayan and Secretary Vance. I would
be happy to make Camp David available for these talks, so that the
three Ministers and their aides would be able to work in private,
without interruption, and away from the pressures and glare of the
news media. If it is convenient, I suggest that the Ministerial talks begin
soon after Secretary Vance and I return from our forthcoming visit to
Mexico, specifically, on Wednesday, February 21. I am also communi-
cating this suggestion to Prime Minister Begin.
I recognize that Prime Minister Khalil and Foreign Minister Dayan
would need to consult closely with you and with Prime Minister Begin,
respectively, as the talks progress. I would anticipate that, after several
days of intensive discussions, the Ministers might then want to return
home to consult with their governments.
In making this suggestion, Mr. President, I assure you of my
continued personal commitment to the successful conclusion of the
Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty and to the implementation of the Frame-
work agreed at Camp David for a Comprehensive Peace in the Middle
East. I also recognize and appreciate how much you have already con-
tributed toward making a successful outcome possible. We now owe it
to ourselves, to the peoples of Egypt and Israel, and indeed to all the
peoples of the Middle East, to make a determined effort to realize the
vision which led you to Jerusalem. I look forward to hearing from you

176.
Letter From President Carter to Secretary of Defense Brown
Washington, February 9, 1979
To Harold Brown
The immediate purpose of your trip is to restore and reinforce con-
fidence in the United States among our friends in the region. In doing
so, you should begin to lay the basis for security collaboration among
the U.S. and key states in the region—Israel, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and
Jordan. Consistent with our strategy in the peace negotiations, we
should be aiming for a situation in which Egypt and Israel are not iso-
lated from the rest of the region.
To that end, you should place very high emphasis on the need for
the rapid conclusion of an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty as the first step
in a wider process of Israeli-Arab accommodation. You should make it
clear that our ability to develop regional cooperation will be severely
handicapped, and perhaps even negated, by continued Israeli-Arab
hostility. That hostility intensifies internal strains in the Arab countries,
contributes to growing radicalization, and opens doors to the reentry of
the Soviet Union. You should, therefore, indicate that the United States
expects a forthcoming attitude from our friends on this issue in order to
facilitate greater regional cooperation on wider strategic matters.
With the foregoing as a key point of departure, you should force-
fully express our recognition of the strategic importance of the region,
its strategic location, its vital resources, and its crucial role in estab-
lishing healthy patterns of internal development and North-South rela-
tions. Make it clear that we see the region to be under serious threat
from Soviet power which is systematically exploiting internal insta-
bility as well as regional conflicts.
With or without a grand plan, determined Soviet efforts, as evi-
denced in the Horn of Africa, the PDRY, and Afghanistan, now abetted
by turmoil in Iran, could lead to general disorder or the imposition of
dominant Soviet influence, which the U.S. and its friends cannot
tolerate.
To counter these threats, the United States sees the need for an in-
tegrated strategy for regional security to which it is prepared to make a
strong political and military contribution. This strategy should be com-
prised of several elements:
—Rapid progress in bringing peace between Israel and her Arab
neighbors, first and foremost between Israel and Egypt, but in a
manner which progressively draws support from Arab moderates for
subsequent peace negotiations.
—New forms of bilateral and multilateral collaboration in security
management, including military assistance, intelligence cooperation,
and contingency planning.
—Increased U.S. military presence in the region, possibly in-
cluding increased naval presence and new collaboration on basing ar-
rangements. You should explore reactions to possible forms of en-
hanced U.S. presence, without making any specific commitment at this
point. Upon your return, I expect a full report on steps that can be taken
to strengthen our position in the area.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Concerted measures to counter radical forces that now provide a
base for the intrusion of Soviet influence.
—Cooperation in oil matters that builds on the common interest of
the U.S., its allies, and the region’s moderate states in security and eco-
nomic development.
You should emphasize our conviction that a new strategy for
peace and security in the region will require new policies on the part of
the U.S. and the governments of the region, demanding the resolve to
effect them at home and internationally. We will do our part, but will
expect in return enhanced cooperation from each of the states that you
will be visiting.
Saudi Arabia
In addition to a review of regional security along the lines indi-
cated above, you should discuss with the Saudis the nature of the “spe-
cial” relationship they say they desire. You should seek their views on
specific security concerns. At their initiative, this could include discus-
sion of oil field security. You should agree to more systematic security
consultations, including the possibility of some joint contingency plan-
ning directed at threats from Soviet surrogates in the region.
In conversations with Saudi leaders it should be emphasized that it
is vital that American policy have the support of the Congress and the
American people. You should note that it is a reality of our political
system that the success of our cooperation with them on security issues
is dependent in considerable measure on U.S.-Saudi cooperation in the
peace process and on economic issues.
With regard to specific arms transfer issues, you should indicate
that a decision on air munitions will be made by me after my conversa-
tions with Fahd. You might also indicate to the Saudis that, subject to
my final approval after the Fahd visit, we expect to continue with the
modernization program for two Army brigades and four National
Guard battalions. Following the discussions with Fahd, I will review
also the issue of nominal FMS credits for third country military
assistance.
Egypt
President Sadat believes that Egypt can play a constructive re-
gional role in support of moderate states and in limiting Soviet influ-
ence, provided a peace treaty with Israel can be achieved and Egypt re-
ceives American support. Egyptian leaders should be encouraged to
think realistically in these terms, consistent with their objective of allev-
iating Egypt’s economic problems, and to focus on specific situations,
such as Sudan, Oman, the Emirates, and Yemen where an Egyptian
contribution to security may be possible. We should seek to initiate the

development of a close U.S.-Egyptian security relationship for the
post-treaty environment. It is particularly important that the Egyptians
understand that our ability to sustain a long-term security relationship
with Egypt depends upon peace with Israel.
With regard to specific arms transfer issues, you can offer to send a
survey team to survey Egyptian air defense requirements; indicate to
the Egyptians that the United States will review the question of FMS in
the light of regional developments; and that I am prepared to consider
favorably the sale of 800 APCs for Egypt in the context of progress on
the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty. You should make the Egyptians
understand the congressional sensitivity on this point, and reiterate
again the connection between regional security and Israeli-Arab
accommodation.
Israel
In your meetings with Israeli leaders, you should provide assur-
ance that the U.S. commitment to Israel’s security remains firm. You
should seek to gain understanding of Israeli perspectives of their secu-
rity problems, especially those that would arise from a reduced mili-
tary presence in the West Bank and Gaza. You should also encourage
Israeli leaders to develop a regional approach to security matters,
building on the common interests of Israel and the moderate Arab
states in limiting hostile Soviet and radical influences within the area.
The critical relationship between the Arab-Israeli peace process and re-
gional security should be emphasized.
On specific bilateral issues, you should:
1. Convey the conclusions of the survey for the relocation of two Is-
raeli air bases from the Sinai, but without commitment as to the extent
or terms of U.S. financial assistance;
2. Agree in principle to provide equipment and technical assist-
ance in overcoming the loss of intelligence and early warning stem-
ming from Sinai withdrawal, the details to be developed in the course
of ongoing security consultations.
3. The air base relocation aside, avoid any commitment in regard to
Israeli requests for FY 1980 financial assistance in excess of the $1 bil-
lion in FMS and $785 million in security supporting assistance.
4. You can indicate to the Israelis that I am prepared to consider fa-
vorably the sale of 960 APCs and 200 Howitzers in the context of
progress on the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty. You should make the Is-
raelis understand the congressional sensitivity on this point, and reit-
erate again the connection between regional security and Israeli-Arab
accommodation.
Jordan
King Hussein will be seeking both general assurance of American
support and specific commitments to supply arms of greater sophisti-

177.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency
Washington, February 16, 1979
SUBJECT
Implications of Iran for Middle East Peace Negotiations [handling restriction not
declassified]
The collapse of the Shah’s regime2 and the current uncertain situa-
tion in Iran have, along with a host of other factors, caused Israel and
Egypt to strike more rigid positions on key unresolved issues in peace
negotiations. Although the upheaval in Iran has directly affected only
one issue—Israel’s desire to secure oil supplies from Egyptian fields in
the Sinai—it has caused both sides to reconsider their approaches to ne-
gotiations in light of broader concerns, which include:
—The diminution of US influence in the region;
—The inspiration that religious revolutionaries in Iran have given
right and left-wing extremists elsewhere; and
—The consequent potential for a wider spread of instability in the
area. [handling restriction not declassified]
We do not believe these concerns have eroded either side’s funda-
mental commitment to continuing the peace effort. Nevertheless, both
countries have been shaken by the fall of the Shah, and seem more de-
termined than ever to protect their own equities and less inclined
toward the kind of flexibility necessary to hasten the conclusion of a
treaty. [handling restriction not declassified]
Concern over US losses in Iran and the perception that Wash-
ington was either unable or unwilling to act in ways to protect its in-
terests there seems to be at the heart of Egypt’s greater caution and to
have reinforced longstanding Israeli suspicious about the value of great
power security commitments. President Sadat’s decision to embark on
a high-risk pursuit of a peace settlement was based on a calculation of
US power in the region and a belief that the US would be able and
willing to use those strengths to engineer a comprehensive settlement
and stand as its guarantor. Israel, although much less inclined to de-
pend on the benefits of superpower guarantees, nevertheless has inte-
grated its special relationship with the US into the basic assumptions
underlying its peace moves. Although both sides have expressed some
appreciation of our difficulties in dealing with rapidly unfolding
events in Iran, confidence in US power and reliability has clearly been
shaken. [handling restriction not declassified]
We have detected an attitude emerging in Israel and Egypt of
stricter self-reliance which contains the seeds of an uncertainty as to
whether a treaty can be concluded which could withstand new shifts in
the power balance and political currents in the region. [handling restric-
tion not declassified]
The tide of Islamic fervor in Iran, the Ayatollah Khomeini’s explicit
endorsement of the Palestinians, and the collapse of the de facto secu-
rity system in the Persian Gulf region have added significant pressure
on President Sadat to demand from Israel a more explicit commitment
to a comprehensive settlement and respect for Egypt’s sovereignty and
pan-Arab obligations. Even before the crisis in Iran, the Egyptians were
deeply disturbed by the force of Arab rejection of their independent
dealings with Israel and particularly by Saudi Arabia’s endorsement of
the anti-Egyptian resolutions of the Baghdad summit. Now the Egyp-
tians face:
—A coalition of Arabs spearheaded by Syria and Iraq, which has
added reason in the wake of events in Iran to maintain an alliance.
—A Saudi leadership [less than 1 line not declassified] seemingly less
willing to risk taking positions unacceptable to the Palestinians and
other Arabs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—An emboldened Palestinian movement which is exploiting its
relationship with Iranian revolutionaries in order to enhance its image
as a force to be reckoned with.
—Early signs of greater assertiveness among Egypt’s own Muslim
conservatives on such sensitive issues as Egypt’s relations with the US,
Israel’s designs on Arab territory, and inequities and decadence in
Egypt’s political and social system. [handling restriction not declassified]
Sadat has countered these pressures with the argument that re-
gional stability depends now more than ever on a just Middle East
peace settlement. Implicit in this argument, however, is a notice to the
US and Israel that a stable peace must include greater satisfaction of
Arab demands and greater assistance to Egypt and other moderate
Arab governments. [handling restriction not declassified]
Israeli perceptions of the Iranian crisis seem to have reinforced
their determination to nail down specific language and commitments
ensuring that a peace treaty with Egypt outlives President Sadat and
minimizes as much as possible the need for US security guarantees. The
Israelis have not substantively changed their negotiating positions, but
they have in recent months dug in their heels further over a number of
issues they consider vital, including:
—Guaranteed access to quantities of Egyptian oil equal to those Is-
rael currently obtains from its operations in the Gulf of Suez;
—US commitments to provide generous financial assistance and
advisory support to facilitate Israeli military relocation from the Sinai
to the Negev;
—Ironclad language in the treaty minimizing if not neutralizing
Egypt’s options to intervene on the Arab side in future Arab-Israeli
conflicts. [handling restriction not declassified]
The Israeli leadership believes that one effect of the Iranian crisis
has been to deepen Egypt’s reluctance to depart from Arab consensus
attitudes. Foreign Minister Dayan and others in the leadership antici-
pate that Sadat, in an effort to reaffirm his solidarity with Arab in-
terests, have taken a tougher position on major negotiation issues still
at impasse. This assessment has probably contributed to the stiffening
of Israel’s own negotiating posture. [handling restriction not declassified]

178.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter
Washington, February 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Middle East Trip Report
You know from my personal messages2 about the highlights of my
meetings with Sadat, Begin, Dayan, Weizman, Hussein and the Saudi
Princes. I will therefore confine this report to a general assessment and
some suggestions for future action.
Conclusions
My overall conclusions are these. First, we must press forward as
quickly as possible to an Israeli-Egyptian accord. Time is probably run-
ning against success. To make this step by Sadat digestible to the other
moderate Arabs, we need to do three things besides portraying the
treaty as part of a process designed to achieve a comprehensive peace:
be forthcoming on regional economic development; be forthcoming on
arms supplies, although not nearly to the extent of the announced de-
mands; and find some form of US military presence which will provide
reassurance without carrying the political burdens of a presence so in-
trusive as a US military base.
These actions will also lay a basis for a greater degree of regional
security cooperation, with US support. That cooperation will come, if at
all, on an evolutionary basis unless the perception of the threat inten-
sifies. All the countries were concerned about the events in Iran; but
there was no panic and, indeed, less anxiety than I had expected. None
of the leaders thought we should do more than “wait and see” on Iran
for the moment.
My second conclusion is that the most likely threats lie in internal
violence supported from across borders or from internal political, eco-
nomic, and social instability. The first will hardly, and the second not at
all, be cured by major military hardware, which can however inhibit di-
rect aggression across borders. We need to promote regional security
cooperation, particularly where there is a threat from a Soviet surrogate
as in North Yemen, and perhaps Oman, from the PDRY. And we need
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
to continue forcefully to assert our willingness and ability to oppose di-
rect Soviet aggression in the area. But most important of all, we need to
do our best to forestall development of internal instability. Our influ-
ence is necessarily limited on this score, but the steps outlined above
may help to enhance it. In particular, assistance in sensible economic
development is needed. Several leaders stressed in private that this
took priority over arms, though this wisdom did not extend to moder-
ating their own long lists of arms requests.
My trip had four main objectives. Pursuant to your instructions,
the first was to restore confidence among the moderate states that the
United States understands the dangers to the region and intends to act
to protect its interests. This was achieved. But there will be backsliding
unless we now follow through on the commitment to play a more ac-
tive role in the Middle East—in frustrating Soviet interference, in dis-
playing some modest presence of our own, and in cooperating more ac-
tively with the moderate states in security terms.
The second objective was to stimulate the development of a gen-
eral strategy for the region. I outlined the major elements: close cooper-
ation between the United States and the individual states, concerted ac-
tions among moderate states, bilateral politico-military consultations
about hypothetical contingencies, a potentially greater US military
presence, cooperation on economic issues (oil) and economic assist-
ance, and, above all, rapid progress on Arab-Israeli peace.
In response, the countries’ leaders acknowledged a commonality
of interest. However, not surprisingly, the Arabs do not see Israel as
having a regional security role, and tend also to criticize each other’s ef-
forts. Several urged a US military presence in other countries “which
are weak and need it” but see it as a lightning rod in their own (the ex-
ception was Israel, which would welcome such a presence for reasons
both plain and, to us, unattractive). It is quite obvious as well that each
country views US interest in promoting regional security as a lever to
obtain more US arms for itself. This presents opportunities for the
United States as well as problems, for we may be able over time to es-
tablish some degree of implicit linkage between bilateral arms supply
relations and regional cooperation.
The third objective was to emphasize the peace process, and its im-
portance for regional strategy. I did this at each stop. I pressed hard the
argument that sustained progress toward peace would make an essen-
tial contribution to the security of the region. While all professed dedi-
cation to peace, recognized the threat to stability posed by its absence,
and wished to exclude the Soviets from the negotiations, reactions to
the Camp David Agreements were along predictable lines.
Sadat and the Israelis are wedded to the Camp David process, but
holding to their positions that progress be on their terms. Each is

seeking maximum reward in US security support as an incentive for
moving forward. Hussein and the Saudis are convinced that the Camp
David process carries more immediate danger than eventual safety.
They appear to have no constructive, practical alternatives and have
difficulty focusing on the threat that stalemate in the peace process
poses to their security. Neither wants to close the door completely—
their desire for our support in security matters precludes this—but they
both seem to be hoping somehow that the moment of decision will go
away. I believe concentration on Gaza with respect to the autonomy
issue would be a good tactic.
The final objective was to strengthen bilateral relationships.
Overall, I sought to convey the idea that a comprehensive peace settle-
ment and other forms of defense cooperation are far more important to
regional security and well-being than additional arms. I made very few
commitments, handling most requests by undertaking to consider
them on my return to Washington or to arrange for US teams to survey
requirements or make staff visits in order to examine the need in
greater depth. In some cases, I was frank in warning them not to expect
approval.
In the main, however, offers of consultations and joint planning
and intelligence exchange were welcomed but were not enough. We
were judged in this functional area by how favorably we responded to
arms requests. My approach was all right as a stop gap but will not
work for more than a few months. No one was satisfied. Everyone had
his list. Saudi Arabia renewed earlier requests for advanced systems,
such as the XM1 tank, without addressing quantities or timing. Jordan
presented a $2 billion plan for filling shortfalls and for force moderniza-
tion, including F–16 aircraft and ROLAND missiles. Israel scrapped
MATMON C, substituting a new eight-year force development plan for
equipment which could cost $6–8 billion. The new plan does cut back
significantly on MATMON C’s planned force expansion and is said to
be 20–25% less expensive, but most of the savings appear to be in the
later years. Egypt listed equipment which would total $15–20 billion, in
effect an “Americanization” of Egyptian forces.
I’m sure none of these nations expected us to respond fully to their
requests. We cannot ignore them, however. I believe we should now
approve military hardware items at a somewhat faster rate (without in-
creasing dollar levels where credit is involved) than we have in the re-
cent past for Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia. I believe we need to plan
for a sharply increased arms supply to Egypt, including FMS credits, al-
though not to anything like the extent of Egypt’s full request. The
Egyptians have a genuine self-defense need to reverse the continuing
decay of their military forces flowing from loss of Soviet support. And,
with Iran gone, Egypt’s role in regional security becomes more impor-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tant; no other country in the region can play a comparable role. The ex-
panded relationship must, of course, be paced by the peace talks; our
survey teams will tide us over until May–June. Also, we will face a dif-
ficult task in adjusting Egyptian appetites downward to fit the threat
and competing economic development needs.
You also asked that I report on the view of the regional states
toward a greater US military presence. Israel favors a US presence,
preferably one in Israel, but even one in the Arab states would be all
right with them. Dayan and Weizman raised the possibility of our
taking over the Sinai air bases. Weizman distinguished between a naval
base at Haifa, which he said would not be antagonistic in an Arab-
Israeli context, and other kinds of ground or air bases which would be.
Neither Egypt nor Saudi Arabia wants a base on its soil, although
they might acquiesce in a US base in some other Arab country. Sadat
thinks a US base would be a sign of Egyptian weakness and showed no
interest in a US presence in the Sinai. The Saudis did not think direct
Soviet military action sufficiently likely to warrant the political risks to
them that, in their view, would follow from a major US military pres-
ence. Some Saudis thought a US presence somewhere else in the Gulf
was worth considering, but it is by no means clear this represents a
consensus.
It may be that, on reflection, one or more of the Arab countries may
be interested in a form of US presence less intrusive than a military
base, such as periodic aircraft deployments, joint exercises, and the like.
It may be that we can develop arrangements for use of facilities in a
crisis, perhaps with some pre-positioning of critical items. This would
give us some of the military advantages of a base with fewer of its polit-
ical burdens. We will learn more about this as our security consulta-
tions progress.
There remain two other “presence” questions. First, the possibility
of base facilities in another country, such as Oman. In 1977 Oman
agreed in principle to our use of Masirah, the former British base, but at
a very high cost. I did not get a clear view of Saudi Arabia’s or Egypt’s
attitude on such a base, although I understand Crown Prince Fahd had
expressed reservation about the idea in late 1976. We should examine
this further within our government and perhaps with Saudi Arabia, to
see whether the question should now be reopened with Oman. More
importantly, I believe we ought to promote assistance from moderate
Arab states to Oman to replace the capability withdrawn by Iran. The
sooner this is done, the more South Yemen will be discouraged from se-
riously considering renewed efforts against Oman.
Second is the question of increasing US military presence off-
shore. I believe we should carefully consider augmenting the Middle
East Force (which now consists of 3 ships) and expanding the facilities

on Diego Garcia. This is not for purposes of reassuring the moderate
Middle East states, who showed little interest. Rather, its justification
would rest on broader geo-political grounds or on improvement in our
rapid deployment capability. I will send you a separate memorandum
on this.
My impressions of the military capabilities of these countries can
be only very sketchy ones, but I’ll give them anyway.
Israel’s forces are very capable, very tough, and very ready. In a
short war with Egypt and Jordan, they should have no trouble win-
ning, but could take casualties substantial for their small population. I
have no way to judge their expressed strong concern about Syrian and
Iraqi capability (the latter is touted in many of the countries of the re-
gion as the coming military power) but I hypothesize that during the
next few years this would not change the outcome.
Egypt’s forces have rather good morale, are quite large, and claim
to be ready. I doubt the last, and their denials of equipment unread-
iness are undercut by their expressed concerns about spare parts. They
are competent technically and professionally. I think they’d do well
against anyone in the area except the Israelis, if we help them solve
their equipment problems.
The Jordanians show spit and polish, are probably well trained (I
saw only the honor guard!) but their forces are both small and very
modestly equipped. They probably have considerable defensive capa-
bility, but would be wise to stay out of offensive operations. They can
make a useful military advisory contribution in the Peninsula (there are
said to be about 1500 Jordanian military personnel seconded to various
countries in the Gulf and North Yemen).
The Saudis, though they are moving ahead toward a professional
air force, seem to me a military zero at this time.
Recommendations
Our assurances of greater US interest and involvement are perish-
able. We need to follow through:
1. By means of the follow-on security consultations with the four
countries to which I have agreed, we should:
(a) Further explore forms of US presence—short of permanent
bases—which would be politically acceptable to host nations and mili-
tarily useful to the United States in deterring Soviet adventurism or en-
hancing our capability for rapid deployment of US forces in a crisis.
(b) Lay the basis for multinational regional security cooperation.
We should concentrate on situations where stability is threatened by
Soviet surrogates, in particular North Yemen and potentially Oman.
2. We should modestly step up the pace of our arms supply ap-
provals within present dollar levels with Israel, Jordan, and Saudi

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Arabia. In the case of Egypt, we should substantially increase our pro-
gram, post-treaty, both quantitatively and by extending significant
FMS credits. We should not, however, lend our assistance to force
structure expansion in any of the four countries, and we should in par-
ticular encourage post-treaty force structure reduction in Egypt in ex-
change for our help in modernizing its forces. In Saudi Arabia we
should encourage the development over time of a more professional
army, not based solely on heavy and sophisticated equipment, but
equipped and tailored to the environment and the Saudi capabilities to
absorb. We should recognize that, at least in the case of the Army, the
prospects for real military capability are very limited.
3. We should not encourage at this stage build-up of arms in the
Gulf states. This issue needs further analysis.
4. The most serious threat to security is likely to be internal insta-
bility. We should review in depth our assessment of the political, eco-
nomic and social conditions in Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the Gulf states
to make sure our policies are best designed to minimize the develop-
ment of internal instability in those countries. This is particularly im-
portant in the case of Saudi Arabia, for reasons that are self-evident. It
is also true in Egypt, where former MOD Gamasy told me privately he
is worried about the effects on Army morale and attitudes of an erod-
ing economic position military personnel experience in their personal
lives. Where we have to make a choice we should give priority to eco-
nomic assistance designed to promote internal stability over arms
transfers.
5. We should plan further speeches and statements—by you and
others—built around the themes of my visit. This declaratory policy
will help maintain momentum and credibility. In doing this, we should
recognize that declaratory policy is no substitute for action and, indeed,
can be counterproductive if not matched with concrete implementing
steps.
Harold Brown

179.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff for the Record
SUBJECT
Meeting on Camp David II, February 19, 1979, The Cabinet Room,
Participants: The President, The Vice President, The Secretary of
State, The Secretary of Defense, Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Ambassador
Hermann Fr. Eilts, Ambassador Samuel Lewis, Assistant Secretary of
State Harold Saunders, Ambassador Alfred Atherton, David Aaron,
Jody Powell, William B. Quandt
The President asked Secretary Brown to comment briefly on his trip
to the Middle East. Secretary Brown said that all of the leaders in the
area are in general agreement on the general security situation that con-
fronts us all. But they are less clear on what we should do. The Saudis
were pleased with what the Secretary said, but were taken back by the
specifics.
The President then asked Amb. Eilts to comment on President
Sadat’s thinking. Amb. Eilts reported that Sadat says he has no further
concessions to make. Prime Minister Khalil will not come with specific
concessions, but he will be prepared to discuss alternative formulations
on Articles IV and VI. Linkage may not be the primary focus of discus-
sions, although the Egyptians still feel that they need something on this
topic. The draft side letter as it now exists should be satisfactory as a
basis for discussion. Khalil will have a positive attitude and he has
some discretionary latitude in negotiations. Concerning oil, the Egyp-
tians will approve to accompany an agreement, but do not want to put
this in writing. We have not really pressed them on this issue and there
will be some scope for negotiation.
The President asked if Egypt would find it easier to sell 1. million
tons of oil to us, and then let us resell it to whom ever we wish. Amb.
Eilts said that this might be possible, and Amb. Lewis agreed, although
he emphasized that the quantities involved would be closer to 2. mil-
lion tons and that the Israelis would much rather prefer to get the oil di-
rectly from Egypt.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President commented on the strategy paper and noted that it
would be best to put forward any U.S. proposals in complete privacy to
Dayan and Khalil. If their advisors are present, they will be obliged to
take harder positions. Amb. Lewis agreed, but added that ultimately
Prime Minister Begin will have to be involved personally in the negoti-
ations for them to succeed. The President added that if this were true, we
would have to leave something for Begin to do and to take credit for.
Amb. Eilts added that President Sadat was also expecting to be invited
to a summit.
The President said that the only new idea that he had involved split-
ting off Gaza from the West Bank. We should perhaps encourage Sadat
to withdraw his offer to represent Hussein’s interests in the West Bank.
This would let him off the West Bank hook. Sadat does not care as
much about the West Bank as he does about Gaza. If he can represent
Gaza, this would allow him to conclude a separate treaty with Israel
and to embarrass Hussein. This would let him claim that he has done
his part, while increasing pressure on Jordan. Otherwise, the President
said he had no new ideas on how to proceed.
The Vice President said that there is widespread expectations that
there will be a summit. It is important then to state that a summit will
only take place if progress is first made at the Foreign Minister level.
The President said that perhaps he should send a personal message to
both Begin and Sadat asking them not to reject any individual points in
the proposals that we will put forward. We want to avoid any public
confrontations. We need to show progress, and then try to pin down
details at a later date. It would be better for both parties to reject our
package, but not to go into the details, and to acknowledge that
progress was being made. If there must be a summit, the President said,
there should not be too much delay.
Amb. Eilts added that the most serious problem for Sadat would be
the timing of the exchange of Ambassadors. The President acknowl-
edged that he would have to deal with Sadat directly on that issue.
Both Ambassadors Lewis and Eilts agreed that the “Gaza first” ap-
proach made sense. Amb. Eilts added, however, that if this is to work, it
must involve a significant degree of authority in the hands of the
self-government, and it must be seen as a precedent for the West Bank.
Dr. Brzezinski added a comment on procedure. He said that the
President himself would have to be directly involved in the negotia-
tions. The success or failure of these talks would be of political impor-
tance. The President might consider meeting both Dayan and Khalil at
the outset to stress the regional security concerns that underlie our
policy. This should add a certain urgency to the negotiations. Dr. Brze-
zinski also said that he felt it would be a mistake for the Ministers, after
having been softened up at Camp David, to go back home not having

reached agreement. There is a danger that positions will harden, that
there will be leaks, and that we will lose control. Therefore, if progress
is made in the talks, it would be desirable to move directly to a summit.
This would help add to the sense of urgency.
Secretary Vance said that he was sympathetic to this idea and that it
should not be ruled out. But he is afraid that it will expose the President
too soon, before a proper framework has been laid. Perhaps the Presi-
dent could come up Friday3 night and meet with the two heads of the
delegations. Dr. Brzezinski said that if the talks fail, the President will be
blamed in any case. If he must be involved, he should start at the begin-
ning. Secretary Brown stated that he shared the concern of involving the
President prematurely. We should hold back someone, but if the Presi-
dent could confine his comments to regional security, then it would be
worth having him meet with both delegations right away.
Ambassador Lewis noted that it might be difficult to get Cabinet ap-
proval for an immediate summit. The Cabinet is very determined to re-
view everything that happens in the negotiations. If Begin is invited, he
will probably try to bring half the Cabinet with him. Nonetheless, Am-
bassador Lewis saw merit in the idea of an immediate summit. The
President said we should keep this as a desirable option. The Vice Presi-
dent asked if we could give something to Dayan to take back to the Cab-
inet, possibly private messages that he would just pass on to Begin.
Turning to the Gaza option, Secretary Vance asked if the letter
should be changed. The President said we should just urge the Egyp-
tians to drop their commitment to negotiate the West Bank. Sadat
should get his foot out of the West Bank, and this would allow him to
put pressure on Hussein. The President felt that two errors had been
made at Camp David. First, too much emphasis was placed on the ex-
change of ambassadors. Second, Sadat should not have been asked to
negotiate for the West Bank.
Dr. Brzezinski asked what the incentives were for each party to con-
clude the negotiations. In particular, what do the Israelis fear from the
failure of negotiations? The President thought they were afraid of Egypt
turning to a more hostile posture. This would contribute to the general
malaise in Israeli society. Ambassador Lewis thought that the primary
concern was the deterioration of U.S.-Israeli relations. The President felt
that the Iranian situation should make the Israelis want peace with
Egypt more. Ambassador Lewis noted that the majority of Israelis may
feel that way, but that others are reacting more cautiously. The Presi-
dent also felt that there was an increase in threat from the Palestinians in
the West Bank and Gaza to the Israelis, and that the situation in Iran has

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
emboldened the Palestinians. Ambassador Lewis felt that the increased
national consciousness of the Israeli Arabs was more of a problem. The
Vice President added that he felt the Israelis were worried about the loss
of public opinion here, and Ambassador Lewis agreed. Secretary Vance
reminded the group of Dayan’s statement that “Israel cannot afford to
win another war”. Ambassador Lewis said that Dayan was the most
aware of all Israeli leaders of the U.S. connection and its importance.
The President said that when we get to the question of oil, we
should check with the Egyptians to make sure that the language of any
letter is satisfactory. Sadat may want to sell the oil to us rather than to
Israel.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether we ought to convey the point that this
was the last effort that we would be able to make in bringing the negoti-
ations to a successful conclusion. Secretary Vance said that he had al-
ready told Ambassador Evron that, the President stated that we should
not be saying that publicly. We do not want to be seen as giving up on
the Arab-Israeli conflict, but practically everyone should recognize that
we cannot start over from scratch. There is a tenacity to Sadat, that he
cannot hold in limbo indefinitely. Ambassador Eilts agreed that if the
talks fail, Egypt will go back to the Arab world. Ambassador Lewis added
that the Labor Party favors a quick settlement, and Secretary Brown
noted that the Labor Party supports the Gaza first option. Ambassador
Lewis said that the Israelis widely believe that this [is] the last serious
round of talks. We don’t need to say it publicly. Secretary Vance added
that the process of erosion is clearly under way.
The President asked about Egyptian-Saudi relations and Ambas-
sador Eilts said that Sadat wants Saudi support, but does not see it as
crucial at this stage. He feels that the Saudis will have to be confronted
with a fait accomplı´. The President added that there is no place for the
Saudis to go once the treaty is signed. They have to work with the
United States and Egypt. Secretary Brown said the Saudis will take a
negative public line, but in private they will not be so upset. Discussion
ensued on the comparative strength of various personalities in the
Saudi ruling family, and it was generally agreed that Fahd remains the
single most important figure, but that Sultan and Abdallah have been
gaining in influence as well.

180.
Summary Prepared in the National Security Council
Washington, February 21, 1979
First Day of Camp David Talks

181.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, February 22, 1979
SUBJECT
Second Day of Camp David Talks (U)
As Dayan and Khalil turned their attention to specific issues in the
negotiations today, there was a noticeable backsliding in comparison to
yesterday’s relatively positive atmosphere. Dayan stuck to a narrow
Cabinet-approved brief, reminding us on several occasions that the
idea of a target date was unacceptable and that Israel will not agree to
any interpretive note dealing with Article VI, paragraph 2. No residue
of the broad strategy overview of yesterday could be seen in today’s
Khalil cut through much of the verbage in our draft letter, but
stuck firmly to the need to change Article VI, paragraph 2, either by an
interpretive note or by deleting the offensive language in the present
draft which indicates that the treaty will be implemented “independent
of any other instrument external to the treaty.” In brief there was no
real give from either side. Little progress was made in discussion of the
“Gaza first” option. It still has some life left in it, but the more it is dis-
cussed the greater the confusion it generates. (S)
We will be receiving textual suggestions for change in the West
Bank/Gaza letter from both delegations in the course of the evening.
We will use these as the basis for a new draft which will be discussed
tomorrow. I continue to feel that we should try to put together a treaty
package for Dayan to take home with him this weekend, if indeed he
must return for Cabinet authorization; and we should urge him to re-
turn by mid-week with Begin in tow. There is a limit, which we are rap-
idly reaching, on how much can usefully be done at this level and in the
absence of decision on non-treaty related issues. (S)
If there are any surprises late this evening still from our discus-
sions with the Egyptians or the Israelis, I will call your office just before
the Friday2 breakfast meeting. (U)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

182.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

183.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Secretary Vance
Prime Minister Khalil—Egypt
Foreign Minister Dayan—Israel
Zbigniew Brzezinski
The President: We are running out of time. Therefore, it is important
when you go back for there not to be any public rejection of any facets
of the proposals advanced here. There should be no categorical state-
ments that one will never yield, etc.
The interim between this and the next meeting will cause
problems. The longer a decision is delayed, the more difficult it will be
to reach it.
My own hope is that we can get together for a summit this coming
weekend and I hope Prime Minister Begin can attend. I can spend some
time on this in the latter part of this week. (To Khalil) You have full au-
thority to negotiate a full settlement, don’t you?
Khalil: Yes, unless we can conclude an agreement now, it will be
difficult to do so in a month and impossible in two or three. Our region
is threatened. Nimeiri and Fahd have urged an Arab summit before an
Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty is concluded. President Sadat has con-
firmed that our desire for peace is consistent, but we cannot isolate our-
selves from the Arab world. The remaining difficulties are trifling. The
proposed formulas are fair to Israeli security and our position in the
Arab world.
The President: The most stabilizing action would be an Egyptian-
Israeli peace treaty. Once it is done, the other Arab countries cannot re-
ject Egypt. An Arab summit after the treaty could be fruitful. Without
peace, things will deteriorate.
Dayan: I agree on the urgency.
The President: Does the Cabinet sense it?
Dayan: All agree, but some might feel that now is not a good time
for a withdrawal or for autonomy. I feel that we should do away with
the military government. But there are differences of view among us on
autonomy.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
From the Israeli point of view, there has been no progress this
week; if anything, the other way. At Blair House2 there were fewer dis-
agreements. The latest U.S. draft on article 6–2 involves adoption of the
Egyptian position, and thus the Egyptian proposal has become the U.S.
proposal.
I would like the Prime Minister to come and reach agreement, but
in my report I will have to say that there was no progress from the Is-
raeli point of view. The gap is now wider than at Blair House.
Vance: The Blair House formulas were ad referendum. What is
really left is article 6.
(Discussion of article 6—of the difficulties of finding good
language.)
Dayan: Other elements include full withdrawal and full normaliza-
tion. Now we are told that ambassadors would be linked to the au-
tonomy issue.
The President: Your version of history is not compatible with mine.
The ambassador issue arose subsequent to the Camp David agreement.
Besides you can have a situation where one is obligated by treaty to
have an ambassador. As a final step there should be a commitment to
exchange ambassadors, but even then each side can withdraw the
ambassador.
In any case we are operating under narrow time limits, but if a
treaty is signed other Arab countries will have to accept it. The Gaza ne-
gotiations could be separated to some extent and that might be
constructive.
Finally, I hope Prime Minister Begin will come over here. We must
avoid a breakdown. Also, we need to have bilateral talks. Our budget is
in the final stages. We therefore need to discuss these matters with
someone who has authority.
The importance of all this is very high to the United States and to
the world at large. The United States will accept whatever the two of
you can accept; there is no U.S. position as such.
(To Dayan) Have you agreed on the statement3 that I can now read
to the press?
Dayan: Yes.
announcing the possibility of moving the negotiations to the “head-of-government
level,” involving Begin and Khalil, by the end of the week, was read by Carter on the
South Lawn of the White House on February 25. The full text of the statement is in the

184.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
46434. For Charge from Secretary. Subject: Message for Prime Min-
ister Begin.
(S-entire text)
1. Please deliver following message to P.M. Begin from President
Carter.
2. Start text:

185.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State and the White House
4000. Subject: Letter From Prime Minister Begin to the President.
1. Secret-entire message.
2. Ciechanover’s office has just telephoned us following text of
Begin’s letter to the President. We understand Ambassador Evron has
been instructed to deliver the letter to the White House immediately
upon receipt.
Quote Dear Mr. President:
I thank you for your letter of February 263 and for the invitation it
contained to participate this week in a meeting, under your sponsor-
ship, with the Prime Minister of Egypt, Dr. Khalil.
Foreign Minister Dayan today reported in detail to the Cabinet on
the talks at Camp David. It is clear that no progress was made towards
an agreement between the parties on the outstanding issues. Indeed,
Egypt actually hardened its positions and, in addition to its previous
proposals which Israel could not accept, has now put forth further pro-
posals which are either inconsistent with the Camp David Accords of
September 17, 1978, or make the peace treaty so meaningless as to be to-
tally unacceptable to Israel. My colleagues and I were compelled, there-
fore, to ask ourselves whether, under these circumstances, a meeting
between Dr. Khalil and myself could be of value to advance an under-
standing between us in the peacemaking effort. Regretably but un-
avoidably, we reached the conclusion that such a meeting would not be
useful. Mr. President, in your letter to me of February 6, 1979, you
wrote: “I recognize that Foreign Minister Dayan and Prime Minister
Khalil would need to consult closely with you and President Sadat, re-
spectively, as the discussions progressed. For this reason, I would an-
ticipate that, after several days of intensive discussions, the Ministers
might then wish to return home to consult with their governments.”
Upon hearing the Foreign Minister’s latest report it became ap-
parent to us that the deliberations of the Cabinet required more time in
order to take, after due study, appropriate decisions.
In your aforementioned letter you also wrote: “Mr. Prime Minister,
I recently said that I would, if necessary, be prepared to meet again
with you and President Sadat. I do not believe, however, that we have
sufficiently tested whether such a meeting is necessary or would be
fruitful.”
Now that the “test” has been made it is evident to my colleagues
and to me that a meeting between myself and Dr. Khalil empowered—
as we have learned from President Sadat’s public statements—to stand
obstinately on Egypt’s demands, could not be useful and perhaps even
be detrimental.
I therefore am regretfully compelled to inform you, Mr. President,
that I cannot leave tomorrow for the proposed meeting at Camp David.
I am, of course, prepared to meet with you as is the custom be-
tween us and in the spirit of our traditional friendship, for talks on all
subjects bearing upon the peacemaking process, the regional issues in
the wake of recent developments and our bilateral relations. I shall be
ready to make a journey to you for such a meeting at your convenience
at any time in the near future.
Yours sincerely and respectfully,
Menachem Begin.
Unquote
Viets

186.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency
RP M 79–10104X
Washington, February 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Possible Arab Acceptance of an Egyptian-Israeli Treaty [handling restriction not
declassified]
The White House suggestion that the Arabs would accept a treaty
if presented with a fait accompli may have been prompted by two state-
ments made during Secretary Brown’s recent visit to the Middle East.
[handling restriction not declassified]
—The Secretary told Sadat that he had found the Saudis less crit-
ical of the Camp David Accords in private than in public, and that King
Husayn was “less intent” on pursuing the issue at the UN or Geneva.
[handling restriction not declassified]
—Sadat, during his conversation with Brown, said that all Arabs
but the “rejectionists” (presumably Syria, Iraq, Algeria, Libya, and
South Yemen) and Kuwait (because of its large Palestinian population)
would accept a treaty. [handling restriction not declassified]
We do not believe that either statement should be interpreted as
indicating that Syria, Jordan or Saudi Arabia would “accept” a treaty
based on the Camp David Accords. Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia
would “accept” the “present draft” treaty only in the sense that there is
little they could do to prevent it. Our reporting [less than 1 line not de-
classified] is nearly unanimous in its rejection of the CDA as not suffi-
cient from the Arab point of view. That view, if anything, has hard-
ened. [handling restriction not declassified]
It is, of course, theoretically possible to devise terms and linkages
that would satisfy most Arabs. Broad Arab support could be secured
by a treaty that provides for specific time-tables making performance
on Egyptian-Israeli issues dependent on progress on Palestinian issues.
That would enable Sadat and potential supporters to argue that Egypt’s
military and diplomatic leverage was being applied on behalf of the
Arab cause. Israel, however, is not likely to accept such linkage. Almost
any treaty, therefore, will provoke Arab criticism. [handling restriction
not declassified]
In the Arab view, an Egyptian-Israeli treaty must contain some Is-
raeli commitment to withdrawal, and it must, at minimum, not fore-
close the possibility of an independent Palestinian state. More specific
Arab demands revolve around two issues; Israeli withdrawal from
Arab territory—including East Jerusalem—captured in the 1967 war;
and Palestinian self-determination. NFAC has no reporting to indi-
cate a significant softening of these terms. [handling restriction not
declassified]
If a treaty does not make some allowance for such views, the
Saudis probably would feel compelled to reaffirm the sanctions voted
against Egypt at Baghdad3 though they might seek to delay implemen-
tation. They would be under great pressure to align themselves more
closely to hard-line Arab states such as Iraq and Syria. Syria, the
toughest on terms, would quicken its efforts to form a new Arab con-
sensus around its leadership. King Husayn would initially equivocate
if confronted with a treaty, but because of Jordan’s contiguous bor-
der with Syria and Iraq and its heavy dependence on external financ-
ing, he would follow the lead of Damascus, Baghdad and Riyadh. He
would not isolate himself with President Sadat. [handling restriction not
declassified]
Insofar as a treaty would require the early participation of other
Arabs in negotiations, we do not believe that Jordan, Syria and Saudi
Arabia would “accept” the treaty and participate. Their willingness
over time to adjust to the situation and allow Egypt to return to the
Arab fold would depend on several developments, including the atti-
tudes of the Palestinians and President Sadat, and on Israeli policies.
[handling restriction not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

187.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, February 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Analysis of Substantive Positions in Camp David Talks (U)
The proper point of comparison for the most recent set of pro-
posals put forward at Camp David II is the package carried by Secre-
tary Vance to Israel last December. Although these were Egyptian pro-
posals, we stated that we thought they were reasonable. The table
below compares the December proposals with those that we presented
to the two delegations on February 25. (S)
December Proposals
Camp David II
Article IV
Included mandatory re-

190.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Begin
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Alfred L. Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State, (NEA)
Samuel W. Lewis, U.S. Ambassador to Israel
Herbert Hansell, Legal Advisor, State Dept.
William Quandt, NSC Staff Member
Ed Sanders, Senior Advisor to the President and the Secretary of State
Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President
Prime Minister Menachem Begin
Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to the U.S.
Meir Rosenne, Legal Adviser, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Yehuda Blum, Ambassador to United Nations
Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Hanan Bar-On, Minister, Israeli Embassy to the U.S.
Dr. Marum Gottesman, Prime Minister’s Physician
Dan Pattir, Press Spokesman
Yehial Kadishai, Director of the Prime Minister’s Bureau
Yehuda Avner, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister
The President: I want to welcome you, Mr. Prime Minister. We had
a productive meeting last night where we discussed strategic relations
in the Middle East, threats to our joint security, and the importance of
Israel in the Middle East, and the benefits to the United States of a
strong, independent, and democratic Israel. Our strategic interests are
obvious.
Camp David opened a vista of peace and provided for Israeli secu-
rity in ways that have not been possible for thirty years. This prospect
of peace is important to our country. Since the Camp David agree-
ments, we have been unsuccessful in getting a treaty. I told the Prime
Minister last night that the United States has no position on the sub-
stantive issues. There is no paragraph or sentence in the text that we
want to impose on either Israel or Egypt. Anything that they agree on
we could accept. When there is a deadlock, we put forward suggestions
and we will keep on trying. But we have no desire to enforce an Amer-
ican position on either nation. I pointed out to the Prime Minister the
value that we derive from our partnership, as well as our strategic in-
terests in the entire region. We have strong and valued relations with
others in the region as well, especially Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan,
and these must be maintained.
We touched on some of the textual difficulties last night, but it
might be worth reviewing them here. Our contribution to Israel in the
context of peace would be important to us and to Israel, and we will
have time to get into bilateral issues this weekend. My suggestion is
that you outline your views, Mr. Prime Minister, and then we will
discuss them. Secretary Vance has been more involved in the texts than
I have. Again, I want to welcome you here.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin: I am grateful to you, Mr. President, to Secre-
tary Vance, and to your colleagues for the efforts that you have made to
save our people in Tehran. This was a great service to Israel and we
will not forget. I would like to say something that I said before. I will
have to quote myself from the first time that I met you in July 1977. At
that time I said that the free world was shrinking, that it was becoming
an island battered by hostile winds. This was the truth. Since that time,
the Soviets have taken over six countries: Angola, Mozambique, Ethi-
opia, Afghanistan, South Yemen, and now Cambodia.
Saudi Arabia is in direct danger from South Yemen. They are a rich
people, but they are weak. Libya is pro-Soviet. Iraq and Syria are under
Soviet influence, and the Baath parties in those two countries are
coming together. There are between two and three thousand Soviet ad-
visers in Syria. There are more Soviet tanks in Syria—2,800—than in
Egypt—between 2,200 and 2,400. Jordan has aligned itself with Syria
and Iraq. Now we have the upheaval in Iran, and we must ask our-
selves about its meaning. We see this as an awakening of Islamic fanati-
cism, just as in the Middle Ages. It could be contagious. Iraq has a ma-
jority of Shiites. Sadat has had to warn his own people about the
fanaticism of the Muslim brotherhood. Sadat sees this problem and he
knows what happened in Iran. It could happen in Egypt, where the
poverty is so much of a problem. When Sadat was in Jerusalem, he
talked of inviting me to Cairo, but he could not do it. I believe it was be-
cause he could not guarantee my security. There are nine million
people in Cairo, a city full of slums and poverty. The Nile Valley is very
narrow.
I told the President that the United States has only one stable ally
in the Middle East, and this is Israel, whose stability is inherent because
it is a democracy. This is also true of the United States, where change
comes by the ballot, not the bullet.
In Iran, a mighty Army collapsed in twenty-four hours in the face
of fanatical masses. The story has not reached an end in Iran. Khomeini

is old, and there are many leftists and Communists. The border be-
tween Iran and the Soviet Union is the longest, except for the Soviet
border with China. We should not forget the old czarist ambitions and
we must be very careful. What can Israel do? I will not exaggerate, but
Israel can play a role. The Israeli Army is a good instrument, it is effi-
cient, and we have land and air forces. Israeli pilots have confronted
Soviet pilots, and in 1970 we shot down five Soviet-piloted planes. We
have had combat experience. We can manage any threats against Israel.
I have suggested that you take over the two air bases in the Sinai,
and that they not be turned over to the Egyptians for civilian purposes.
Etzion could be most vital for the protection of Saudi Arabia. You
would not have to send F–15s to Saudi Arabia if you could have an air
base at Etzion. We are prepared to give you that base, but Sadat appar-
ently is not. Israel can do whatever is necessary to prevent Saudi Arabia
from being taken over by Communism. We cannot lose Saudi oil to
Communism. I would like to note that we used to ask for arms in order
to defend Israel, but we have now reached the end of this thesis. From
now on we will contend that Israel should be in order to fulfill the
common interests of the free world. This is the situation as we see it,
and we hope that you will look at it carefully. The world is in turmoil
and the Soviets are taking over by proxy.
Now I will turn to the negotiations with Egypt. It is my duty to say
as a free man, and I am speaking frankly, that the negotiations are in a
state of deep crisis. We reached an agreement at Camp David and we
want to be true and faithful to that agreement, both in spirit and in
letter. We accepted a draft of a treaty on November 11th, and the Cab-
inet decided that we would sign that treaty on November 21st. We gave
up serious reservations that we have on parts of the preamble. Secre-
tary Vance urged us not to reopen the text of the treaty. Then in Cairo
they found a way to reopen the text of the treaty indirectly through in-
terpretive notes on agreed minutes. In my opinion, there is no differ-
ence in how one reopens the treaty, through the texts or through notes.
It means reopening the text because it changes the content. Now let me
turn to the main issues.
First the good news. The Government of Israel has accepted the
American proposal8 on Article 4 (the Prime Minister reads the text of
the interpretive note to Article 4).
Rabin briefed Kissinger on the air engagement on the night of July 29–30 in which four of
the five Soviet-piloted MiGs were shot down. A record of this conversation is scheduled
1972.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President: That is the text that Israel wanted, and now Egypt
has accepted it.
The Prime Minister: It says nothing about a review in five years.
First I will deal with Article 6. The delegation of Israel was pre-
sented with the following proposal by the American delegation at
Camp David. This refers to the second paragraph of Article 6. (The
Prime Minister reads paragraph two of the text). The note concerning
the fifth paragraph of Article 6 provides for the unique priority of the
United Nations Charter and does not acknowledge “any other pri-
ority”. Now for the analysis. (The Prime Minister reads Article 6, para-
graph 2 in its entirety). If we were to accept this note, I would say that
we would be interpreting away the content of Article 6 paragraph 2.
The words which say that the treaty is concluded “in the context of a
comprehensive peace settlement” would mean that peace must be
achieved between Israel and Syria, Israel and Jordan, Israel and Leb-
anon, and autonomy must be established in Judea, Samaria, and Gaza.
Israel wants this comprehensive peace; it does not want a separate
peace. If there is a separate peace, then there is still hostility on the
northeastern front. They have 5,600 tanks there, and 1,000 combat
planes. Israel does want a comprehensive peace settlement, but it is not
up to Israel or Egypt alone to reach this. Sadat cannot persuade Assad.
He cannot bring Jordan to the table. These are beyond his control to do.
So what may happen? Israel will sign a treaty, and we will withdraw.
But these words would allow Sadat or to his successor to say legiti-
mately that if there is no comprehensive peace, Egypt can take back its
ambassador, or can declare that parts of the treaty are null and void. It
is absolutely clear that this would be the meaning of this interpretive
note.
The second sentence of the interpretive note is even more serious
and dangerous, although the first is bad enough. Article 1039 of the
U.N. Charter is referred to and this establishes a unique priority, but
the note goes on to say that there is “no other priority”. If we were to
accept this, then this would automatically give priority to Egypt’s obli-
gations to the Arabs over its commitments in the treaty. Egypt has
agreed with all of the Arab states in 1950, through the Arab League,
that implacable enemy of Israel, to enter a defense relationship. Egypt
has an alliance with Iraq and Syria, dating from 1962. The aim of that
treaty is the liberation of Palestine, which means the destruction of Is-
rael. Most important is the defense treaty with Syria of November 1966,
which was invoked in 1967 and again in 1973 against us.

When we say there is no other priority, and we know of these other
pacts, then this means that they in fact have priority. This is a rule of in-
ternational law. Let me quote from the Law of Treaties by McNeil. “If
Country C is aware of an earlier inconsistent treaty between A and B,
he contracts a treaty with them at his own risk”. If we do not say that
the Israeli-Egyptian treaty must prevail, then we are acknowledging
the validity of those other obligations. (The Prime Minister quotes from
Lauterpacht11 to the effect that the treaty is null and void if it conflicts
with a prior treaty). This means that at any time Egypt could join a war
against Israel. If we have a war on our northeastern front, we will be
able to defeat our enemies, but we will do so by counterattacking. We
cannot defend ourselves from Tel Aviv. We will take the war to the
other side. If we counterattack in self-defense, and if we approach Da-
mascus, Egypt may call this Israeli aggression. Egypt will be able to
carry its commitments to Syria. I am not boasting when I say that we
may get within ten kilometers of Damascus. Israel will never initiate a
war, but if Israel is attacked, we will counterattack. Egypt could then
join the war, and the peace treaty would be null and void.
These proposals are totally unacceptable to Israel. We had a letter
from Mr. Hansell which has now been nullified by this minute. It
should be nullified. That also gave Egypt the means to attack Israel.
There shall be no interpretive notes to Article 6, neither for paragraph 2
nor for paragraph 5. A Cabinet decision was taken before I left. We will
not sign any so-called peace treaty unless Article 6 stands as it is. There
can be no interpretation. This is the heart of the peace treaty. We cannot
be derelict in our duty. Israel has been attacked five times, and each
time Israel has been branded the aggressor. Israel wants to be sure that
the treaty will not be nullified suddenly because a comprehensive
peace has not been achieved.
Now let me turn to the question of the letter on the West Bank and
Gaza. The draft13 of the letter that our delegation received at Camp
David contains deviations from and contradictions with the Camp
David agreement. We want to fulfill the Camp David accords faithfully
and completely. I signed those agreements for Israel, but I cannot agree
to deviations. Here is the list of deviations. First, there is a proposal to
distinguish between Judea and Samaria on the one hand, and Gaza on
the other. Where is this written in the Camp David agreements? There
is no difference there.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President: Do you object to the concept of dividing the two?
Prime Minister Begin: The Camp David agreements talk about a
single autonomy for Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza District. This is my
preference. We may talk of this subject of a difference, but in writing we
must stick to the Camp David accords.
Second, it is written that Egypt will assume Jordan’s role. Where is
this in Camp David? Did we ever agree that Egypt would assume
Jordan’s role? The Camp David accords say that Egypt, Jordan, and Is-
rael shall negotiate for the self-governing authority or administrative
council, a vital concept, but it has become clear that Jordan will not join
the peace-making process. So Israel said that it would negotiate with
Egypt alone. Let me explain. We had the right to say that until Jordan
joins there would be no such talks. It is vital to have Jordan along with
Egypt. Egypt has no role in Judea and Samaria, and was only in occu-
pation of Gaza because of an illegal act of aggression which gave Egypt
no rights there. Egypt has nothing at all to do in Judea and Samaria.
Nonetheless, we undertook to negotiate with Egypt on the modalities,
the powers and responsibilities of the administrative council in Judea,
Samaria and Gaza. We did this to prove that there was no Israeli inten-
tion to avoid negotiations if Jordan stayed out of the talks. We wanted
to banish this idea, and to show our goodwill. So we are prepared to ne-
gotiate with Egypt alone. This is our concession, which we can give and
we can take back. We are not obliged to do it under the Camp David
Agreements. We can wait for Jordan.
The President: In the Camp David Accords, it said that Egypt would
assume the Arab role.
Prime Minister Begin: It only said that in a letter, not in the Camp
David Agreements.
The President: All of the letters were discussed at Camp David. We
never heard before of an Israeli objection to that letter. We heard that
Dayan would prefer reference to Egypt taking the Jordanian role,
rather than the Arab role.
Secretary Vance: Khalil, Dayan, and I talked about this recently at
Camp David. Dayan said he preferred reference to Jordan’s role instead
of an Arab role, whereas Khalil preferred to talk about the Arab role.
Dayan said that reference to Jordan’s role was reasonable and he would
refer this to the Cabinet.
Prime Minister Begin: On behalf of the Cabinet, I say this is unac-
ceptable. It is preposterous that Egypt can take the Arab role, but Egypt
cannot take the Jordanian role either.
The President: This was a common agreement at Camp David. I
heard no objection there.
Prime Minister Begin: We made our concession to show that we are
serious about autonomy. So we will negotiate with Egypt alone.
Mr. Rosenne: Five letters were signed on September 27th. President
Sadat never signed a letter dealing with the language on Judea and Sa-
maria. Some of the letters were unilateral, as was Sadat’s on the Arab
role.
The President: I know. But there was no disagreement that Egypt
would negotiate on behalf of the other Arabs. Israel raised no objection
at the time.
Prime Minister Begin: You got my letter15 on the Palestinian Arabs,
and I got your acknowledgment. Egypt is now asking for liaison of-
ficers. This is a third deviation from Camp David. In those accords it
only speaks of liaison with the local police forces, once those have been
formed. This means that there should be one liaison officer from each
state, not only an Egyptian liaison officer, but also an Israeli liaison of-
ficer. We are not talking about Egyptian liaison officers in the Gaza
Strip.
The fourth problem concerns the target date. There is no mention
in Camp David of a one-year target date. Let me explain the problem.
We talked about this at Kennedy Airport. At that time, Foreign Min-
ister Dayan said that he favored a target date; but I opposed it on the
spot. I took it to the Cabinet, and there a unanimous decision was
made, including Foreign Minister Dayan, that we will not accept a
target date. Let me give my reason. To have autonomy, you need to
have electors, candidates, and you need to insure that no Palestinian
state will arise. People go to Judea and Samaria and say to the Arabs
that they should take autonomy as a first step, and that then they will
have a Palestinian state later. We know this from reliable sources. If we
thought a Palestinian state could arise from autonomy, we would never
have agreed. At Camp David, you proposed the word self-governing
authority. We accepted, but we added “administrative council”, not a
legislative council. A legislative council can declare independence, but
an administrative council cannot. If the administrative council one day
proclaims a Palestinian state, we will arrest them. But we don’t want to
arrest a legislative council. That is what the Bolsheviks did and we are
not Bolsheviks. The administrative council will have 11 members, but it
is not to declare independence. After five years, as I told you, Mr. Presi-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
dent, we will claim our sovereignty and others may claim their sover-
eignty. If that happens, then the autonomy will go on. We will never
agree to refer to the self-governing authority without mentioning the
administrative council.
Let me explain why we do not want a target date. We must have a
guarantee that there will not be a Palestinian state first. This would be a
mortal danger to us. Arafat has taken over the Israeli Embassy in
Tehran. There have been meetings in Nablus, the ancient town of She-
chem. Thousands of people showed up and there was a proclama-
tion that the Arabs should liberate Jerusalem and Jaffa. In such cir-
cumstances, we cannot accept the idea of a target date. As that date
approaches, the PLO will use its Kalashnikovs to intimidate the
population.
After Mr. Saunders met with the Palestinians in Judea and Sa-
maria, we had to guard them to protect their lives. We cannot set a
target date, because then there would be no candidates and no electors.
It should be possible to introduce autonomy within six months, but it
might take as long as two years. This is a question of life or death to Is-
rael. We shall leave all of Sinai. But in seven hours the Egyptian army
can be on our southern border. In the east, if the PLO takes over, they
will be on the mountains with their Soviet weapons, and we will be in
the valley with only eight miles between us. All of our children will be
in the range of their guns, and all our airfields will be closed, because of
their fire. This would be a mortal danger to Israel. It would be peril to
the free world if there were a Palestinian state that became a Soviet base
in this area. The PLO sent arms to Khomeini. There would be Soviet
generals in Bethlehem. Does this free world need a Soviet base in Judea
and Samaria? With all due respect, this would not be wise, it would be
a grave danger. Israel must have iron-clad guarantees that there will be
no Palestinian state. You have said that there should not be a Pales-
tinian state in your public remarks. But some people give advice that
autonomy is just a first step, so any target date is impossible. I under-
stood from our talk last night that you might consider the phrase “as
expeditiously as possible” as a substitute.
The President: I was also talking about that as the formulation on
the timing of the exchange of ambassadors.
Prime Minister Begin: I’ll come to that. We have prepared a counter-
draft of the letter. We propose using this phrase “as expeditiously as
possible”. This is as far as we can go.
Egypt has suggested that autonomy might first be established in
Gaza. They also talk of Egypt assuming the Jordanian role. The transi-
tional period of five years would start from the time of the Gaza au-
tonomy. This was not agreed at Camp David and it is not written. This
is a contradiction to Camp David.
The letter19 also talks of the two Camp David Agreements being at-
tached to this letter. I have not agreed to this. This is a novelty to me.
The letter as now written talks about the self-governing authority with
full autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza. This is a complete deviation
from the Camp David framework. We are not talking about autonomy
for or to the West Bank and Gaza, but only for the inhabitants. It is
written so. (Mr. Rosenne reads from the Camp David Framework.)
These are two worlds apart. If the self-governing authority pro-
vides full autonomy to the West Bank, this means that the territory has
full autonomy, and Israel will have no right to be there. But we do have
that right, because this is the Land of Israel. We suggest that the inhabi-
tants have full autonomy and this is the way it is written in the Camp
David Agreements. It should be this way in the draft letter.
For several weeks, in our drafts we suggested that the negotiations
should deal with the modalities of elections, the powers and responsi-
bilities, and “other related issues”. Why was this latter phrase deleted?
It is important to us. The Camp David Agreements talked about secu-
rity for Israel in the transitional period and beyond. This is what we
meant by “other related issues”. We are concerned about security be-
yond the transitional period. These words were deleted. These are my
remarks. We cannot accept these proposals. We have prepared counter-
proposals for you to study. I would like to sum up my observations. We
have agreed on Article 4. Article 6 must stand without any notes. We
have rephrased the letter and we ask that you study it. Now I want to
raise the question of oil.
We have a commitment from you in 1975 on oil. Recently you
were asked at a press conference and you said that you would honor
this commitment. Israel has been prudent and diversified its sources of
oil even before the Shah fell. The Shah had already hinted that he might
withhold oil from Israel in some circumstances and we could not afford
to rely on one man. Israel provides a bridge for oil from Iran to reach
the Mediterranean through our pipeline, but now that pipeline is dry.
We used to get 60 percent of our consumption from Iran and now that
is lost. We have looked for other sources, such as Mexico, Indonesia,
States and Israel agreed through a separate memorandum that in the event Israel was un-
able to meet its oil requirements through “normal procedures,” the United States would
“promptly make oil available for purchase by Israel to meet all of the aforementioned
normal requirements of Israel.” For the text of this memorandum see Foreign Relations,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and others who might surprise you. We have not turned to the United
States. Oil to Israel is not wasted. But if we have no oil, then our tanks
and planes cannot move and we would be in deadly danger. This is a
matter of life and death.
We now have oil in the area of Sinai from which we will withdraw.
Israel now gets 1. million tons from those wells. In six months this will
be up to 2. million tons. I want a commitment from Sadat in writing
million tons annually. I also am asking you to give an American guar-
antee to the Egyptian commitment. If Egypt will not give such a com-
mitment, we shall proceed to evacuate Sinai in the context of the peace
treaty, but we will not give up the oil wells. And I will say so to Sadat.
This is a matter of life and death. The Camp David Agreement was
signed when the Shah was still ruler. We are asking for no favors. We
will pay the market price. We are giving back the oil wells which we de-
veloped to Egypt, but we need a commitment from them.
On the question of ambassadors, Sadat agreed to normalization of
relations. If he reopens the Annex dealing with the exchange of ambas-
sadors, we will also reopen the question of the timing of withdrawal,
and we may change the time for the interim withdrawal from nine to
eighteen months or the time for the final withdrawal from three to six
years. If there is a reopening, it should be done on both sides.
President Carter: I want Secretary Vance to respond to your com-
ments on the letter, but I have some remarks to make.
Secretary Vance: Let me say one word. The President has indicated
that we are trying to help the parties reach agreement. We have been
asked to make suggestions. That has been our role. On the specifics, the
letter does offer the possibility of making a distinction between the
West Bank and Gaza. The suggestion was made that it might be easier
to establish self-government in Gaza first. This was discussed among
the three ministers at Camp David. Dayan said that the Cabinet had not
made a decision on this, but that it was an interesting idea. He said that
he would take it back to the Cabinet, and this was the basis for our de-
veloping such a proposal.
Prime Minister Begin: But Dayan told you that he would agree to
this provided that Sadat would not have anything to do with the nego-
tiations on autonomy in Judea and Samaria.
Ambassador Evron: We were, of course, not present, but Dayan told
us that if an agreement is made on Gaza separately, then he would rec-
ommend that Egypt should have no role in the negotiations on Judea
and Samaria.
Prime Minister Begin: I have his cable.
Secretary Vance: I don’t recall it that way. Concerning Jordan’s role,
the suggestion was made by the Egyptians at the first Camp David

meeting that Egypt should assume the Arab role in the negotiations.
Dayan objected to this, and one of us suggested that Egypt could as-
sume the Jordanian role. There was no Israeli objection and that is the
reason it is there.
Prime Minister Begin: This was ad referendum to the Cabinet.
Secretary Vance: We were trying to draft a letter so that the Cabinet
could consider it. On the question of Egyptian liaison officers, this was
also discussed, and Dayan said that it would have to be taken to the
Cabinet. He said that it was an interesting idea in the context of the
Gaza first option. It would help to bring about early elections. This was
fully discussed.
Mr. Rosenne: From the second day of the Blair House talks, the
Egyptians raised the possibility of separating Gaza from the West Bank
in all of their proposals. They said that there should be an Egyptian po-
lice force and Egyptian liaison officers. This was rejected by the Israeli
delegation. At the second Camp David talks, the idea of Egyptian li-
aison officers was raised again. This is in the seventh draft, although
the Israelis have not gotten copies of all the drafts. Reports were sent by
Dayan after each of the meetings, and it is clear on this question of li-
aison officer that Dayan rejected the idea in discussions. If we look at
the Camp David Agreements, there was a difference concerning liaison
with local police forces.
Secretary Vance: The idea of liaison officers has been in every draft.
Dayan did point out that the idea of liaison officers from the start of the
negotiations was new, and he said that it should be discussed in the
Cabinet.
Ambassador Evron: All I can say is that when Dayan met with us he
said that we should stick to the Camp David language and we suggest
using Camp David language on the question of liaison.
Prime Minister Begin: The Cabinet has read the draft letter and took
a decision against Egyptian liaison officers in Gaza.
President Carter: I have talked to Sadat . . .
Prime Minister Begin: We accept the Camp David Accords.
President Carter: I have talked to Sadat about the idea of separating
Gaza from the West Bank. He thinks that this could help to break the
present deadlock and might encourage the Palestinians in Gaza to par-
ticipate. Egypt and Israel could use their influence. This sounds reason-
or to work against Israeli interests, but to help carry out the Camp
David agreements. They would not constitute any threat against Israel.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Vance: They would be there to be helpful.
President Carter: We still think that this could be a useful idea.
Prime Minister Begin: This is not my idea. Egypt has nothing to do
with Gaza.
President Carter: They will be part of the negotiations.
Prime Minister Begin: We can discuss Dayan’s idea. If we deal only
with Gaza, and if Egypt drops all interests in the question of autonomy
in Judea and Samaria, then we can consider this.
President Carter: You talk of Egypt intervening in Judea and Sa-
maria, but we agreed at Camp David that Sadat would negotiate if
Jordan did not join the talks. This was discussed by us. You never ob-
jected to Sadat representing Arab interests.
Prime Minister Begin: I never agreed. I only said Israel was ready to
negotiate with Egypt alone, if Jordan does not join. This was to show
our good faith.
President Carter: I agree. What is the difference?
Prime Minister Begin: We did not agree that Egypt will replace
Jordan. Egypt cannot make peace for Jordan.
President Carter: When Sadat sent a letter23 concerning the Arab
role, you made no objection. Sadat is not trying to intervene in the West
Bank. He is trying to help in the negotiations.
Prime Minister Begin: This is a genuine misunderstanding. I have
not given any commitment.
President Carter: You have a right to object.
Secretary Vance: We never suggested that the self-governing au-
thority could declare independence.
Prime Minister Begin: You should write that it is an administrative
council.
Secretary Vance: That can be added.
Ambassador Evron: In one draft, the words administrative and
council were included, and then they were dropped.
Secretary Vance: This is not a big problem.
Mr. Rosenne: The Prime Minister objects to dropping administra-
tive council, and he objects to the reference to full autonomy for the self-
governing authority. Camp David talks about full autonomy only for
the inhabitants. The self-governing authority does not have autonomy.
Secretary Vance: What is the difference?
Mr. Rosenne: We should refer to the administrative council and the
goal of autonomy for the inhabitants. The powers of the administrative
council have to be established. When you say the self-governing au-
thority should have full autonomy, this makes it appear as if the self-
governing authority can make major decisions. There is no reference to
a self-governing authority with full autonomy. We should stick to the
language of Camp David.
President Carter: (Reading from the Camp David agreements on the
self-governing authority.) There is no reason not to use this language.
Secretary Vance: “In order to provide full autonomy” . . .
Prime Minister Begin: “To the inhabitants.”
Mr. Rosenne: The idea of autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza is a
different concept.
Prime Minister Begin: This is completely different.
President Carter: No one is trying to trick Israel by slipping in a
word here or there. We are not scheming against Israel; we are not
trying to hurt you; and neither is Sadat.
Prime Minister Begin: I never suspected such a thing.
President Carter: When there are doubts, let’s stick to the Camp
David language.
Prime Minister Begin: I speak for a brave nation surrounded by en-
emies. I cannot commit the sin of dereliction of duties.
Secretary Vance: Concerning the question of the target date, this has
been discussed before. We never suggested that the self-governing au-
thority could declare its independence. The idea of setting a goal or
target was to give an impetus to the negotiations to encourage the Pal-
estinians to participate. It is only a goal, not a fixed state. This seemed to
be a positive idea, not a source of danger. We previously said that the
end of 1979 should be the goal, but you objected, so we have now tried
new language on completing the negotiations in one year.
President Carter: We originally talked of three or six months.
Secretary Vance: Then we talked of six or nine months, then the end
of 1979. You turned all of that down.
Prime Minister Begin: Even if you suggest one year or three years,
I cannot accept. This would be most detrimental to the idea of
autonomy.
Secretary Vance: We also changed the language so that we are
talking of making preparations so that the elections can be held. We are
trying to meet your concerns. You talked about the transitional period
starting in Gaza first.
President Carter: At Camp David, there was an agreement that we
proceed on the Sinai and on the other Camp David agreements. Egypt’s
concern is that all of the negotiation has been on Sinai, and nothing on
the other agreement. At Camp David, we set a three-month goal for

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
achieving an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. It was realized that the
Egyptian-Israeli agreement was a first step. It is obvious to you and to
me that we missed the three-month goal and the prospects are not good
now. Sadat originally wanted a fixed goal for the establishment of the
self-government before withdrawal had been carried out in Sinai. Now
he will accept a target date. In his message24 to you when he raised the
question of Gaza first, he said that if the Palestinians or others refused
to participate, Israel would not be held responsible. There has to be
some element of good faith on both sides. We cannot envisage every
possibility for abrogation of the peace treaty. Sadat feels that he made
major concessions on the question of setting a goal. He won’t hold Is-
rael responsible if others fail to participate. You have apparently dis-
counted Sadat’s message and are afraid that he will use the idea of a
target date as an excuse to break the peace treaty. I don’t believe that
Sadat wants that.
Prime Minister Begin: I remember President Sadat’s letter. I sent
you a copy of my reply. We have had experience. We decided on a
target date for the treaty negotiations at Camp David. When that date
passed, Israel was then blamed for the failure. The target date was not
met. The Egyptians blamed us, and not only the Egyptians. Israel
should not be in a position to have to justify herself. Israel is blamed
even though Israel was ready to sign the treaty. But this is not the only
issue. The target date will be a stumbling block to the autonomy. Don’t
forget the PLO and their Kalashnikovs and their ability to intimidate
the population. We cannot guard everyone. The PLO is a reality in
Judea and Samaria. They will not let autonomy be introduced. If we set
a target date, it will be dangerous. I contend that we should take the
Camp David Agreement as it is. There were three parts to the Camp
David Agreement: an Egypt-Israel Treaty; autonomy for Judea and Sa-
maria; and an invitation to others to join the negotiations. We should
follow the same sequence. There should be a treaty, then autonomy,
then an invitation to others. There should be no target date, and we
should simply say “as expeditiously as possible.”
President Carter: Do you see any interrelationship among these
three elements?
Prime Minister Begin: That is a very dangerous phrase. At Camp
David we heard this phrase of interrelationship, but we also heard the
word “unconditional,” and then it was all right. But it is very character-
istic, and I told this to my colleagues, that the word interrelationship
would remain, but we would hear no more of the question of uncondi-
tionality. That is a fact. If we can say that there is an interrelationship
but do not say that is unconditional, then the treaty would depend on
carrying out the autonomy, so the treaty could be annulled.
President Carter: If we report the results of these talks to Sadat and
there can be no further progress on the treaty, would you be willing to
negotiate on the autonomy before concluding the treaty with Egypt?
Prime Minister Begin: I cannot give an improvised reply. I would
suggest that we not accept. We are not committed to do this by Camp
David. We should not start with the autonomy.
President Carter: Camp David says nothing about the sequence, as
far as I can see.
Prime Minister Begin: It is not a coincidence that we decided to start
with the treaty.
President Carter: We are looking at the possibility, at the proba-
bility, that a Sinai agreement cannot be achieved. If that happens, rather
than ending the process and going back to animosity, would you con-
sider shifting to negotiations on the West Bank? Sadat is concerned that
Israel does not intend to go forward with autonomy for the West Bank.
He sees more of a possibility of progress in Gaza. If the Palestinians
don’t cooperate, West Bank autonomy will be difficult. Because of his
influence in Gaza, and with Israel’s help, there would be a better
chance. Rather than have everything end, would you consider this?
Prime Minister Begin: My colleagues in the Cabinet have already
raised this. I said no. There are serious reasons. The majority of the Cab-
inet rejected this approach. We have to negotiate with Egypt, but we
cannot then tell what the results will be of the talks on autonomy.
Meanwhile, the great revolutionary change in the area would be the
treaty between Egypt and Israel.
President Carter: I am just looking for a way to get the Camp David
Agreements moving simultaneously. This would not cancel out what
we have achieved on the treaty. We would try to have both negotia-
tions simultaneously.
Prime Minister Begin: The way it is now written, it would be almost
simultaneous. We would start the negotiations for the autonomy one
month after the treaty is signed.
President Carter: But you must see that the possibility of the whole
peace process could break down. I want to avoid that.
Prime Minister Begin: I will take this idea to the Cabinet. Two of my
colleagues have suggested it. I opposed it. It is not a healthy develop-
ment. It is not the sequel envisaged at Camp David, but I will take it to
the Cabinet.
President Carter: It says nothing in Camp David about negotiations
starting one month after the treaty. A goal was set to conclude the
treaty negotiations in three months and you said it could be in two.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin: I also agreed to start the negotiations on au-
tonomy one month after the treaty.
President Carter: There is nothing in Camp David that says the
treaty must precede the West Bank /Gaza negotiations. It might go a
long way to removing obstacles to the peace treaty negotiations. It
could help overcome the linkage problem. This might be the only door
to keep open if there is a deadlock.
Prime Minister Begin: I will tell you what I have told my colleagues.
There should be no judicial linkage. The American view is that there is
a political linkage.
President Carter: That’s right.
Prime Minister Begin: But I say there is no judicial linkage and there
is no political linkage, there is just a time linkage. We are prepared to
start the negotiations on Judea, Samaria, and Gaza almost immediately.
But there can be no political linkage, only a time linkage.
Secretary Vance: On the question of the annexed documents, there
is no mystery. You had it in your own counterdraft.
Mr. Rosenne: We met on Saturday at Camp David to talk about the
agreed minutes. The draft we got on February 24th had different lan-
guage on Article 6.
Secretary Vance: We are not talking about Article 6. I am talking
about the annexed documents. This was mentioned in our first draft,
and your counterdraft included it.
Mr. Rosenne: Previous drafts had said that there would be just one
annexed document. This was only the document on the autonomy. We
object to having both documents annexed. When we included in our
draft that both documents could be annexed, it was because there was a
sentence that said that implementation of both frameworks would be
independent of each other, and there was a phrase about uncondition-
ality that was dropped, but the two documents were left. Egypt also
did not want the two documents. At least Khalil was prepared to delete
the first two pages of your draft. Our position is that we object to both
documents being annexed with the deleting of the phrase about inde-
pendent implementation.
Secretary Vance: We talked about the problem of full autonomy for
the inhabitants. On the question of “other related issue,” there should
be no difficulty.
Prime Minister Begin: But we want it understood that this means se-
curity for Israel in the transitional period and beyond.
Secretary Vance: There is no problem. On Article 6, paragraph 5, let
me review how we got to this point. Originally there was language that
this treaty would “prevail over other treaties.” This was dropped.
Agreement could not be reached on that. Then we reached agreement

on the language in Article 6–5 on ad referendum basis. Later Foreign
Minister Dayan said that this meant the Egyptian-Israeli treaty pre-
vailed over other treaties. Once this was said, Egypt raised questions
and pointed out that this was contrary to the negotiating history.
Therefore, they asked for an interpretive note.
Prime Minister Begin: This is unacceptable to us. It interprets away
what is written. What is written is that if there is conflict between the
obligations under this treaty and other obligations, this treaty would be
implemented and binding. This is the weakest of all the formulations,
but it must be included. This note would let Egypt join any war against
Israel. They would reserve their right to interpret what is aggression in
the case of an Israeli war with any Arab country. This is not a matter of
legal formulations.
Mr. Rosenne: We reached agreement with Mr. Atherton on the
note26 of a legal opinion that would be given to the Israeli Government,
but Egypt did not agree to that note. We did not see your note to them.
Some thought that this could solve the problem.
Prime Minister Begin: I prefer that both letters be nullified. We
should not have letters from the United States which contradict each
other. The letter to Israel is contradictory to the letter offered to Egypt.
The United States should be careful not to do this. This is my advice as a
friend.
President Carter: They are not in contradiction.
Secretary Vance: I would not sign such letters.
Prime Minister Begin: It is better to forget both letters. Egypt should
hear that the letter you gave them is null.
Secretary Vance: On paragraph 2 of Article 6, an attempt was made
to find language to indicate that all of this is part of the search for a
comprehensive peace. This was not made to nullify this treaty or to
give any party a right to do so. The language that is there does not do
this.
Mr. Rosenne: In our second meeting at Camp David, different lan-
guage was put forward. The draft27 now presented is identical to the
December 13 Egyptian proposal. It was unacceptable to us then.
Secretary Vance: I have been trying to find a way to help. I have
been breaking my back doing so. We made changes in this draft, and
you rejected all of them, so I came back to this draft without making
any special reference to paragraph 2 of Article 6. I thought this might
help. I have run out of ways to help. You have rejected everything.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin: We are grateful to you, but this language
cannot be accepted by Israel. It is written that this treaty is in the con-
text of the Camp David Frameworks and a comprehensive peace. Mr.
Baz will one day advise the Egyptian ruler to abrogate the treaty unless
a comprehensive peace has been achieved. You can be sure of this.
Ambassador Blum: Article 3128 of the Geneva Convention would
allow Mr. Baz to make such a legitimate interpretation.
Secretary Vance: We tried to use the language of the Vienna Con-
vention, but you rejected it.
Prime Minister Begin: This is the first time that I have ever heard
that something Mr. Baz said might be legitimate.
President Carter: Will you agree to delete Article 6 entirely?
Prime Minister Begin: No! It is the soul and the heart of the peace
treaty. (The Prime Minister quotes the language of Article 6). If Syria
does not join in the comprehensive peace, the treaty must still stand. If
this Article is deleted, it would cancel the peace treaty. If I may quote
Dr. Kissinger in this room, he used to say that what Israel is being asked
to give is tangible, and what the Arabs promise is intangible. Egypt
gives us a peace treaty and recognition and for that we should not be
thankful. They should have done it in 1948. This is what Sadat gives us,
plus an ambassador who can be recalled. In return we give him Sinai,
two wonderful air bases, our settlements, and this represents the
greatest sacrifice ever made for peace. If Article 6 is not left in the treaty,
then the treaty stands on whether the rulers in Damascus will make
peace or not. If Article 6, paragraph 5, is weakened Egypt, could go to
war at any time. This article must stand as it is. It is the soul of the peace
treaty.
President Carter: Let me close by saying that we will meet again on
Sunday. I suggest that we each get together with our own sides to
discuss these issues.
Prime Minister Begin: We can meet again on Saturday night.
President Carter: We can decide on our next meeting at a later time.
Before closing, I want to say that we have talked today a lot about
words and technicalities. You seem to be assuming that Egypt is
looking for written excuses to attack Israel. This is the same fear that
you had two or three years ago, but there have been changes since then.
Treaties which posits a “general rule that a treaty is to be interpreted in good faith in ac-
cordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context
and in the light of the treaty’s purpose.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1969, p. 736) The
complete text of the treaty is at KAV 2424.

Prime Minister Rabin told me the first time I met him30 that Israel
wanted direct negotiations, diplomatic recognition, and a recognition
by Egypt of Israel’s security needs. Israel has achieved all of those
things now.
We have an interest in a relationship with Israel, and it is to our
mutual advantage, because it enhances stability in the region. We also
have an interest in good relations with Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan,
as well as others. We want to see Israel strengthened. If there is no
peace, if there is a reversion, and if the Arab world turns totally hostile,
then our help to Israel, will be seen as a threat to Egypt. We lived with
that in the past, and we can go back to that again. You know the domi-
nant role that Egypt can play in the Arab world. Egypt needs a stable
relationship with Israel, obviously. Saudi Arabia needs stability in the
Middle East. I don’t believe that there is a direct threat to Israel in the
near future, not for the next five, eight, or ten years. At the least, the
threat will not come from the military forces of Egypt, even combined
with Jordan and Syria. Israel can defend herself and would be able to
punish anyone who would threaten her. This alone should be able to
deter war. But after Iran, radical elements in the Middle East may be en-
couraged. I know for a fact that the major restraint on PLO activity has
been the influence of Egypt and the benign influence of Saudi Arabia.
They cannot fully control the PLO. I know about the bombs that go off
in Israel, but an Egypt-Israel accommodation would be a major stabi-
lizing factor and a restraint on radicalism, dissention, and revolu-
tionary Palestinian groups.
Sadat has never spent any time with me talking of an Israeli attack
on Egypt. But the major topic here today has been the idea that Egypt
will attack Israel. Sadat has proved that he wants peace for Egypt, not
just a temporary truce. There is no way to guarantee what happens
when we are all gone. I hope while you and Sadat are in office that the
treaty can be concluded. It will open up the way for a new Egyptian-
Israeli re-relationship, so that you can show the advantages of peace to
everyone. The advantages of trade, cultural exchange, economic ex-
change, and the beneficial influences of Israeli technology, the example
of democracy. This help reduces the risks of war. At present, Egypt has
a more benign relationship with Israel than it does with Syria. After the
treaty is signed, the euphoria of Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem and of the
Camp David agreements will be restored. This can evolve into a perma-
nent Egyptian-Israeli ties. I have never heard Sadat threaten Israel or
try to break off the negotiations. He has negotiated in good faith, as
have you.
August 1978, Document 18.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
There was a change when the two of you exchanged visits. We all
agreed to work for a comprehensive settlement. You are afraid that
Egypt will renege on its treaty commitments, and Egypt fears that you
will not carry out the West Bank/Gaza agreement. Neither of these
fears is warranted. We want to avoid a hardening of positions by either
of you. We cannot lose this opportunity. You expressed my views yes-
terday when you said that talks were in a “deep crisis”. We are all con-
cerned. Where do we go from here. This is very serious. If you show no
flexibility, then Sadat will not accept the agreement. If he shows no flex-
ibility, you won’t accept. I would then see no reason for more negotia-
tions. We hope you will try to maintain the spirit of Camp David and to
search for accommodation. Let us make the final attempt today to put
together some new ideas.
I hope you won’t reject the idea of negotiating on the West Bank
and Gaza, or maybe Gaza alone, rather than dropping everything. You
know Hussein’s views on going to the Security Council. Others favor a
return to Geneva. Sadat could withdraw from contacts and go back to
the Arab world where he would have support from the militant Arabs.
I want to avoid this. To be frank, the language differences to me are rel-
atively inconsequential compared to what has been achieved, and they
are in some cases very minor. If you assume that Sadat does not want
peace, they may take on very great significance. If Egypt were to accept
totally your views, Egypt could still allege you broke your word and
then could go to war. That could be suicidal for Egypt, because of Is-
rael’s military capability. It is hard to imagine that happening. But that
possibility can’t be overcome by a mere change in language. I don’t
know how to express my concern more clearly. The whole effort could
be abandoned. We want to avoid this.
Prime Minister Begin: I want to clarify one misunderstanding. I
have never said that Egypt is looking for an excuse to make war against
Israel. I tried to explain that we cannot sign any document which legiti-
mizes a revoking of the peace treaty or making war on Israel. The peace
treaty with Article 6 could be broken. I have read history and I know
that treaties are torn up. I remember about the neutrality of Belgium. I
know that this may happen and we must all take risks. In Sinai, even
with the demilitarized zone, there would be no resistance if Egypt de-
cided to send its army back to our border. Israel needs three days to
mobilize reserves and then Israel can fight everyone. If there is sur-
prise, there would be a high cost. Egypt is building tunnels underneath
the Suez Canal. Why? Israel has taken all of the risks so far. But Israel
will not openly sign a document that would legitimize a war against
her.

President Carter: That would be a completely unwarranted inter-
pretation of the current drafts.
Prime Minister Begin: I am sorry, but that is our view. We are re-
sponsible for the lives of our people. We need arms, not American sol-
diers. We need to be careful. There is a red line that we cannot cross. We
cannot legitimatize an attack from a country that signs a peace treaty
with us. If there is a breach in the peace treaty, we will fight. President
Sadat gave me a pledge of “no war”, but that is not real peace. If he
breaks his pledge, Israel will fight its way across the Suez Canal. But Is-
rael cannot knowingly sign a treaty which would give legitimacy to an
attack on her or to an abrogation of the treaty. To say that Israel is ada-
mant after all the concessions that we have made, the removal of settle-
ments and all of that, is unfair. When I went home after Camp David, I
read that if the settlements question was not resolved that Camp David
would be null and void. I took a stand and I made the sacrifice for the
treaty. I will bear the pain of this to my grave. It is the most painful de-
cision that I have ever made since my days in the underground. I will
go visit the settlers in Sinai. They have made the desert blossom. Now
we must uproot them, 3,000 of them. How can there be charges of
adamancy against Israel? Our only compensation is that we may get a
real peace treaty, but we can’t cross the red line.
Dr. Brzezinski: As I see it, the dilemma is the following: For you any
language in Article 6 that does not fully meet your needs is inadequate,
because it may legitimize the use of force against you. The very need
for Article 6 requires the most binding of language from your point of
view. By its nature, that language means that Egypt is not signing a
treaty with Israel, but is also explicitly disavowing its political and mili-
tary relations with other Arabs. So Sadat wants to dilute the language,
which you cannot accept. I think the fact that Sadat is signing the treaty
will be a fundamental breakthrough and it will cause a split between
Egypt and the other Arabs. To ask him to acknowledge this publicly is
too much. Not only is Sadat being asked to make peace with Israel, but
he is also being asked to renounce his ties to the other Arabs. The peace
treaty itself is a de facto disengagement by Egypt from the other Arabs.
This is a genuine dilemma which cannot be solved by any language. It
might, therefore, be better to eliminate the article entirely. That would
be better than having weak language.
Prime Minister Begin: Thank you for your understanding of our
point of view. There is no word in Article 6 that derogates from Egypt’s
commitments to the Arab world. We don’t ask for any abrogation of
these commitments. The real interpretation of Article 6 is that those
commitments should be able to stand, except in the case of conflict.
Without this, Egypt would be able to make legitimate war against
Israel.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Dr. Brzezinski: If there is bad language, it could be construed to le-
gitimate war. The language that you want makes the signing of the
treaty almost impossible for Sadat for political reasons. Therefore, it
might be better to have no article at all.
Prime Minister Begin: I want Sadat to have a good standing in the
Arab world, but we cannot sacrifice ourselves on the alter of Sadat’s
prestige in the Arab world.
Mr. Rosenne: Don’t forget that the preamble already establishes in
six different paragraphs a linkage to the Camp David frameworks. The
linkage is there.
Secretary Vance: We had the concept of “prevailing over”, and it
has now been dropped. Each treaty stands on its own feet. That was ac-
cepted. It was Foreign Minister Dayan’s statement that caused the
added problems.
Prime Minister Begin: Prevailing over, supremacy over, all of that is
good language. This is the weakest version, but we need at least this.
Secretary Vance: Would you be willing to say that this treaty does
not prevail over, but stands on its own along with others.
Prime Minister Begin: No. It is no equal. The others are hostile to Is-
rael. We need to solve the problem of what happens in the event of
conflict.
Ambassador Blum: In Europe, it is common in treaties to abrogate
principles in previous treaties that are in conflict. We have not insisted
upon this.
Secretary Vance: You have said that this treaty should prevail over
the other treaties.
Mr. Rosenne: We gave that language up.
Secretary Vance: But Dayan stated it publicly and it has not been
retracted.
Prime Minister Begin: We gave up the word prevailed.
Secretary Vance: But you haven’t said it does not prevail.
Mr. Rosenne: The draft at one point was titled “priority of obliga-
tions”. Dayan said that only where there was conflict between these
obligations and others, then the terms of this treaty should be honored.
Egypt’s objections came later.
President Carter: We’ll work on this later today.
(At the end of the meeting Prime Minister Begin handed Secretary
Vance a letter32 on oil.)

191.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State and the White House
4429. Subject: (S) Meeting With Sadat—March 4. Ref: (A) State
1. (S-entire text).
2. Met with Sadat for hour and one-half this morning at Pyramids
Rest House. VP Mubarak was also present. Sadat had obviously read
media reports about hard line Begin has taken in Washington talks and
was very somber.
3. After I had gone through points cited reftel and supplemented
these with oral instructions that President Carter had given me prior to
my departure, I noted talks to date have not been particularly prom-
ising and that no one could say whether situation would improve at
today’s session. I had been asked to alert Sadat to the possibility that we
might not get anything further out of Begin at this time and noted that
President Carter would welcome having Sadat’s thoughts on what
might be done in such a situation. President Carter was deeply appre-
ciative for what Sadat has done up to now to facilitate peace effort and
would not want anything to happen that might hurt Sadat or Egypt’s
image. I made a point of telling Sadat that President Carter had com-
mented that there are few people for whom he has the regard and affec-
tion that he has for Sadat (Sadat was deeply touched). In this context,
the President thought it important that he be fully candid with Sadat.
4. After he had heard me out, Sadat said that he had foreseen this
eventuality. The situation, he stated, is at a “turning point.” He deeply
appreciated President Carter’s efforts to date and reiterated his total
cret; Flash; Exdis Distribute as Nodis.
points for Eilts to make in his conversation with Sadat. Vance instructed Eilts to inform
Sadat that it would not be possible to convene a new round of talks involving Begin and
Khalil and that Carter had concluded that it was important for him to meet with Begin
“as quickly as possible in an effort to overcome present Israeli objections.” Vance also in-
structed Eilts to present some “preliminary observations” on the talks between Carter
and Begin and to reassure Sadat that the United States continued to negotiate from the
documents discussed with Khalil and Dayan at Camp David in February and that it re-
mained “prepared to discuss with both parties what we can do to ensure that the treaty
is a strong and viable one.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
his March 4 meeting with Sadat. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
confidence in the President. He also appreciated the President’s candor
and said he wished to analyze situation as he sees it. He then spoke
along following lines:
— (A) Just as President Carter does not want anything to harm
Sadat and Egypt, he, Sadat, is concerned that nothing that happens
damages President Carter’s position. This, Sadat thought, is especially
important since, as he views situation, Begin is simply playing for time.
Begin is against everything that was signed at Camp David. Begin was
“forced” to sign CDAs against his desire and has ever since been
seeking to undermine the CDAs. Begin first violated the December 17
target date and is now playing his “last card” in order to try to return
the situation to a pre-Camp David configuration. At minimum it will
be several months before Begin can be brought around to sign treaty.
— (B) If we agree that joint US/Egyptian actions should not harm
either President Carter or Egypt, Sadat viewed this as an important
starting point. This should mean that our policies be identical. If this is
agreed upon, Sadat thought it essential that a new, bold initiative be
taken before the House, Senate, American and world public opinion in
order to demonstrate who is genuinely interested in peace. Sadat said
he could guarantee European support for such an initiative. He
thought that the majority in the U.S. will also favor his position when it
is fully explained. Time for confrontation (with Begin) has come. He
did not wish to leave the initiative in Begin’s hands. Why should we ap-
pear to be defensive before House, Senate, American and world public
opinion? Best defense, Sadat noted, is an offense.
— (C) He had given Israel everything that is reasonable between
equal parties. But he would not accept Israel as a “super power,” as
Begin seems to be demanding. If we agree to Begin’s demands and
views, he was sure that the Israeli PriMin will only ask for more.
5. Alluding to his comment that a new initiative is needed, Sadat
outlined following scenario that he has in mind:
— (A) He would ask me to tell the waiting press after our meeting
that I had given him a preliminary report on the talks with Begin. Be-
fore commenting himself, he would want to get a full report on today’s
session. He had asked me to meet with him again tomorrow morning in
order to provide him with a full report. At that time he would also give
me his responses. (I did so with press after our meeting.)
— (B) After our meeting tomorrow, Monday, he plans to an-
nounce that he had talked with President Carter this evening and that
he had received a follow-on report of the Begin talks. Here he noted
parenthetically his hope that the message he will receive from Presi-

dent Carter tomorrow will be one that clearly states the negative Israeli
position without in any way making President Carter appear to be prej-
udiced. He will then reply that he had decided to go to the U.S., de-
parting Tuesday, March 6, and arriving in Washington on the fol-
lowing day. Sadat noted that he will go even if uninvited. I assured
him that President Carter would be happy to have him come at any
time.
— (C) In the U.S., Sadat’s theme will be the following: he had as-
sured the Congress and the American public that he will never let them
down. His purpose in coming is not to discuss anything with Begin,
since he has nothing to discuss with the Israeli PriMin. Instead, his pur-
pose will be to hold discussions with President Carter, to whom he had
given major concessions, and to brief the House and the Senate on the
“more dangerous situation” that currently exists in the area following
the Iranian collapse. At a later point in our discussion, Sadat said that
he did not wish to exclude a tripartite summit, but reiterated that he
has nothing to discuss with Begin. He left it entirely up to President
Carter as to whether to ask Begin to remain in the U.S. for a few more
days. He emphasized that Begin should not rpt not be told at today’s
session of his proposed announcement tomorrow or upcoming trip to
U.S. The Arab/Israeli problem, Sadat repeatedly insisted, is merely a
small part of the major area problem, but charged that Begin is unable
to see this.
— (D) He will plan to be frank with the American public. Before
leaving, he will release his letter of November 78 to President Carter (78
letters will show that he has done everything humanly possible to meet
the legitimate Israeli concerns. Sadat commented that, as we knew, he
has long been convinced that there is no hope of concluding a peace
treaty as long as Begin is in office. Begin is not capable of accepting
peace because it is against the Israeli PriMin’s fundamental principles.
He thought President Carter and he should now try to manage situa-
tion so that Begin “either bends or breaks.”
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
— (E) In meeting with congressional committees, Sadat intends to
brief them on current area situation. He noted Numeiri/Mengistu
meeting in Freetown had been a failure and that Qadhafi had only a
few days ago spoken of concluding a military pact with Ethiopia. He
also alluded to the PDRY attack on YAR as further evidence of the dete-
riorating area situation. The Sudan, he contended, is now in grave
danger. He might have to act to defend it. In saying this, he did not
mean that he contemplates an attack against Libya, but that he has to
take into account that the Sudan is now likely to be threatened both by
Ethiopia from Eritrea and in the west from Libya. He saw situation de-
veloping in accordance with Soviet desires. Soviet purpose, Sadat in-
sisted, is to neutralize Egypt. For this reason, he noted, GOE is pre-
pared to assist Oman and Somalia. He hoped Congress would
recognize seriousness of situation and be willing to assist him in
meeting it without insisting on previous conclusion of treaty.
— (F) Sadat continued that he will invite House and Senate “to
write a treaty as they would between USG and any friendly state” for
use with Israel. He would sign it without reading it. His sole condition
is that treaty must be on equal basis and not rpt not try to make “super
power” out of Israel. Later in our talk he modified his earlier statement
somewhat by saying that President Carter and he should, during their
upcoming meetings, agree on what they regard as a fair and just treaty
and present it to the Congress for endorsement.
— (G) The primary purpose of his visit to the U.S., Sadat reiterated,
is to place the Israeli problem before the American Congress and
people in proper perspective after the Iranian situation. Everything in
the area, he pointed out, is heading toward area-wide “hatred” for Is-
rael. He hoped that USG will not accept Israel as its “vanguard” in area
because this would mean that USG receives same “hatred.” Israel will
do nothing without getting something for it.
— (H) After he had asked Congress and American public to “re-
lieve me of my commitment to you because Israel is not ready” Sadat
said that he would call UN Security Council to meet in order to discuss
situation. He would discuss details of what he has in mind when he
meets President Carter. USG support will be necessary.
— (I) Sadat reaffirmed that he remains committed to the two CDAs
and is prepared to reaffirm this.
— (J) Towards end of our meeting Sadat indicated that he hopes to
come back with USG commitment to increase economic assistance to
Egypt for development purposes (“Carter Plan”) and to provide arms
for use in meeting Soviet threats to Middle East and Africa.
6. If President Carter disagreed on certain points or has other
views, Sadat said that he will be pleased to have them. He hopes it will
at the very least be possible to agree on general lines. If what he pro-

192.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Begin
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter Mondale
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense
Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President
Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President
Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Samuel W. Lewis, U.S. Ambassador to Israel
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Herbert Hansell, Legal Adviser, State Dept.
William Quandt, NSC Staff
Ed Sanders, Senior Advisor to the President and the Secretary of State
Prime Minister Menachem Begin
Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to U.S.
Meir Rosenne, Legal Adviser, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Yehuda Blum, Ambassador to United Nations
Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Yehuda Avner, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister
Hanan Bar-On, Minister, Israeli Embassy to the United States
Dan Pattir, Press Spokesman
Yehial Kadishai, Director of the Prime Minister’s Bureau
President Carter: Last night we spent two hours together. This is
the most stubborn problem that I have ever dealt with. We made little
progress. There is a need for flexibility on both sides. There has been no
proposal put forward by Israel that would be easier for Egypt to accept
than those that are now on the table. I want to ask Secretary Vance to
tion of the target date.
Secretary Vance: We want to build on the talk we had at lunch on
Friday. You made a helpful suggestion, Mr. Prime Minister, con-
cerning Article 6, paragraph 5. Let me hand out suggested language on
Article 6 for you to consider. We suggest a short, simple statement. We
have not reviewed this with anyone else. At lunch you said that you
did not insist that Article 6 meant that the treaty prevailed over other
treaties. I said that this was a major step, and we should build on this.
We want to try to couple this with the principles that are already in
paragraph 5 as now drafted. The proposals would say that there is no
assertion that this treaty prevails over other treaties, but this does not
derogate from the language in paragraph 5.
Prime Minister Begin: Is the first paragraph of your draft connected
to the second part of Article 6?
Secretary Vance: Yes. Let me explain. You objected to the words
“comprehensive peace” and “in the context of the Camp David frame-
works”. We have come up with the language which is very simple and
which says that the provisions of Article 6 are not in contradiction to
the Camp David agreements.
Prime Minister Begin: I shall have to study this and consult with my
Cabinet. You see I have less power than Mr. Khalil.
President Carter: You had more power at Camp David. You didn’t
have to refer to the Cabinet then. You signed the agreements without
referring to your Cabinet.
Prime Minister Begin: (Speaks for some time with his colleagues in
Hebrew). The first remark deals with the second part of your proposal
that there is “no assertion that this treaty prevails over”. It should also
say “and vice versa”.
Secretary Vance: I see no problem.
Prime Minister Begin: With that addition, and if the letter from Mr.
Hansell is withdrawn, then I personally favor this proposal to deal with
Article 6, paragraph 5. I need Cabinet agreement, and I need a majority.
I cannot promise such a majority. Without “vice versa”, it would be
wrong.
President Carter: We will present this to the Egyptians. They have
not received a copy of it yet.
Prime Minister Begin: I’ll cable it to my Cabinet. We won’t wait until
I return. I will have a Cabinet session called for tomorrow. I’ll be able to
tell you from New York their decision. If they reject it, I will go back
and argue it with them. But please do not tell the Egyptians of the pro-
posal yet. If we accept, you’ll know tomorrow. If they reject, I’ll try to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
convince them later. Now let me come to the first paragraph in your
draft. I need to study it more. I would like to ask for an adjournment.
There is some difficulty here.
Secretary Vance: Let me explain.
Prime Minister Begin: As far as saying that there is no separate
peace, that is a first step, we have already done this in the preamble.
This still implies that Egypt’s ruler could one day say that the Camp
David Agreements foresaw comprehensive peace. If there is no such
peace, then they could abrogate the treaty. We need more study at this
period. I’ll consult today with my colleagues.
Secretary Vance: This says that the treaty will not be construed as
being in contradiction to the Camp David accords. It is a truism.
Mr. Rosenne: There is a problem here. The Vienna Convention4 in
Article 30, paragraph 2, says that where a treaty is referred to in rela-
tionship to previous treaties, the previous treaties should be under-
stood to prevail. Could this be put in a letter concerning the autonomy
rather than as part of Article 6? It would make it easier.
President Carter: You want us to put this elsewhere?
Mr. Rosenne: We don’t want it attached to Article 6.
Secretary Vance: We would have to think about that. This says
nothing in the treaty that purports to contradict Camp David.
Mr. Rosenne: But there are six references in the preamble to the
Camp David frameworks. Article 6 refers to the independence of this
treaty. If there is a problem of interpretation, you could say that the
treaty depends for its interpretation on language in the preamble which
refers to Camp David. For example, if Israel were to withdraw and
Egypt were to say that the framework agreements had not been carried
out. They might say that they do not have to normalize relations, but
Article 6 says that the treaty is independent of any other instrument.
Prime Minister Begin: We are among friends. There is a possibility
that we could leave these three lines as you suggested them, but we
would like to add lines from the middle of the second paragraph. In
other words, we would like to say that this first sentence does not dero-
gate from the language of Article 6, paragraph 2, which we would then
want to quote in total. This is not a final proposal.
Secretary Vance: Let’s leave this.
Prime Minister Begin: This would add symmetry. We could use the
same language “does not derogate from”.
states: “When a treaty specifies that it is subject to, or that it is not to be considered as in-
compatible with, an earlier or later treaty, the provisions of that other treaty prevail.” For
the citation to the complete treaty text, see footnote 28, Document 190.

Secretary Vance: Let us consider that.
President Carter: I hope that Egypt will accept these proposals. It
will be difficult. We will have to do our best.
Prime Minister Begin: May I boast. I said that if we make an intellec-
tual effort, we will find solutions. I said that we should not be discour-
aged. I need the approval of my Cabinet and I need to consult with my
colleagues. I’ll tell a story. In Ben Gurion’s Cabinet after independence,
there was a very religious member and there was an all-out atheist.
Sometimes Ben Gurion tried to get the two of them together. But in my
Cabinet I have to get five generals together. They have all led armies to
victories. They are used to command, not to taking commands.
President Carter: And I have to deal with a Senate. The Senate has at
least five presidents or future presidents in it.
Secretary Vance: The third issue involves setting a goal for the self-
governing authority. You said that the date for elections could pose
problems, because it would increase the incentive for extremists to at-
tack inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. We have tried to set a goal
while meeting your concerns. We suggest saying that “Egypt and Israel
set for themselves the goal of completing the negotiations in one year
so that the elections can be held at the earliest possible date thereafter.”
They would be setting a goal just for the negotiations, not the elections.
Prime Minister Begin: You could say “as expeditiously as possible”.
I will have to study this. It is a serious proposal. I can’t give you a reply
now. I’ll have to send a cable to the Cabinet. It is a change.
Secretary Vance: It is a major change.
Prime Minister Begin: We will have to consider this again. I do not
have a counterproposal to suggest. I have to consult with Ambassador
Blum who is a jurist. (The Prime Minister then recounts an incident
from his interview on Issues and Answers concerning a question of
why he had appeared on the show.) Do you have any idea about how
to handle the question of the exchange of ambassadors?
President Carter: I plan to talk to President Sadat this afternoon. I
will try to get him or whomever he sends over here to discuss this issue.
I will talk to him about it.
Prime Minister Begin: It shouldn’t be changed. We should leave
annex 3 as it is. In that annex it says that the ambassadors should be ex-
changed “upon completion” of the interim withdrawal.
President Carter: He agreed to that, Mr. Prime Minister, because
Dayan and Weizman proposed an early withdrawal. I then called Sadat
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and asked him to agree to an early exchange of ambassadors. He
agreed with my proposal. Later your proposal was withdrawn. Sadat
then called me, and he said that it was wrong for the Israelis to have
withdrawn its proposal. Sadat said that he would not go back on his
promise to me about the ambassadors, but he had made no commit-
ment directly to Israel. Could Israel return to the idea of accelerated
withdrawal?
(Ambassador Blum enters the room at 2:30.)
Prime Minister Begin: We cannot go back on this. We do not rule it
out. We agreed to set up a mixed commission to discuss this. The gov-
ernment decided that this commitment cannot be made a priori. The
committee must decide.
President Carter: When would the mixed committee meet?
Prime Minister Begin: After the ratification of the treaty. (Lengthy
discussion in Hebrew with Ambassador Blum.)
President Carter: It might be good if you could keep this language
confidential within your Cabinet.
Prime Minister Begin: I’ll do my best.
Ambassador Evron: Do you plan to call President Sadat this
afternoon?
President Carter: I won’t tell him about this on the phone. I’ll just
tell him that we made some progress.
Prime Minister Begin: We still have the problem of oil.
President Carter: The Egyptian position is that when other issues
have been concluded, they will be forthcoming on this. I have talked to
Sadat. We can guarantee your supply of oil. With our guarantee and
with Sadat’s willingness to sell you oil, we can reach an agreement. If
the oil must come from the Sinai wells, I am not sure that Sadat will
agree.
Prime Minister Begin: We know of your 1975 commitment. It could
raise psychological problems in the United States. We want other inde-
pendent solutions. We have several sources. We don’t want to have to
invoke the U.S. commitment, but we may have to in the future. We
need oil to safeguard our lives. We only need 2. million tons. Egypt
doesn’t need the oil.
President Carter: There may be more problems in Egypt on this than
in the United States. Our country is deeply committed to Israel. We
don’t expect it would cause any problems for us to supply you with oil.
Prime Minister Begin: We need an iron-clad guarantee from that
source.

President Carter: We can’t guarantee that Egypt will be the source
of your oil.
Prime Minister Begin: We need a serious commitment. We get 1.
million tons now from the Alma field.
President Carter: You agreed at Camp David that you would give
up those wells.
Prime Minister Begin: But if there is no guarantee, that is a change.
We gave that commitment on the assumption that we would get the oil.
President Carter: I don’t remember that being raised at Camp
David. (A pause during which each delegation talks within its own
members.)
President Carter: (To Ambassador Blum jokingly). Are you trying to
help?
Prime Minister Begin: I will talk to my colleagues.
Vice President Mondale: As I understood the Prime Minister, he said
he wanted to keep the first three lines of our proposal and then would
want to make an addition.
Prime Minister Begin: This is an idea. I am not sure.
President Carter: I want to close our discussion by saying that we
hope these are constructive ideas. After we get your reply, we will
discuss with the Egyptians these questions, plus the question of ambas-
sadors and of oil. We can’t force them to sell you oil. If that proves to be
impossible, we will guarantee you that level of oil. We prefer that it
come from the Sinai wells. We are faced with a deteriorating situation
in the Middle East. We are not looking for a policeman of the Middle
East, Israel or anyone else. Some Arabs fear Israel more than they fear
anyone else. You have said that you don’t want any more weapons for
the defense of Israel. In the context of an Egyptian-Israeli treaty, the
treaty between our two closest friends, we could discuss increased se-
curity arrangements. I hope we can expedite the negotiations. We will
contact Sadat. One other question is what we should say in public. We
have no preference on what to say, or when to make a comment, but we
should agree on a statement.
Prime Minister Begin: We can say that the United States delegation
under the President’s chairmanship made a proposal to the Israeli dele-
gation under the Prime Minister’s chairmanship. The Israeli delegation
undertook to study the proposals and to refer them to the government
for discussions. We should say that they will study them.
President Carter: Let’s have Jody Powell and Mr. Pattir work on a
draft statement.
Prime Minister Begin: We will give nothing to the press.
Secretary Vance: If we mention proposals which have not been
discussed with the Egyptians, they might object. Let’s use the word
formulation.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Evron: Or we could use the words suggestions.
Secretary Vance: I like the word suggestions.
193.
Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Egyptian President Sadat
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
President Sadat
Exchange of pleasantries.
President Carter: Have you seen Eilts?
Sadat: I saw him2 and agreed to your theory.
President Carter: We put forward to the Israelis after 2–3 days of
negotiations some suggestions on article 6 and the target date. They
were not exactly what you want but should be acceptable to you. Begin
just called me3 to say the Cabinet accepted them by a close vote. We
have not addressed the time of withdrawal issue nor the question of
ambassadors.
I would like to come to Egypt as soon as possible to discuss these
items with you as well as the regional security issue and the U.S. inter-
relationship with Egypt.
Sadat: I told Eilts it would be a great event but let us agree on the
treaty first . . . it will be something marvelous.
President Carter: I don’t quite understand your answer. It would
be best if I first came to Ismailia.
Sadat: Why not Cairo? What you told me about article 6 and target
date, maybe we could invite Begin to come and sign.
President Carter: We are not that close yet. We need to talk first
about bilateral and regional security issues, and then we could wrap it
up.
Sadat: Would you visit Israel?
President Carter: After visiting you. When would you want me to
come?
Sadat: Any time you want.
President Carter: I would plan to leave Wednesday4 evening.
Sadat: Thursday here? Very good, very good.
President Carter: In my judgment these proposals can be accepted
by you even if they are not exactly what you want. We have to settle in
a week or so or simply call the whole thing off.
Sadat: I shall be waiting. When shall we declare it?
President Carter: Wait until you hear from me. I have not dis-
cussed it yet with Begin or my people. A little later today Washington
time.
Sadat: It will be a great event.
President Carter: If we don’t agree we will let the public know we
stand together as partners.
Sadat: Marvelous, marvelous.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
194.
Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Egyptian President Sadat
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
President Sadat
Exchange of pleasantries.
President Carter: We are prepared to announce at 12: noon
today.
Sadat: Fine.
President Carter: What time do you want me to arrive?
Sadat: No later than 2: P.M.
President Carter: We will do that. I told Begin. He asked me to
come to Jerusalem Saturday4 evening.
Sadat: Let’s wait. I want to show you the millions of Egypt.
President Carter: If we need more time we can arrange it then. In
the meantime we will announce Saturday evening for Israel. Where
would you prefer me to come, Ismailia or Cairo?
Sadat: Cairo. I am very, very excited. Will Rosalynn come?
President Carter: Rosalynn will come. My advance team will leave
this afternoon.
195.
Handwritten Note by President Carter
undated
(1) Israel prepared to delay. Privately describe their motives in
doing so.
(2) Emphasize need to shift Egypt’s attention from Israel to more
real threats—Libya, Ethiopia, etc. toward Egypt, Sudan & others.
(3) Need for U.S. to have a strong & free Egypt. (Let me make any
commitments)
(4) Give strategic briefing—PRC, India, NATO, etc.—Emphasize
U.S. gains and resolves. Friendship with Sadat one of most important
assets of U.S. & me personally.
(5) Use of PRC, Egypt & others to recruit doubtful nations away
from Soviet influence.
(6) Listen to Sadat & forward directly to me his views & concerns
so I’ll be prepared.
(7) Describe U.S. political situation re SALT, Israel, Taiwan, etc.
(8) Emphasize administration’s harmony & unified purpose.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(9) Israel-Egypt peace blow to USSR & victory for me & U.S. Arab
opposition—will it fade? Can Sadat handle it?8
(10) Threats from any spread of radicalism in the Mid East.
(11) Get Sadat’s ideas on the concept of a broad security consulta-
tive arrangement in Mid East/N Africa region.
(12) Post-treaty steps re Saudis & Jordanians? Syrians? Iraqis?10
(13) Post-treaty steps re Palestinian problem?11
(14) Cautiously seek Sadat’s assessment of U.S. military and/or
monitoring presence in Sinai (Etzion).
Zbig: Your assumption & demeanor should reflect absolute convic-
tion that proposals on peace treaty are in Egypt’s interests. Do not ac-
knowledge any doubt about this.
We must implement Camp David accords together.
Sadat should not insist on speaking for W Bank Palestinians.

196.
Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat
Washington, March 5, 1979

197.
Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of
State
1442. Subject: (S) Oral Message to President Carter From King
Hussein.
1. S-entire text
2. King Hussein called me to palace today, March 6, and made fol-
lowing presentation which he allowed me to take notes on.
3. King said he had received news of President Carter’s forth-
coming visit to Egypt and Israel and King wishes “as a friend to the
U.S.” to convey his “deep concern” if there is any possibility that U.S. is
contemplating concluding a mutual defense agreement with Israel.
King said he knows this idea has been under consideration in U.S. from
time to time and recalled that Sadat himself has mentioned subject in
the past.
4. King stated that, as a friend, he believes taking such a step before
there is a withdrawal of the Israelis from the occupied territories and a
resolution of the Palestinian problem would be “an unwarranted slap
in the face of the Arab friends of the U.S.” King said that he hopes and
prays this surmise is not correct, but indicated that the gravity of the
issue in the absence of any substantive information from the U.S. thus
far on the President’s forthcoming visit had caused him to wish to reg-
ister these views. He had thought of writing a letter to President Carter
but has instead chosen this means in view of the short time remaining
before the President’s visit.
5. I attempted to draw King out further on background to his con-
cern but he declined to elaborate.
6. In reply, I said that I would convey his message immediately but
indicated that I had no information whatsoever to indicate that a U.S.-
Israeli mutual defense treaty is under consideration. Although the U.S.
has not released any information regarding the substantive issues of
the current negotiations, I noted from press accounts that there have
been denials by U.S. officials that security agreements were under con-
sideration. I then went over with the King the White House announce-
ment2 of the President’s visit and mentioned White House spokesman’s
statement that in our judgment President’s trip offers the greatest hope
for success of current phase of the peace negotiations.
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to the White House.

7. King Hussein seemed somewhat comforted by this presentation,
but reiterated that he certainly hoped his fears of a possible U.S.-Israeli
security agreement were unfounded.
E. Comment: I recognize that time is short before forthcoming visit
and that we necessarily wish to minimize discussion of substantive
issues outside of actual negotiations. However, anything that we can
provide King Hussein on forthcoming visit, particularly in reply to his
concern over issue of U.S.-Israeli mutual security agreement, would
help make King and GOJ more receptive to other substantive aspects of
the negotiations during President’s visit.
9. Suggest Department repeat this message to Cairo and Tel Aviv.
Suddarth
198.
Backchannel Message From the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
and Secretary of State Vance
for the President and Secretary Vance only. To be handled directly by
the Senior Duty Officer in Situation Room White House.
1. I met for two hours today with President Sadat, on a one-on-one
let me summarize my central impressions:
2. First, Sadat is extraordinarily eager to make your visit a massive
success. He stressed this over and over again.
3. Secondly, he wishes to use your visit here and to Israel to bring
the peace process to a rapid conclusion. He asked me explicitly whether
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the President is prepared to insist that Begin sign a peace treaty in the
course of his visit. In response to my query, he indicated that he would
not be prepared to go to Jerusalem but would welcome the President
and Prime Minister Begin to Ismailia in order to sign the agreement. I
pointed out to Sadat the psychological importance of inviting Begin to
Cairo and, after some exchanges, he conceded that this was psycholog-
ically important and said that he would be willing to invite Begin here,
immediately after the President’s visit to Jerusalem.
4. Third, with regards to our specific language, Sadat made only
indirect comments which seem to indicate that he himself was not
raising any objections and was prepared to accept it. He went on to
raise additional issues, such as oil, indicating a willingness to be accom-
modating. My impression is that you will have his support on our new
formulations unless tomorrow his colleagues talk him out of it.
5. Fourth, Sadat was extraordinarily delighted by your willingness
to consider the issue in a wider security context. He interrupted me sev-
eral times with exclamations to the effect that this is “marvellous, mar-
vellous” and that it represents his own thinking exactly. In fact, he told
me that to him the regional security issue is now the more important
one.
6. You will note in the more detailed account which follows that he
is anxious to give us some “secret weapons” to take to Jerusalem,
though the issue of ambassadors still gives him difficulty. Having
noted his uneasiness over that issue, I did not probe any further but
merely registered the point that you will discuss it with him in greater
detail. The most important “secret weapon” he wishes to offer, but
please note that it is only to you and that it is not to be incorporated in
any formal agreement, is the willingness to build an oil pipeline from
the Sinai to Israel.
7. Insofar as the conversation itself is concerned, I started by cov-
ering all of the points that you asked me to make. Sadat listened very
attentively, interrupting only to express agreement regarding my char-
acterization of Begin’s motives, regarding the impact on U.S. domestic
politics of the Middle Eastern crisis, and particularly regarding the
point that the U.S. wishes to see a strong Egypt. At that moment he in-
terjected with a number of comments, expressing enthusiastic approval
of your approach, stressing the positive results for the U.S. of a friend-
ship with a militarily and economically strong Egypt.
8. After I handed him our proposed new language, Sadat read ex-
tremely carefully and out loud. With respect to Article VI, he simply
said “ah-ha, you made it neutral,” and then asked Roy Atherton to
come in in order to make certain whether that would or would not be
part of the treaty or would be a side letter (and Roy told him that it
would be attached to the treaty). Regarding the target date language

Sadat said “believe me, they are idiots. I gave them a better proposal on
Gaza, and they will come to regret the fact that they did not accept it.”
After finishing reading the proposed U.S. language, Sadat turned to me
and asked “what if I accept? Why doesn’t the President plan to sign the
treaty during the trip?” I told Sadat that you had that eventuality in
mind if things go well, and he expressed the strongest support for such
an approach.
9. He then went on to say that he wishes me to convey to you his
“two directives”. The first is his directive to all of his associates to make
your visit to Egypt “A devastating and unprecedented success, at
whatever cost.” The second is that the U.S. and Egypt should join in a
partnership and go forth together, whether Begin agrees to a settlement
or whether he doesn’t.
10. It was at this stage that I told Sadat of Begin’s desire to visit
Cairo and that it would be a mistake to shunt him aside to Ismailia.
After some exchanges, Sadat smiled and said that I might well be right
for psychological reasons, and that he will give you an invitation to
convey to Begin, if things go well, to visit Cairo. He would propose that
the three of you stay at the Mena House at the foot of the pyramids, and
that by pre-arrangement a day or so be spent on “bargaining” so that
Begin can protect himself at home, following which the peace treaty
would be signed.
11. Sadat kept reiterating the importance of success in this venture
and asked me what are the things you might need “to hammer Begin.”
It was at this point that I ventured that you might need some help from
him on oil and on the ambassadors. He then made the aforementioned
proposition on oil, which he will authorize you to take with you to Is-
rael. On ambassadors, he said he might be willing to do it immediately
after the first phase of withdrawals is completed, but he added that he
needs to discuss this with you. I stressed to him the symbolic signifi-
cance of this issue to the Israelis and how it could prove to be a decisive
element in making it impossible for Begin “to stall”, a tactic which
Sadat fears Begin will employ.
12. The foregoing essentially completed the bilateral part of the
discussions, with Sadat being deeply touched by your letter and ex-
pressing, in a manner which impressed me as very genuine, his
warmest feelings for you. He was particularly responsive to my frank
discussion of our domestic political aspect of the problem.
13. The second part of the discussion involved a geopolitical re-
view. Sadat had a globe brought out into the room and he gave me an
overview of the regional situation as he sees it. Its essentials can be re-
duced to the following points: he described Saudi Arabia as a scare-
crow and a U.S. protectorate, to which we attach excessive importance.
He indicated that he could give additional assistance militarily to Saudi

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Arabia through planes and pilots, but it is important for the U.S. not to
exaggerate the Saudi role. The Saudis are indecisive and incapable of
action.
14. With regard to Syria, he sees the internal situation as rapidly
deteriorating, and he expects a major and violent change this year. He
believes that the Syrians would be interested in discreet arrangements
with the U.S.
15. With regard to Iraq, he reiterated the point that discreet ar-
rangements with the U.S. are timely and that the U.S. has much more in
common with Iraq than Iraq has with the Soviet Union. He encouraged
us to move towards a relationship.
16. He was scathing and contempuous of King Hussein. He ac-
cused him of already now trying to undermine the Camp David Ac-
cords, and he urged that we dismiss him altogether. He emphasized the
strong position he has in Egypt, which he believes is based on the fact
that the Egyptian people no longer have a complex over Israel. That
complex was shed during the 1973 war.
17. In talking of the Arabian Gulf, he stressed that he enjoys a great
deal of support in Bahrain, Abu Dhabi, Qatar, and Oman. That support
cannot be openly expressed but the fact is that there is sympathy for his
policies. Turning to other regions, he asserted that he will shortly be
transferring 200 tanks to Somalia, and he would wish them replaced by
us. He expressed the view that the situation is deteriorating in Libya
and may soon get out of hand. In his view Algeria will henceforth
pursue more genuinely neutral policies, and considers that to our col-
lective advantage.
18. Finally, at the very end of the conversation he floated the idea
that Egypt might propose, after the Israeli withdrawals from the Sinai
have been completed, that U.S. forces be made part of the UN Sinai
force. He thought that this might provide an international cover for the
introduction of an U.S. military presence in the Sinai. At the same time,
he expressed reservation regarding Begin’s idea that Etzion be made
into an U.S. airbase.
19. Throughout the discussion he emphasized his desire to work
closely with you either in reaching accommodation with Begin or in
working together in spite of him. He also responded favorably to my
strategic overview of your policies.

199.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Jordan
55737. Subject: Message for King Hussein.
1. Please deliver the following message from the President to King
Hussein.
2. Start text.
Your Majesty,
Our two governments have worked together on crucial matters for
many years and I place great importance on our continued ability to
work together in the cause of peace and regional stability. I know of
your deep concern about progress toward resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, and I want to share with you my objectives in my coming trip
to Egypt and Israel.
I remain deeply committed to a comprehensive peace in the

200.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (McIntyre) and the President’s
Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to
President Carter
Washington, March 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Financial Assistance to Israel and Egypt
We have discussed with you a number of times previously the im-
plications of various levels of US assistance which might accompany a
Middle East settlement. While we would not presume to predict the
focus of your ultimate negotiations, we do want to highlight for you
several key elements which may be useful to you in the talks. (C)
First, prior year assistance levels tend to become unbreakable min-
imums or floors later. That argues in our view for defining any settle-
ment aid as a special one-time package with no hint of continuation in
subsequent years. (C)
Second, the US budgetary impact varies significantly with alterna-
tive forms (FMS credits versus Security Supporting Assistance) of aid,
so that by moving to less “costly” forms, we can hold down our budget
costs even as we look at higher dollar totals of aid. Along these same
lines, our current FMS credit programs are basically off-budget, unsub-
sidized loans, except for Israel. For Israel, we have recently (and auto-
matically) forgiven 50% of the FMS loans, thus making the program
half grant and costing us 50 cents in outlays for each FMS dollar. (C)
Whatever the dollar level you contemplate in the settlement, these
elements—special one-shot rather than ongoing package, more FMS
than SSA, and making the FMS “regular” as opposed to “half grant”—
would help to mitigate what will in any case be a major budget cost and
serious threat to your present fiscal ceiling, as well as a significant
threat to our other aid, particularly development aid. (C)
With these concerns in mind, we offer suggestions on three foreign
assistance issues that may require your decision if a Middle East settle-
ment is reached. (C)
I. Israel’s $3 billion request for extraordinary aid.
The Israeli request is for full US funding of the costs of (a) repli-
cating in the Negev two Sinai airbases (estimated by DOD to cost about
$1 billion, without all required infrastructure, if constructed in three
years under US Corps of Engineers control with largely imported re-
sources); (b) other Israeli military redeployments to new facilities (esti-
mated by Israel to cost about $1. billion); and (c) military equipment
additional to current procurement levels (estimated by Israel to cost
about $750 million). (C)
We see two options:
Option 1. Full US financing of the airbases only ($1 billion), either
on standard FMS long-term credit terms or—if a more liberal offer is re-
quired—on the unique terms (half grant, half long-term credit) now ap-
plicable to FMS credits to Israel. If this option is chosen, we would re-
spond to the remainder of the Israeli request by a noncommittal offer to
consider, as peace treaty implementation proceeds, requests for mili-
tary or economic aid in the course of annual security assistance consul-
tations. The commitment of $1 billion would result in budget outlays of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
appropriation for the entire funding of the three-year airbase construc-
tion program. (S)
the $3 billion special Israeli request. Under this option, outlays would
rise by about $250 million in FY 79 and annually thereafter. We would
request a supplemental appropriation of $500 million in FY 79 and
amendment of your FY 80 foreign assistance budget request in the
same amount, largely or wholly in the FMS account. (S)
Recommendation: We recommend Option 1 with standard FMS
credit terms, because it:
—costs less and is hence more consistent with your overall fiscal
policy (we are already getting complaints about rumored FY 79 supple-
mentals from the Hill);
—minimizes the risk of locking us into a permanent higher level of
aid (current aid levels already exceed Israel’s requirements);
—makes any aid over the cost of relocating the airfields dependent
on actual Israeli expenditures and on clear evidence that additional
economic aid is required;
—insulates the foreign assistance budget for other countries from
offsetting Congressional cuts better than Option 2 because it is confined
to the costs of a single event—airbase relocation—and because it does
not involve annual aid requests for four years. (S)
In declining order of acceptability, we suggest two fall-backs:
a. Option 1 with the usual half-grant terms of FMS to Israel;
b. Option 2, with a hardening of the terms of at least the incre-
mental aid to those of standard FMS credits. (S)
II. Egypt’s request for military aid.
You have a current proposal from Secretary Brown for military
assistance to Egypt, involving annual arms sales of $500 million, with
$200 million of this being on FMS credit terms. We have no basis for
comment on these figures. We do suggest that you limit the time period
of the commitment, so as to preserve latitude for tactical use of aid com-
mitments as the peace process evolves and Middle East security re-
quirements change. We would prefer two to three years, and would
recommend not going beyond three years, at a maximum. (S)
III. Economic aid to Egypt and to regional development.
Sadat has frequently and publicly discussed a massive “Carter
Plan” for Egypt and possibly other Middle Eastern countries; he may
ask you to adopt this foundling. State and AID agree that a significant

201.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs (McGiffert) to Secretary of
Defense Brown
Washington, March 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Possible Security Measures for Israel
Listed below are possible security measures (most of which don’t
rise to the level of “guarantees”) which the President might offer (or
might authorize you to offer) the Israelis should that seem appropriate
in the course of the peace process. These measures would be additional
to current United States commitments (see Tab A), deriving largely
from the Sinai II agreement, to:
(1) provide oil to Israel if it cannot secure its oil needs (applicable
for five years after signing of Sinai II, with a one year termination pro-
vision thereafter);
(2) conclude a contingency plan for a military support operation to
Israel in an emergency situation (not yet accomplished)
(3) maintain Israeli defense strength through the supply of ad-
vanced equipment such as the F–16s; and
unlabeled folder. Top Secret.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(4) submit annually for approval to Congress a request for military
and economic assistance.
The possible additional measures include:
Materiel Support
(1) joint planning with Israelis for US logistical support without
European bases being available, thereby implementing Sinai II
commitment
(2) a commitment to follow-through on such plan in an emergency
(3) creation of Israel WRM
—earmark items in US inventory: for example, from CONUS
equipment of POMCUsed divisions
—alternative: build up general stocks
(4) put in President’s budget an item called “Israeli contingency
fund” to use if requirement—which could be a war or something less—
arose.
(5) pre-position some US materiel in Israel which could be diverted
to Israel if appropriate.
(6) extend Sinai II oil guarantee3 for additional definite period.
Arms Sales
(7) commitment to expansion and/or modernization of Israeli
forces
(8) cut off supplies to countries opposing Israeli in war
—variant: to “aggressors” against Israel (raises question of what
happens if Israel preempts).
(9) Change Israel’s PD–134 status
—equal to NATO
—almost equal
Exercises
(10) US maritime exercises in Israeli waters.
(11) US exertion of maritime rights in international waters relevant
to Israel, e.g., Suez.

(12) US/Israeli joint maritime exercises (e.g., as with South Amer-
ican countries)
(13) US air exercises with Israeli’s
—with US aircraft from carrier
—with USAF fly-in (fly-in need not include exercise)
(14) US joint ground exercise with Israelis (as with Koreans)
—need not include US troops although it could, but could be lim-
ited to logistical support/air support
(15) conduct overflights on Israel’s behalf
—e.g. like SR–71 flights over Cuba
Training
(16) provide Israelis training in US
—e.g., vs. Red Flag squadron
Intelligence/Warning
(17) provide Israel US reconnaissance/early warning support (ei-
ther in war and/or peace)
—E2C/AWACS
—could have Israeli member in crew
Facilities
(18) home port US ship in Israel port
(19) establish maintenance facility for US forces in Israel
(20) US base in Israel
Diplomatic
(21) Initiatives to reduce Israeli isolation
—support in US, including initiatives to keep/put back Israeli in
US organizations
—initiatives to increase number of countries recognizing Israel
National Disclosure Policy
(22) Increase Israel status in National Disclosure Policy (from
CONFIDENTIAL to SECRET or TOP SECRET)
David E. McGiffert
Assistant Secretary of Defense
International Security Affairs

202.
Summary of Meetings
Washington, undated
American Side
Egyptian Side
President Carter
President Sadat
Secretary Vance
Vice President Mubarak
Dr. Brzezinski
Prime Minister Khalil
President Carter and Sadat one-on-one, followed by President
Carter, Vance, Brzezinski/Sadat, Mubarak, Khalil.
President Carter assured Sadat that he would represent his in-
terests as well as our own.
Sadat responded by stressing the gratitude of his people and re-
peated his “two directives” (which were previously communicated by
Brzezinski to the President). The Egyptian people admire you. We are
not governed for the first time in 2,000 years by foreigners. We want
friendship with the United States. I shall always be proud of your
friendship and brotherhood.
President Carter: I hope we will never let you down. You are prob-
ably the most admired statesman in the United States. I hope to con-
clude the peace process during this trip. The Israelis will be very diffi-
cult with implementation of the accords.
Sadat: Proposes an Egyptian-U.S. economic board under Prime
Minister Khalil to cut through red tape in U.S.-Egyptian economic
relations.
President Carter agrees in principle and stresses the importance of
U.S. private enterprise having access to Egypt.
This is followed by detailed review of all negotiating issues and
basic U.S.-Egyptian agreement.
Egypt (full memcon3 available)
American Side
Egyptian Side
President Carter
President Sadat
Secretary Vance
Vice President Mubarak
Secretary Brown
Amb. Ghorbal
Dr. Brzezinski
Prime Minister Khalil
Amb. Atherton
Hassan Kamel
Hal Saunders
Hamid Sayah
Amb. Eilts
Jody Powell
Bill Quandt
Subject: President Carter reviews with President Sadat the pro-
posals he will discuss with Prime Minister Begin; indicates that Secre-
tary Brown will discuss military relations; reviews economic assistance
problems. President Sadat conveys encouraging message from Mayor
of Gaza; raises economic relationships; asks Economics Minister Sayah
to brief on economic priorities; indicates to President Carter that he has
authority to negotiate best possible agreement on behalf of Egypt.
American Side
Egyptian Side
President Carter
President Sadat
Private conversation; no record available unless President Carter
has one.
Private Dinner, Jerusalem, Israel
American Side
Israeli Side
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Private conversation; no record available5 unless President Carter
has one.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(full memcon6 available)
American Side
Israeli Side
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Full American Delegation
Cabinet Defense Committee
Subject: President Carter and Secretary Vance present full package
of proposals. Prime Minister Begin reacts negatively to changes in
notes to Article 6; rejects language in draft letter on West Bank/Gaza
concerning implementation in Gaza first and possibility of Egyptian li-
aison officers.
The Prime Minister begins meeting by introducing his Cabinet.
The President thanks him for his hospitality and his working
throughout the previous night. He stresses close ties with Israel. He
notes that we are now at a historic point. Peace can be achieved with
Egypt and then with others and that in turn will enhance the relation-
ship with the U.S. All of this is important to regional stability.
We recognize your need for security and for oil, and we will guar-
antee it. We will do our best to contain the negative Arab reactions. You
have been forthcoming and we appreciate it.
The President then reviews specific points of the agreement.
He notes the extreme importance to the U.S. of the Gaza issue. The
deletions are of great importance to the U.S. There must be access to the
people of Gaza. The omission of the liaison officers would be a serious
loss to us and to Egypt. I cannot send Secretary Vance otherwise to
Egypt. I consider this to be crucial.
The Cabinet earlier agreed to withdrawal in stages. We need to
know what these stages will be so that we can resolve the issue of
ambassadors.
Oil issue: The demand for permanent pledge by Egypt is rejected.
The U.S. is prepared to provide guarantees.
Only issue to be resolved: access to Gaza. This is not only for the
U.S. but for Egypt.
Begin responds by noting that after normalization the Egyptians
would be free to travel anywhere. He is very rigid on the subject of the
letter and will not accept the inclusion.
The President: To me this issue is crucial. Your response is not ade-
quate. Only once have we taken such a position. Unless negotiating
teams have access, I do not feel I have fulfilled my obligations.
Begin: We will sign only to what we have agreed. None of this is in
the Camp David agreements. (Begin keeps interrupting the President
and the President has to say “let me finish.”)
memcon7 available)
American Side
Israeli Side
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Full American Delegation
Cabinet Defense Committee
Subject: Continued discussion of Gaza First option, text of West
Bank/Gaza letter, discussion of bilateral memorandum of agreement
on assurances. Prime Minister Begin asks for two changes in letter of
assurances. President Carter concludes with strategic overview, asks
each delegation to develop alternative language on Article 6, urges Is-
raeli decision on accelerated withdrawal in exchange for early sending
of ambassadors.
memcon8 available)
American Side
Israeli Side
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Full American Delegation
Cabinet Defense Committee
Subject: Discussion of words for notes to Article 6; Prime Minister
Begin agrees to convene Cabinet Session in the evening to make deci-
sions on all outstanding issues, including oil and exchange of ambas-
sadors. Begin suggests that Vance then go to Cairo with Israeli pro-
posals. President Carter strongly urges conclusion of all issues of the
negotiations during visit. Begin resists, saying that Knesset must be al-
lowed to have full debate.
President Carter makes a strong regional review, emphasizes the
importance of progress to U.S. national interest and then adjourns the
meeting, having clearly impacted on the Israeli Cabinet.
memcon9 available)
American Side
Israeli Side
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Full American Delegation
Full Israeli Cabinet
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Subject: Prime Minister Begin reports on Israeli Cabinet decisions
of previous night and Prime Minister Begin responds. Begin explains
reason for removing reference to comprehensive peace in note to Ar-
ticle 6, paragraph 2. Begin explains rejection of language in West Bank/
Gaza letter on Gaza First and Egyptian liaison. Offers language to the
effect that Israeli will consider proposals on Gaza first in next phase of
negotiations. Begin insists that Egypt must supply 2. million tons of oil
annually over long term at market prices. President Carter says that
Egypt will not accept this arrangement on oil and asks for Israeli recon-
sideration. Prime Minister Begin says he can go back to the Cabinet
again, but not today. Other Cabinet members discuss importance of
oil.
Jerusalem, Israel
American Side
Israeli Side
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
No record available unless President Carter has one.
American Side
Israeli Side
President Carter
Prime Minister Begin
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
Dr. Brzezinski
Subject: The President pressed for Begin’s commitments on the
issues of oil and withdrawals.
Begin would make no commitments but merely promised to bring
this up at the Cabinet next Sunday12 or perhaps on Thursday. In gen-
eral Begin insisted that these issues have to be negotiated out and one
must not press for immediate resolution.
American Side
Egyptian Side
President Carter
President Sadat
Secretary Vance
Vice President Mubarak
Dr. Brzezinski
Prime Minister Khalil
Tuesday, March 13—Meeting at Cairo Airport
The President: I believe my assignment has been carried out satis-
factorily. You will be pleased.
Sadat: Marvellous.
The President: First 2 days Begin himself—unpleasant, interrupting.
Then moderates convinced Begin to be more accommodating. Begin
will wait to hear your position. He will go to the Cabinet this Thursday
or Sunday. I believe the Cabinet will approve but I have no guarantee.
Then Knesset approval. Begin will pledge to resign. If approved, all in-
vited to Washington for signing ceremony—then exchange of visits be-
tween Cairo and Jerusalem.
Items: On commitments—unilateral steps—letter by U.S. to Egypt.
Article 4—no change.
Article 5—technical Egyptian change accepted.
Article 6–V–2 contravene instead of derogate (discussion—Egyp-
tians prefer “inconsistent with”)
Oil—Israelis wanted 2. million tons. Finally agreed that in context
of normal relations Egypt would sell oil—and U.S. would guarantee for
15 years the needed amount. They have not accepted yet.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Subphasing of withdrawals/ambassadors—Cabinet also to review
this. It would be helpful to have diplomatic relations—also El Arish
would be evacuated. (Cy reads details of subphasing withdrawals.)
Targetting language—o.k.—“can” changed to “will”
Gaza—prolonged discussion. Could not arrive at acceptable lan-
guage. Israelis would not agree that formal commitment be made to
start with Gaza and Egyptian presence. Agreed to free passage. Israelis
finally agreed if Israelis can move freely in Egypt, then Egyptians can
do so in Israel, West Bank, Gaza. After diplomatic relations, Consulate
or Cultural Center could be established—maybe on the fringes of Gaza.
Sadat: This depends on opening Egypt to Israelis?
The President: Even before treaty is signed any Gazan can travel to
Egypt. After one month the negotiating teams can travel. The highway
between Gaza/El Arish can be opened within three months. After
normal relations, consulate or cultural mission.
Khalil: Designated liaison offices?
The President: No designated liaison offices but consulate OK. Is-
raelis do not want to split off the West Bank from Gaza—not write it
into documents.
Secretary Vance reads the proposed letter.
The President: It’s a very good letter, and it leaves you flexible.
Khalil: Wouldn’t it be better to have Gaza first?
The President: It’s better to have a genuine invitation to Hussein
stand—for a while at least.
Khalil: When does the five-year transitional period begin?
The President: If the West Bank Palestinians and Jordan refuse to
participate, Sadat/Carter would have to resolve the future of the West
Bank without their participation because the clock has run out. So we
fall back on the Camp David language. I would like to induce Hussein
and the Palestinians to take part.
Khalil: Suppose Hussein doesn’t come in? He can block the whole
thing. Discussion about implementation letter doesn’t cover it.
Discussion of this issue and intent of Camp David.
The President: I would like to have your approval of what we have
negotiated, including U.S. position on oil and phased withdrawal/am-
bassadors (if Cabinet approves).
Sadat: Ambassadors—one month after? Yes, if the Cabinet ap-
proves the withdrawals.
The President: One month after interim withdrawal—we need your
approval. I would like to ask two more things as gestures of goodwill:
—Open the borders to movement of people, maybe in three
months after El Arish.

—Encourage Egyptian TV & newspapers to have a more friendly
attitude toward Israel.
I hope you can help on these two things.
Sadat: According to the laws of every country.
The President: Yes, even without waiting for normal diplomatic re-
lations. Begin would respond immediately.
Unilateral commitments—
—no peaceful political activity forbidden;
—no restriction on free expression;
—no restriction on freedom of movement and travel abroad;
—amnesty—under existing British law—32 under current deten-
tion. Begin will have the law abolished (others have been tried—range
—will expand program on family reunification;
—there is a limit on return to West Bank/Gaza
—planning to move military HQ out of populated areas. No more
military maneuvers in above areas.
I will give you a letter to that effect.
Last item: I don’t know if you can do this. I told Yadin I would ask
you to invite Yadin to visit Cairo museum, pyramids. A small personal
thing . . . maybe you can do it.
This is what I would like to say: that I reported to you; on all items
there was agreement, you accept; on other issues there are U.S. pro-
posals—and that you have agreed (oil/ambassadors-withdrawal); and
that Begin has agreed to put these proposals to his Cabinet. This will be
a U.S.-Egyptian agreement and the Israelis will have to accept or reject.
(Discussion of meaning of Article 6. The President makes the point
that you should interpret the language as your victory. The Israelis
always do that.)
The President: For the last 18 months I, the President of the most
powerful nation on earth, have acted the postman. I am not a proud
man—I have done the best I could—but I cannot go back to try to
change the language. (Above in response to Khalil’s request for word
change.)
Egyptians will send letter to Cy saying that “not consistent” = “not
contravene.”
Sadat: Will invite Yadin after the signing; will open the frontiers
after El Arish.
Hassan has asked for $22 [million] help in arms. Will need your
help. Bokassa also asked for arms. SR–71 will have facilities for Yemen
flights.
The President: Let Brown handle this—his military team.

203.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
President Carter’s Meeting with President Sadat
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President
Herbert Hansell, Legal Adviser, Department of State
William Quandt, NSC Staff Member
President Anwar al-Sadat
Muhammad Husni Mubarak, Vice President
Mustafa Khalil, Prime Minister
Lt. General Kamal Hasan Ali, Minister of Defense and War Production
Hasan Kamil, Chief, Office of the President
Butrus Butrus Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
Hamid Abd al-Latif al-Sayeh, Minister of Economy, Economic Cooperation and
Foreign Trade
President Carter: My visit here and your reception of me and the re-
ception shown by your people has been an inspiration to me and has
been very reassuring. I am convinced that we cannot fail to give the
people what they want. We recognize that in going to Jerusalem2 you
started the whole process. You knew there will be divisions in the Arab
world. Other Arab leaders have condemned you and this is not unprec-
edented. But whatever happens in the future, my life is bound to yours,
and that of the United States to Egypt. We hope for success. It would be
a tragedy if we failed. Success would be great for us. Prime Minister
Khalil and others have had good talks with Secretary Vance. We under-
stand your concerns. When I go to Israel, within the bounds of pro-
priety, I’ll represent the Government of Egypt as I often did at Camp
David. Then we would agree on our views, with some flexibility, and
the results showed that we prevailed, because we gave Israel little
things. I’ll leave you with the commitment to honor your concerns and
try to get a peaceful resolution of the differences. I would like to end
my visit with a peace treaty, following which we need to prepare for a
massive interaction between our two governments, not only in the mili-
tary and economic relationships, but only in the private sector. We
need to get American business leaders to the White House to get them
to come to Egypt to work on problems of food, housing, and infrastruc-
ture. It would be good for us both. The prospects are good if Israel
wants peace. If they don’t, I can’t help. I’ll represent your interests and
concerns.
President Sadat: I am happy. Let me express the gratitude for your
sincerity and your generosity. You have shown brotherhood to my
people and have held out the promise of peace. I was with my aides
and I told them that I gave two directives for the negotiations. This trip
of yours, which is very daring and very courageous, should end in a
smashing success. Second, we shall always feel proud and happy to
keep our positions identical. This is our intention. What you saw today
and yesterday is the magic of the word peace. Last Christmas, in 1978, I
was in upper Egypt and I visited a small remote village. I saw there the
same feelings that you saw today. You even feel this in the remote
areas.
My people admire you, your principles, your morals, your assist-
ance and your help. We have suffered from foreign domination here.
The last were the Soviets, before then the British. For two thousand
years Egypt has been ruled by foreign rulers until the Egyptian Revolu-
tion. That was the first time that Egyptians could take pride. It was
really something to be proud. Now we are proud that the relations be-
tween Egypt and the United States have been established. In the bottom
of the heart of each Egyptian is a feeling of friendship for the United
States. We had 18 years of confrontation, but you saw the sentiments
that they expressed today. Any American citizen can feel how much
they cherish American friendship. When we started in 1973 with the
peace process, my people were proud to have the United States as
friends. I got hundreds of letters from ordinary American citizens.
I want you to know that we shall always be friends. I will always
be proud of your friendship and brotherhood whatever happens. To
make this trip a success is a success for all who value morals. I would
like to show you more of my country.
President Carter: I’d like to come back.
President Sadat: You know our position. You have spent your time
on this problem in a marvelous way. We shall never be able to meet

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
your generosity. I just hope that God will help in your mission. You can
count on us as peace loving friends in happiness and in sorrow.
President Carter: I hopefully pray that in spite of difficulties that I’ll
never disappoint you. You are the most admired person in my country.
That is a justified feeling. The situation in the Middle East has greatly
changed since I first met you. We have just a few more hours together.
When I get to Israel on Sunday, I’ll start the substantive talks. I’ll try to
conclude the talks as quickly as possible. It shouldn’t take long. The dif-
ferences that remain are relatively minor compared to the past. Begin
and Dayan have behaved well in the last few days. They have not made
any claims of victory, they have been cautious, and there is an attitude
of hope. Even in New York, Begin struck a very moderate tone. This is
possibly a good omen. I know that Begin is strong, courageous, and
honest. He has made difficult sacrifices in Israel. He has gone further in
his actions than his predecessors. He has suffered at home. He can get
his own party to support him. I’ve tried to understand Israel politics.
The Israeli people are as anxious for peace as those in Egypt. This may
also be true in Syria. The leaders are not in step with the people there. I
hopefully expect that after a few months of difficulty, the attitudes of
the people in Jordan and Syria will change their leaders’ attitudes.
We’ll do all that we can to prevent punitive actions against Egypt. We
will use our maximum influence with Jordan and Saudi Arabia to get
them to accept the accomplished fact. I’ll let them sound off for a while,
but I intend to quietly lean on them. Then I will do all that I can to bring
it to an end. I’d like to leave the Middle East with the peace treaty. If I
go back, it will be hard to reopen the negotiations.
President Sadat: Right.
President Carter: On the prospect of the SALT talks, I need to meet
and to prepare for those. My hope is that if the Israelis provide me with
a good surprise, we can conclude and sign the whole thing early next
week. If so, I would like to leave with good feelings between Egypt and
Israel. There should not be a grudging acceptance. There will be
problems in the future and they can be worked out with cooperation.
Israel can exaggerate little difficulties. Within the limits of expectation,
we are trying to put a good spirit into the whole process. A negative re-
action in the Arab world will be minimized if they see that there is not a
grudging acceptance. If they see things hanging by a thread, then Hus-
sein may try to stir up the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. No

Arab leader has done anything to restore the rights of the Palestinians,
except for you. I need your advice on how to open negotiations with the
Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank. I know that some of you, such
as the Vice President and Mr. el-Baz, have contacts. We’ll do what we
can to bring them in in a constructive way. Israel will be reluctant to
carry out Camp David with enthusiasm. When they have a choice,
they’ll go for a narrow interpretation. We’ll have to urge them to be
more forthcoming. This plays into the hands of the Israelis when the
Palestinians don’t cooperate. We need some mechanism through which
Vance can give me advice on this. Secretary Vance or the Vice President
could return. We’ll try to choose a top-level negotiator to work on this
problem. We want to try to make this permanent and to prove by
events that it is a step toward comprehensive peace. Next would be
Gaza, and possibly the West Bank, and then Jordan, and last Syria. I am
available to meet with you. This is the greatest thing that I have ever
worked on. You have taken the bold steps.
President Sadat: You instigated it. You remember your letter.
President Carter: Secretary Brown will talk about our military rela-
tionship. We are revising our aid programs. We have planned a reor-
ganization. You can help by having Ambassador Ghorbal advise us on
private investment opportunities. We have some bureaucratic prob-
lems in carrying out projects. We need to show that things can move
rapidly. I’ll try to change the bad situation in the United States and
hope that you will look at your Cabinet to see if obstacles can be re-
moved. Our business relations could improve.
Secretary Vance: We’ll do all that we can to help.
President Carter: Secretary Vance went over with me his talks with
Prime Minister Khalil. I’ll do my best. I can’t shuttle, but we’ll commu-
nicate through Ambassador Eilts. My intention is to bring the talks to a
successful conclusion.
President Sadat: This is a very encouraging development. A few
moments ago the Mayor of Gaza sent me a letter. He is taking a positive
attitude. He is saying that he is waiting and is sure that the efforts that
we are making will reach agreement for the comprehensive peace in
the area. He knows that you have helped the Palestinian people in their
self-determination. He wants you to continue your blessed efforts.
President Carter: Once the treaty is an accomplished fact, I hope this
attitude will develop.
President Sadat: Gaza I am sure of. In the West Bank, because of
King Hussein and the PLO, there is a question. There are the interests of
the mayors. They are businessmen. On the economic interests, I suggest

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
a joint board headed by the Prime Minister. We should drop all of our
work on this board. We can guarantee your investors what is needed.
We can have feasibility studies.
On the other question, do your best to get an agreement. Vance has
heard Prime Minister Khalil. From my side, you have full authority to
reach an agreement. You know the situation here and there. You join us
as a full partner for years to come. You have my authority to do what
can be done. If Israel refuses, that is a new situation. But let us be
identical.
Secretary Vance: The Prime Minister has given me a note7 on unilat-
eral actions. We’ll raise this.
President Carter: Let us review the contents of the note. We’ll try.
Prime Minister Khalil: I have the greatest esteem for you, and as you
know, I spent many years in the United States. I want U.S.-Egyptian re-
lations to be close. I am a staunch defender of peace on a solid basis that
can be defended.
President Carter: I’ll never forget this.
Prime Minister Khalil: I cherish your idealism.
President Carter: Your contribution at Camp David gave us an edu-
cation [on] the issues that made this possible. When you came, there
were bad prospects. I need a Prime Minister Khalil to run my gov-
ernment for me.
Minister Sayeh: If you’ll allow me, I’ll be brief. Due to certain ele-
ments, our economy is growing at about nine percent annually. After
1967, we fell to zero. Due to the open-door policy of President Sadat
and due to the economic help of the United States, the economy is im-
proving. We now have democracy and the rule of law. There are no
confiscations or expropriations. Private investors have confidence, as
do foreign investors. All is working well. If I may add, we are with the
IMF on economic reform. The IMF always wants higher prices. With all
this, these need to be done in a non-traditional way. We are one and
one-half million housing units short. We now only have 80,000 new
units being built. We won’t catch up. This is causing big problems. We
can’t have an open or a closed door if we have a poor telephone system.
We always have problems of sewage and water supply. We are begin-
ning to work on rural electrification which is very important. The
public sector is very poor and needs to be renewed, but we have 10–15
billion Egyptian people tied up in it. It needs help. We need a non-
traditional approach. Your one billion dollars helps, but we need mas-
sive help. I sense that you want to use American investment. I am ready
for it. Coca Cola is already moving. The boycott has ended. Peace, and

204.
Memorandum of Conversation
Jerusalem, March 11, 1979,
SUBJECT
President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Begin
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Samuel W. Lewis, U.S. Ambassador to Israel
Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President
Jerry Rafshoon, Assistant to the President for Communications
Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President
Ed Sanders, Senior Adviser to the President and the Secretary of State
Richard Viets, Deputy Chief of Mission, U.S. Embassy, Israel
Mr. William Quandt, NSC Staff Member
Menachem Begin, Prime Minister
Yigael Yadin, Deputy Prime Minister
Moshe Dayan, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense
Ariel Sharon, Minister of Agriculture
Eliezer Shostak, Minister of Health
Yitzak Zamir, Attorney General
Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to U.S.
Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor, Minister of Foreign Affairs Office
Harry Hurwitz, Prime Minister’s Information Officer
Ayre Naor, Cabinet Secretary
Yosef Burg, Minister of Interior
Dan Pattir, Press Spokesman
Yehuda Avner, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister
Eliyahu Ben-Elissar, Chef de Cabinet, Prime Minister’s Office
General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Prime Minister Begin: I welcome you to the Cabinet Room. It is a
great honor to have you visit this room. We have taken many demo-
cratic decisions here. It is the custom that the host preside, but since I
am only a Prime Minister, we will elect the President as chairman of
our meeting. This is unanimously adopted.
President Carter: Now I see how you prevail!
Prime Minister Begin: The word prevail is dangerous!
President Carter: I hope that we can keep the discussions here confi-
dential. Some of what I say about my meetings with Sadat should not
be revealed. I am honored and gratified to be in Jerusalem on the free
soil of Israel. My own deep feelings mirror those of the American
people, including non-Jews. We feel a friendship toward Israel, we see
mutual security interests, and we see a deep historical relationship with
one another that fills my heart. When I was riding in from Tel Aviv last
night, it was pointed out to me that Jerusalem was the city of peace, but
that it had suffered in thirty-six wars. I would like to end my public
service with actions that helped insure that there will be no more wars
over Jerusalem. We have come a long way together against great odds.
When we have reached the final moments of negotiations, you have
never disappointed me. You have always helped to bring the negotia-
tions toward a success.
I have just come from Egypt where I have seen an outpouring of
feelings by the Egyptian people for peace. I know that the Israeli negoti-
ators in Egypt found this same welcome and the broad desire for an
end to war. I would like to conclude the negotiations and settle all of
the terms of the peace treaty today. President Sadat is eager to conclude
the negotiations. I share that desire. It is very likely that if we are not
successful it will be difficult to bring the talks to a conclusion in the
near future. There are Arab pressures on Egypt. Saudi Arabia may cut
is a threat of boycott. Sadat accepts this possibility. Some of his min-
isters are reluctant, but he is not. We have resolved most of the difficult
issues. There are many that you consider to be more important than I
do. I recognize that what we see as semantics may take on a difference
for you. You are more directly involved. In our talks with the prime

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
minister in Washington, we clearly saw the difficulties. If there were
not difficulties, we would have solved these problems long ago. But I
substantial agreement. There are some minor problems. On the target
date there has been some controversy. We also need to clear up the
letter.
President Sadat has told me that if the negotiations are successful
based on what he needs to protect Egyptian interests, he would come to
Jerusalem to sign the final documents, and he would invite Prime Min-
ister Begin to Cairo to sign them. This could be done in the next couple
of days, after assessing the remaining issues, the Egyptian positions are
sufficiently forthcoming for Israel to accept. We are prepared to spend
the time that is needed to reach an agreement on the remaining issues. I
told Sadat that I would give him a report this afternoon. I need not
trouble you with describing the strategic advantages of the treaty. A
treaty would improve the prospects for better relations between us on
economic and military matters. It would help two of our best friends
not to continue to be in a state of war.
Prime Minister Begin: As you remember in our private talks, we can
proceed by talking about either procedure or substance. I told the Presi-
dent that we had taken decisions in the Cabinet to hold debate in the
Cabinet on our proposals for autonomy in Judea, Samaria, and Gaza,
before the signing of a treaty. We also had a commitment to the Knesset
to have a debate before any signing. This stands. This is not an insur-
mountable problem, but we need some time to hold a debate in our
Cabinet. We can discuss this. I suggest first we hear from you on all of
the Egyptian proposals on all of the outstanding issues. We agreed in
and on the target date. The Cabinet approved of these proposals by a
majority vote. We also need to discuss the question of oil. Sadat has
made some proposals. Then I will reply.
President Carter: There are three basic questions on substance. They
involve the West Bank and Gaza letter and Article 6, paragraphs 2 and
5. Secretary Vance has worked with Egypt most directly on these ques-
tions. We feel that there should be a slight modification on Article 6. It
should be acceptable to you. If these changes are made, it should be
possible to reach agreement. You can look at the letter. The procedure
for handling the other Camp David Framework is important. There is a
question of whether Gaza and the West Bank should be kept together,
or separated, as well as the degree of Egyptian presence in Gaza, and
whether there could be a small number of Egyptians to help prepare for

the elections there. Let’s take up Article 6 first, then the letter, then oil,
then the question of ambassadors.
Secretary Vance: The Egyptians have made slight suggestions for
the new proposal).
President Carter: The Egyptians found the word “derogate” diffi-
cult to accept. We have tried to find a synonym that would be accept-
able to you.
Secretary Vance: The Egyptians have suggested using the phrase “is
not inconsistent with” instead of “does not derogate from”. They have
suggested that the same change be made in Article 6, paragraph 5. In
paragraph 2, they also want to have, after the reference to the Camp
David Accords, the phrase “which express the determination of the
parties to reach a just, durable and comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East conflict”.
Prime Minister Begin: May I respond? Let me begin with Article 6,
paragraph 5. We agreed in Washington to the text “does not derogate
from”. If there is no difference, then there is nothing wrong with that
phrase. If there is a difference, then we will stay by what we agreed.
Then the United States and Israel will agree, and Egypt will disagree. If
the United States changes its position, that is okay, but it will be a devi-
ation. The Cabinet would have rejected these proposals if the words
“does not derogate” had not appeared.
Sadat is entitled to make counterproposals. The United States can
change its mind. But we are free men and we can approve or reject. We
will reject. Let me explain why. Why does Sadat play with words? Why
does Sadat pay attention? I would like to hear what is the difference. In
our view, the two phrases are worlds apart. Article 6, paragraphs 2 and
5, are the heart and soul of the peace treaty. Without this article, it
would be a sham. What is the great difference? If we used the phrase
“does not derogate,” it means that Article 6, paragraph 5 stands, the
heart and soul of the treaty. If we replace that phrase, then the first part
of the note prevails. It would mean that the first sentence is the key, and
it would put this treaty after other treaties. It would be the worst ver-
sion, even worse than that offered at Camp David. We would know-
ingly sign a sham document. It would lose its meaning. The assertion is
that other agreements between Iraq and Egypt that call for the libera-
tion of Palestine would prevail over this treaty. It is not a matter of
theory or legal form, but a matter of life. Syria may attack Israel, and
Iraq, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia may join. The Baghdad Conference

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
countries object to all of this. They are against Sadat. Now there is a
very serious problem on Israel’s northeastern front. They have 5,600
tanks there, and 6,000 guns. Israel has more than 3,000 tanks. That
means they have a two to one ratio. We can defend ourselves only
through counter-attack. We cannot withdraw to Haifa or Tel Aviv. If
we reach the gates of Damascus, and this is possible, Syria may invoke
its agreements with Egypt. Egypt would then be obliged to come to
Syria’s aid. If these words “are not inconsistent with” are crucial in-
stead of “do not derogate”, it means that Egypt will start a war while
having a peace treaty with Israel. Therefore, we cannot accept.
President Carter: Egypt is not trying to attack Israel, nor is the
United States. The top sentence was added at the request of Egypt.
which are inconsistent with this treaty. We can make it clear in the note
that Article 6, paragraph 5, does prevail. We could add the phrase “are
not considered to be inconsistent with”.
Prime Minister Begin: Respectfully, I differ. That doesn’t change one
iota of the meaning. We stand on the agreement we made in Wash-
ington. We do not accept this proposal from Egypt. Egypt cannot
threaten war now. We would have five divisions across the Suez soon.
But when the Baghdad states attack us, Egypt will have to join. I will
read to you from the controlled Egyptian press. On February 20, 1979,
one of Sadat’s close advisers wrote a letter to Khomeini in which he vio-
lently attacks Israel. He says the peace treaty will cease to exist. On Jan-
uary 26, 1979, another writer talked of Israel becoming a second Tai-
wan, an artificial entity established by force on others’ lands. Anis
Mansour wrote in the magazine, “October”, that the Jewish people lie
and are deceitful. Another author wrote of Israel not being a state and
said that Israel was run by the Mafia.
President Carter: What is the purpose of your reading this to me?
Prime Minister Begin: This is the atmosphere in which the peace
talks are conducted.
President Carter: I have never detected any of this in my talks with
Sadat.

Prime Minister Begin: You asked us to have confidence in Egypt.
But it is a very bitter pill for us to read these attacks on the Jewish
people. I ask your ambassador to call this to their attention. This is the
atmosphere in the official Egyptian press. Now I am asked in two days
to sign a peace agreement with Egypt. I place this complaint before
you. As we read these passages, we must be careful. Now we will turn
to paragraph 2 of Article 6.
President Carter: Do you have a counterproposal?
Prime Minister Begin: No, sir. We stand by our previous position.
We may think and we may discuss later and will consult. The previous
draft of Article 6–2 was adopted by the U.S. delegation. The Cabinet ap-
proved it. The additional words on the comprehensive peace are not
completely unacceptable. We will consider them. But I have an amend-
ment to make. It should be stated that the treaty between Egypt and Is-
rael is the first step toward a comprehensive peace. It makes it clear that
it is not a condition of the Egyptian-Israel treaty to have a comprehen-
sive peace. We are not talking about a separate peace treaty. I will sug-
gest that we accept these words with this amendment. But the main
problem is the use of the words “not inconsistent”. We stand by “does
not derogate from”. This would mean that the first part would prevail,
not the second, if we accepted the Egyptian change. This is my first re-
sponse. After the break, I’ll consult with my colleagues and we’ll de-
cide on any amendment to your addition to Article 6–2. We have the
same opinion on the language “does not derogate from”. May I hear
your further proposals?
President Carter: Would you consider “does not contradict”?
Prime Minister Begin: It’s the same. Let us consult. Remember the
talks we had in Washington. We’ll break our brains. We stand by “does
not derogate from”.
President Carter: What does “derogate” mean to you?
Prime Minister Begin: We state something in the first part that is
very dangerous for Israel. But then we say it does not derogate from the
terms of the treaty and that brings back the original meaning. So it does
not do any harm to the treaty. It is a wonderful expression, it is strong
and proper.
President Carter: Is there some way of saying the same thing?
Secretary Vance: Let’s turn to the draft7 on the West Bank and Gaza.
President Carter: This deals with the self-governing authority. It is
the result of months of tedious negotiations. This is the best that we can
do.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Vance: I will read the letter. (The Secretary reads the text
of the draft letter).
Prime Minister Begin: We’ll have to break with consultations to
discuss this. There are improvements compared to the drafts submitted
at Camp David. There is a return to the Camp David language, but
there are problems. I will start with page 3. You have changed the word
can to will. I remember that we agreed on can. And you accepted the
phrase “as expeditiously as possible”.
Mr. Rosenne: The Prime Minister suggested the change “as expedi-
tiously as possible”.
Prime Minister Begin: I said so. I sent this to the Cabinet. Then there
is the phrase “possibly first in Gaza”. This is put in the sentence on set-
ting up the self-government one month after elections. I never heard
such a proposal. I cannot agree. (The Prime Minister misunderstands,
and corrects himself when he notes that the establishment of the self-
government one month after elections is part of the Camp David
Agreement.)
Here is the idea of starting with Gaza. I use the words Judea and
Samaria. We exchanged letters8 on this. We can’t use the phrase West
Bank. This is a serious matter. It is a distortion of geographical and his-
torical facts. The West Bank refers to all of the area west of the river, not
just the area annexed by King Abdullah. If we sign a letter, either in pa-
renthesis or as a footnote to the Israeli version, we must refer to Judea
and Samaria.
President Carter: No problem.
Prime Minister Begin: The idea of implementing the self-governing
authority first in Gaza is a deviation from Camp David. If we both
agree, it would be okay. What is the idea? I’ll say openly that Secretary
Vance asked me if autonomy could first be established in Gaza. I re-
plied that if we have the commitment from President Sadat that he will
not then interfere in Judea and Samaria, then we will consider this pos-
sibility, with the authority of the Cabinet. We cannot agree that we will
go first in Gaza leaving Judea and Samaria, and then later negotiate
Judea and Samaria separately with Egypt. That would be completely
paradoxical. We agreed to negotiate with Egypt alone in order to show
our good faith. No one wants to be truer to the Camp David Accords.
Why did we agree? We could have waited for Jordan. Autonomy was
our idea, and it is one of the most beautiful ideas ever proposed by
Zionism and Judaism. Egypt has no right to Gaza. Gaza is a foreign
edging that the “expression ‘West Bank’” would be “understood by the Government of
Israel as Judea and Samaria.” The letter was attached to the Camp David Accords. See
Document 57.

country to the Egyptians. They unlawfully occupied it. It was invaded
by Farouk.
President Carter: They don’t claim Gaza.
Prime Minister Begin: I agree. We stand for that. But they were there
for nineteen years. So we must take that into account. We will negotiate
Gaza, and Judea and Samaria, also if Jordan does not join. But if Sadat
suggests Gaza first, I would not reject it, provided he leaves Judea and
Samaria. Sadat cannot give us peace in the east. Only Jordan can do
that. Only Jordan can work with us to introduce autonomy in Judea
and Samaria.
We must also write the words administrative council after self-
governing authority. We are not Bolsheviks. They dismissed the demo-
cratic elected assembly in 1917. This was the end of the only democratic
assembly in February. We don’t want to disperse a legislative council.
If it is an administrative council and it declares a Palestinian state, we
shall arrest them. We need iron-clad guarantees. The words adminis-
trative council should be added. We will negotiate with Egypt on Gaza,
if they give us a clear commitment that Egypt will not then be a party to
the negotiations on Judea and Samaria.
President Carter: That is a deviation from Camp David.
Prime Minister Begin: A deviation begins with the idea of Gaza first.
If Sadat departs by taking out Gaza, then we can change it. Let us go by
Camp David. If there is a deviation, we may consider it, but only on this
condition. I speak on behalf of the Government of Israel. Even if we get
together with Judea, Samaria, and Gaza, or we separate Gaza, then we
don’t deal with Egypt on the autonomy for Judea and Samaria. I re-
serve my right to consult with my colleagues on this.
Secretary Vance: Under Camp David, Israel, Egypt, and Jordan have
responsibility for negotiating the establishment of the self-governing au-
thority in Judea, Samaria, and Gaza. This letter precedes to do just that.
But if the implementation of the agreement on the West Bank proves to
be difficult, then the letter suggests that the implementation might take
place first in Gaza.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, but then Egypt cannot be a partner to the
autonomy in Judea and Samaria. Together is all right, but if they are
separated, Egypt has no more to do with Judea and Samaria.
Secretary Vance: Let me clarify. There will be negotiations for one
year after ratification. There are three tasks: agreement on the modal-
ities on elections; agreement on the powers and responsibilities of the
self-governing authority; agreement on other related matters. Agree-
ment would have to be reached on three topics. Then there would be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the question of implementation. Maybe it would not be possible to im-
plement the agreement in West Bank, so we might start in Gaza.
Prime Minister Begin: I am sorry, I have to differ. If we deviate from
Camp David, and we agree to deal with Gaza first, then that is the end
of Egypt’s negotiations with Israel on autonomy in Judea and Samaria.
Egypt can give us nothing on the eastern front. We can’t change our
mind on this. Our foreign minister likes the idea, provided that Egypt
drops Judea and Samaria. We’ll call on the Jordanians and the Pales-
tinian Arabs to negotiate. Autonomy is our idea, but not with Egypt. I
suggest that we return to the original language.
Secretary Vance: You will have done so in the letter. The only ques-
tion is the implementation, not the negotiation.
Minister Weizman: If we finish in Gaza, and if Jordan does not come
in, will Egypt act for Jordan in the West Bank? We prefer to talk to the
Palestinian Arabs.
President Carter: Let me preside.
Secretary Vance: The modalities, and the powers and the responsi-
bilities for both areas will have been negotiated together.
President Carter: Then the question of holding elections arises.
Secretary Vance: Later, the West Bank Palestinians may say okay
we’ll join, but we need some adjustments for the West Bank. They
would want to just add to what had already been negotiated.
Foreign Minister Dayan: Let me repeat what I said to you and Prime
Minister Khalil. It would take more than just one change to adjust what
had been agreed for Gaza to the West Bank. Now we are talking about
one unit of the autonomy. There will be representatives from Gaza, and
from Judea and Samaria. There would be one council.
If Gaza goes first, then you have to make a change. Gaza would
have the full power to run the self-governing authority in Gaza; while
in Judea and Samaria, it would not be done that way. We would have to
agree that there would be two units first. The self-autonomy in Gaza
alone is possible. I told Khalil and Secretary Vance that I don’t exclude
it. People in Gaza are not Jordanian citizens. They have no close ties to
Jordan, but Hussein may retaliate against the Gazans. We can’t be sure
that they will like the idea.
If we do go Gaza first, then we have to look at the second part.
Some West Bank representatives go to the Parliament and are
members. Khalil was surprised to learn this. They sit there as part of the
Jordanian parliament. At Camp David, we agreed on Jordanian partici-
pation in the police force. I said this was no problem since all of the in-
habitants in Judea and Samaria are Jordanians. King Hussein won’t
send people from Trans-Jordan. He will choose locals. It doesn’t matter
to us which side of the river Jordanian citizens come from. In Jerusalem

and Hebron, you can find ex-ministers of the Jordanian Government. If
Hussein comes in, he will work with the Jordanians and the Pales-
tinians. They are already there, people like Anwar Nuseibeh. If you
replace Jordan with Egypt, Khalil will say that he wants to send Egyp-
tians, and we will say no sir. We agreed that in Gaza, after the au-
tonomy, there would be some Egyptian liaison. They would not neces-
sarily be in Gaza. We only agreed to Jordan and the police force, and to
joint Israeli-Jordanian patrols. The Egyptians can’t do this. We have a
special relationship with Jordan. It is bad to divide Judea and Samaria
from Jordan. They are the same families. I would object to introducing
Egypt to replace Jordan. At Camp David, we assumed that King Hus-
sein would like Sadat to represent him. This seemed a good possibility.
Now we assume that Jordan will oppose the negotiations. We have to
wait until Jordan is willing to negotiate. The Palestinians won’t just ac-
cept what Egypt has accepted.
President Carter: What Foreign Minister Dayan said is accurate. If
Jordan delays coming into the negotiations, Egypt would represent the
Arab peoples after consulting with the Jordanians and Palestinians.
This is what Sadat wrote me in a letter. I thought that Israel had
agreed. Last November, the question of the autonomy seemed to be a
major obstacle. Sadat called me11 to try to break the deadlock. He said
that he was ready to go ahead in Gaza alone. He is not trying to put off
Gaza, nor is he trying to claim Gaza. He was trying to break a deadlock.
It is not possible for Egypt to help in Gaza without some kind of
liaision.
I am anxious to hear Israeli suggestions on how to resolve this
problem. Sadat doesn’t want to have Egyptian police on the Jordan
River, but he does want to work out the modalities for the self-
governing authority. There are doubts in the Arab world and some feel
that Israel wants to delay the establishment of the self-governing au-
thority. I share these doubts. If actions can be taken by Israel to keep the
Jordanians and the Palestinians from participating, then you can keep
the area forever. Mr. Sharon talks about one million settlers. This makes
it impossible for the West Bank Palestinians to join the talks. I can’t see
how much you really want the autonomy to work. But my word of
honor is at stake. We agreed to recognize the legitimate rights of the
Palestinians.
Carter, attached to the Camp David Accords, stating that Egypt would “be prepared to
assume the Arab role” in the implementation of the provisions of a comprehensive settle-
ment related to the West Bank and Gaza “following consultations with Jordan and the
representatives of the Palestinian people.” See Document 57.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin: We said also the legitimate rights of the Pales-
tinians. We also have rights. It is written this way.
President Carter: What do you suggest? If Jordan does not partici-
pate, and the Palestinians are reluctant, how can we carry out the
autonomy?
Foreign Minister Dayan: I would personally distinguish three
phases. We should invite all of the parties first. If they don’t come, then
we could negotiate on Gaza alone. We talk about the powers and re-
sponsibilities just for Gaza. They could take a different form, and the
areas would not have to be unified.
President Carter: Do you agree that the basic goal is to prescribe a
self-governing authority for the West Bank and Gaza both?
Foreign Minister Dayan: There should be three stages. The general
invitation, then if there is agreement on Gaza first, a specific negotia-
tion for Gaza only and not the rest of the area. Then the invitation
should stay open for Jordan and the inhabitants of Judea and Samaria
to come in. It should be an open invitation. But the negotiations should
not be done by Egypt, just by the people in the area and Jordan. So we
would leave the door open. They would have to have their own negoti-
ations on different issues.
Secretary Vance: I agree on the general invitation. There should be
negotiations on the powers and the modalities, and the invitation
should remain open. But the negotiation of the powers and responsibil-
ities would be largely common to both, and the modalities would be
similar.
Foreign Minister Dayan: Khalil said why shouldn’t the West Bank
residents have both Jordanian citizenship and Palestinian citizenship.
Deputy Prime Minister Yadin: Let’s forget about who wants what.
Let’s look practically at the question. I was hurt when you said that you
shared the views of those who think we are reluctant about the au-
tonomy. There is a debate here in Israel. I was politically offended. We
want to implement the autonomy on our terms. Now things are being
turned upside down as if Sadat suggested autonomy. We should be
practical. We should deal with the modalities in the whole area, and
then implementation could come in Gaza first. But that might be coun-
terproductive. If Jordan doesn’t join, why should we agree to what
Sadat negotiates? Who gave Sadat power to negotiate for the West
Bank? If Sadat can deliver the goods in Gaza, or Shawa, that is okay.
But elsewhere Egypt can’t deliver. If we were to go Gaza first, we
should forget the rest. Let them come when they are ready.
President Carter: At Camp David we agreed that Jordan and Egypt
would negotiate on the West Bank and Gaza combined. We also agreed
that Egypt would participate on behalf of the other Arabs. It would vio-

late Camp David if Israel, the United States, and the Palestinians were
to exclude Egypt from these discussions.
Prime Minister Begin: Let’s follow the Camp David agreements. We
can’t help suspicious minds. What we can do if Jordan does not join is
to negotiate with Egypt alone. But Israel never said that Egypt will re-
place the Arabs or Jordan. We can’t do more. We could agree on one
year of negotiations. We can hold the elections as expeditiously as pos-
sible. We can take one month to set up the self-governing authority. I
have read about people who suspect Israel and the Jewish people. But
that belongs to a different period. This autonomy is the focus of our de-
bate. The parliamentary opposition is against it, and so are many of my
friends. But we stand by our plan. I believe that one of the best ideas of
Judaism and Zionism is the autonomy. We don’t want to interfere, but
we need security. Minister Sharon has spoken of one million Jews in
Judea and Samaria. There is nothing wrong for the Arab inhabitants in
this. The number of Jews in Judea and Samaria is not a problem. We
have the idea of living together. We only want security and no Pales-
tinian state. I have a suggestion.
President Carter: Before we change the subject . . .
Prime Minister Begin: Minister Sharon will wait. He can obey.
Minister Sharon: Only for a little while.
President Carter: Egypt will have a liaison relationship in Gaza.
(The President reads from the draft letter.)
Prime Minister Begin: We should delete that whole sentence. There
should be no Egyptians in Gaza. They won’t be there. We will never
agree to Egypt doing this. There is no provision for liaison officers in
the words of Camp David. Each state will have liaision officers with the
police. I suggest deleting the whole paragraph. There can be no Egyp-
tians in Gaza.
Minister Sharon: I believe we could have moved forward more
quickly if you understood our plans for Judea, Samaria, and Gaza. This
is my personal opinion. We decided to have a debate on autonomy in
the Cabinet and we will do it. I’ll emphasize that I believe in the idea of
autonomy. We can live with it. But when we speak of autonomy, we
don’t mean the establishment of second Palestinian state. There is al-
ready one Palestinian state. Israel should emphasize that Jordan is a
Palestinian. They are exactly the same Arabs as in Judea and Samaria.
They are the same Palestinian Arabs who lived in the pre-1967 borders
of Israel. They are represented in the Jordanian Parliament. Thirty of
the 60 members of the Parliament are Palestinians from Judea and Sa-
maria. Fifteen out of 30 members in the Senate are Jordanian citizens
from Judea and Samaria. Jordan is a Palestinian state. The Hashemite

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Kingdom is the only non-Palestinian element in Jordan. I am not rec-
ommending anything. Jordan is a Palestinian state.
You are trying to convince us to establish a second Palestinian
state. We’ll go far, but we will never agree to a second Palestinian state.
You should make that clear now. We should make clear what we plan
to do. There is no way to prevent Jewish settlers from settling in Judea
and Samaria. We can’t prevent this while Israel has one-half million
Palestinian Arabs in its pre-1967 borders. No geographical line can di-
vide the Jewish people from the Arab population. We have to live here
together. When I use the figure of one million Jewish settlers in twenty
or thirty years, I can assure that they will live there. In Jerusalem, in
greater Jerusalem, there is a crucial problem to have one million Jews.
They will live there and elsewhere. We were very careful to settle Jews.
We fill all of the empty houses. We don’t settle them in areas of heavy
population. We settle in empty areas or where there is only a small
Arab population. This is our homeland. But our approach is not reli-
gious. It is only based on security. We are settling people there. This is
part of our national security concept. It is a vital means for protecting
our population. It is easier to proceed if things are clear.
We have the problem of water. One-third of Israel’s water comes
from the aquafer in Judea and Samaria. This is a matter of life and death
for Israel. We have problems of internal security, of Arab terrorism. If
the day comes of true peace, with no terrorism, Israel will be the first to
stop our activities in the inhabited Arab areas. We only put settlements
in the most vital areas. There is plenty of land for one to two million
Jews. We won’t restrict the Arab population, but we won’t restrict the
Jews living there. This is a matter of life. My generation has seen war.
We have seen many terrible things. Remember we can only make a mis-
take once. We want to exist. We are striving for peace, but you can’t
frighten us by war. We want peace, but we will go on for ten wars to
preserve our security and independence.
Minister Burg: One should be enough.
Prime Minister Begin: We should adjourn now. We are having
lunch downstairs together. We can then come back, or take a break. We
have one other problem with the letter which has to with the counting
of time from the establishment of the administrative council in Gaza.
This cannot be accepted. The transitional period can only begin when
the autonomy is established in Judea, Samaria and Gaza. This is an im-
portant remark for the record.
President Carter: The liaision relationship must be established.
Egypt must be able to use its beneficial influence to work with the Pal-
estinians. I thought that Dayan and Khalil had resolved this. We need
to bring this to a head. We’ll try to use the language of Camp David.

resumes.)
President Carter: Secretary Vance will respond to some of the tech-
nical problems. Then I’ll summarize. Then I would like to meet with my
people for an hour or so and then we can meet again at five o’clock.
cussed these problems and have some suggestions. We should deal
with this first.
President Carter: I talked to Sadat at length. He didn’t understand
your concern on the 1960 and 1966 treaties until recently. But he wants
a new word for derogate.
Secretary Vance: On the letter, there is no problem in the first one
and one-half pages. There are problems concerning liaision in Gaza. It
is important that there be a method to bring Gaza along.
Prime Minister Begin: The first page is okay with us. Please add the
words administrative council after self-governing authority. Also the
Israeli version of the letter should say Judea and Samaria in a footnote
when the West Bank and Gaza are referred to.
Secretary Vance: We can use a footnote in the Israeli version. There
is a problem on when the transitional period begins.
Prime Minister Begin: The problem starts on page two. Here is the
Gaza first idea, and here starts the problem.
Secretary Vance: On page three at the top, there was apparently
some misunderstanding of what the Cabinet approved.
President Carter: We proposed the language.
Ambassador Evron: You remarked that the term “as expeditiously as
possible” should be used.
Secretary Vance: We said that we would look at it.
Mr. Avner: As expeditiously as possible was discussed.
Secretary Vance: I said “or something like that”. We will look at this.
I gave Foreign Minister Dayan a draft memorandum of agreement.
Foreign Minister Dayan: Why say anything about the transitional
period?
Secretary Vance: When does it start?
Prime Minister Begin: When the self-government is established in
both areas as is written in Camp David.
Secretary Vance: If you leave it that way, and it is established only in
Gaza, it nonetheless would be operating.
Prime Minister Begin: It is not written.
Foreign Minister Dayan: Suppose that the autonomy begins in Judea
and Samaria two months later. Then it makes no difference. But if it

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
starts four years later, then there is a problem. Why should we mention
it at all?
President Carter: We understand. Let’s try to work it out.
Secretary Vance: I gave a memorandum of agreement to Dayan. It
covers all the points you want covered.
Prime Minister Begin: I have read it and will have to consult with
my colleagues. At the end of page two, it says the United States will not
supply arms for “unlawful” armed attack. There cannot be such a thing
as “lawful” attack on Israel.
President Carter: We’ll be the judge of that, Mr. Prime Minister. We
will leave out the word “unlawful”. We are trying to be accommodating.
Prime Minister Begin: On the first page, we want no reference to the
possibility of a violation of the agreement by Israel. It says either party.
This should not be in a bilateral agreement. You can say the same thing
to Egypt if you want. But Israel cannot sign a document that says Israel
might violate the agreement. It is a good document, Mr. Secretary.
President Carter: Let me summarize before the recess. If Israel and
Egypt want a peace treaty in the context of a comprehensive peace, it is
important to conclude the treaty during this visit. There is a limit on my
time. I have SALT negotiations and other matters to attend to. If we fail
to reach an agreement, it will be difficult to revive the momentum. We
hope to resolve all of the differences today. We are trying, representing
Egypt within the limits of our ability, to resolve the wording on Article
takes precedence over the commitments to destroy Israel. But the word
derogate is one that they object to. In my opinion, the word is okay. We
hope you can find a synonym to say the same thing. I have no objection
to derogate, but they have a problem with it. The Egyptians are not
pushing for Gaza first. They put this idea forward to break a deadlock.
If both of you see it as necessary, you can proceed in Gaza alone. In
Gaza, I see the sensitivity about liaison for Egypt and Gaza. But I don’t
want the agreement between Egypt and Israel to be just a piece of paper
marked by distrust. I have seen the euphoria of Camp David and of the
Jerusalem visits. If we have the treaty signed, Israel will have to treat
Egypt with the same respect that you show the United States and vice
versa. We have to have a sense of working for common goals. We’ll do
our best. There is a question of oil. I can assure that if the other matters
are resolved, we can find a solution to this. The same is true on ambas-
sadors. But in Sadat’s mind, it is tied to the early withdrawal to the in-
terim line. On that basis, I went to Sadat and he gave me his commit-
ment. He has not reversed. I want an Israeli commitment to a faster
withdrawal, in return for which I can get the exchange of ambassadors
after one month of the interim withdrawal. The memorandum of agree-
ment is very important. There will be new relations and advantages for

Israel and Egypt after peace. Egypt makes up about forty percent of the
Arab world. If Egypt is a friend and ally, guided and corrected by us
when there is a departure from what has been promised, within the
limits of our influence, the agreement should work. If Sadat is weak-
ened, we will do everything we can within the limits of our power to
insure Egyptian compliance with the agreement. You have my per-
sonal commitment. We stand behind all of these documents. Israel still
feels threatened by terrorism and the Arab build-up over the next 10 to
30 years. The Arab world is capable of persuading some countries be-
cause of oil. The United States can withstand such blackmail. Egypt is a
partner of Israel. We place a restraint on the PLO, and on the radical
Arabs as threats to Israel. We plan to go to the Saudi leaders to caution
them against overt acts against Egypt. Saudi Arabia fears the Soviet
Union and we help protect them. We stand with you as equal partners.
What we do for you is more than balanced by what Israel does for the
United States. A democratic and stable Israel is a tremendous strategic
asset to the United States, but this is especially true if Israel is at peace
with Egypt as a friend. We can work more closely with both countries
then. There will be difficult days ahead. You have different views on
autonomy for the Palestinians. We have never put pressure on Israel to
sign an agreement that is contrary to your interests.
The treaty could open a new day for Israel that would bring ad-
vantages and permanent peace. You would have diplomatic relations
with your largest Arab neighbor. I asked you to be forthcoming and
generous. My belief is that Sadat has been very generous and forth-
coming in the last two days. He has asked us to use all of our influence
to bring an agreement now. Sadat is waiting to hear from us. I am
willing, if you agree, to work all night to conclude the agreement. The
remaining differences are minor compared to the differences we faced
a year ago.
(The session ends at 3: p.m.)
(The meeting resumes at 5: p.m.)
Prime Minister Begin: I have good news. We have found a synonym
for the notes to Article 6. We propose “does not affect in any way”.
President Carter: That is much worse than it was. It means it has no
significance at all.
Secretary Vance: Let me try “contravene”.
Prime Minister Begin: We’ll have to think again. I don’t reject. I have
to think about it. We shall consider. In Article 6–2, I made a provisional
amendment about the Egyptian-Israeli treaty as a first step. I have de-
cided to give up the amendment and to delete my addition to that
amendment. I would rather stick to what was agreed in Washington.
We will drop the word derogate. We want to expedite things. We will
have a Cabinet session tonight and take all the decisions. In a session

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
with the Cabinet tomorrow, you’ll get a complete reply. On the bilat-
eral letter, I’ll take it to the Cabinet tonight. We think the pledge of eco-
nomic and military assistance is perhaps too general.
President Carter: Secretary Brown can talk to Weizman.
Prime Minister Begin: We’ll include the questions of ambassadors
and oil. You will have a Cabinet reply on all issues. After the session of
the Cabinet, we will have agreement on some issues, and maybe it will
be some issues on which the United States will have to [go] back to
Cairo. Secretary Vance could go to Cairo if you must leave. Then you
can bring the reply of Egypt. If there is agreement, we’ll tell you. We
will have an agreed communique. Before signature, we will have to
deal expeditiously with the question of autonomy in the Cabinet. We
will have to bring it to the Knesset. This will take eight to ten days. That
means next week there could be approval before we were ready to sign.
Tomorrow morning we will give you a full answer between eight and
nine o’clock. Then Secretary Vance can go to Cairo with our proposals.
Then next week between Monday12 and Wednesday, we will possibly
get Knesset approval. If we do not get approval, then the government
will resign.
President Carter: Secretary Vance knows the Egyptian position inti-
mately. Instead of your Cabinet meeting now, I suggest that you let Sec-
retary Vance consult with you as you evolve your language. Secretary
Vance will not shuttle between Cairo and Jerusalem. Let him work with
you before your Cabinet decision.
Prime Minister Begin: Dayan can meet with Secretary Vance.
Foreign Minister Dayan: On Article 6, that can be clarified before the
Cabinet meeting. Rosenne, Zamir and I will meet with the Secretary
and his group. We can find agreed language. That is not so easy on the
joint letter. There are matters of substance there. In a short hour we
cannot solve this. It is not just a question of words. There are matters of
substance. Maybe during the Cabinet meeting we can be in touch, but
not before the Cabinet meeting.
Prime Minister Begin: I am very tired. We need time. I asked for an
adjournment. The two foreign ministers will sit together. On Article 6,
we need Cabinet agreement. We can’t convene again for these matters.
I am totally tired. I have reached my limit.
President Carter: Let Secretary Vance and Dayan work through the
banquet.

Foreign Minister Dayan: There is no point in discussing it with me.
Prime Minister Begin: You will have the full powers of Dr. Khalil.
Let the two foreign ministers meet.
President Carter: I think if we conclude this visit without a public
expression of agreement, there is serious risk of not reaching success. I
understand that you cannot sign the treaty without Knesset approval.
We need to sign some kind of declaration or letter. We need at least an
ad referendum agreement. But if this slips, and I leave, it will [be] hard
to rekindle the forces for success. I hate to let this opportunity go by for
discussing the basic issues. I could stay over until Tuesday, but no later.
I don’t know if you want a joint ceremony with Sadat.
Prime Minister Begin: If we reach agreement, why not? But not be-
fore the Knesset has discussed the matter. If after Secretary Vance goes
to Cairo he comes back with an agreement, good. If there is no agree-
ment, the sky doesn’t fall. We will continue. If we agree, Cairo can ac-
cept, and we will have a common declaration by the three gov-
ernments. We can have a common communique. We can inform the
world that we have reached agreement on all outstanding issues. We
can say that there are no problems with the peace treaty. Then the Is-
raeli Government will bring to the Knesset the treaty for a vote next
week.
President Carter: Would you sign together?
Prime Minister Begin: We can make a declaration without a
meeting. I suggest I don’t go to Cairo for this, or that he come here.
Only when we sign the peace treaty, should we do that. We should be
patient. If we reach agreement, I will make this a matter of confidence
for the Knesset and I will fight for it. But we shouldn’t need to do this to
issue a one sentence statement. You can issue the communique in
Washington if we agree.
Minister Burg: I understand what the President is saying. The Pres-
ident is suggesting that we should take this up in the Cabinet tonight.
Prime Minister Begin: I agree.
President Carter: Let me add a word of caution. If we leave the
Middle East without Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat ap-
pearing together, as demonstration to the Israeli and Egyptian people,
we may miss an opportunity. I don’t care about the communique. I
want the public agreement. If not, you’ll never go to Egypt, and he’ll
never come here. My belief is that my presence has a stabilizing effect. I
want to see some friendship between you. If there is a communique,
and then a Knesset debate, there will be controversy in public. You will
say that Sadat has promised oil, and he is willing to do it, but if you say
that, he may be embarrassed. There will be problems on the debate on
autonomy. The whole agreement could come apart.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Minister Weizman: Let’s discuss it in the Cabinet.
President Carter: It’s not just a symbolic matter. I want to leave here
with a solid expression of friendship between the two governments.
Prime Minister Begin: This group of ministers cannot now decide
this issue of a meeting with Sadat. We will take this to the Cabinet and
give you a reply tomorrow.
Foreign Minister Dayan: If the Cabinet approves tonight and Secre-
tary Vance brings the approval of the Egyptians, then the Knesset will
approve. We don’t underestimate the ceremony, but if it doesn’t work
out for Tuesday, that should not be a problem.
(The meeting ends at 5: p.m.)
a.m., March 12, ultimately agreeing to the Egyptian wording of the interpretive note to
Article VI, as well as deciding both to omit any references to establishing autonomy first
in Gaza in the treaty’s joint letter and to inform Vance that Israel would be willing to pur-
chase from Egypt the total oil production from the wells that Israel had drilled in the
Sinai. (Vance, Hard Choices, pp. 247–248) Dayan’s account of the Cabinet meeting is in
Breakthrough, pp. 273–274.

205.
Message From Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton, Jr. to
the Ambassador to Egypt (Eilts)
Conveyed to Eilts by ALA by secure phone from Jerusalem about
Please inform Sadat that President had long and difficult talks
with Begin and a number of his Cabinet colleagues last night2 and
today, and that Secretary supplemented these in follow-on meeting
with Dayan this evening. President is making major effort to persuade
Begin to agree to positions on remaining issues as discussed with Sadat
and Khalil at end of our visit to Egypt. Begin has called Cabinet
meeting for tonight5 (after state dinner for President) which will prob-
ably last into early morning hours, and we expect to hear Israeli posi-
tions Monday morning. Until then, we will not be able to judge
whether our efforts have been successful. If Cabinet approves reason-
able positions, Pres. will ask Sec. to go to Cairo Monday. Will be in fur-
ther touch Monday morning.

206.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
President’s Meeting with Prime Minister Begin
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Samuel W. Lewis, U.S. Ambassador to Israel
Alfred Atherton, Ambassador-at-Large
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Herbert Hansell, Legal Adviser, State Department
William Quandt, NSC Staff Member
Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President
Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President
Richard Viets, Deputy Chief of Mission, U.S. Embassy, Israel
Menachem Begin, Prime Minister
Yigael Yadin, Deputy Prime Minister
Yosef Burg, Minister of Interior
Simcha Ehrlich, Minister of Finance
Shmuel Tamir, Minister of Justice
Moshe Nissim, Minister Without Portfolio
Gideon Patt, Minister of Industry, Commerce and Tourism
Eliezer Shostak, Minister of Health
Chaim Landau, Minister of Transport
Moshe Dayan, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense
Yitzha Modai, Minister of Energy and Infrastructure
Zevulun Hammer, Minister of Education and Culture
Ariel Sharon, Minister of Agriculture
Aharon Abu-Hatzeira, Minister of Religious Affairs
David Levi, Minister of Immigrant Absorption
Israel Katz, Minister of Labor and Social Betterment
Mordechai Zippori, Deputy Minister of Defense
Yitzak Zamir, Attorney General
Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to the U.S.
Dan Pattir, Press Spokesman
General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Eli Rubenstein, Assistant to Director General to the Foreign Minister
General Avraham Tamir, Assistant Minister of Defense for National Planning
Jossie Chiehanover, Director General, Foreign Minister’s Office
Dr. Eliahu Ben-Elissar, Chef de Cabinet, Prime Minister’s Office
Arye Naor, Cabinet Secretary
Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor
Schlomo Nakhdimon, Advisor to the Prime Minister for Press
Ilan Tehila, Military Secretary to the Minister of Defense
Yehuda Avner, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister
(The Prime Minister begins the meeting by introducing all of the
members in his Cabinet).
President Carter: I want to thank you for your hospitality and seri-
ousness with which you have addressed the treaty. I deeply appreciate
your having met all last night in order to accommodate my time
problems. It was very gracious of you. We have very close ties to Israel.
We value your strength, and your democratic form of government.
They are matters of deep admiration to us, and are a great benefit to the
United States. I believe the benefits are mutual.
We are close to an historic achievement. This could be the first of
many steps to establish even more securely peace in Israel. Israel can
defend herself. But we want your security to be based on peace with

your neighbors as well as on military power. We admire this special
strength and spirit of Israel. You and Egypt are fated to be neighbors.
This could be a first and major step in cementing your relations with
your neighbors based on fundamental changes. Israel could be at peace
with the most important Arab nation. This could be the basis for a
strengthened relationship.
In the context of peace, we will be more forthcoming on economic
and military issues. As cooperation grows, we can work to enhance re-
gional stability and to meet Soviet designs of intrusion. The events in
Iran and elsewhere show the effectiveness of dedicated martyrs to a
radical cause. Egyptian-Israeli relations will be a restraint on radi-
calism. We recognize the risk that Israel is taking in withdrawing from
Sinai. We know you need a secure supply of energy and oil. Egypt is
prepared to transmit this oil to us and then to you, and we’ll guarantee
the supply.
We will also try to minimize adverse Jordanian and Saudi reac-
tions. We may have some influence on Syria and Iraq as well. The
danger of losing this opportunity is very great. Once lost, it would be
almost impossible to redeem. I consider you to have been very forth-
coming. You have often been very generous. You have taken sacrifical
steps in the past to save the negotiations. Camp David was good for Is-
rael. When we are done, we will relay the results of our meeting to
Sadat, without any public discussion. I hope you will join us in
keeping down public discussion of these issues until we have commu-
nicated with Sadat.
I would like to explain the points on which the Cabinet has acted.
On Article 6–2, you have deleted language from Camp David on a com-
prehensive peace. You have often spoken of the comprehensive peace.
This is not crucial to the United States and it does not contradict Camp
David, but it is very important to Sadat. He has to justify his actions. It
would be a matter of generosity, with no harm to Israel, if you could
leave this in. It is important to Sadat and would be very much
appreciated.
The formulation on Article 6–5 should be acceptable to Sadat. On
the letter, the changes in the first sentence are all right. The addition at
important issue to the United States. I am a signatory of the Camp
David Agreement. I am honor bound to carry out Camp David. On
page 2 Israel has asked for a revision on the part dealing with Gaza and
Egyptian liaison officers. This is of great concern to the United States. It
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
is of great importance to us that the negotiations on the self-governing
authority and on the modalities should proceed as we agreed. There
must be access to the people of Gaza to help prepare the elections. We
are talking of a political process. The people in Gaza should be able to
freely express their views. We and the Egyptians need to be in touch
with them. I have no preference on Gaza first, but the implementation
of any agreement may be easier there. Raising doubts about Gaza is
bad. The omission of liaison officers is bad. We need to have arrange-
ments for the negotiating parties to work actively with the people of
Gaza. I ask you to reconsider this. I hope we can instruct Foreign Min-
ister Dayan and Secretary Vance to work out new language. I can’t send
Secretary Vance to Egypt unless we have some assurances that Egypt
will have access to Gaza. This is a crucial issue.
Page 3 is okay and the footnote you suggest is okay. We have not
gotten any reply on the technical amendment to Article 5. We under-
stand that the Cabinet approved it.
Prime Minister Begin: The amendment to Article 5 is acceptable.
President Carter: You said that the Cabinet agrees to staged with-
drawal. I want to know about the stages so that we can resolve the
question of the exchange of ambassadors. The American proposal on
oil, including a guarantee from us, should be adequate. Egypt does re-
ject Israel’s proposal to sell 2. million tons of oil annually to Israel. We
have worked on an “evergreen” contract approach. There would be an
annual renewal, and if there were any interruption, we will guarantee
your supply. I suggest that you review this. We will provide an
iron-clad agreement of the kind that Israel seeks.
The Cabinet’s proposals are very forthcoming. The only one from
our point of view which causes problems concerns access to the inhabi-
tants of Gaza during the negotiations and elections. I do not want my
own commitments to be violated. Any access that the United States
would have in Gaza should also be available for Egypt. When the early
withdrawal from al-Arish was discussed, Israel said that there would
be free access between al-Arish and Gaza. The Cabinet then took a con-
trary position. I can’t take a proposal to Egypt unless this is provided. I
am not wedded to any exact words, but the spirit is crucial.
Prime Minister Begin: We considered Article 6–2. The Cabinet was
forthcoming. We approved the word “contravene”. We consider this a
synonym of derogate. We can say that Article 6–2 stands. In Wash-
ington, we agreed on the first part of this note. The provisions of Article
VI will not be construed as contradicting Camp David. The United
States and Israel agreed. In Cairo, an Egyptian proposal was made that
Israeli Cabinet has now rejected. It is legitimate to accept some pro-
posals and to reject others. The first formula was agreed to by the
United States and Israel. Egypt has sought to make a very serious

change. There is danger that it will be interpreted as meaning “in the
context of a comprehensive settlement”. We stand by what the United
States and Israel agreed to in Washington. On behalf of the Cabinet, it is
my duty to say that this is all that we can accept.
On Article 6–5, there is no problem. We found a synonym. We do
not want to add or detract. It is up to Egypt to accept the agreed U.S.-
Israeli proposal. We cannot do any more about it. We have to think of
Israel’s problems. We have done our best. We can’t do better.
On the bilateral letter, thank you for accepting our two amend-
ments. The aid references may be too general, but we will deal with aid
later. This is a bilateral problem and has nothing to do with Egypt. We
shall have some amendments to make at the proper time. This is not
now the issue.
On the letter, thank you for accepting my amendments to page 1.
On page 1 there is no problem. We are glad that you have accepted the
language on “as expeditiously as possible”. We are in full agreement.
Thank you for accepting our footnote. It is important morally and his-
torically. We are also glad that you included reference to the adminis-
trative council. This makes it clear that autonomy is the goal, not sover-
eignty or a Palestinian state. To us, this is the most vital issue after the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty. It should be clear to all that a Palestinian state is
out of the question. We only favor full autonomy. This is a fine concept
of Judaism and Zionism. It proves our liberal approach. Israel recog-
nizes the Arab nationality in Israel. There is no problem for us in also
recognizing the rights of Palestinian Arabs as we did at Camp David.
The administrative council reference applies everywhere that the self-
governing authority is mentioned.
On the question of Gaza first, we had a very serious debate. We de-
cided to leave the issue open. We could not agree to the American pro-
posal. We cannot let Egypt deal with Gaza first, then with Judea and Sa-
maria. We prefer to just keep to Camp David. To prove our good will,
we express our agreement to deal with Egypt if Jordan does not join the
negotiations. There will be no delay. We have left open for consider-
ation the Gaza proposal. Israel has proposed substitute language that if
Egypt should propose autonomy in Gaza first, Israel is prepared to con-
sider such proposals. Secretary Vance is empowered to say this. If there
is a concrete Egyptian proposal, Israel will consider it.
We cannot approve the reference to liaison officers. This is a matter
of principle. Egyptian occupation of Gaza gives Egypt no rights there.
Egypt cannot come to Gaza with liaison officers. We stand by Camp
David. If there is a strong local police force, then there should be liaison
officers of the three governments on this issue. This is an Egyptian pro-
posal to change Camp David. The two sides are free to change if they
wish. But we do not want to and we cannot do so. This is the decision of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the Cabinet. Secretary Vance can say that after signing the peace treaty,
and after the normalization of relations, anybody is free to visit any-
body, we can go see the pyramids, Egyptians can go to Jerusalem, and
they can visit Gaza as we can visit Luxor. This shows our complete
good will. There will be no special deal for Egyptian liaison officers in
Gaza.
Annex 1 provides for entry points, and there will be free entry sub-
ject to normal checks. This is agreed.
President Carter: I don’t want to pass over this. This is crucial. Your
response is not adequate. Only once in the negotiations has the United
States taken a position that we consider important to our own integrity.
We are a signatory . . .
Prime Minister Begin: It is not written in Camp David.
President Carter: Unless there are clear assurances that the negoti-
ating teams can have access to the inhabitants of Gaza and the West
Bank, I don’t feel that I can carry out my commitment to Camp David.
Prime Minister Begin: We will sign only what we agreed to.
President Carter: But I am asking you to agree.
Prime Minister Begin: We won’t sign if we don’t agree. We will
carry out every word of Camp David. It is not written in Camp David
that there should be Egyptian liaison officers in Gaza or in Judea and
Samaria. There is specific language. We will be faithful to Camp David.
On the question of oil, we agree that Egypt must supply 2. million
tons of oil at market prices. They will get the oil wells that we devel-
oped. We want access to this oil through Egypt. If Egypt doesn’t keep
its agreement, then the U.S. should guarantee the oil.
President Carter: To use your words, this is not in Camp David.
There will be differences from Camp David as we work for a peace
treaty. I have made our position clear. Israel has the freedom not to sign
an agreement and you can insist upon your position. But this is so im-
portant that I think you should designate someone to work with Secre-
tary Vance on this. I don’t want the negotiations to break down over the
negotiators having access.
Prime Minister Begin: I can bring this again to my Cabinet. I can’t do
more. I can only speak about the decisions that were made today. If you
wish to bring it up again, I will. On oil, there is no misunderstanding. I
thought we had a complete agreement. I thought there would be an
Israeli-Egyptian agreement with a U.S. guarantee. We don’t want to
turn to the United States. Your Sinai II commitment3 will be honored.
But we don’t want this matter of oil to hurt our relations. We don’t
want Americans to complain about Israel. We haven’t used the 1975

commitment. We are not asking for any infringement of Egyptian
sovereignty.
Minister Modai: The Prime Minister has covered our views. This is
the basic situation.
Secretary Vance: Egypt has made it clear that they will not sell a
fixed amount of oil to anyone. They do not enter into multi-year con-
tracts, only the “evergreen” type. Therefore, there are two elements of
the Israeli proposal which Egypt has refused. I have discussed this be-
fore with you. They won’t change their position. I have argued with
them and they stick to their position. You have posed two conditions
that can’t be met.
President Carter: If there are interruptions, we can guarantee the
supply.
Minister Sharon: On oil, we should be thinking of this in the context
of real peace. It is hard for us to accept that we have to get oil via the
United States. This is not an issue between the United States and Israel.
We are going toward true peace. We don’t accept any restrictions on
selling oil to Israel.
There should be no liaison officers or mission in Gaza. There is a
third point that worries me. We agreed that you should be a full partici-
pant, but I don’t see any situation where you would become a mediator
between the Palestinian Arabs and the Government of Israel. This is
impossible.
You spoke of free passage from al-Arish to Gaza. But this should
be mutual. We are ready when we sign the normalization of relations.
Then we can go freely to Egypt. It should be entirely mutual.
On settlements, you said nothing. But you raised a question that
worries you. There should not be any misunderstanding about the fu-
ture. You should take it for granted that we will settle Jews in Gaza, es-
pecially the southern part. We need a barrier between the 400,000 Pales-
tinians in Gaza and the 40 million Arabs in Egypt. We will not stop our
settlement plans in the Jordan Valley, in the Golan, or in Gaza. But we
will do our best to avoid heavily populated areas. We will only settle in
areas that are crucial for our security.
President Carter: I understand your position and you know ours.
Minister Tamir: We have Annex 3 which could cover oil. There
should be a removal of all of the discriminatory barrier upon comple-
tion of the interim withdrawal. Your proposal is to get Egyptian oil
under the cover of the United States.
President Carter: Egypt will sell oil to Israel on a competitive basis,
or we will guarantee your supply. What Israel is demanding is con-
trary to all international law contracts. You are asking for a special
relationship.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin: Did Egypt accept our proposal on a letter for
oil or 2. million tons?
Secretary Vance: It was rejected.
President Carter: We also don’t approve of that approach.
Prime Minister Begin: My impression was that you agreed.
Secretary Vance: I agreed to raise it with them.
Prime Minister Begin: Then I am right. They have rejected it.
Minister Tamir: There are two aspects. I realize what you have said.
We would be reintroducing the Arab boycott idea of an untouchable Is-
rael. They won’t sell us oil directly. We have heard you, often make the
point that we should not be stingy about the peace process, about the
new relationship, and that we should have faith in the next steps. But
this is the only tangible test that we can put to Egypt. You stressed the
urgency because of the fall of Iran. Iran’s fall has hurt you, but it is a
completely serious blow to our oil situation. Now we are asked to give
up the oil that is under our own control. We have no oil of our own. We
have a neighbor which refuses to consider us as a neighbor. In the oil
market, the idea of free competitive bidding allows everyone to play
tricks. It is then totally up to their discretion on whether they sell. We
have to think of our security. Our whole war appartus depends on this.
It is the only tangible test of the new relationship. This raises doubts of
whether they really want peace.
Prime Minister Begin: Let me call attention to the timetable. We
don’t have agreement on oil with Egypt. Now you will have to go to
prepare for your speech. At 11: you will leave for the Knesset. There
are now thousands of children waiting on the road to see you. I suggest
that we move on now. We do not have agreement on oil, and we will
have to reach an agreement. The other issues I will bring to my Cabinet.
President Carter: Will there be any further meetings?
Prime Minister Begin: At noon, we go to the Knesset. That will last
one or one and one-half hours. The speaker will greet you. Then you
have a lunch with the Foreign Affairs Committee. We do not partici-
pate. During that time, we will sit with Secretary Vance. If there is
agreement, we will now decide that the Cabinet will meet after the
Knesset speech. Our delegations will hold talks. We will either have a
full Cabinet meeting or the Defense Council meeting with Secretary
Vance. We should hear Minister Burg.
Minister Burg: Iran is a debacle for Israel. Another evergreen con-
tract would hurt Israel. This is absolutely contradictory to peace.
President Carter: The American assurance takes care of the
problem. We also have no answer on the accelerated withdrawal.
(The meeting ends at 11: a.m.)

207.
Editorial Note
Following his morning meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Mena-
chem Begin and the Israeli Cabinet on March 12, 1979, President Jimmy
Carter accompanied Begin to the Knesset where the two leaders ad-
dressed the assembled legislature. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance re-
called in his memoirs that the “session was a stormy one with much
shouting and hectoring of Begin by the Communists and some
members of his own Likud party.” (Vance, Hard Choices, page 248) In
the midst of the proceedings, one Likud member of the Knesset, Geula
Cohen, was ejected from the chamber. In his address, Carter delivered
what he termed “the speech of concern and caution and hope.” Noting
the “somber responsibility of us all to exert our energies and our imagi-
nations once again to contemplate the tragedy of failure and the legiti-
mate exultation if we bring peace,” the President urged Israelis and
Egyptians to continue to work toward achieving the peace treaty. The
full text of Carter’s speech is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book
I, pages 424–428. During speeches made by Begin and opposition
leader Shimon Peres, Carter instructed Vance to meet with the Israeli
Cabinet that afternoon, asking him to “concentrate” on the Israeli oil
supply and Egyptian access to Gaza. (Carter, Keeping Faith, page 423)
To guide the Secretary’s conversation, Carter’s handwritten notes
posed two questions, upon which Vance added his own handwritten
responses. First, Carter asked, “Can the negotiating nations—or their
designated liaison teams (representatives)[—]have free access to the in-
habitants of Gaza or the West Bank during the time of negotiations to
determine the modalities of the establishment of self government—and
during the elections?” In the margin next to this question, Vance wrote,
“yes—but.” Second, Carter asked, “Is the sale of oil from Egypt during
coming years under normal marketing procedures adequate, provided
the U.S. will guarantee adequate supplies of oil to Israel under all cir-
cumstances?” Vance answered, “No.” (Notes made by President Carter
during Begin’s Speech to the Knesset, March 12; Carter Library, Plains
National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski met with Begin and his
Cabinet. No memorandum of conversation or official record of that
meeting has been found. Handwritten notes from the meeting, kept by
U.S. Ambassador to Israel Samuel W. Lewis are in the Department of
State, U.S. Embassy Tel Aviv, Principal Officers Program Files, Lot
85F104, [unfoldered Lewis spiral notebook]. Vance recalled in his
memoirs that the meeting “got nowhere. Each side repeated its prior
positions and we remained deadlocked. Finally, when it became clear
that nothing new would emerge, we adjourned.” Begin, Vance re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
counted, “gave me a draft of a joint statement to be issued by him and
Carter. I read it grimly. It tried to paper over the harsh reality that after
the Camp David summit, the Blair House talks, the ministerial sessions
at Camp David, my rescue mission to Cairo and Jerusalem, Begin’s visit
to Washington and the president’s trip to the Middle East, we had
failed to bridge the last narrow gap.” “The remaining three issues,”
Vance contended, “seemed so insignificant compared to the prize that
could be seized with a little flexibility and imagination.” (Vance, Hard
Choices, pages 248–249)
On the evening of March 12, Vance met again with Israeli Minister
for Foreign Affairs Moshe Dayan at the King David Hotel. No memo-
randum of conversation or official record of the meeting has been
found, but Vance and Dayan recorded the substance of the exchange in
their respective memoirs. (Vance, Hard Choices, pages 249–250; Dayan,
Breakthrough, pages 275–276) During the meeting, lasting “several
hours,” Dayan “urged me [Vance] to persuade the Egyptians that we
should drop the idea of Gaza first and make no mention of Egyptian li-
aison officers in the West Bank and Gaza letter. He stressed that the
Egyptians could propose advancing elections in Gaza (“Gaza first”) at
the autonomy negotiations. He also underscored that when Israel with-
drew from El Arish and normal relations began, ‘any Egyptian could
travel to Gaza on an Israeli visa, just as any Israeli would be able to go
to Cairo on an Egyptian visa.’ I was prepared to accept Dayan’s sugges-
tion if we could reach an agreement on the oil supplies question.” On
oil, Dayan told Vance he “understood that the Egyptians could not
agree at this time to sell Israel oil on a long-term basis and at a preferred
price.” “When I heard this,” Vance later recalled, “I knew that we were
approaching a breakthrough.” Dayan suggested to Vance that Carter
invite Begin to a breakfast meeting the following morning, March 13;
Vance telephoned the President who immediately agreed to the sug-
gestion. (Vance, Hard Choices, pages 249–250)
After this, Vance and Dayan “turned to constructing the final
pillars of the bridge.” Vance asked Dayan “what Israel could live with
in terms of U.S. guarantees. He replied that it would be necessary for
the U.S. oil guarantee to last for twenty years rather than the five we
had offered. I said I felt we could move in his direction on this. Dayan
said further that there must be a clause in the treaty stating that Israel
had a right to buy oil directly from Egypt. He pointed out that without
such a clause the Egyptian boycott would remain in effect. It would be
difficult to do, but I felt we could draft language to meet his point and
persuade the Egyptians to accept it. I so indicated to him, saying I
would, of course, have to discuss these matters with the president but
that I was hopeful.” After gaining the President’s approval for a U.S. oil
guarantee to Israel for a fifteen-year period and for the revisions to

West Bank and Gaza letter proposed by Dayan, Vance met with Assist-
ant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold
H. Saunders, Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambas-
sador to Israel Samuel W. Lewis, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Michael E. Sterner, to
draft the new treaty clause. “By early morning [March 13],” Vance
wrote, “we had an acceptable draft, which we took to the president. He
approved.” (Vance, Hard Choices, page 250)
The following morning, March 13, Vance again met with Dayan
and presented him with the U.S. draft of the oil agreement; the two then
adjourned to join the breakfast meeting between Carter and Begin.
The oil agreement was prepared as an attachment to Annex III of the
treaty text, the section that addressed the normalization of Egyptian-
Israeli economic relations. For Carter’s breakfast with Begin and the
subsequent quadripartite meeting with Vance and Dayan, see Docu-
ment 202. The final text of the agreed minutes on oil stated, “The treaty
of peace and Annex III thereto provide for establishing normal eco-
nomic relations between the parties. In accordance therewith, it is
agreed that such relations will include normal commercial sales of oil
by Egypt to Israel, and that Israel shall be fully entitled to make bids for
Egyptian-origin oil not needed for Egyptian domestic oil consumption,
and Egypt and its oil concessionaires will entertain bids made by Israel
on the same basis and terms as apply to other bidders for oil.” (Tele-
Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–2651) A draft version of the mem-
orandum of agreement on oil between Israel and the United States pro-
posed by Vance, along with two alternative draft versions produced on
March 16, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern
Oil.
for Egypt, where Carter met with Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat at
the Cairo airport. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s
Daily Diary) The substance of their meeting is in Document 202.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

208.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Embassy in
Israel
For Ambassador Lewis from Secretary Vance.
1. Please deliver following revised message to Begin from President.
2. Start text.
Dear Mr. Prime Minister,

209.
Memorandum From the White House Counsel (Lipshutz) for
the File
March 13, 1979
This memorandum is being dictated as we return on Air Force One
from Israel and Egypt on March 13, 1979.
Approximately one hour ago, President Carter announced at the
Cairo Airport, with President Sadat of Egypt standing at his side, that
President Sadat had accepted in full all of the proposals for settlement
of the various problems involved in the peace treaty between Israel and
Egypt. President Carter announced that he had just talked with Prime
Minister Begin, which I witnessed at the Cairo Airport, advising him of
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
this decision by President Sadat. And Begin stated that he would
submit the final matters to his Cabinet. We heard shortly after takeoff
from Cairo that Begin had called a meeting of the Israeli Cabinet for
these last outstanding matters.
Clearly, the final decision is in the hands of the Israelis on the few
remaining and relatively less important questions, the resolution of
which has been recommended by President Carter and agreed to by
President Sadat, and which Begin previously had agreed with Carter to
submit to the Cabinet (although he had not stated whether or not he
would recommend them to his Cabinet).
On board Air Force One the atmosphere is one of exhilaration,
tempered somewhat by the realization that there are still many weeks
and months of difficult implementation lying ahead, assuming that the
Israeli Cabinet will agree to the final details and that the Knesset of Is-
rael will ratify these actions. The President himself has walked through
the plane, thanking everyone who has been involved in the process for
their help, and Secretary Vance has received particular expressions of
admiration and congratulations along with the President for his role in
this process, which has included 10 trips to the Middle East during the
past couple of years.
In addition to the President and Mrs. Carter on board, also on
board are Secretary and Mrs. Vance, Secretary Harold Brown, Dr. Brze-
zinski, Hamilton Jordan, Gerald Rafshoon, Ed Sanders, Roy Atherton,
Harold Saunders, Bill Quandt, Herbert Hansell, et al. Secretary Vance
commented very forcibly that this was a successful team effort and that
everybody on board this plane particularly, as well as others, had made
a significant contribution to the success of this long effort. One of the
obviously important items which must be worked upon is the selection
of the United States’ representative for the future negotiations between
the parties, which are going to be extremely tedious, time-consuming,
and complex. Secretary Vance mentioned that it is extremely difficult to
find someone like Sol Linowitz, who was excellent in the Panama Canal
Treaty negotiations, to handle such a project. Every effort obviously
should be made to find a person who has the right characteristics and
tenacity to represent the United States government, because these ne-
gotiations have proved that it is essential that our government play a
key role in the relationship between Israel and Egypt.
In reviewing many of the details of the agreements which have
been worked out, it is obvious that the various specific recommenda-
tions which I passed on to the President as a result of my communica-
tions with Leon Charney, which resulted from his communications
with Ezer Weizmann, have been both accurate and helpful. It is impor-
tant that first I write an appropriate letter to Leon and further that
something from the President be sent to him as an expression of appre-
ciation. This does not mean that the relationship is ended; to the con-
trary, it probably will continue for a very long period of time and hope-
fully be as helpful as it has in the past. It is obvious that Ezer Weizmann
and Harold Brown have an excellent relationship established and
therefore that it may be that many matters which we had handled
through these “back channels” can be handled in a direct manner in the
future. I have not discussed this with Harold Brown, I do not know if
he is interested in getting into the diplomatic or political aspect of rela-
tionships, but we should determine these things to make sure that we
are coordinated and utilizing this entire relationship with Weizmann in
the most effective manner. Perhaps I should discuss this with the Presi-
dent first, and then with Harold Brown.
Having been so close to the day-to-day and hour-to-hour negotia-
tions and other activities in connection with this matter, particularly
over the past several days, it is difficult to comprehend the magnitude
of the entire situation. Several of us have discussed this and realize that
it really is a mammoth undertaking which the President embarked
upon, and it appears that the success of it will have a profound effect on
both the United States and Israel, as well as many other millions of
for Egypt to sell Israel a fixed number of barrels of oil at world market rates “provided it
does not jeopardize (conflict with) Egyptian national interests,” backed by a U.S. guar-
antee. This memorandum is ibid. Charney noted that this memorandum was passed to
Carter on the morning of March 13. (Charney, Special Counsel, p. 137)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
people throughout the world. That is what makes it so difficult to com-
prehend when you are involved in the minutiae, as well as other things
relating to a situation like this.
It is interesting to recall now how Jody and others handled the
press treatment of this entire project. From the beginning it was repre-
sented, properly, as a mission which had no assurance of success and,
to the contrary, had significant likelihood of not succeeding. It is ob-
vious that many cynics felt that President Carter already “had it
wrapped up” before he embarked upon the venture, but that is now
quite obviously false.
The expectations of success for this trip were correct for two
reasons:
1. In fact it was a high risk venture with no assurance whatsoever
of success and with every possibility of failure.
2. By keeping the expectations low, should it prove to be successful
(as it has) then the accomplishment would of course, seem even greater.
President Carter throughout this entire Middle East situation has
demonstrated some amazing characteristics, and even though I have
had almost unlimited faith in him for many years, even I did not com-
prehend his capacity to handle this situation in the manner he has.
Among these characteristics are:
1. The ability to study and understand this tremendously complex
situation involving so much history, emotions, geopolitical consider-
ations, etc.
2. The ability to establish personal relationships with people who
are attractive and people who are unattractive, but all of whom were
necessary to give any hope of succeeding in these negotiations.
3. The willingness to devote the amount of time which he has de-
voted to this entire matter, much more than he has devoted to any other
matter since he became President. (I personally believe that he really
has taken this on as a “mission” not only because he is President, but
because of his personal feelings and concern about this entire
situation.)
4. His patience and tenacity in pursuing this basic objective of
peace in the Middle East, which he has expressed over the last three or
four years, and which he has demonstrated over the last two years. This
obviously is in the face of tremendous opposition, frustration, and
discouragement.
5. His ability to handle the numerous legal problems involved in
negotiation of a treaty, injecting not only the necessary technical abil-
ities, but also the psychological and other factors which have proved to
be so necessary in order to reach some type of resolution.

210.
Memorandum for the Record
Washington, March 14, 1979
The attached reflects an oral expression of opinion by Secretary
ident Carter, President Sadat and Prime Minister Khalil.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Attachment
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to Egyptian Prime
Minister Khalil
Washington, undated
Dear Mustafa:
I am writing this to follow up our discussions on March 13 at the
Cairo airport concerning the Agreed Minutes to Articles VI (2) and VI
(5) of the Treaty of Peace. Those Agreed Minutes are as follows: Quote:
ARTICLE VI (2)
The provisions of Article VI shall not be construed in contradiction
to the provisions of the Framework for Peace in the Middle East Agreed
at Camp David. The foregoing is not to be construed as contravening
the provisions of Article VI (2) of the Treaty, which reads as follows:
The Parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations
under this Treaty, without regard to action or inaction of any other
party and independently of any instrument external to this Treaty.
ARTICLE VI (5)
It is agreed by the Parties that there is no assertion that this Treaty
prevails over other treaties or agreements or that other treaties or
agreements prevail over this Treaty. The foregoing is not to be con-
strued as contravening the provisions of Article VI (5) of the Treaty,
which reads as follows:
Subject to Article 103 of the United Nations Charter, in the event of
a conflict between the obligations of the Parties under the present
Treaty and any of their other obligations, the obligations under this
Treaty will be binding and implemented. Unquote.
This will confirm that in my opinion these Agreed Minutes to Ar-
ticles VI (2) and VI (5) are interpretations of those Articles.
Sincerely yours,
Cyrus Vance
final from Blair House.
Would like to ask you to use your good offices of Eilts and make
suggestion to Egyptians. Either General Ali, ?, or Mubarak.
JC: Have you picked out a time?
MB: Ezer could leave tomorrow or within a few days.
JC: I will tell Eilts to work out schedule with Ambassador Lewis.
MB: Oil also approved. Minister of Energy has a suggestion to
make. There are no conditions. Would like him to speak to Vance and
Vance to you. He has something of interest to tell you.
JC: Okay. I will tell Vance to expect the call.
MB: Last issue, in conjunction with your letter regarding unilateral
action—please send to me (Begin) first the draft letter3 before sending it
to Sadat.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
JC: I will do so.
JC: Let me respond. I think the entire process is gratifying to all of
us. I want to express my thanks for your hospitality, and my admira-
tion to you as a strong leader.
MB: Strength from Abraham. Thanks.
I also want to ask Secretary Brown to meet with Ezer to discuss bi-
lateral matters.
JC: Secretary Brown will be glad to meet with Ezer.
MB: I have now been empowered by the Cabinet. You may think
now I didn’t make a mistake when I said you would leave the country
with satisfaction.
JC: Thanks. We will be extending to you and Sadat an invitation at
the earliest convenient date and will clear the schedule with you and
Sadat before making the invitation public.
MB: The debate will take place next week, perhaps Monday,4
Tuesday or Wednesday. The debate will last for 10–12 hours. I hope to
get a majority, and even a strong majority.
You saw our democratic process. You have had the experience.
JC: It was a very interesting experience.
MB: In Parliament you know you have to know how to take and
how to give. I must still meet coalition parties. I suppose the opposition
will vote with us. I hope to get a majority. If not, government will re-
sign, as I said yesterday to the Israeli people.
JC: Israel cannot afford to lose you as Prime Minister. Good luck.
MB: Best to Rosalynn . . .
JC: Our love to Alisa . . .
MB: Only one thing, if the Egyptians prefer the meeting to take
place at American encampment at Sinai or in Washington, we will ac-
cept either proposal.
JC: I will inquire through Hermann Eilts
MB: Let me know through Lewis.
JC: This is good news indeed.
MB: God bless you.
JC: Good bye.

212.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter
Washington, March 14, 1979
SUBJECT
Supply of Arms to Egypt and Israel in Connection with the Peace Treaty
During our trip I discussed the supply of arms and other facilities
and services and their funding with Egyptian Minister of Defense
Kamal Ali and with Israeli Minister of Defense Ezer Weizman. With the
Egyptians, I described an implied release, after a peace treaty was con-
cluded, of a number of equipment items (Tab A), with USG financing of
part FMS credits, the mix and terms to be determined. With the Israelis,
I indicated that, in the case of a peace treaty, we would make certain
equipment items available (Tab B) and would assist in the relocation of
air bases from the Sinai to the Negev. The total funds would (in addi-
three years. Again, the mix of grants, credits, and sales was to be deter-
mined. With both, I stressed that the U.S. Government was prepared to
make these commitments in the context of the Peace Treaty and subject
to consultation with and approval of Congress. (Weizman will be in
Washington Friday for discussions on this subject.)
Financing will be critical to accomplishment of these commit-
ments. The options for financing as I see them now are as follows:
OPTIONS
A
B
Egypt ($1. billion)
Terms: credits
cash
Israel ($2. billion)
Terms: grants
none
FMS credits
Other loans
none
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
We should begin negotiations on a conservative level of U.S. com-
mitment, but be prepared to move to a level you now decide on. For Is-
rael, I would strongly recommend that you decide now that we will be
prepared to seek grant aid for the airbase relocation, in the amount of
$1. billion. Since the U.S. intends to perform all the work on the con-
tract, much of this amount would be spent in the United States and not
adversely impact on balance of payments. The rest, $1. billion, would
be FMS credits (of which half is customarily forgiven). This extra $1.
billion could be spent, in a mix to be determined by the Israelis, among
equipment, extras for the relocated airbases, and other Sinai relocation
costs. For Egypt, I recommend a 50–50 credit-cash split. The cash for
sales would have to be found by them, presumably from Saudi Arabia,
though this is chancy given likely violent Arab League reactions to the
Peace Treaty. We could also seek grants from other western countries
and from Japan. If Egypt obtains such a Saudi or other grant, then their
terms would be equivalent to the terms we extend Israel for FMS
credits, i.e., half forgiven. Alternatively, we might extend Egypt the
FMS terms (half forgiven, the rest paid over 20 years beginning 10
years later, at commercial interest terms) that we customarily provide
Israel.
The total package shown amounts to $4. billion over the three
year period, although the amounts required to be appropriated
would be much less. The first year costs and their financing will have
to be determined based on how quickly we can get programs going.
We can envisage, for instance, that an Egyptian program, front-
loaded, might require $300 million in FMS financing in the first year.
The airbase relocation will require as much as $500 million in the first
year, in order to insure completion within the three year limit. These
would require an FY 1979 supplemental to get going, while other initial
costs might be accomplished by a change in the FY 1980 budget
proposal.
The U.S. Government will also need to consider economic aid for
Egypt. Egypt’s economy is not in good shape, and such aid might be
very important to Sadat’s political survival. He may well have diffi-
culty in obtaining continued assistance from other Arab states, in-
cluding Saudi Arabia, which in the past has amounted to around $500
million a year in non-military aid.
Recommendation: That you authorize me to negotiate financial ar-
rangements (covering a three year period) with Israel and Egypt up to,
but not exceeding the following:
a. Israel: $1. grant assistance for airbase construction (Israel
would pay all costs above this amount), and $1. billion
FMS (half forgiven) credit.

b. Egypt: $750 million (none forgiven) FMS credit, and $750 mil-
lion in cash sales to be financed by others.
Harold Brown
Tab A
List Prepared in the Department of Defense
Washington, undated
EGYPT: EQUIPMENT
$ Million
INDICATED AS LIKELY TO BE AVAILABLE (but
requiring choices among them by the Egyptians to
stay within 1.5B$)
One cruiser (the ALBANY)
Up to four Gearing Class Destroyers (two for active
service; two for cannibalization if necessary).
Reasonable quantities of Armored Personnel
Carriers (e.g., 1000)
Twelve I-Hawk missile batteries
Additional F–5 aircraft (50)
Additional C–130 aircraft (20)
CH–47 “Chinook” helicopters (40)
Pressure test of Egyptian Soviet-built submarine
hulls
Technical Data Package for retrofitting current
Egyptian tanks
TO BE CONSIDERED:
F–4 aircraft in moderate numbers (35)
One or two diesel submarines (Guppy type or Tang
class)
TURNED DOWN:
F–15 or F–16 aircraft
Attack helicopters
M60 tanks
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Tab B
List Prepared in the Department of Defense
Washington, undated
ISRAEL: EQUIPMENT
INDICATED AS LIKELY TO BE AVAILABLE
Acceleration of 55 F–16 aircraft, but keeping the
same original total of 75, with deliveries to begin in
January 1980 instead of April 1981.

213.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency
Washington, March 15, 1979
SUBJECT
Arab Reactions
Arab renunciation of President Sadat and the Egyptian-Israeli
treaty is building toward a crescendo. We expect the effort by Iraq,
Syria, and Libya to stampede the more moderate Arabs into unquali-
fied condemnation of the treaty to be largely successful. The culmina-
tion of the effort will be a new conference in Baghdad—possibly timed
to open the day a treaty is signed—and a vote to impose sanctions
against Egypt. [handling restriction not declassified]
We detect some initial ambivalence on the part of Saudi Arabia
and Jordan toward “punishing” Sadat. It will be difficult to keep them
that way until the early, largely hostile Arab reaction has run its course.
The sentiment, moreover, is tentative and the full weight of anti-Sadat
pressure has not yet been applied. That will occur at Baghdad, where
there will be few significant countervailing pressures. We doubt that
the moderates have the self-confidence to stand against the hardliners
given their own reservations about the treaty. We should not rule out
that the Iranians will ask to participate, adding to the pressure on Saudi
Arabia. [handling restriction not declassified]
The day of reckoning that the Saudis have long feared appears to
be at hand. In their eyes a treaty forces them to choose between two
pillars of Saudi foreign policy—Arab unity and a special relationship
with the United States. They seek a middle ground, but developments
since Sadat’s trip to Jerusalem seem to have denied them this option.
[handling restriction not declassified]
The signs in recent months indicate that—for the Saudis—the Arab
option is in the ascendency, although the issue is a contentious one
within the leadership. Foreign Minister Saud told Ambassador West on
Wednesday2 that the immediate and “automatic” consequences of
Egypt’s signing a treaty would be ouster of Egypt from the Arab
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
League, transfer of League headquarters from Cairo, and expulsion of
Egypt from the Arab Mutual Defense Pact. Such sanctions were agreed
to at the Baghdad summit last November. On the important question
of economic sanctions, Saud said his government would “maintain its
economic contacts with Egypt” and continue “current commitments.”
Further economic commitments were ruled out. [handling restriction not
declassified]
A contributing factor to Saudi attitudes is skepticism about US
willingness to guarantee Saudi security. Such doubts will not be easily
or quickly overcome. Prince Saud did say, however, that Crown Prince
Fahd wants to reschedule his visit to Washington—an indication in
part of the great apprehension among Saudi leaders that their “Arab
commitments” will undermine the “special relationship.” [handling re-
striction not declassified]
We expect considerable vacillation from the Saudis as their key
leaders consider their next step. Barring dramatic treaty language or
unilateral Israeli gestures on linkage, however, we expect a gradual
and reluctant slide by Saudi Arabia into an Arab consensus position
condemning the treaty and imposing sanctions, possibly including new
limits on economic aid. [handling restriction not declassified]
Iraq, Syria, and Libya will do their best to quickly push reluctant
Arab governments into unqualified condemnation of the treaty and
President Sadat. The actual treaty language is probably immaterial and
unlikely to affect the attitude of the hardliners. The moderating role
played by Syria and Iraq in the recent Yemeni conflict—after Saudi
efforts to defuse the crisis had failed—probably gives them added
leverage with the Saudis. In the short term, the peace treaty will
quicken the pace of Syrian-Iraqi reconciliation, particularly in the area
of foreign policy and military cooperation. [handling restriction not
declassified]
We look for Palestinian groups to show their anger over a treaty
by:
—Attempted acts of terrorism by radical Palestinians against
Egyptian, Israeli, and perhaps US targets in Europe, the Middle East,
and Israel proper.
—Encouragement for continued protests by Palestinians in the oc-
cupied territories, and Palestinian demonstrations in Lebanon.
It is possible that Yasir Arafat and the more moderate Palestinian
majority will temporize briefly while they examine the terms of the
peace for Palestinian gains and assess the reaction of other Arabs. Such
restraint will likely soon give way if the Arab world, as seems likely, in-

214.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, March 15, 1979
SUBJECT
[1½ lines not declassified] Fatah Leader Yasir Arafat
2. [1½ lines not declassified] Arafat denies having threatened Amer-
ican officials, accuses the Israelis of the murder of his aide on 22 Jan-
uary 1979, and berates the United States for failing to denounce this
murder. Arafat then asks the following questions on the current peace
talks:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
a. Is it true that the U.S. has agreed to guarantee that Israel will re-
ceive its needed oil supplies, at OPEC prices, from either Egypt or the
U.S.?
b. Is it true that the U.S. is handling the issue of Egypt’s defense
pacts with other Arab states by obtaining a specific Israeli guarantee
not to attack Syria or Jordan? [less than 1 line not declassified] Arafat sees
this as an “open invitation” for the Israelis to strike at the Palestinians
in Lebanon, rather than protection for Syria or Jordan.)
c. Is it true that the U.S. will agree to a clause making any “self-
rule” timetable contingent upon “cooperation” by the inhabitants of
the occupied territories? [handling restriction not declassified]
5. This information is also being provided to the Assistant to the
President for National Security Affairs. (U)
Stansfield Turner

215.
Letter From President Carter to King Hussein of Jordan
Washington, March 16, 1979

216.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Egypt and Israel
65822. Subject: Joint Letter.
1. Secret-entire text
2. Following is final text of joint letter concerning West Bank/Gaza
negotiations:
3. Begin quote:
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Hansell; cleared by Atherton and Joseph Hulings
(S/S–O); approved by Saunders. Sent for information Immediate to the White House.

The President, The White House
Dear Mr. President:
This letter confirms that Egypt and Israel have agreed as follows:
The Government of Egypt and Israel recall that they concluded at
Camp David and signed at the White House on September 17, 1978, the
annexed documents entitled ‘A Framework for Peace in the Middle
East Agreed at Camp David’ and ‘Framework for the Conclusion of a
Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel.’
For the purpose of achieving a comprehensive peace settlement in
accordance with the above-mentioned frameworks, Egypt and Israel
will proceed with the implementation of those provisions relating to
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. They have agreed to start negotia-
tions within a month after the exchange of the instruments of ratifica-
tion of the peace treaty. In accordance with the ‘Framework for Peace in
the Middle East,’ the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is invited to join
the negotiations. The delegations of Egypt and Jordan may include Pal-
estinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip or other Palestinians as
mutually agreed. The purpose of the negotiation shall be to agree prior
to the elections on the modalities for establishing the elected self-
governing authority (administrative council), define its powers and re-
sponsibilities, and agree upon other related issues. In the event Jordan
decides not to take part in the negotiations, the negotiations will be
held by Israel and Egypt.
The two governments agree to negotiate continuously and in good
faith to conclude these negotiations at the earliest possible date. They
also agree that the objective of the negotiations is the establishment of
the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza in order to pro-
vide full autonomy to the inhabitants.
Egypt and Israel set for themselves the goal of completing the ne-
gotiations within one year so that elections will be held as expedi-
tiously as possible after agreement has been reached between the
parties. The self-governing authority referred to in the ‘Framework for
Peace in the Middle East’ will be established and inaugurated within
one month after it has been elected, at which time the transitional pe-
riod of five years will begin. The Israeli military government and its ci-
vilian administration will be withdrawn, to be replaced by the self gov-
erning authority, as specified in the ‘Framework for Peace in the
Middle East.’ A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will then take place
and there will be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into
specified security locations.
This letter also confirms our understanding that the United States
Government will participate fully in all stages of negotiations.

217.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
65824. Entire text. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With Weizman
March 16.
1. Secretary met with Weizman for about an hour afternoon March
16, for first half hour with group comprising Evron and Tehila on Is-
raeli side and on US side Mrs. Benson, Atherton, Saunders, Hansell and
Korn, and for second half hour alone. Following are main points that
came up in group session.
2. Weizman expressed concern that in their talks this weekend on
sub-phasing General Ali might press him for withdrawal from Al Arish
in three months. He said Dayan has already told the Likud Knesset
group that withdrawal from Al Arish would be in four months; short-
ening of that time would cause problems. Secretary said he would do
his best to help get agreement on four months. He could not guaran-
tee that Ali wouldn’t start by asking for three months, but he did not
think this was something the parties should get hungup on. Secretary
pointed out that there are two other things that might cause problems
in the talks on sub-phasing: 1) the fact that Alma comes at the end of 9
tian civilian police into evacuated areas when full withdrawal is com-
pleted. Weizman indicated that if Israel could get some further assur-
ance on provision of oil from Egypt transfer of Alma could take place
earlier than nine months.
3. Weizman’s main concern was with levels of assistance. In
Knesset debate on the treaty next week he wanted to be able to say that
“our defense problems are being taken care of.” He would like to leave
the US with assurances on this. Israel had asked only for $3 billion in
redeployment assistance but it now looks as though actual cost will be
costs. Weizman stressed magnitude of work Israel will have to do to
build infrastructure in Negev and value of infrastructure and installa-
tions it is giving up in Sinai. Furthermore inflation is steadily eroding
value of US annual $1 billion FMS program. Weizman asked that an-
nual assistance program be increased by $500 million and that another
billion dollars be added to proposed USG redeployment aid package.
This would cover Israel’s needs and give Israelis a feeling of security. It
would be very good if I could go back with this, Weizman said. If not,
Israel will still sign the treaty but “there will be much less joy,” in later
remarks, Evron expressed concern over what he had heard concerning
terms of our redeployment assistance package. Evron said there had
been talk about commercial bank loan and this was worrisome (owing
to an interruption Evron was unable to spell out fully his concern and
there was no time for further discussion of it).

218.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
United States
Saudi Arabia
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Crown Prince Fahd Abd al-Aziz
Warren Christopher
al Saud
Ambassador John West
Prince Abdullah Abd al-Aziz al
General David Jones
Saud
Chip Carter
Prince Sultan Abd al-Aziz al Saud
Gary Sick
Prince Saud Faysal al Saud
David Ransom
Dr. Rashad Pharaon
Isa Sabbagh
Mr. Abd al-Rahman al-Mansuri
Note taker
Crown Prince Fahd opened the meeting by noting that the audience
with the King had been excellent.
Dr. Brzezinski said that he brought greetings from the President.
He hoped that the Crown Prince would soon be able to visit Wash-
ington and continue these talks. The President believes that our coun-
tries are linked not only by interests but by a shared belief in God and a
special spiritual bond. There is a very special relationship between us.
We wish to preserve that. We believe those relations today are chal-
lenged by internal and external threats to our interests. As a conse-
quence we must respond to the challenge, to determine if the future
world will be dominated by moderate or radical forces. The external
threat originates with the Soviet Union, and its effects have been seen in
Afghanistan, Ethiopia, and South Yemen. The internal threat consists of
forces creating regimes favorable to the Soviet Union. The United
States is determined to respond to both challenges. In recent weeks we
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
have demonstrated our intent to respond. We are prepared to use force
if necessary to protect the vital interests of ourselves or of our friends.
We are willing to work with all Arab countries who have shared
security concerns, to shape a consultative security framework. This is
not an attempt to split the Arab world, though we recognize that some
Arab countries are better friends than others. It is in our longer term in-
terests to increase our relations with Syria and Iraq, and we would wel-
come your suggestions on how that might be done. I have already
spoken to King Khalid about the intellectual and spiritual revival of
Islam and the importance that we attach to it. In this context, we want
to find a solution to the Arab-Israel dispute.
We see the Israel-Egyptian treaty as the beginning and a corner-
stone of a comprehensive peace settlement. The President has made
very clear his determination to use this treaty to work to protect and
preserve the rights of the Palestinians. This [is] a point of personal prin-
ciple. We hope that the treaty will establish the principle of Israeli with-
drawal and Israeli dismantlement of settlements in occupied territories.
It should also lay the basis for the United States Arab friendship since it
will result in changing attitudes on both sides. The treaty opens the
door of redressing justice for the Palestinians and creating new condi-
tions for giving the Palestinians their legitimate rights. We also believe
that anything that hurts or undermines the treaty helps our adver-
saries. The Soviets do not wish a treaty, the Arab radicals do not wish
one, the anti-Arab forces in the United States oppose it, and those Is-
raelis who want to retain all of their lands also oppose it. So we want
your cooperation over the next few months when it will be particularly
difficult after signing the treaty.
We believe at this new historical stage you and we are ready for
new wider relationships; but any economic or political sanctions
against Egypt would hurt us as well [as] Egypt. We have been encour-
aged to hear that it is not your intention to do anything to disadvantage
or hurt Egypt and that you will exert every effort to maintain normal
relations with Egypt. This is a statesmanlike position. The President in
Cairo pledged himself to work to solve the problem of the Palestinians.
I cannot imagine any President in the future willing to do so much for
the Palestinians. I would like to be able to tell him from you when we
go back that there will be no tangible actions by you that would hurt
Egypt or us. The President hopes that you will be able to visit Wash-
ington soon to discuss these matters and joint decisions to be taken. In
the meantime, we remain committed to relations with you which we
think are very deep.
Crown Prince Fahd said he was pleased when he first heard of the
visit. He saw a clear indication of the interest of the President of the
United States. All we hope for is that the efforts of President Carter con-

tinue to another stage to see the objective achieved with justice. I can as-
sure you it is one of our salient principles that Saudi Arabia will not
hurt anyone, so it stands to reason that we will not hurt Egypt which is
our friend and relative. It suffices to mention two things—last week we
signed with Egypt a $120 million agreement for purchase of machinery
and another $525 million contract. Would we do that if we wanted to
hurt Egypt? Of course one must admit as a realist that you cannot tell
what will happen next week. But I reiterate we will not permit harm to
come to anyone through us.
Saudi Arabia is thinking seriously about sending a special emis-
sary to Iraq, Syria, and the Palestinians. Perhaps this will cause them to
reduce their enmity and bring them closer to moderation. This is just a
hope. Circumstances are not settled. Our hope is that the treaty in-
volving Israel, Egypt and the United States will embody something
with which we can work and put to rest those anguished souls who
wish to do something drastic. We need something we can use as a
counter-argument. Does the treaty indicate the path on which the Pal-
estinians travel to determine their own future.
Dr. Brzezinski said the treaty has provisions which create the cir-
cumstances for Palestinians to participate in the political process. This
will probably not be satisfactory initially but if it is exploited by the
Jordanians and Palestinians the situation on the West Bank can be
transformed.
Mr. Christopher said that the crux of the negotiation over the next
several months will be the efforts of President Sadat to find linkages or
relationships between the treaty and a comprehensive settlement. If
Sadat wanted only a bilateral settlement, he could have had that long
ago, but he held out and now he has a strong commitment that negotia-
tions will begin one month after the treaty is ratified with respect to ar-
rangements on the West Bank. The timetable has been laid out under
which, within one year, the modalities had to be determined with re-
gard to election and self-government. Both Palestinians and Jordanians
are free to participate. He wants to make it clear that Sadat fought hard
for the process leading beyond the bilateral stage.
Dr. Brzezinski said it was predictable that the radical Arabs would
say this is not enough. But we want to start a process which over the
next few years transforms the conditions on the West Bank. Those Is-
raelis who want to retain permanent control are very fearful about the
provisions of the treaty. He had recently been to Israel with President
Carter, and he could say truthfully that he was surprised by the polit-
ical difficulties that Begin is encountering. That is why we are anxious
to start a process as soon as possible to insure that the process is not
derailed. The creation of an Egyptian-Israeli treaty helps to overcome
difficulties in the United States thereby creating possibilities for a wider

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
relationship on security issues with Arab states. This is why the Presi-
dent asked him to come here. You understand that we are walking
down the path of history together.
Crown Prince Fahd asked is there nothing in the treaty that the Pal-
estinians after a certain time will get self-determination? The Pales-
tinians will ask us that.
Dr. Brzezinski said the words “self-determination” have not been
used. To Israel that means a separate Palestinian state. We have used
the words “participate in determining their future,” because we believe
that the next five years will bring conditions in which Palestinian and
Israeli objectives are not incompatible. He mentioned the Peres speech
in the Knesset on Palestinian rights as evidence that change does take
place over time. Golda Meir said there was no such thing as a Pales-
tinian. Begin said one year ago that the Israelis are Palestinians. Peres
may be the next Prime Minister and he spoke of the rights of the Pales-
tinians. President Carter and President Sadat created a framework in
which we can redefine existing reality into something very different
within the next five years.
Mr. Christopher said that difficult questions lie ahead in deter-
mining the scope of self-government in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
The concept of full autonomy is to a large degree self-government. In-
stitutions can be created on the West Bank and Gaza Strip which would
eliminate most of the objectionable aspects of outside involvement. It is
important that the Palestinians find a means of becoming part of the ne-
gotiations themselves. We are prepared to welcome the Palestinians
into negotiations on the basis of their acceptance of Resolution 242.
Your government earlier made efforts along those lines. We hope you
will do so again to insure that moderate Palestinians join the process.
Crown Prince Fahd said of course they would continue the process
toward the results mentioned, but they are asked questions and they
need an answer when the Palestinians ask them. They hear the pro-
nouncements of the ultimate aim but they want assurances that they
have a choice of their own future.
Dr. Brzezinski said the answer is that in the course of the next five
years the situation can be altered in ways not specifically predictable at
present. If the United States now stated flatly that there would be a Pal-
estinian state in five years, they would not get a single Israeli prepared

to cooperate in the process. But many Israeli critics of Begin in the
Knesset say the result will be a Palestinian entity with self-government.
Therefore, we hope and ask for two things. First, we want the Pales-
tinians to show the political wisdom to seize this opportunity; sec-
ondly, we want our friends, and especially our close friends with
whom we can cooperate on regional security, to give this process a
chance and not join into actions designed to derail it. I am very encour-
aged by what his Royal Highness said that Saudi Arabia has an over-
riding interest in shaping a moderate Middle East.
Mr. Christopher said that we live in a world of alternatives. This al-
ternative (the treaty) is much preferable to others. Leaving the status
quo only creates a dangerous situation. If the present situation con-
tinues and the Israeli occupation continues, there is no chance of
progress.
Crown Prince Fahd said that he would speak as a friend and that he
shared the desire for a stable Middle East, but he wanted to mention
and make clear that no one can guarantee that what we say will be
heeded by Iraq, Syria, or the others. We will do our best because we
share this view. We will try to knock some sense into them. He would
like to have something clear, however; if the area experiences acts of
destruction and we find ourselves keeping quiet or following a policy
not readily understood, you should know that we are not being de-
structive but dealing with the matter in our own way. We are happy to
consult but you should not misunderstand our motives. It simply
underscores the need of both sides to get together on what is hap-
pening. Things are not predictable.
Dr. Brzezinski said that his mission is an example that we are
always ready to do that. We hope that you will soon be able to consult
with the President, since there is no substitute for consultation at the
highest level. He deduced that our fundamental objectives are similar,
that we share the same concern regarding the external threat and in-
ternal security and to continue to help Egypt set in motion the peace
process so that we can go on to the next phase. We are talking about a
partnership for moderation and stability in the Middle East.
Crown Prince Fahd said this is what is required.
Crown Prince Saud noted that there were certain Arab League tech-
nical measures that would be taken.
Dr. Brzezinski said we would hope the Arab League would not
force you to do things that you would not want to do, such as economic
sanctions.
Crown Prince Saud said the technical measures are not punitive but
jointly agreed upon by the Arab League including such things as a
boycott.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Dr. Brzezinski asked if the Arab League measures would not have
the effect of economic sanctions. (All said no.) He noted that we are
launching ourselves on an effort to help the area. We intend to help
Egypt militarily, and other damage to Egypt would hurt us. We might
as well be frank about it.
Prince Saud said that the measures stipulated by the Arab League
are not to be taken as punitive measures against Egypt or the United
States.
Mr. Christopher said that he was heartened by the indication that
Saudi Arabia will not take unilateral direct steps to interfere with the
peace process. We are anxious to report that to President Carter. In the
candor of our friendship it should be pointed out that the U.S. people
and the Congress may not distinguish so clearly between acts taken
unilaterally or collectively with Arab friends. If you do make efforts to
persuade others, it would be desirable if this became known, even if it
fails, and I hope that it does not. We have asked Congress to do some
extraordinary things in our mutual interest so it is very desirable to be
able to explain to Congress the acts that have been taken.
Crown Prince Fahd said that the point was well taken with regard to
your attempts to bring Congress around. He hoped that you would
bear with me when he says that in this part of the world we know best
how to make friends. Some things are better done quietly.
Dr. Brzezinski said we are not asking you that, and not giving you
advice on how to conduct your relations. We wonder what is behind
the words used by Prince Saud. We do not want to surprise you and we
do not want to be surprised by you. We understand the Foreign Min-
ister says that collective actions will not prevent Saudi cooperation.
This is really important to us. We are going to the Congress to ask
money for Egypt, to undertake measures to enhance security for the re-
gion as a whole to promote moderation, and to prevent the Soviets
from gaining a position. So we need to know what you will be doing.
Prince Saud said the measures to be taken would consist of three
categories. (The interpretation of what might be harmful to the bilateral
relationship between Egypt and Saudi Arabia would depend on the na-
ture of those relations.) These actions will stem directly from the Arab
League and the Mutual Defense Pact. In the event the Egyptians sign a
treaty, the automatic results or the measures to be taken will be based
on the regulations and charter of the Arab League: First, suspension of
membership in the Arab League; second, moving the headquarters
from Cairo elsewhere; and, thirdly, to apply Arab boycott regulations
to Egyptian companies or institutions dealing with Israel. This means
changing the relationship not only between Egypt and Saudi Arabia
but between all the members of the Arab League. They will change the
responsibility of Egypt to the Arab League and vice versa. It is some-

thing like a member of NATO having a treaty with the Soviet Union.
What relations would they then have with the rest of NATO?
Dr. Brzezinski said there were two questions:
—First, what economic effect would the boycott have with regard
to Egyptian-Saudi relations?
—Secondly, are you telling me that at a time when the United
States is starting to help the Egyptian military become stronger in the
region with respect to Israel, you would terminate assistance to Egypt
for military purposes?
(All the Princes shake their heads no.)
Crown Prince Fahd said that he had explained at Baghdad4 that he
would not stop aid to Egypt. He cited the two examples that he had
given previously as evidence that Saudi Arabia had no such intention.
Prince Saud said there was one point that needed to be clear. We
consider Israel to be the enemy, not just any state. Therefore, any agree-
ment that Egypt makes with Israel is not just like any agreement. With
respect to cooperation with the United States, that will continue for-
ever. That is not a question.
Mr. Christopher asked if Egypt will lose some aid due to its depar-
ture from the Arab League. (Prince Sultan shook his head no.)
Prince Saud said he wanted to be careful in his reply because he
was not sure what the Arab League might pay to Egypt. In fact Egypt
might gain by not being required to pay its dues to the Arab League.
Crown Prince Fahd said that the situation was very delicate. He re-
peated that they would lean over backwards to help obviate the
problem facing Egypt, but if they fail they are only human.
Dr. Brzezinski said that in all relations with Saudi Arabia, now and
in the past, we have found them to be men of their words. President
Carter has given his word that we will work for the West Bank. They
should remind their Arab colleagues that we see the Egyptian-Israel
treaty as the first step to a comprehensive settlement. Even the
Baghdad conference called for a comprehensive settlement, so on that
basis we can work together.
Crown Prince Fahd said that when they talk to the Palestinians and
their Arab friends who have ears to hear, can we say we have it as word
from President Carter that this treaty is only the first step to the larger
goal and that he is committed to work for a settlement of the Palestinian
problem so that they will have freedom and self-determination?
Dr. Brzezinski asked him to use the phrase “self-expression” rather
than “self-determination”. We cannot signal a Palestinian state. We

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
have used the phrase that they would “participate in determining their
own future”.
Crown Prince Fahd said that was an exceptionally anglo-Saxon
phrase. There is nothing like that in Arabic. (Some discussion ensued
about how to translate the various phrases.)
Dr. Brzezinski wondered how President Carter’s speech5 in Cairo
had been translated. He thought they should use that translation. That
was a very careful choice of words.
Crown Prince Fahd said that the status of Jerusalem had a very spe-
cial significance for this country. Muslims first turned to Jerusalem to
pray until God declared that they should turn to Mecca.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had been asked this specif-
ically in Israel, i.e., to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. There
are also demands for such an action in the United States. Our position
remains unchanged. This issue will be resolved only in the context of a
comprehensive peace settlement.
Mr. Christopher said that we stand by our position not to recognize
any unilateral steps by Israel which claim that whole territory. It is rec-
ognized by us as occupied territory to be dealt with in the context of a
settlement of the West Bank and Gaza.
Crown Prince Fahd said that this had been a very fruitful exchange.
He would like once more to reiterate their determination to be helpful
in lessening the problems. We will be sending out words and emis-
saries to lessen the problems. We urge you to recognize human limits.
We will come to you at once and say, “This is the problem that re-
mains.” We must stay in close contact and look at the whole area. We
are surrounded by more than just nuisances. Try to see the situation
that we are in and never attribute ulterior motives to us. Saudi Arabia
will not dig the U.S. in the ribs or harm relations with Egypt.
[Omitted here is discussion of regional security issues.]

219.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
United States
Jordan
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
King Hussein
Warren Christopher
Crown Prince Hassan
General David Jones
Prime Minister Mudhar Badran
Chip Carter
Abdul-Hamid Sharaf
Ambassador Nicholas Veliotes
Abd al-Salam Majali
Michael Sterner
Hasan Ibrahim
Gary Sick
(At the beginning of the meeting there was a brief photo opportu-
nity by the press.)
Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had asked him to give the
King a personal letter. Dr. Brzezinski said that our countries are bound
by certain common interests and shared expectations. We have entered
a particularly turbulent situation which affects social systems and the
distribution of power. Perhaps the central choice in future international
arrangements will be whether domination will be by radical or mod-
erate forces. This is a problem that is both local and regional.
The President is seeking a just and lasting peace. No President
since 1948 has been committed as deeply personally and willing to take
risks to himself as this President with regard to this issue. If this Presi-
dent does not succeed, the next President will not try. His failure will be
taken as an object lesson that it is better not to touch the problem be-
cause of the political risks. President Carter has staked his personal po-
litical fortunes on this issue. He wished to help moderate forces prevail.
We would like to shape an Arab Middle East which is moderate in na-
ture and at peace. Our premise is that what hurts U.S. power helps the
Soviets and hurts our friends.
There are two basic threats—internal and external. The internal
threat is the rising appeal of radicalism which is rooted in many social
causes. The conflict with Israel contributes to this, particularly in the
Palestinian case. So the internal struggles are strong, perhaps growing.
The external threat is the Soviet ability to extend its power, to increase
its military strength. The Soviet ideology is not congenial to the U.S.
and does not have great appeal to very many people anywhere. But
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
they do have an ability to project their military power, and that is
serious.
The U.S. is prepared to respond to both threats. For the external
threat, we are willing to use military power if our vital interests require
it. An example of that was our sending of the carrier Constellation to
the Arabian Sea.
There are three basic principles which guide our approach.
—First of all, we want to work with those Arab countries that are
willing to work with us. We wish to have a consultative security ar-
rangement which would be nothing like an alliance; however, there
may be circumstances susceptible to bilateral or multilateral security
arrangements, depending on the situation.
—Secondly, we are ready to cooperate with all Arab states. It is not
our intention to split the Arabs. We wish to work closer with our
friends and moderates, and we are not excluding others. Iraq, for ex-
ample, has been helpful in Yemen. We see the Islamic resurgence as ter-
ribly important. It marks the rebirth of Arab vitality which is the best
bulwark against communism.
—Thirdly, we wish to promote a process of a comprehensive peace
in the Arab-Israel dispute.
The Israel-Egyptian treaty will be concluded shortly. We have pro-
moted it and we see no other choice. Trying to solve all differences at
once is, in fact, to solve nothing for a long time, or ever. Rather, we be-
lieve that setting in motion a process will establish the principles of
withdrawal and the dismantling of settlements. It establishes a prece-
dent. Maybe this will not be universally applied. However, if it is ex-
ploited intelligently it can help the Palestinians. The President has
made a public pledge to that effect, both in Cairo and in Israel. Once
that process begins, people will have to focus on clearcut issues such as
elections, registration, who votes, and other clear problems. That will
have an important political effect and help to mobilize world public
opinion on this issue.
We have been asked why do we not state clearly or precisely what
the final outcome of this process will be. First of all, we do not know the
answer to the question. Secondly, to state it would, in fact, be counter-
productive. If we state an outcome favorable to the Arabs, the Israelis
will not join. If we state an outcome favorable to the Israelis, then no
Arabs will join. And if we require major concessions of both sides, nei-
ther will join. Rather, we need to set in motion a process which is some-
what open-ended. Let the process shape attitudes. There have been
major changes, both among the Arabs and the Israelis. Mr. Peres now
speaks about the rights of the Palestinians. Begin once told me at Camp
David that he would rather cut off his hand than to see a settlement dis-
mantled. However, now he says that he will resign if they do not dis-

mantle some settlements in the Sinai. This is a dramatic change in
attitudes.
Arab stereotypes have often been found offensive in the U.S., but
that is changing radically today. If credit is to be given, Sadat has to be
given credit for this change. The American public now sees a difference
in those most interested in peace.
Therefore, we intend to persist. We intend to complete the treaty
and move on to the next phase. We want to seek through negotiations
to resolve the issues of the West Bank and Gaza. This will certainly be
more difficult than the first phase. But what we have is an opening
wedge to a serious, sustained effort leading to respect for the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians. Our own vital interests are involved. This is
the only way to real security. The only way to stop an inimical process.
We wish that our friends not engage in actions which will make our job
more difficult. We also hope that in quiet ways our friends can help us.
We recognize that our friends have constraints and may possibly have
to act indirectly.
We hope to engage the moderate Palestinians in negotiations re-
garding the West Bank and Gaza. We want to give local government as
much power as possible and ensure that elections are real political exer-
cises. This will not be easy. The Palestinians are suspicious. They live
under a military occupation which challenges their sense of dignity.
We recognize that a treaty could result in a frozen situation. We want to
avoid that. We hope those who consider themselves friends will help,
or at least not obstruct that effort.
King Hussein thanked him and expressed pleasure at this very brief
visit. He asked that Dr. Brzezinski convey to the President his deep ap-
preciation for the kind message, also for the opportunity to talk frankly
about a subject that is important to all of us. It is a problem that [will]
affect our hopes, our dreams, our rights. Perhaps my response will
meet some of the points you raised.
First, for the sake of historical fact, this city and its people during
the years I have had the privilege of being involved, has had the
courage to stand by its convictions and defend them at a time when
forces threatened the dignity of the Arabs. Israeli expansionism is a
long-standing fact. It is the story of twenty years or more. When we
speak to friends from the U.S., we know the limitations of our country,
but our relations are based on mutual respect. The dignity of the people
of this country is most important to me. When we saw a leftist tide al-
most overcome us, we stood, we were vocal, and we paid a price.
Always, we thought we had a just cause and the American people be-
lieve in justice. If the U.S. had different positions from us in the past
and we suffered, we felt it was partly our fault in the way we presented
our cause.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
I had the privilege of meeting President Carter, who gave me more
time than any previous President. I know that he desires peace and sta-
bility and I respect that. Unfortunately, to the pain of myself and others,
we have lost touch with each other. From a good beginning, we went
our different ways. In the beginning we spoke of mutual problems.
Then the President was the first to speak of Palestinian rights, then of
going to Geneva. We began to prepare to go to Geneva, then came the
surprise visit4 of Sadat to Israel.
This is a chance for me to express the feelings of the people as a
whole. The visit to Jerusalem under occupation had great religious sig-
nificance. My grandfather is buried there. He was involved in the Arab
revolt against colonial rule and he died because he would not compro-
mise. We lost Jerusalem in 1967 under Egyptian command. We knew
we would lose, but we went into that war anyway. Under Egyptian
command and responsibility, the West Bank was lost. The Sadat visit
was a very, very big shock. Yet we chose to take the moderate path and
describe the visit as a courageous move. Sometime later, I asked Sadat,
“Why did you not tell me. Why not ask what you could get for 242.” I
never got a positive answer. Also in 1973, there was no consultation.
Egypt has given much to unity, but it cannot be a unity of one. The
losses and expenses since 1973 are losses that we suffered.
The real peace process was derailed by Sadat. We were close to Ge-
neva. We were all getting ready to go. Sadat wrote me about Camp
David and reiterated his determination to demand Israeli withdrawal
from the West Bank and Jerusalem. I wrote to President Carter also. I
told him that if Israel was intransigent, to consider going to the Security
Council. I talked to Sadat while he was at Camp David and reiterated
that position. Then came the agreement, a very limited agreement. We
were told that the vagueness was intentional. The role provided for
Jordan under the Camp David agreements was that of a policeman, to
ensure the security. Of whom—the occupied? We tried to keep as quiet
as possible. But that is not a role that we could play. What we wanted to
know was what was the final object. Perhaps if we knew that, we could
work it out.
The Arab view about Egypt is that it has been an abnegation of
moral responsibility for those who took risks and suffered. Egypt is the
largest of the Arab states, but they cannot first take in the Soviets then
throw them out—make war, then make peace—without regard to our
feelings on both sides. I agree this is a turbulent and dangerous period.
Many things have shocked us in the recent past. The whole approach is
involved in asking us to keep quiet. In the past, you did not ask, for at
that time we were your only friend in the Arab world.
How does one draw the line between the extremist and the mod-
erates? I know that our U.S. friends were upset by the Baghdad Confer-
ence. From my perspective and responsibility, this was the best that
could be done. In light of Afghanistan, Iran, the Horn of Africa, all of
these things were seen as threats to our very existence. That, plus the
Palestinians, comprised the worst of all possible circumstances. South
Yemen posed a serious threat; fortunately collective action was taken,
successfully.
In 1950 Egypt took the initiative of ensuring that any country
which signed a unilateral peace with Israel would be expelled from the
Arab League, as well as certain other things. At the time this was prob-
ably aimed at Jordan. How can you have the Arab League at Cairo or
the Chief of Staff of the Arab forces an Egyptian, when Egypt has
signed a unilateral peace treaty? (At this point, Dr. Brzezinski passed a
note across the table pointing out that the time was 4: which was
when the American delegation was due to depart.) King Hussein con-
tinued, the last time Jordan broke diplomatic relations with Egypt was
over the possibility of establishing a United Arab Kingdom8 to ensure
the exercise of self-determination.
Unfortunately, this is not an inter-Arab dispute only. It involves
the U.S. and we are very sad when this occurs. It is difficult to see how
West Bank to be joined with Jordan in a unified kingdom under his rule. In protest, Sadat
broke diplomatic relations with Jordan on April 6, 1972. (William Dullforce, “Egypt Cuts
ference between Sadat, Assad, and Hussein in Cairo, the Egyptian Government an-
nounced the re-establishment of Egyptian-Jordanian relations on September 12, 1973.
(Jim Hoagland, “Egypt, Syria Renew Jordan Ties; Palestinians Silent,” The Washington

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the U.S. can play a role as a mediator when it is so committed to the
support of the Zionists. If they have everything, why should they con-
sider giving anything up? Always they have had the strategy of sepa-
rating Egypt from the Arab world. They have always wanted to turn
this problem into an East-West problem. At times like this, Jordan be-
comes an embarrassment.
In the regional security plan, where does Israel fit? The holocaust
did occur. Although this area had nothing to do with it, this city has
suffered the most, receiving the victims of another kind of holocaust.
Should we tell our people to cooperate with Israel? Here is the greatest
threat to stability. I have known no President to take as many risks for
peace; however, it is not like ’48, which was a disaster from our point of
view, but like 1956. No one here is discussing the existence of Israel, but
we are wondering what about the rights of others. Jordan could be an
embarrassment if it relies totally on its friends. But I want to come back
to the great problem.
Arab unity and coordination have always been resisted by our
friends. The problem has been Israel. It must be addressed before it is
too late. With regard to the precedent, the facts and figures that we
have regarding the West Bank and the occupied territories, we have to
bring before the Security Council. We were asked to postpone it for the
third time; however, we went ahead because there were serious
changes taking place on the ground. We saw postponement as being
worse. What is the alternative to bringing it up? Could our friends pre-
vent this? You may be right that the treaty will cement U.S.-Arab rela-
tions, but it is contrary to all of my expectations and experience.
Mr. Christopher said that he had listened intently to the eloquent
and somber presentation by King Hussein. It seems that events in the
last month may assist to achieve the rights of the Palestinians. This is
your goal and we share it. It has given the U.S. a new sense of authority.
A timetable has been agreed upon. There is a new sense of confidence
in carrying out provisions leading to providing a homeland for the Pal-
estinians. Before you act, we hope you will ask if it is in our interests
and your own self-interests. Leave the door open to the possibility that
we may be right. Do not take an irrevocable act or close doors. This is
the thought I would like to leave with you.
King Hussein responded that he would not act on personal whim.
His fears are genuine, even for Sadat.
Dr. Brzezinski thanked the King for the time he had given us and
indicated that he would convey his views to the President. I think we
understand each other. We will persist because we think it best. It
would not be good for us or you if the problem were reduced to an
East-West conflict. That is all the more important that we not be alone
in what we are doing. There are different ways of being helpful, or un-

220.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
United States
Egypt
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
President Anwar al-Sadat
Warren Christopher, Dep. Sec.
Prime Minister Mustafa Khalil
State
Hassan Ahmed Kamel, the Chef
General David Jones, Chairman,
de Cabinet
JCS
Chip Carter
Ambassador Hermann Eilts
Michael Sterner, DAS/Near East
Affairs
Gary Sick, NSC Staff Member
Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had asked us to go to Saudi
Arabia and Jordan to get their attitudes and get a feeling for their pat-
tern of behavior in the weeks and months ahead. We had very exten-
sive talks. We had prolonged sessions with Prince Saud2 and Crown
stressed the importance of the process that has been set in motion. The
President sees the prospect of a stable Middle East tied to a peace
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
treaty. We indicated that we are very concerned that any reaction by
Saudi Arabia directed negatively at the treaty, such as attacks or tan-
gible economic actions, could adversely affect our interests. We had in-
tense discussions.
In the eyes of the Saudis this initiative greatly complicates their sit-
uation. They are faced with conflicting pulls from the U.S. and the other
Arabs. They feel that you (Sadat) have not consulted with them and
they see a difficult period following the treaty. They see themselves
bound by collective obligations of the Arab League. We pressed them
with regard to the differentiation between the collective obligations
and bilateral actions. We noted that we are involved in a growing rela-
tion with Egypt and it would be senseless if the Saudis diminished their
relations.
I believe it is fair to say that our discussions usefully conveyed to
the Saudi leadership the gravity with which we would view such ac-
tion. We sought an understanding from them that they discuss very
precisely the technical steps they intend to take, distinguishing be-
tween symbolic steps as opposed to those that have tangible, bilateral
effects. We heard the answer from Saud and from Fahd with una-
nimity. We find ourselves encouraged.
They made a point which struck us as sensible, that you have not
done enough to explain your motives and actions. They find them-
selves in the position of explaining your actions to others. It would be
helpful if you could make a public case using the kind of argument that
we made to them, stressing that the victims of any freeze in the present
situation would be the Palestinians. Dr. Brzezinski then invited Mr.
Christopher to comment.
Mr. Christopher said that Dr. Brzezinski’s account was entirely ac-
curate. He would say that Saudi Arabia was pulled in three directions.
First, by their Arab brothers; secondly, by their friendship with the
U.S.; and third, by their friendship and admiration for Egypt. They
want to do everything in their power not to hurt Egypt over the next
weeks and months. On a bilateral basis they are prepared to continue
the aid relations and they referred to two substantial aid programs as
recent signal or talisman of their good faith. They were careful to note
that things may change, but they intend to be a good friend of Egypt.
On the collective side it is different. They intend to send an emis-
sary to the other Arab countries to promote moderation. They will join
only in the technical outcome, i.e., the move of the Arab League head-
quarters from Cairo, suspension of Egyptian membership in the Arab
League, and the application of the boycott to Egyptian companies
dealing with Israel. They could not stop action short of that.
We are in for a period of very careful waiting and watching. They
will try quietly and in their own way on the collective front. We got the

collective responsibility of the Saudi leadership. They had met in ad-
vance and decided. I am encouraged. Their attitude was warmer
toward you and toward us than I had feared.
General Jones said that he had talked with the Saudis about the
Yemen situation, noting that ammunition had moved in only a few
hours and that the F–5s were arriving in Dhahran today. The carrier
task force was now in the Gulf of Aden, with the carrier Constellation, a
cruiser, three destroyers and three frigates. It had very good fire power
on board. It could take out the South Yemeni Air Force in a matter of
hours. The AWACS was performing command and control training,
and surveillance and other actions were underway. We want to shore
up the situation in Yemen and develop closer and warmer relations
with the Saudis. A planning team is going to be coming soon to Saudi
Arabia. We hope the ceasefire will hold since other nations have now
come to Saudi and Yemen’s aid.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the Saudis realized that if they take any ac-
tions it will have an effect on their relations with us. We were quite
reassured. They indicated that we may face unpredictable acts, but they
felt that we gave more assurances on the strategic side and on the rela-
tions between you and ourselves. They know where we stand.
Jordan is more difficult to describe. The discussion6 did not focus
on tangible things. For one thing, there was less chance to talk. The
King was in a very somber mood. He had a tone of sadness and disap-
pointment about the future and about relations between us and you. I
cannot precisely summarize exactly where he stands. We did make
clear that any obstruction of the peace process would affect them and
us. (President Sadat interjected, “This is Hussein. This is Hussein.”) We
suggested that although it might be difficult for him to join in, he could
possibly encourage the Palestinians to join in. He did not rule this out,
but gave us no positive indication. He talked at great length, but all in
very dark, somber tones.
Mr. Christopher said that the King feels events have moved away
from the direction he had hoped. We urged him to keep doors open,
but we cannot honestly report any encouraging result.
Dr. Brzezinski said the best we can say is that it was not negative.
All we can express, all we can expect from him is a wavery course. I be-
lieve that covers the essence. Then Dr. Brzezinski said he wanted to
mention the question of the signing ceremony.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Sadat said he had received a message from Begin. He
would show it to him.
Dr. Brzezinski said it was psychologically important not to exclude
Begin from visiting Cairo, or you from visiting Jerusalem.
President Sadat said we will be good neighbors, and we have no ob-
jection if he comes here. However, the whole show is Carter and for
that reason he had suggested signing all three of them in Washington.
He then read the message from Prime Minister Begin which indicated
that the Washington signing was acceptable, with two additional
signings in Cairo and Jerusalem, with the order to be determined later.
President Sadat then read his proposed answer which was that “All
that President Carter told you, as you mentioned in your message is
correct and I
8 everywhere. My statement about signing three
copies in Washington was motivated only by the fact that it was en-
tirely a Carter show. Until we meet in Washington, please accept my
warmest wishes and congratulations.”
Dr. Brzezinski said it was especially President Sadat and Carter,
since you started the process by your trip to Jerusalem.
Mr. Christopher said I am very reassured. I am sure the President
will be also. I assume the modalities will be agreed upon in
Washington.
President Sadat said yes. He said you have seen my people.
Dr. Brzezinski said they are your great strength.
Mr. Christopher said the treaty is also extremely popular in the
United States.
President Sadat said yes and the whole world, except among the
Arabs. Referring to the Mubarak visit to Saudi Arabia10 he said that he

had set a target date before which he could not send anyone to Saudi
Arabia. They (the Saudis) are scared about the Palestinians, the Iraqis,
the Syrians. I had not intended to send Mubarak from Sudan to Saudi
Arabia. I was in the garden when President Numayri called me and
told me of his proposal that Vice President Mubarak go to Saudi Arabia
after Sudan. He said Mubarak was beside him there (when he called).
Why not send him to Saudi Arabia? I said that it goes with the target
date. But then I agreed to do it if Numayri would contact the Saudis. He
did so and they welcomed Mubarak.
Dr. Brzezinski asked when.
Prime Minister Khalil said two days ago.
President Sadat said that before Mubarak went to Europe to report
he met with King Khalid and Abdullah and Sultan. He received an
open reception. King Khalid asked someone in his entourage why will
passed. He asked some questions and Mubarak gave him the answers.
Abdullah rode with him on the way back to the airport. He said please
do not tell President Sadat what King Khalid asked you. Mubarak said
that the question is not anything important. Abdullah told him that all
of us are behind Sadat. He then proceeded to Jidda where Fahd was
keen to meet with him. Indoors, the Saudis say one thing; outdoors, it is
something completely different. But this time Fahd went too far in sup-
port. He proposed a plan which he will give to Mubarak when he re-
turns from Europe. The situation in Saudi Arabia is exactly as you ana-
lyzed it. The Saudis are important, first of all, on the Gulf where all
except Kuwait are with me—Oman, Qatar, Abu Dhabi, Bahrain. But
since Saudi Arabia is the big one, they will not proclaim this until the
Saudis do. Secondly, I received yesterday a Japanese delegation, a
Deputy for Economic Aid, to discuss the possibility of economic coop-
eration with us. What they fear is that Saudi Arabia, which is their main
source of oil, may join with the Baghdad group and, for example, boy-
cott them in Japan if they deal with Egypt. I agree they will think twice
before doing that. They will not cut aid off or oil. The most important
thing is that we send this message—Egypt and you too—since others
will try to put pressure on us. There will be a hysteric state for one
month maximum. After the second disengagement agreement, it was
much more vehement than now. You should have heard it.
Dr. Brzezinski said they had mentioned the boycott as applying to
Egyptian firms dealing with Israel. If they try to extend it to the coun-
for the Saudis and Egyptians to manage the “post-treaty situation” in the region, though
he did not provide details of the proposal. Eilts relayed a full report of the briefing, ob-
serving that “pending harder evidence of a shift in the Saudi position, Mubarak’s report
of the Saudi reaction should probably be taken with caution.” (Telegram 5403 from Cairo,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tries which deal with Egypt, that would affect us. We were very clear
about the limits of what we would accept: they are very narrow. There
are things that you and we could do to mobilize the moderate Arabs.
Urge the moderates to speak up. I have thought that Morocco, Tunisia,
Oman, and others would be willing to speak up.
President Sadat, referring to his critics, waved his hand and dis-
missed them as “all those scarecrows.” At best, they are protectorates.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had promised to do some-
thing about Japan. My Deputy, Henry Owen, is going to Japan with in-
structions to stress the importance we attach to Japanese assistance to
Egypt. I also talked to David Rockefeller to organize a meeting of lots of
U.S. business leaders during President Sadat’s visit to the U.S. (Presi-
dent Sadat interjected “Marvelous.”) Private enterprise is much more
important than government in our country.
Ambassador Eilts said he had received an invitation for President
Sadat to consider speaking at the New York Economic Club and won-
dered if he wished to consider it.
President Sadat responded “Right.” He continued that, with regard
to the Saudis, our main effort should be to persuade them not to come
to the point of involving other nations, such as Japan. I will drop them a
line. In the end they would have only you and us as friends. With re-
spect to Hussein, he was visiting an aide in London and announced
that he was ready to come to Camp David. I called and asked what is
your program. This came during a bad period at Camp David when
things were not going well. King Hussein cannot miss any show. I
could not ask him there when I was fighting Begin. He always tries for
show, not for substance. I told him that when we decide anything, I will
let you know. We can discuss it. Later on TV I was watching Barbara
Walters. Hussein said that he had been contacted by me and I had
asked to meet him in Morocco, but he had no time and was proceeding
back to Jordan. After we reached our agreement, I met Barbara Walters
and I told her that I was going to choke her, since she misled every-
body. She said “But the King told me that.” That man is a showy one.
He thinks himself the most clever politician in this area, so this tactic.
He wants me and President Carter to come and beg him to save the sit-
uation. There are three main influences on him. First, the Saudi; second,
the U.S.; third, the Syrians, whom he fears. He does not heed the Pales-
tinians, despite what he says, and he does not protect Palestinian rights.
If President Carter and I give him the West Bank, he will be shouting

praises. No objection to Jordan getting it after five years. This is his
way. He is an opportunist. He waits for anything to collapse then save
it. He is a schizophrenic. President Carter said to be patient with him,
but be fair. I am not boasting. You have seen my people. I intend to
submit the treaty to my Parliament on my return. I will ask if I should
keep the Arab League when it is Libya, Syria, and Iraq who pretend to
protect the Palestinians. If that is so, take it away. All of them are
shaking. We are not shaking here. No leader in any of these countries in
Africa goes around in an open car. These 40 million people (in Egypt)
are the dream of the Arab world. The others are bedouins. We are com-
mitted to defend Saudi Arabia and Yemen. It is marvelous that you
acted so promptly. I told Congress two years ago, at that time it was
Angola. I said next it is coming to East Africa. This was a good move.
There must be a U.S. presence in the area. Where? The near future will
tell me what to advise you. When we check the Soviets, then we have
the upper hand. South Yemen, that boy Qadhafi, are nothing. The im-
portant thing is not to lose the upper hand. I sent a military team to
Yemen. Also, I have antitank missiles. They shot 400 Israeli tanks in
three days, the ones you tried to replace. They are very accurate,
though they use the primitive Soviet material. Now we have the British
Swingfire. It is better. If the situation deteriorates, I will send them.
They will shoot every tank in the South Yemen Army. We are always
ready. We have the Mirage, two squadrons of MIGs. From their base in
the Red Sea, it is only one and one-half hours to the Gulf and one hour
anyplace in Saudi Arabia. Tell them I am always ready to rescue them,
whenever they ask. For Hussein, we will be patient and fair. He will
now undermine the whole thing in the West Bank, but not in Gaza. It is
his benefit. Whatever happens, I will fulfill this in Gaza. I will make it a
model. I was asked about autonomy after one month. I said yes but
Begin will raise hell. I am very optimistic. Before one year things will
come to shape.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that there has been a great change in Israel.
Peres spent one-half of his speech on Palestinian rights. This is your ef-
fect. We will work together to keep Saudi Arabia in line. We were quite
clear with Hussein.
President Sadat said that he (Hussein) is always pessimistic. It is a
psychological thing. He is a schizophrenic like his father. He is full of
show. Now he is not able to make any show.
Dr. Brzezinski said that Hussein had asked what the results would
be after five years. I told him that there were three things that we could
say. If it was pro-Arab, the Israelis would not join in. If it was pro-Israel,
the Arabs would not join in. If it required concessions of both sides, nei-
ther would join in. We need to shape an outcome that is acceptable. No
one can predict what that is now. It would be ridiculous to try.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Sadat said Hussein wants the West Bank for his United
Kingdom. I will tell in my speech why did he not form a Palestinian
state when he had it. His grandfather, Abdullah, agreed against every
code of morals. Whenever we stand together, all will come together. I
anticipate a Syrian change. An important fact is that no one opposes me
who has strong ground to stand in their own country. If Israel had not
lost the last fifteen months, things would be much better. It is my
theory that the peace process starts after the signing, not like Begin who
wants to get everything. We will bring the Israelis to something you
cannot imagine. In Jerusalem I said that 75% of the problem is psycho-
logical. We will give all of them psychological satisfaction. Do not fear
the scarecrows.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if there was anything we could do to help.
President Sadat said the economic and military aid is important. We
need 200 tanks with crew maintenance. We need surface-to-air mis-
siles. That will change the situation there and around the Bab al-
Mandeb when we give them to Somalia. In my speech I will call on
Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine and tell them that I am ready to
receive them in Al-Arish, which has been liberated. Are they ready to
take the cause in their own hands and fight? Egypt did and made
peace.
Dr. Brzezinski said that is a good idea—to build popular pressures.
Prime Minister Khalil said that he agreed with Dr. Brzezinski that
the Saudis would not boycott the country, but can boycott individual
firms. This will not happen in the near future since it must wait for the
normalization of relations and that is not imminent. He felt that we can
neutralize the members of the Arab League. The most will depend on
the outcome of the negotiations with Israel on the West Bank.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we are with you as is world public opinion.
Israel is now talking about survival and people listen to that. But when
they are talking about Palestinian rights, their right to vote, water
rights and such issues, it will be a different matter.
Prime Minister Khalil said that if we succeed in the West Bank nego-
tiations, I think our position will be strong. But if it drags on more than
President Sadat said I think we will succeed. It is in the interest of
Israel.
Dr. Brzezinski said that Mr. Begin does not see it that way. He is
suspicious about Gaza. It is only with some effort that those suspicions
were overcome.
President Sadat said what about the military, looking at General
Jones. I shall choke you in the Pentagon.

General Jones noted that Defense Minister Ali is in Washington and
will be talking with Secretary Brown. He mentioned that he had seen
Ezer Weizman13 and he sent his regards (Sadat interjected. “I like that
Ezer.”) General Jones continued that a treaty is like a marriage license.
You sign it and throw it in the drawer and it is what happens after that
that counts.
President Sadat said that he had been sent a list of ten countries to
send weapons to in Africa. All are asking because they know I am your
friend and that you support me. I have a hard problem with Siad
Barre. He sent out the Soviets and then he asked me to come and hold
Berbera for him. He fears a Soviet push and that the Ethiopians will
take it. He has turned very bitter. He supported whole heartedly the
treaty signing since he knows that I will send tanks. Let us not depress
those who ask. You know that I do not seek an empire or others’ lands. I
seek to stop the game of the Soviets, mainly against Egypt as the leader
of the Arab world, especially after Iran faded. So I would like you to
put into consideration this idea. The Soviets chose agents of no impor-
tance. That boy in Libya, South Yemen, they are all despised. Iraq and
Syria are of no real significance. You do not need a base. You can get fa-
cilities better than any base. I could be asking for your help in building
a very big base, a naval base at Berenice for the Red Sea Fleet. This is a
very important location because of the Bab al-Mandeb, which is in
North Yemen and must be protected.
Ambassador Eilts said that after Secretary Brown had talked to Gen-
eral Kamel, he sent a list of military equipment. I sent it to Secretary
Brown.
President Sadat said that he had asked for a team from the Pen-
tagon. With an Egyptian team, it would visit everyplace and reach an
agreed certain strategy. All must be planned, not haphazard. We have
Sudan with us. We shall defend Saudi Arabia. The last time Numayri
met with Mengistu15 in Nigeria, Mengistu adopted a very hard line. He
will cause trouble in South Sudan. That is my border. Our waters come
half from Ethiopia, half from Sudan. Western Sudan alone is the size of
Egypt plus the East and the South. I would join them in the next mo-
ment if anyone tried . . .
Dr. Brzezinski said you are a factor for stability and we will work
with you. Dr. Brzezinski noted that he (Sadat) was an optimist and that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
only optimists shape history. He thanked President Sadat for the time
that he had given the delegation.
As the meeting broke up, Chip Carter said to President Sadat that
he considered him “one of the two greatest men in the world.” Presi-
dent Sadat put his arm around Chip and walked with him to the door.

221.
Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to
President Carter
March 19, 1979
Dear Mr. President,
I consider it necessary to write to you on the question of the situa-
tion in the Middle East. In the past I set forth more than once my con-
siderations on this matter. What makes me return once again to this
question is the situation emerging now in connection with the steps
taken by the United States to push forward a separate agreement be-
tween Israel and Egypt.
Our principled attitude to attempts to solve the Middle East
problem on the road of separate deals is known to you. We have ex-
pressed this assessment of ours both through diplomatic channels and
publicly, in particular in connection with the US-Israeli Egyptian
meeting in Camp David last year.
So far we do not know yet all the details of the agreement being
prepared, and the fact that they are kept secret is symptomatic in itself.

222.
Memorandum From Reginald Bartholomew of the National
Security Council Staff to President Carter
Washington, March 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Egyptian-Israeli Dispute over Subphasing of Withdrawal (U)
The Egyptian and the Israeli negotiating teams in Washington
have apparently reached an impasse over the question of accelerated
withdrawal from the Alma oil field. The Egyptians had expected a re-
turn to last fall’s formulation of withdrawal from the oil field within
four–six months. The Israelis were prepared for early withdrawal from
al-Arish, but Weizman is under strict instruction not to agree to with-
drawal from the Alma field until the end of the nine-month period. (S)
The Israeli Cabinet voted today on the full package of proposals,2
but included in that package is the Israeli proposal of not withdrawing
from the oil field until the end of the nine-month period. As a result,
Weizman has no more negotiating authority to deal with this issue, and
Begin has specifically ruled out any possible compromise. (S)
The Egyptians have reacted badly to this development. In their
view, the Israeli proposal does not constitute genuine subphasing of
withdrawal and therefore Prime Minister Khalil has informed us that
Egypt will not be bound to the exchange of ambassadors one month
after the interim withdrawal has been completed, nor will Egypt agree
to talks on the orderly transfer of oil fields and on company-to-
company arrangements to insure continued supply of oil to Israel
during the period of turnover. (S)
Secretary Vance will be available later this afternoon to discuss this
issue with you. Minister Weizman, who is quite unhappy with his gov-
ernment’s position, will be leaving at 6 p.m. today. It might be worth
having Secretary Vance call Weizman before his departure. (S)
The attached cable4 reviews the status of the talks on this issue as
of last night. (U)

223.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, March 19, 1979
SUBJECT
U.S.-Israeli Agreement on Military Issues (U)
Secretary Brown reached agreement this afternoon with Minister
Weizman on the outstanding military issues. With the President’s ap-
proval, Secretary Brown offered $3 billion over the next three years, of
which $800 million would be in the form of cash grants. The remainder
will be FMS credits (10 years grace period of repayment of principal
and 20 years repayment after the grace period). This was a smaller
grant component than the Israelis had hoped for, but Weizman seemed
satisfied. (S)
Brown also informed Weizman of the following equipment
approvals:
AIM–9L’s
MAVERICKS
M–60A Tanks
M–109 HOWITZERS
M–113 Armed Personnel Carriers
PHALANX Gun Systems
Encapsulated HARPOON Systems2 (S)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
There are number of other minor issues on which agreement was
almost reached. The most important of which was a memorandum on
research and development. (U)
224.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to the
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Newsom)
Washington, March 19, 1979
SUBJECT
U.S.-Israel Agreement on Airbase Construction: Circular 175 Authority
We request authority to negotiate and conclude an agreement with
the Government of Israel relating to construction by the United States
of two airbases in Israel in connection with Israel’s withdrawal from
Sinai under the Egypt-Israel peace treaty. We would like to have a
DOD-State-Embassy team begin negotiations in Israel on March 23,
1979. We will continue to keep the Congress informed on this matter.
A Memorandum of Law is attached.
Recommendation
That you authorize the negotiation and conclusion of a U.S.-Israel
Agreement on Airbase Construction along the lines of the draft text at
Tab 2. Any subsequent changes to this draft will be subject to prior ap-
proval by NEA, T, PM, L and the Department of Defense.
ited Official Use. Drafted by Deputy Director, Office of Israel and Arab-Israeli Affairs,
Department of State, Charles M. Hill.

225.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
5638. Dept Pass USDel Secretary. Subject: Egyptian-Israeli Military
1. (S-entire text).
2. Summary. Khalil insists that, with Sadat’s agreement, there can
be no further Egyptian compromise on sub-phasing agreed to at the
Blair House talks and on oil arrangements. Israel, having gotten virtu-
ally everything it demanded as a result of Sadat’s acquiesence in Presi-
dent Carter’s proposals, should now be pressed to honor its word. He is
sending, through Ghorbal, a message to the Secretary on the subject.
We are now translating Arabic text and will send English translation by
septel. End summary.
3. Met with PriMin Khalil early this afternoon to urge greater
Egyptian flexibility in sub-phasing. I found Khalil primed for bear and
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
in a more emotional state than I have yet seen him. He had obviously
had a report from Kamal Hassan Ali on talks with Weizman and with
Atherton and was visibly upset. He had trouble controlling his sense of
outrage as he spoke. He said flatly that “we cannot go back on what has
been agreed upon” and that he had earlier in the day sent the Secretary
a message through Ghorbal on the subject. (I have obtained a copy
from Boutros Ghali and will send English translation by septel.)
4. Specifically, Khalil said:
— (A) GOE will under no circumstances agree to a company-to-
company oil arrangement with Israel as the Israelis are demanding.
The treaty annex which provides that Israel may bid on the interna-
tional market for Egyptian oil will not be implemented before Egypt
and Israel enter into negotiations on normalization. Furthermore,
Egypt will under no circumstances specifically agree to sell Alma oil to
Israel. It will only be in terms of surplus Egyptian oil.
— (B) In the meantime, Israel has USG guarantee to provide Israel
with its oil requirements. If USG wishes purchase oil from Amoco for
this purpose, this is USG business.
— (C) Moreover, he could not accept what he called the new Israeli
proposal not to withdraw from the Alma fields until seven months
after signing of the treaty. This is totally inconsistent with letter and
spirit of earlier sub-phasing agreement developed during Blair House
talks10 and, Khalil insisted, with what he had been told by President
Carter and the Secretary during President Carter’s visit. The same ap-
plies to the Al Arish withdrawal. When I pointed out our view that
three months Al Arish and seven months oil fields strikes us as a rea-
sonable compromise, Khalil hit the ceiling. He reiterated that this is not
consistent with what was said here during President Carter’s talks. I
noted that Atherton had told Kamal that he was confident that nothing
specific about a two month or four month date had been said in those
talks and I also knew of no such statement. Khalil responded that Ath-
erton was only part right. He claimed to have specifically asked Presi-
dent Carter about the sub-phasing dates and that the President had re-
plied he could not remember the dates, but that they would be those

reached during the Blair House talks. This statement, Khalil insisted,
represents a USG obligation to support what had earlier been agreed
upon, especially since Sadat had, against Khalil’s advice, agreed that
ambassadors would be exchanged one month after completion of the
interim withdrawal.
— (D) Khalil also insisted that he had told the Secretary in Cairo
that GOE will not rpt not be involved in the oil for Israel question be-
fore the end of the interim withdrawal period and that this will come
only in the context of normalization. I noted that neither the treaty nor
Annex III, including the agreed new minute, preclude normal trade re-
lations before the negotiation of an Egyptian/Israeli trade and com-
merce agreement. I urged that GOE consider the matter on practical
rather than legal basis. Khalil was clearly expecting this one. He simply
said no, he could not agree with our point of view. USG has committed
itself to provide Israeli oil requirements, he reiterated, and this should
be source of Israeli oil in the interim period.
5. In response to my warning about disastrous effect on Israeli
Knesset debate which Egyptians again raising question of exchange of
ambassadors would have, Khalil said that is simply too bad. There
would be no problem if Israelis would for once honor their word in-
stead of constantly reneging. Sadat had reinstituted his earlier agree-
ment that ambassadors will be exchanged one month after termination
of interim withdrawal. He had done so, Khalil insisted, on clear under-
standing Israelis would reinstitute sub-phasing arrangement worked
out at Blair House—not something totally new and different. Once Is-
raelis get what they want, Khalil charged, they constantly seek whittle
down their obligations.
6. By this time, he had worked himself into quite a stew and stated
emphatically that GOE has had enough of this. USG, including Presi-
dent Carter, must be aware of what Sadat has done to facilitate the
peace process. He expressed distress that American negotiators now
seem to be looking for further compromises instead of pressing Israelis
to honor their word. I assured Khalil that we are all aware of what
Sadat has done on the peace treaty issue, but emphasized that it is in all
of our interests find suitable compromise on the remaining issues.
Khalil’s response was that Egypt has compromised all that it can.
7. To make the matter more personal, he recalled that he had
spoken on TV about sub-phasing based on the Blair House arrange-
ments. That TV interview is to be repeated tonight. Was he to be ex-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
pected to stand up and say that he was a liar? Or that Egypt has given
way to more Israeli demands? And all of this in the face of Begin’s to-
tally unhelpful statements yesterday about Jerusalem; re Jerusalem,
no independent Palestine state or anything else that might help Egypt
in its present difficult period with the Arabs.
8. Khalil asked me to make it clear that there can be no further flex-
ibility in the Egyptian position on sub-phasing or oil. This, he claimed,
has been made clear in the letter he has sent to Secretary Vance. He
emphasized that everything that he had said in that letter had been
included with the full approval of President Sadat. Sadat, he said, is
as disgusted as he about the Israeli position put forth during the
Weizman/Ali talks.
9. Comment: As predicted, the new Israeli position on subphasing
has aroused Egyptian hackles. They are disappointed that we do not
seem willing to press the Israelis to abide by the Blair House sub-
phasing agreement. They feel that once again they have been taken—
Sadat, in response to President Carter’s urgings, accepted the compro-
mise brought by the President only to find that we are now asking for
more compromises. I do not believe that the Egyptians will allow the
treaty to founder on these issues, but they are going to insist on the
Blair House arrangements being honored and that the USG has guaran-
teed Israel oil supplies, hence no Egyptian/Israeli arrangements, even
through private companies, will be permitted during the interim
period.
Eilts

226.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, March 20, 1979
SUBJECT
U.S.-Egyptian Military Assistance Agreement (U)
We have come close to agreement with the Egyptians on the fol-
lowing terms:
—We will be prepared to request Congressional approval of up to
$1. billion in military sales to Egypt over the next three years.
—FMS credits could cover as much as 50% of the total sales. The
Egyptians would be expected to pay cash for the other 50%. If, by
chance, the Saudis and others are more forthcoming than expected, we
would not cut back on the FMS credits offered. But the credits will be
on standard terms with no forgiveness (e.g., 10 year deferred payment
on principal, with 20 years thereafter to pay off the loan). We have told
both the Egyptians and the Israelis that they will receive equal treat-
ment on these new FMS credits. (We can expect a joint Egyptian-Israeli
lobbying effort to convert the credits to grants. The impact on the
budget is a major consideration, since we only have to authorize funds
to cover 10% of the credits. In brief, we buy $3 billion in FMS credits
with $300 million of the taxpayers’ money).
On specific equipment, Brown has discussed the following major
items with General Ali:
—F–4s. Egypt wants 50. Brown has said we will provide some-
thing “more sophisticated” than the F–5, which would probably be the
F–4.
—20 CH–54 helos. OK in principle.
—350 M–60A tanks. No. Suggest Egypt look to British for Chieftans.
—12 battalions I–HAWKs. OK.
—4 destroyers (five-year life). OK in principle.
—Submarines. Maybe.
—Coastal patrol boats. OK. (S)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
In order to stay within the $1. billion limit, the Egyptians will
probably have to choose among these items. The equipment list is
pretty good; the financing arrangements are less attractive. (C)
In answer to your question2 on whether there is anything the Is-
raelis did not get, the answer is essentially “nothing” among their pri-
ority requests. They did hope for a larger grant component in the total
and will probably work on Congress to get this reversed. (C)
As things now stand, we are committed to sell equipment and
services worth $4. billion to Israel and Egypt. If present terms are
maintained, the U.S. Treasury will be hit for only $1. billion of that
amount and this is all that Congress will have to authorize. This is on
In sum, the total of resources (goods and services) which we will
transfer to Egypt and Israel over the next three years will be almost $13
billion, of which over $3. billion will be financed directly by the U.S.
taxpayer. (S)

227.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, March 20, 1979
SUBJECT
Peace Treaty Signing Ceremonies
I have forwarded your comments on Begin’s cable to Vance2 for
action.

228.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, March 21, 1979
SUBJECT
Credits for Egypt (U)
Harold Brown is preparing to sign a letter2 to General Ali today
which promises Egypt that we will be prepared to recommend to
Congress that the United States will provide military equipment and
services to Egypt over the next three years of a value of at least $1. bil-
lion, $750 million of which is to be in the form of FMS credits compa-
rable to those we provide to Israel, i.e. current interest rates, ten year
grace, twenty additional years to repay. The remaining $750 million
would have to be financed by Egypt. (S)
I am concerned about the lack of comparability between our assist-
ance to Egypt and Israel. Israel is getting $3 billion, all of which is FMS
credits and $800 million of which will be entirely forgiven. Even al-
lowing for the additional military expenses Israel faces in its relocation
of facilities from the Sinai, the proposal is extremely lopsided in Israel’s
FMS credits place very little burden on the American taxpayer and
on the budget. (Congressional authorization of 10% of the credits as a
guarantee is all that is required.) I believe we should offer credits for
the full $1. billion of the Egyptian program. I am not concerned that
this will remove incentives for continued Saudi military assistance to
Egypt. Egypt will still be faced with the need to pay interest, and even-
tually to repay these loans. It would be easier, in my view, for Egypt to
persuade Saudi Arabia to pick up these finance charges than it would
to get them to fund large new military programs at this time. Similarly,
it could provide the basis for persuading Saudi Arabia to increase its
non-military assistance on the grounds that it would free up Egyptian
funds to repay the FMS loans. (S)

229.
Memorandum From Willam B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, March 21, 1979
SUBJECT
Unresolved Issues (U)
1. Subphasing of withdrawal. Israel is sticking with the position of
not withdrawing from the Alma field until the end of the nine-month
period. Egypt says this is contrary to the concept of subphasing and
has suspended its agreement to send an Ambassador one month after
the completion of the interim withdrawal. This morning, Roy, Hal and I
developed a possible compromise proposal: withdrawal from the oil-
field in six months; arrangements to insure continued supply of oil to
Israel until normalization of relations begins; exchange of Ambas-
sadors on schedule. The six month figure is eminently defensible. We
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
referred to the subphasing as discussed at Blair House. That means four
or six months, depending on which set of talks is referred to. A message
to Begin will probably be needed. (S)
2. Memorandum of Agreement on Oil. The Israelis have submitted a
counterdraft3 which would include a price subsidy formula and an op-
tion to extend the guarantee almost indefinitely. (C)
3. Memorandum of Agreement on Assurances. Senator Church has
said that anything more than what we have in our draft would virtually
constitute a treaty and would require Senate approval. The Israelis are
asking for significant changes. (C)
4. Unilateral Steps Letter. Begin wants to discuss this with the Presi-
dent. His initial reaction suggests that we will have problems. (C)

230.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt
72667. Subject: Brown-Ali Letter.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Following is text of letter from SecDef Brown to Egyptian
MinDef Ali dated March 23 confirming discussions held between the
two on March 19:
Begin text: Quote: Dear Mr. Minister:
In the context of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, the
United States is prepared to enter into an expanded security relation-
ship with Egypt with regard to the sales of military equipment and
services and the financing of at least a portion of those sales, subject to
such congressional review and approvals as may be required.
With respect to financing, the President is prepared to recommend
to Congress that the United States provide military equipment and
services during the next three years of a value of 1. billion dols, with
up to 500 million dols annually in foreign military sales (FMS) credits.
The credits will be made available on the following terms: current in-
terest rates, a ten-year deferment of payments on principal, and twenty
years to repay the loan thereafter.
The United States is prepared in general to supply the items of
equipment we discussed and which are listed in a classified attachment
to this letter. In this connection, the United States agrees to dispatch
teams to Egypt in the very near future to survey and discuss Egyptian
needs for naval forces, air defenses, and ground force armored and
other vehicles. The United States is also pleased to receive an Egyptian
team in Washington in the near future to discuss the needs of the Egyp-
tian Air Force. Signed: Sincerely, Harold Brown. End text.
3. Following is text of attachment to above letter. Begin text: Quote.
The United States is prepared to approve the sale of the following
equipment and services to Egypt:
—Jet training aircraft (e.g., of the T–38 type)
—10 additional C–130 aircraft
—16 CH–53 helicopters
—aircraft ECM pods
cret; Immediate. Drafted by Zweifel; cleared for information by Keene, March, Small,
Flaten, and Gaffney; approved by Marthinsen. Sent for information Immediate to Tel
Aviv. Sent for information to the White House and the Secretary of Defense.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—12 improved HAWK batteries
—4 TPS–59 three-dimensional radars
—4 destroyers of the US Gearing class, henceforth to be referred to
as quote frigates unquote
—Harpoon and Phalanx weapons systems for installation on frig-
ates, number to be determined
—pressure testing of diesel submarine hulls
—800 M113 armored personnel carriers
—technical data package to upgrade T–54 and T–55 tanks
—lorries and tractors, number to be determined.
The United States is willing to consider favorably the following
items of equipment, subject to further discussion and definition:
—F4 Phantom aircraft
—radars for detecting low-flying aircraft, of a type to be deter-
mined by the Air Defense Survey
—diesel submarines of the Guppy type, following evaluation of
the program for pressure testing existing Egyptian submarine hulls
—auxiliary equipment (e.g., ground radars, communication equip-
ment, forward and side looking camera, equipment for frogmen)
—patrol boats
The United States also maintains its offers of the following equipment:
—cruiser (USS Albany)
—CH–47 helicopters
—additional F–5E aircraft.
Vance

231.
Summary of Conclusions of a Mini-Special Coordination
Committee Meeting
SUBJECT
Security Assistance for Egypt and Israel (U)
PARTICIPANTS
State
Daniel O’Donahue, Deputy Director, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs
David Zweifel, Office of Near Eastern/South Asian Affairs
OSD
Robert Murray, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Near Eastern, African and South
Asian Affairs
JCS
Lt. General William Y. Smith, Assistant to the Chairman
Major William H. Cook, Mid East/African Expert
CIA
[name not declassified], Office of Economic Research
[name not declassified], Assistant NIO, Near East and South Asia
ACDA
Deputy Director Spurgeon Keeney
Dr. Barry Blechman, Assistant Director, Weapons Evaluation and Control Bureau
OMB
Dr. John White, Deputy Director
Edward Sanders, Deputy Associate Director for International Affairs
White House
David Aaron (Chairman)
NSC
Leslie G. Denend
A mini-SCC meeting was called to review issues surrounding the
security assistance which will be extended to Israel and Egypt in the
context of a peace treaty. (C)
billion in budget authority required to support $4. billion in military
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
assistance should be sought in a single FY 1979 supplemental budget
request. (C)
2. Negev airbase construction: DOD and OMB will develop options
for alternative sources of financing to begin construction should final
Congressional action be delayed until July. (C)
3. Deliveries of military equipment to Egypt: DOD will review options
for the prompt delivery of some of the items on the Egyptian list which
we feel Egypt is sure to ask for. (C)
4. Further review of sales to Egypt and Israel: As specific sales con-
tained in the lists for Israel and Egypt move forward, agency comments
on timing and the U.S. view of Egyptian and Israeli priorities (e.g., sub-
marines for Egypt) will be sought through the normal arms transfer re-
view process. (C)
5. All approved the scope and composition of the proposed mili-
tary assistance package being considered by the President. ACDA
added that the proposal seemed modest when compared to what had
been expected. (C)

232.
Draft Memorandum of Agreement Between the
Governments of the United States of America and
the State of Israel
Washington, undated
Memorandum of Agreement Between the Governments of
the United States of America and the State of Israel
Recognizing the significance to Israel2 of the conclusion of the
Treaty of Peace between it3 and Egypt and considering the importance
of full implementation of the Treaty of Peace to Israel’s4 security in-
terests, the contribution of the conclusion of the Treaty of Peace to the
security and development of Israel5 as well as its significance to peace
and stabil-ity in the region, and to the maintenance of international
peace and security;
Recognizing that the withdrawal from Sinai imposes additional
heavy security, military and economic burdens on Israel;
The Governments of the United States of America and the State of
Israel, subject to their constitutional processes and applicable law, con-
firm as follows:
1. In the light of the role of the United States in achieving the
Treaty of Peace and the parties’ desire that the United States continue
its supportive efforts, the United States will take appropriate measures
to promote full observance of the Treaty of Peace.
2. Should it be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the United States
that there has been a violation or threat of violation of the Treaty of
Peace, the United States will consult with the parties with regard to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
measures to halt or prevent the violation, ensure observance of the
Treaty of Peace, enhance friendly and peaceful relations between the
parties and promote peace in the region, and will take such remedial
measures as it deems appropriate, which may include diplomatic, eco-
nomic and military measures as described below.
3. The United States will provide support it deems appropriate for
actions taken by Israel in proper6 response to violations7 of the Treaty
of Peace. In particular, if a violation of the Treaty of Peace is deemed to
threaten the security of Israel, including, inter alia, a blockade of Israel’s
use of international waterways, a violation of provision of the Treaty of
Peace concerning limitation of forces or an armed attack against Israel,
the United States will be prepared to consider, on an urgent basis, such
measures as the strengthening of the United States presence in the area,
the providing of emergency supplies to Israel, and the exercise of mari-
time rights in order to put an end to the violation.
4. The United States will support the parties’ rights to navigation
and overflight for access to either country through and over the Strait
of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba pursuant to the Treaty of Peace.
5. The United States will oppose and, if necessary, vote against any
action or resolution in the United Nations which in its judgement ad-
versely affects the Treaty of Peace.
6. Subject to Congressional authorization and appropriation, the
United States will endeavor to take into account and will endeavor
to be responsive to military and economic assistance requirements of
Israel.
7. The United States will continue to impose restrictions on
weapons supplied by it to any country which prohibits their unautho-
rized transfer to any third party. The United States will not supply or
authorize transfer of such weapons for use in an armed attack against
Israel, and will take steps to prevent such unauthorized transfer.

233.
Letter From Egyptian Prime Minister Khalil to Secretary of
State Vance
March 25, 1979

234.
Letter From Egyptian Prime Minister Khalil to Secretary of
State Vance
March 26, 1979
Dear Secretary Vance:
Pursuant to my letter of yesterday2 concerning the proposed Mem-
orandum of Agreement between U.S. and Israel3 I wish to inform you
of the following:
While Egypt does not contest the right of the United States Gov-
ernment, or any other government for that matter, to take the decisions
it deems compatible with its foreign policy, the Government of Egypt
maintains the right not to accept any decision or action which it con-
siders directed against Egypt. I would like to state that the contents of
the proposed Memorandum will have a direct bearing on the Peace
Treaty.
You are certainly aware of the keen desire of Egypt to strengthen
the friendly relations between our two countries as well as to establish
peace and stability in the whole region. This will be furthered by
achieving a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel as an important step
towards a comprehensive settlement of the conflict in the Middle East.
Bearing this in mind, I want you to know that we were deeply disap-
pointed to find the United States accepting to enter into an agreement
we consider directed against Egypt. The Memorandum does not serve
any useful purpose. On the contrary, its contents and purport would
adversely affect the whole process of peace and stability in the area.
Egypt rejects the Memorandum for the following reasons:
1. It is contrary to the spirit existing between our two countries and
does not contribute to the strengthening of relations between them. I
wish to put on record that Egypt was never consulted on the substance
of the proposed memorandum.
2. The contents of the proposed memorandum are based upon al-
ledged accusations against Egypt and providing for certain measures
to be taken against her in that hypothetical case of violations, the deter-
mination of which is largely left to Israel.
3. We have been engaged in the final process of negotiating the
Treaty for over a month now, however, we have not been notified of the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
intention of the United States to agree on such a memorandum. More-
over, we learned of it by way of information and not consultation. Am-
the scheduled ceremonies for signature of the Treaty.
4. The United States is supposed to be a partner in a tri-partite ef-
fort to achieve peace and not to support the allegations of one side
against the other.
5. The proposed Memorandum assumes that Egypt is the side li-
able to violate its obligations.
6. The proposed Memorandum could be construed as an eventual
alliance between the United States and Israel against Egypt.
7. It gives the United States certain rights that were never men-
tioned or negotiated with us.
8. It gives the United States the power to impose measures, or to
put it bluntly, punitive measures, a matter which raises doubts about
the future relations and could affect the situation in the whole region.
9. The proposed Memorandum even uses dangerously vague
terms as “threats of violations” against which certain measures would
be taken. We consider this to be a matter of grave consequences.
10. It implies that the economic and arms supply are subject to the
sole judgment of the United States Government in connection with the
alledged threats of violations being attributed to one side.
11. It makes certain aspects of Egyptian-American relations to be
subject to elements extraneous to those relations and its commitments
made to a third party.
12. It implies the United States acquiescence to Israel’s embarking
on measures, including military measures, against Egypt on the as-
sumption that there are violations or threats of violation of the Treaty.
13. It gives the United States the right to impose a military pres-
ence in the region for reasons agreed between Israel and the United
States. A matter which we cannot accept.
14. The proposed Memorandum will cast grave doubts about the
real intention of the United States, especially in connection with the
peace process. It could be accused of collaboration with Israel to create
such circumstances that would lead to American military presence in
the area, a matter which would certainly have serious implications es-
pecially on the stability in the whole region.
15. It will have adverse effects in Egypt towards the United States
and would certainly drive other Arab countries to take a harder posi-
tion against the peace process, and would give added reasons for them
not to participate in that process.
16. It would also pave the way for other alliances to be formed in
the area to counter the one whose seeds could be found in the proposed
Memorandum.

235.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
U.S. SIDE
ISRAELI SIDE
The President
Prime Minister Begin
Secretary Vance
Foreign Minister Dayan
Zbigniew Brzezinski
The President: opened by informing Begin that he understood that
the announcement of the return of El Arish in two months instead of
the originally proposed three months will be made by him in Cairo as a
surprise gesture to the Egyptians.
Begin: I agree but then my friends will say I have misled them, and
therefore it is better to announce it now.
The President: Sadat agreed to return of the oil sector in seven
months in return for uninterrupted flow to Israel. Is that right?
Begin: That is correct. On exchange of visits, I proposed that I re-
turn the visit to Cairo, but not on April 1—that is April Fool’s day.
(Throughout these exchanges Begin smiled, was very friendly and
obviously pleased with himself.)
The President: I got you the Gulf of Eilat formula. Now we have to
resolve the reference to Samaria and Judea in the joint letter.
Begin: I can’t change one word. I will have to resign. I have had
Knesset approval.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Vance: An attachment would be sufficient.
Begin: No, it must be an integral part of the joint letter. I am willing
to write a footnote in my own handwriting underneath my signature.
Brzezinski: proposed in that case maybe Sadat should write in a
footnote in his own handwriting disagreeing with Begin.
The President: proposed that he himself write in the footnote as a
compromise.
Begin and Dayan accept.
The President then cites some gestures that Sadat will make for
Begin when Begin visits Cairo—Synagogue, scholars, Jewish community.
Begin seems genuinely touched.
Begin then asked the President to intercede with Brezhnev to agree
to direct flights from the Soviet Union to Israel.
be changed to 50–50 as a personal gift to his wife. He really stresses the
personal gift idea.
The President laughs but says he cannot grant this. I cannot give
you any encouragement.
Begin responds by saying that we hope you will consider it. At
least you are not discouraging me.
The President repeats that he cannot offer any encouragement. The
President then says he wishes to raise a couple of sensitive issues. Sadat
is a man of impulse and generosity. You, Mr. Begin, are also a man of
great generosity and bravery (the idea of bravery is then embellished). I
want you to be sensitive to the fact that settlements pose a key problem
for the future. I hope that your statements and actions will recognize
the importance and sensitivity of this issue. The second matter involves
Jerusalem. I understand your position, but if in your public statements
you could refer to the role of the three great religions, if you could use
or quote somehow from the Koran, and with your erudition you could
find some appropriate words, it would really be helpful.
Begin responds by saying that as far as Jerusalem is concerned
there are some self-evident truths which he need not reiterate all the
time (that it is the capital of Israel, etc., etc.), and then reiterates his
usual line on the settlements.
Dayan adds that it is a matter of proportion—what we do and how
we do it.
The rest of the discussion involves the signing ceremony and mu-
tual expressions of admiration and recognition.

236.
Letter From President Carter to Israeli Prime Minister Begin
Washington, March 26, 1979

237.
Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat
Washington, March 26, 1979

238.
Letter From President Carter to Egyptian Prime Minister
Khalil
Washington, March 26, 1979

239.
Editorial Note
After more than six months of negotiations, the Treaty of Peace be-
tween the Arab Republic of Egypt and the State of Israel was signed by
President Jimmy Carter, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, and Israeli
Prime Minister Menachem Begin on the North Lawn of the White
House on the afternoon of March 26, 1979. The final agreement package
consisted of the treaty text itself—comprised of a preamble and nine ar-
ticles—supplemented by annexes dealing with post-Treaty security ar-
rangements, including the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from
Sinai, as well as the normalization of political, economic, and cultural
relations, including the exchange of ambassadors and the termination
of economic boycotts. In addition, the text carried agreed minutes to
Articles I, IV, V, and VI and the letter from Begin and Sadat to Carter on
West Bank and Gaza negotiations (see Document 216), along with an
explanatory note from Carter explicating the Israeli use of “Judea and
Samaria” to denote the “West Bank.” (See Document 237) The ex-
change of ambassadors between Egypt and Israel was confirmed by
three attached letters: one, from Sadat to Carter stating the exchange of
ambassadors between Egypt and Israel would occur one month after
Israel’s withdrawal to the agreed interim line; a second, from Carter to
Begin, affirming this pledge; and a third, from Begin to Carter, ac-
knowledging receipt of Carter’s letter. Finally, U.S. assurances re-
garding its role in ensuring compliance among the signatories to the
Treaty provisions were laid out in identical letters sent by Carter to
Begin and Sadat. The complete English language version of the Treaty,
including all annexes, minutes, and letters, is printed in Public Papers:
the signatories also signed the Arabic and Hebrew-language versions
of the Treaty during this ceremony.
In a separate ceremony held in the office of Secretary of State
Cyrus Vance on March 26, Vance and Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs
Moshe Dayan signed two Memoranda of Agreement between the
United States and Israel. The first, a Memorandum of Agreement be-
tween the United States and Israel, pledged U.S. commitment to up-
hold the Treaty and to support Israel in the event of Treaty violations.
(See Document 232) The second memorandum, a supplement to the
September 1, 1975, U.S.-Israeli Agreement on oil, extended U.S. com-
mitments to ensure Israel’s oil supply from a period of five years to a
period of fifteen years. This latter memorandum is printed as Docu-
ment 241.

240.
Letter From Egyptian Prime Minister Khalil to
President Carter
March 27, 1979

241.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts
78095. Brussels for EC. Subject: Memorandum of Agreement Be-
tween the United States and Israel.
1. Following is the text of the Memorandum of Agreement be-
tween the Government of the United States and the State of Israel
signed by Foreign Minister Dayan and Secretary Vance on March 26.
This memorandum and the accompanying annex (also contained
herein) describe agreements to be concluded regarding oil supply ar-
rangements between the U.S. and Israel.
2. Memorandum of Agreement
Begin text:
March 26, 1979
Memorandum of Agreement Between the Government of the
United States and Israel
The oil supply arrangement of September 1, 1975, between the
Governments of the United States and Israel, annexed hereto, remains
in effect. A memorandum of agreement shall be agreed upon and con-
cluded to provide an oil supply arrangement for a total of 15 years, in-
The memorandum of agreement, including the commencement of
this arrangement and pricing provisions, will be mutually agreed upon
by the parties within sixty days following the entry into force of the
treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel.
It is the intention of the parties that prices paid by Israel for oil pro-
vided by the United States hereunder shall be comparable to world
market prices current at the time of transfer, and that in any event the
United States will be reimbursed by Israel for the costs incurred by the
United States in providing oil to Israel hereunder.
Experts provided for in the September 1, 1975, arrangement will
meet on request to discuss matters arising under this relationship.
classified; Immediate. Sent to Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, Manama, Sana, Tehran,
Abu Dhabi, Baghdad, Doha, Kuwait, Dhahran, Tunis, Tripoli, Rabat, Algiers, Paris,
Brussels, Ottawa, Copenhagen, Bonn, Athens, Rome, Oslo, Lisbon, Ankara, The Hague,
Madrid, Nouakchott, Khartoum, Tokyo, Moscow, USUN, and USEC. Drafted by Rose-
mary D. O’Neill (NEA/EGY); approved by Saunders. Sent for information Immediate to
Tel Aviv and London.

The United States administration undertakes to seek promptly ad-
ditional statutory authorization that may be necessary for full imple-
mentation of this arrangement.
(Signed)
Moshe Dayan
For the Government of Israel
Cyrus R. Vance
For the Government of the United States.
End text.
3. Annex to Memorandum of Agreement
Begin text:
Annex
Israel will make its own independent arrangements for oil supply
to meet its requirements through normal procedures. In the event Israel
is unable to secure its needs in this way, the United States Government,
upon notification of this fact by the Government of Israel, will act as
follows for five years, at the end of which period either side can termi-
nate this arrangement on one-year’s notice.
(A) If the oil Israel needs to meet all its normal requirements for
domestic consumption is unavailable for purchase in circumstances
where no quantitative restrictions exist on the ability of the United
States to procure oil to meet its normal requirements, the United States
Government will promptly make oil available for purchase by Israel to
meet all of the aforementioned normal requirements of Israel. If Israel
is unable to secure the necessary means to transport such oil to Israel,
the United States Government will make every effort to help Israel se-
cure the necessary means of transport.
(B) If the oil Israel needs to meet all of its normal requirements for
domestic consumption is unavailable for purchase in circumstances
where quantitative restrictions through embargo or otherwise also pre-
vent the United States from procuring oil to meet its normal require-
ments, the United States Government will promptly make oil available
for purchase by Israel in accordance with the International Energy
Agency conservation and allocation formula, as applied by the United
States Government, in order to meet Israel’s essential requirements. If
Israel is unable to secure the necessary means to transport such oil to
Israel, the United States Government will make every effort to help Is-
rael secure the necessary means of transport.
Israeli and United States experts will meet annually or more fre-
quently at the request of either party, to review Israel’s continuing oil
requirement.
End text.
Vance

242.
Editorial Note
On March 27, 1979, in the aftermath of the signing of the Egyptian-
Israeli Peace Treaty, a conference of Foreign Ministers from eighteen
Arab states and the Palestine Liberation Organization convened in
Baghdad to consider the implementation of sanctions censuring
Egypt’s negotiation with Israel passed at the Baghdad Summit in No-
vember 1978. Reporting on the opening session, the United States In-
terests Section in Baghdad noted the “harsh rhetoric” used by Vice
Chairman of the Iraqi Ba’ath Party Saddam Hussein, Palestine Libera-
tion Organization leader Yasser Arafat, and Iraqi Foreign Minister Sad-
doun Hammadi, to condemn the Peace Treaty, the U.S. role in its nego-
tiation, and Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat. In his speech to the
first public session, Hussein “made it clear that any Arab state not re-
maining committed” to the Baghdad resolutions “was an ally of Sadat
and thus an ally of the Zionist enemy.” It was, he continued, “incum-
bent on Arabs to take actions against any backsliders lest decisions of
Arab Kings and Presidents become mere ink on paper.” Saddam also
criticized the United States for “pushing Sadat in to a peace settle-
ment,” an action which he noted would cause U.S. interests in the Arab
world to “suffer.” Arafat called upon the Arab countries to “take deci-
sions to punish the U.S. and to impose boycotts on it in the fields of pe-
troleum, finance and commerce.” Lastly, Hammadi stated that the
United States “bore the ‘primary responsibility’” for the “capitula-
tionist treaty,” adding it was the “nationalist responsibility of Arabs to
check Zionist imperialist conspiracy through an increase of awareness
and sacrifices.”
Hammadi’s speech outlined six demands for the conference: 1) “to
expel Egypt from the Arab League and to isolate it both from Arab
world and within the international community;” 2) transfer the Arab
League headquarters from Cairo, along with all of the League’s associ-
ated institutions; 3) stop all Arab economic, financial, and technical
assistance programs for Egypt; 4) “withdraw all official and private
Arab deposits from Egypt[ian] financial institutions;” 5) “freeze” Egyp-
tian membership in all economic, cultural and other groupings; and
6) “call upon the Egyptian people to shoulder their responsibility by
supporting collective Arab efforts to confront Zionist, imperialist plots
which have turned the Egyptian regime into their executive tool.”
Central Foreign Policy File, D790142–0982)

However, the March 28 conference sessions were marked by in-
tense debate over the proposed sanctions. Jordan announced it would
recall its Ambassador from Cairo but would not break relations; the
Omani Government, which had boycotted the conference, issued a
statement praising the Peace Treaty as it brought the return of Sinai to
Egypt. The delegation from Saudi Arabia only agreed to the “minimum
sanctions” against the Egyptians which had been agreed at the
Baghdad
Summit
the
previous
November,
a
position
which
drew rebuke from Arafat. (Marvine Howe, “Arabs, Deeply Split, Bar
Stronger Steps Against U.S., Egypt,” The New York Times, March 29,
1979, page A1) Addressing the conference, Arafat attacked what he
viewed as Saudi Arabia’s lack of support for the Palestinian cause and
its “soft” position on imposing sanctions upon Egypt or the United
States. The speech provoked a “heated exchange” between Arafat and
Saudi Foreign Minister Saud bin Faisal, followed by a walk-out by the
Libyan, Syrian, and P.L.O. delegations. The Saudi Deputy Foreign Min-
ister Abd al-Aziz al-Thunayyan informed Ambassador to Saudi Arabia
John C. West that Arafat’s attack was “most serious and completely
unexpected.” “The Saudis,” West reported, “had expected to imple-
ment the Baghdad sanctions and to achieve a consensus but the Arafat
accusation had upset all plans and calculations. Thunayyan said that he
could not understand why Arafat attacked as he did and he did not
know what the outcome of the Baghdad meeting would be.” (Telegram
Policy File, D790144–0446)
In the end, on March 31, a set of compromise resolutions, imposing
an extensive diplomatic and economic boycott of Egypt, was unani-
mously approved by all the delegations in attendance. While no
decision was taken to withdraw Arab funds from Egyptian financial in-
stitutions, impose exchange controls on Egypt, or impose an oil em-
bargo on the United States, the delegations resolved to suspend diplo-
matic relations with Egypt; to suspend Egyptian membership in the
Arab League and all associated ministerial councils as well as other
specialized Arab organizations; to transfer Arab League headquarters
from Cairo to Tunis; and to halt all financial and technical aid pro-
grams. Moreover, the resolutions stated intent to seek the suspension of
Egyptian membership in the non-aligned movement, the Islamic Con-
ference, and the Organization of African Unity for “violating the reso-
lutions of these organizations pertaining to the Arab-Israeli conflict.”
The full text of the Baghdad resolutions is printed in Keesing’s Contem-
Meeting with West to discuss the resolutions on April 3, Saud ex-
plained that his country had “worked hard to prevent radicals from
carrying the day at Baghdad.” The Conference had ended in a “com-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
promise absorbing the furor of the Arab world, which was, in Saudi
view, [the] best that could have been expected.” Saud advised that if
the United States was “going to pursue Phase II of peace process, it
should take steps to open direct contacts with PLO.” Otherwise, he as-
serted, “it would be better to forget about [the] peace process for the
moment and concentrate on bilateral relations with the Arabs while the
dust settles.” (Telegram 2746 from Jidda, April 4; National Archives,
243.
Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin
MB: I had a wonderful visit to Cairo!2 The people of Egypt opened
their hearts to me. In the morning, tens of thousands lined the streets on
both sides, and cheered and waved, and took me to their hearts. I am
very moved. I left my car for a while, to the disturbance of the Egyptian
secret service, and went into the crowd, which was crying, “We like
you; we love you.” It was absolutely wonderful. Yesterday’s reception
was at the Qubba Palace. The evening was a “thousand nights into
one”. It was fantastic. The hospitality was marvelous.
President Sadat and I have some agreements—we will exchange
Instruments of Ratification next week, after debate in the Egyptian
Parliament on Thursday, likely concluding on Sunday; Monday5 or
Tuesday we’ll exchange instruments at the American monitoring sta-
tion in the Sinai in early morning. Butros Ghali with their document;
Dayan will have our document. Will put up a tent with all three flags. If
you will give instructions to your man in charge; we want to have a tent
with three flags, and armies of the three nations form the honor guards.
Secondly, on May 26, President Sadat will receive, in person, El
Arish. On the 27th I will arrive and we will make two announcements:
We will open the direct corridor between Cairo and the Ben Gurion air-
port, and will then have a 40 minute flight of what would take 1½
hours. We will also declare the borders between Egypt and Israel open
for all citizens.
We also reached agreement on the committees. We will have five
Ministers from each country; we will have five Ministers and Egypt
will have five Ministers. We will meet first in Beer Sheba, then El
Arish—(after Egypt resumes sovereignty the second in El Arish.) The
chairmanship will rotate; first the Israeli will be chairman, and then the
Egyptian will be chairman—each on his own soil.
(MB) The same will apply to the military committee; Ezer will be
chairman, and General Ali will be chairman.
President Sadat asked for the return of Santa Catarina on No-
vember 19 of this year. I said I will do my best and will recommend this
to the Cabinet.
We reached agreement in 50 minutes what would take others 6
months.
We wanted to call you together, but didn’t want to wake you up.
We decided that I would call from Jerusalem and President Sadat from
Cairo, instead of calling at 5: in the morning.
JC: Thank you. Let me respond. I am not surprised the people
opened their hearts to you because of the great courage you have
shown and the great generosity of the Israeli people you exemplify.
We were thrilled to see the news reports about the compatibility
which exists between you and President Sadat, his Ministers, and the
Egyptian people.
I think one of the most significant things you did was to leave your
car and let the people touch you.
We are very gratified at the generosity shown by both sides in ex-
pediting the exchange of territory and the agreement to meet again.
El Arish has a special place in President Sadat’s heart. He served
there as a young man. Your sensitivity about this will pay rich
dividends.
I am also pleased at the direct air corridor—and the opening of
borders is a tremendous event. I will immediately instruct our people
to prepare for the exchange of the ratified documents. Do you know
when?
MB: Next Monday or next Tuesday.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
JC: I’ll tell them to prepare for either day and you can let me know,
through normal diplomatic channels, which day.
(JC) You are correct in identifying Santa Catarina as special to Pres-
ident Sadat’s heart. He has mentioned it before to me. This is a very fine
step. He also discussed this long ago with Mr. Peres.
MB: On November 19th. Very symbolic. Will do our best to
transfer on November 18.
I also want to tell you how proud each of us will be to be with you
on December 9th in Oslo, for the Nobel Peace Prize.
JC: (Laughing) . . . Your remarks are both very generous and pre-
sumptuous. All the credit goes to you and President Sadat.
MB: (Mentions a cable) . . . As I said, it was history-making and you
did it. President Sadat and I absolutely concur.
JC: Thank you. I would like to say for future reference, no matter
what time of the day or night it is, do not hesitate to call me. I get up
very early most mornings, and was up at 5: this morning.
MB: Thank you. I won’t abuse it; but will, if necessary, use it.
JC: I hope you all will explore every possibility of small gestures of
generosity and cooperation above and beyond the treaty agreements.
MB: . . . President Sadat and I discussed the release of prisoners.
This will take a few weeks. We will also take out the military head-
quarters from Gaza City. You gave him a letter, but he appreciated
hearing it from me.
JC: I am very grateful, and want to express my congratulations and
appreciation.
MB: Thank you. My wife and I send our best wishes equally to
Rosalynn, Amy, and to your mother.
JC: My mother will never forget your embracing her first after the
signing ceremony.
MB: All the time she was sending kisses to me in the air! The eve-
ning in the tent was beautiful.
JC: Hamilton Jordan may have expressed our feelings when he
said, “Begin for President!”
MB: Hamilton. Hamilton is a wonderful man. He likes to make
jokes. He is a wonderful man.
JC: Not all a joke.
(Ending pleasantries from both Heads of State)

245.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter
Washington, April 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Nuclear Cooperation Agreements with Egypt and Israel
We initialed identical nuclear cooperation agreements with Egypt
and Israel in August 1976. It was our intent at the time to submit these
agreements to Congress right away. President Ford, however, subse-
quently decided to withhold submission.
The agreements have remained in abeyance pending the Adminis-
tration’s review of our non-proliferation policy and passage of the new
non-proliferation law. Over this period we have assured the Egyptians,
who have continued to press us on concluding an agreement, that we
intended to do so as soon as practical.
Aside from the question of renegotiating our initialed agreements
to reflect the requirements of the new law, the Egyptian and Israeli
agreements have always been informally “linked” with a tacit under-
standing that they would be substantially identical and move forward
in tandem. Several developments have occurred, however, which make
such linkage doubtful.
For its part, Egypt appears ready to comply with the added non-
proliferation conditions specified in the Nuclear Non-proliferation Act
of 1978, but only so long as we guarantee it equal treatment with any
agreement subsequently concluded with Israel. Israel, on the other
hand, has not pushed us to conclude an agreement. Moreover, under
the law we would insist on safeguards being applied to all of Israel’s
existing nuclear facilities (including the unsafeguarded nuclear facility
at Dimona). The Israelis have resisted this in the past and will probably
continue to do so.
The Israelis remain interested in a nuclear cooperation agreement
and they might seek to have you waive the full-scope safeguards re-
quirements both for the agreement and for export licensing purposes.
Both waivers are subject to Congressional veto by concurrent resolu-
tion, and the export licensing criterion can only be waived on an annual
basis. We do not favor such waivers because of their adverse impact on
our entire non-proliferation policy, as well as on our policy in the
Middle East.
Moreover, the law prohibits exports to any non-nuclear-weapon
state found by the President to have engaged in activities since March
1978 involving nuclear material and having direct significance for the
manufacture or acquisition of nuclear explosive devices, unless that
state has taken steps which, in the President’s judgment, represent suf-
ficient progress toward terminating such activities. If faced today with
a proposed nuclear export to Israel, you might find it necessary, based
on current evidence, to determine that the prohibition applied. Again,
the law provides a waiver on non-proliferation or U.S. common de-
fense and security grounds, which is subject to concurrent resolution
Congressional veto, but we would be reluctant to recommend use of
this waiver.
We believe we should now approach Egypt and Israel with iden-
tical agreements, which have been revised in accordance with our new
law. We expect that this will likely result in an agreement only with
Egypt in the foreseeable future. Egypt’s longstanding and favorable at-
titudes toward non-proliferation and Sadat’s enhanced image in the
U.S. appear to make it possible now for us to consider moving ahead
separately on an agreement on the assumption that an agreement with
Israel will not be ready at the same time. The Egyptian’s concern about
“equal treatment” could be handled in the context of an explicit state-
ment that they will receive treatment no less favorable than Israel
would receive under any subsequent U.S.-Israeli nuclear cooperation
agreement.
Israel, or its American supporters, may oppose a nuclear coopera-
tion agreement with Egypt for a variety of reasons, but especially if Is-
rael sees little prospect for an agreement with us because of our new re-
quirements. The consideration of a separate agreement with Egypt,
therefore, could become a contentious issue on the Hill which we must
be prepared to deal with if we are to fulfill our promises to Egypt. In
addition, it is possible that criticism could come from other sources for
initiating nuclear cooperation with non-parties to the NPT in a volatile
region.
The United States’ commitment to nuclear cooperation with Egypt
has been reaffirmed on several occasions, along with assurances that
we will move forward with the agreement as expeditiously as possible.
In this latter regard we are behind schedule in providing the Egyptians
with our suggestions for revising or re-negotiating the existing agree-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ment to conform to the requirements of the new law. Ambassador Eilts
is concerned that the delays which have already occurred in concluding
an agreement are undermining Egyptian confidence in our intentions
on an issue which they view as a major bilateral concern, especially
when they appear ready to agree with our non-proliferation policies
and are willing to concede our requirements. Egypt and Israel already
agreed in 1976 to much more stringent controls, excluding safeguards,
than exist in our other agreements.
In our judgment it is desirable to avoid delays on moving toward
concluding an agreement with Egypt. In this context, we need your
agreement that we will vigorously support an agreement with Egypt
recognizing the possibility that it could become a controversial issue in
Congress. No time is an ideal time for this, but the treaty signing seems
likely to provide the best atmosphere in which to send this to Congress.
If we do not move soon, we will not be able to complete Congressional
review this session.
If you agree to move forward quickly on the re-negotiations, we
would submit to both Israel and Egypt, within a month, identical draft
revised agreements for their consideration. We will also indicate our
willingness to send a U.S. negotiating team to conclude agreements at
an early mutually convenient time.
Under our current perceptions, we expect that the agreement with
Egypt could be ready for submission to Congress during the current
session. We will, however, have some control over the timing of
various steps in the progress toward concluding an agreement. We also
hope that the issue will be insulated to a large extent from domestic
politics since our position on both the Egyptian and Israeli agreements
will be based squarely on our non-proliferation policy, the requirement
of the law and the energy needs of the two countries.
Recommendation:
That you agree to move forward quickly with renegotiating the
nuclear cooperation agreements with Egypt and Israel, including a pro-
vision for equal treatment for both countries, understanding that Egypt
will expect us to support our agreement with them even if we do not
have a parallel one with the Israelis.

246.
Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter announced on April 24, 1979, the appoint-
ment of Special Trade Representative Robert S. Strauss as his Special
Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations. Strauss was ap-
pointed to the rank of Ambassador at Large, replacing Alfred L. Ath-
erton, Jr., who had been named Ambassador to Egypt. The text of
Carter’s announcement, along with statements by Strauss and Secre-
tary of State Cyrus Vance to the assembled press, is printed in Public
prior experience in dealing with Middle East issues, he had recently re-
turned from a trade and investment mission to Egypt and Israel.
Strauss visited Egypt April 17–19, meeting with Egyptian President
Anwar al-Sadat, Vice President Hosni Mubarak, and Prime Minister
Mustapha Khalil, and other top Egyptian officials to discuss the global
economic situation as well as U.S.-Egyptian bilateral business relations.
An overview of the Egyptian talks is in telegram 8106 from Cairo, April
0362) Strauss’s meetings with Sadat, Mubarak, and Khalil on April 17
are summarized in telegram 7910 from Cairo, April 18. (National Ar-
reported on further discussions with the Egyptian section of the Joint
Business Council on April 17 and top Egyptian economic officials on
Cairo, April 19, respectively. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
Israel April 19 for a 30-hour visit, meeting with Israeli officials, in-
cluding Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, Minister for Foreign
Affairs Moshe Dayan, Minister for Defense Ezer Weizman, Minister for
Finance Simcha Ehrlich, and Minister of Industry, Trade and Tourism
Gideon Patt. On April 20, Strauss and Patt signed the U.S.-Israel Multi-
lateral Trade Negotiation Agreement. In telegram 8383 from Tel Aviv,
April 23, the Embassy summarized all of Strauss’s meetings with the
Israelis. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
8249 from Tel Aviv, April 21, respectively reported on Strauss’s indi-
vidual meetings with Dayan and Weizman. (National Archives, Cen-
8188 from Tel Aviv, April 20, the Embassy reported Strauss’s discus-
sion with Ehrlich on April 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy, D790182–0592)
Before making the public announcement of Strauss’s appointment,
Carter confirmed his decision with Begin and Sadat in separate tele-
phone conversations on the afternoon of April 24. According to the

247.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
8600. Subject: An Overview of Destabilizing Forces in Egypt. Ref:
State 38873.
1. (S-entire text).
2. Summary. The threat of Sadat’s assassination has been height-
ened by the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty. This could be very destabi-
lizing, particularly since there is no established successor of Sadat’s
stature. Assassination could polarize the country between those who
unify behind a temporary successor (probably Mubarak) and those
who would seek safety in return to the Arab fold. Over the longer term,
it is difficult to imagine Sadat’s successor being able to persist for long
in a policy opposed by the rest of Arab world. Sadat’s security, how-
ever, is good and the Egyptians are aware of the threat. The following
assessment of destabilizing forces in Egypt, prepared in response to
reftel, assumes Sadat’s remaining in office at least until 1982.
Egypt learned important lessons from the January 1977 subsidy
riots3 and is unlikely to repeat past mistakes. The economy has im-
proved (the Ministry of Economy claims a per annum GNP growth in
real terms of over 9 percent), but important sectoral snags remain. It is
questionable how much improvement has trickled down to the lower
income levels. Housing and public services are woefully inadequate;
the urban fabric has been strained almost to the breaking point. Institu-
tional weaknesses and a lack of resources limit the government’s ability
to address these problems.
Sadat remains physically and psychologically isolated; officials
have difficulty in making and following through on decisions; and
most of those close to the President will not give him bad news. Never-
theless, Sadat is widely popular, while his opposition is fragmented
and without effective leadership. The Peace Treaty is backed by an
overwhelming majority, including the military. Mass media and labor
present no current challenge to the regime. Fundamentalist Muslim or-
ganizations oppose many governmental actions, including the Peace
Treaty, but they are bereft of real leadership and do not constitute a
present threat. The Soviets, opposing Sadat’s leadership and the peace
process, have few assets with which to work.
Continued stability depends greatly on the political and economic
momentum generated in the critical months ahead. If forward move-
ment is not maintained, destabilizing forces could present a threat to
Sadat’s regime. End summary.
2. In the charged atmosphere following the conclusion of the
Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty, the threat of Sadat’s sudden removal
from office by assassination has been heightened. Syria, Iraq, Libya,
and the PLO, even Jordan, have as a primary objective the overthrow of
Sadat. While Sadat’s security is good, and the Egyptians are aware of
the threat, we cannot rule out the possibility of a successful assassina-
tion attempt. Such an event could well be destabilizing, the more so
since there is no established and automatic successor of Sadat’s stature.
Assassination could polarize the country—those who would react in
rage and unify behind a temporary successor (probably Mubarak) and
those who would seek safety in return to the Arab fold. Much would
depend upon the wishes of the military leadership. Over the longer
term, it is hard to imagine any successor to Sadat having the fortitude,
vision, tactical flexibility and political base to persist for long in a policy
opposed by the rest of the Arab world.
3. The following assessment is based on the assumption that Sadat
will continue in office, at least until his current term expires in 1982.
Should he then decide to transfer power to Mubarak, we assume the
process would go smoothly. Nevertheless, even with Sadat in office,
the Egyptian system is subject to a number of strains which have the
potential to destabilize the situation. These are outlined below.
4. Egyptian vulnerability to destabilizing forces was best demon-
strated by the January 1977 subsidy riots which severely shook this

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
government. For a few days there was some doubt as to the outcome. In
the end the government did survive and in doing so appeared to learn
some lessons that make it less vulnerable today. The proximate cause of
the January rioting was the government’s announcement of precipitous
rise in prices of basic commodities. It has not repeated this mistake, but,
rather, has achieved much the same goal by resorting to incremental
price increases. There have been some grumblings, but there appears to
be no mass discontent.
5. This is partly due to the fact that Egypt’s overall economy has
been steadily improving. Since January 1977, the Egyptian GNP has
gone up by approximately 8 percent per annum in real terms (the Min-
istry of Economy says the figure is more than 9 percent). The balance of
payments picture has dramatically improved and, for the first time in
its history, Egypt is current on its external debt. Income from Canal
tolls, oil exports, tourism, and remittances are all rising. Some sectoral
snags remain, however, particularly in the construction industry.
6. There is some question, however, on how much of this improve-
ment in the large has trickled down to the lower income levels. Certain
sectors of society obviously have benefitted from Sadat’s open door.
Others, particularly lower paid government employees, have not. The
frustrations of living in Cairo and other Egyptian cities increase daily.
This is a function of population explosion, of urban migration, and of
an infrastructure which was sorely neglected for 25 years. Cairo could
10 million. The housing shortage is acute; perhaps as many as a half
million Cairenes are camped out in a semi-permanent status in the
City of the Dead, with virtually no government services. Cairo’s water,
sewage, transportation, and telecommunications are all woefully
inadequate.
7. In addition to a lack of real resources, the government’s ability to
address problems is limited by institutional weaknesses, including con-
siderable corruption. The Egyptian bureaucracy has grown so large
that in many cases it barely functions. Everyone dealing with it, Egyp-
tian or American, is fast frustrated. Egypt’s bureaucracy has been not-
ably inefficient and venal on at least a petty scale throughout history;
with the increased money available in the economy this phenomenon is
on the increase. This corruption is widely assumed to extend to the
highest level of Egyptian society. Sadat’s wife and his closest advisor
are popularly believed to be involved, although hard evidence to sup-
port this charge is difficult to come by.
8. The government’s ability to deal with major social and economic
issues is further limited by Sadat’s physical and psychological isola-
tion. His peripatetic style of government makes it difficult for key offi-
cials to get decisions. Access to the President is strictly limited, and

most who surround him are very reluctant to give Sadat bad news. He
has few close associates. This would be less damaging if subordinate
officials were willing to make independent decisions. Unfortunately,
the nature of Egyptian society pushes almost all issues to the top for
resolution. Until Sadat reaches a decision, all too often nothing
happens. (Frequently, little happens even after Sadat issues directives;
there is little follow-up, and bureaucratic inertia is massive—see 78
Cairo 19822.)
9. Sadat’s popularity nevertheless continues to be wide and appar-
ently genuine. The opposition which does exist is fragmented and lacks
dynamic leadership. Thus far, to the best of our knowledge Egyptian
security forces (military and civilian) are loyal to Sadat, cohesive and
professional, and seem to genuinely welcome the peace treaty with Is-
rael. The Egyptian military—specifically its lower officers and rank and
file—reflects its society and is not an elite organization. On the one
hand, the military is not cut off from the people. On the other, it is af-
fected by the same economic and social problems which afflict society
in general. Additionally, the armed forces are acutely aware of the fact
that their military capability has declined in recent years, particularly
when compared to Israel.
10. The mass media is government-controlled and uncritical.
While there is no prior censorship, editors are government-appointed
and are expected to know what should not appear in print. By and
large they observe closely these unwritten rules. Labor groups, too, are
amenable to government direction. There have been no significant
strikes since January 1977, and recent wage increases have permitted
workers to keep up with inflation, if only just barely. Labor leaders re-
port no mass discontent, but say there is a pervasive sense of drift.
11. Student and fundamentalist Muslim religious organizations
could cause the administration difficulty, as Sadat undoubtedly is now
aware. The conservative campus-based Islamic societies (with links to
the Muslim Brotherhood) are the best organized force in the country
outside the military and the communists, and are deeply committed to
their cause. They control student governments on many campuses, and
sion of Egyptian economic policy-making responsibilities as background for Carter’s
preparations for the Camp David Summit. The analysis concluded: “In sum, decision-
making at higher levels in the government-dominated Egyptian economy tends to be dif-
fused, poorly coordinated, lacking in clear guidance from superior authority and unre-
sponsive to out-of-the-ordinary requirements. Buck passing is a well-developed bureau-
cratic art; individual responsibility for decisions normally is accepted only if impossible
to avoid. The extensive use of government committees is a device designed at least as
much to arrive at collective responsibility for decisions as it is to reach a consensus on fea-
sible, preferred courses of action.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
are in a strong position in the national student leadership. The Islamic
societies, and their adult associates, oppose much of Sadat’s peace
policy, especially the failure to resolve the Jerusalem issue, and have
strong reservations over the course of domestic developments. They
fear modernization, and oppose Sadat’s economic open door. The reli-
gious right, however, bereft as it is of real leaders does not at present
constitute anything more than a latent threat. It has attracted no more
than 10–15 percent of the student population, and the campus groups
are fragmented geographically and ideologically. The lack of a hier-
archical structure in Sunni Islam argues against the rise of large scale
organized opposition from the religious right. It could develop, but it
would take time. There is no charismatic leader, but the situation is ripe
for one to emerge. Sadat has shown that he recognizes the potential
threat and has initiated a two-track policy. He has warned that he will
crack down on the Ikhwan and the Islamic societies while, at the same
time, offering financial inducements to main line religious figures.
More funds have been appropriated for mosque construction, wages
have been raised in the religious sector, and a large number of mosques
are about to be brought under government control.
12. The only significant minority group in Egypt, the Copts, has
little ability to destabilize the country. At most, there are 4 million
Copts in a total population of some 40 million. They are scattered
around the country, with the largest concentration in rural upper
Egypt. Despite their protestations to the contrary, the GOE does not
seek to deliberately discriminate against Copts. Fundamentalist Islamic
organizations do seek, however, to repress the Christian community.
This is a problem for the government as well as for the Copts. Out-
breaks of religious strife will continue but should be easily contained
by the security forces, as they have in the past. Sadat has repeatedly
stressed his commitment to communal peace. In doing so, he has done
much to calm the Coptic leadership.
13. The Soviets continue to work against Sadat, but few assets re-
main with which they can work. Their consulates and cultural centers
have been closed, and their activities are carefully monitored. They
have considerable influence with domestic leftists, but these same
leftists have little power or influence of their own. Many were discred-
ited by their involvement in the excesses of the Nasser era. The do-
mestic left continues to have a disproportionate amount of influence
with Cairo’s intellectual elite, but has made little inroad with the Egyp-
tian masses. While the left retains the ability to exploit incidents (as it
did in January 1977), it has so far showed itself incapable of instigating
instability on its own.
14. Overall, our assessment at this time is that destabilizing forces
are evident on the political-economic scene and that those forces in

some respects could pose potential problems for the continuation of
moderate rule in Egypt over the coming critical months in which nego-
tiations for a comprehensive peace will have to be pursued. The peace
is overwhelmingly popular among Egyptians, but it has been bought at
the price of near-total political isolation in the Arab world, with all that
connotes for the continuation of economic support from the oil-rich,
formerly “moderate” Arabs, and for the ingrained Egyptian claim to
leadership in the Arab world.
13. Egypt’s economy is improved; growth rates are up. But peace
brings its own additional demands in the form of rising popular ex-
pectations on the standard of living, and built-in distortions in the
economy limit the government’s maneuverability in policy terms. (It
would be a reckless policy maker, indeed, who would advocate at-
tacking head-on the enormously costly subsidy burden.)
14. Continued stability in this potentially unstable setting depends
greatly on the political and economic momentum Sadat is able to gen-
erate in the conduct of Egypt’s affairs, and thus is subject to virtually
continual reassessment by the Embassy. Sadat has just pulled off an
historic political coup, and his Economic Ministers are able to point to
significant, identifiable economic advances in some areas of their re-
sponsibility. The question now is: what follows? A brief pause of some
few months in which negotiations remain inconclusive may be accept-
able. After that, if forward movement is not maintained in Egypt’s ex-
ternal and domestic economic problem areas, now quiescent destabi-
lizing forces indoubtedly will surface and pose to Sadat’s government
basic questions of survival.
15. The above arguments are predicated on Sadat’s remaining
around and in power for the immediate future. As indicated earlier,
should he leave office suddenly, the stability problem could become
acute. There is no clear precedent for succession. According to the con-
stitution, if Sadat dies in office the Speaker of the People’s Assembly
would become acting President, until Parliament nominates, and the
electorate endorses, his successor.
16. At the moment, Vice President Mubarak appears to be the clear
favorite, and Sadat’s choice, for this office. His role in vetting the na-
tional Democratic Party’s candidates for the coming election should
give him considerable control over this body. Many, however, would
oppose Mubarak’s assumption of the presidency, undoubtedly em-
boldened by recognition of the fact that the Vice President lacks an in-
dependent power base. Up to now Mubarak is Sadat’s creation.
Without his mentor in the presidency, he would be a much weakened
man. Some suggest, however that Mubarak is ambitious, and with his
man Kamal Hassan Ali as Min Defense, might at some time decide to
make a power play of his own. It is possible in this society, but there is

248.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom
108592. Subject: Letter to Prince Saud. London for Under Secretary
Newsom: Alert Tice at Hotel Europa; Jidda for Charge. Ref: Cairo 8604.
1. (C) Entire text
Confidential; Niact Immediate; Exdis. Also sent Immediate to Jidda and Riyadh. Drafted
by Roger B. Merrick (NEA/ARP); cleared by Crawford, Sterner, Saunders, and Richard
Castrodale (S/S–O); approved by Vance. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo.

2. Please deliver2 the following letter from the Secretary to Prince
Saud at the earliest opportunity:
3. Begin text:
HRH Prince Saud bin Faisal al-Saud, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Your Royal Highness:
I want to share with you my concern that the outcome of the Is-
lamic Conference3 could affect Egypt’s international position in a way
that would have negative consequences for each of our countries. The
United States believes that Saudi Arabia and its moderate Gulf
neighbors understand that the survival of a moderate government in
Egypt is important for the geo-political interests of Saudi Arabia and its
neighbors and that the current Arab campaign to punish Egypt is
turning toward extremes which can only undermine the security of the
region and the position of the moderates in it.
Expulsion of Egypt from Islamic or international groupings which
are not exclusively Arab can only work against broader long-term in-
terests of countries like Saudi Arabia, and we hope that Saudi Arabia
will lead in resisting such efforts.
I bring this matter to your attention because of the critical nature of
the present period for all of us and because of the leading role Saudi
Arabia can play in support of Egypt’s rightful place in the Islamic Con-
ference. A positive approach by Saudi Arabia on this matter would
clearly benefit us all, while Egypt’s expulsion would further damage
interests which each of us considers important.
Sincerely, Cyrus Vance. End text.
3. FYI: Under Secretary Newsom will be making same points to
Crown Prince Fahd. End FYI.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

249.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, May 3, 1979
SUBJECT
West Bank/Gaza Negotiations
Secretary Vance has sent you the memo at Tab A2 in advance of our
Friday morning meeting with Bob Strauss. At this point more ques-
tions are raised than answered. Specifically:
—A deputy for Strauss. Bob will not be able to assume full responsi-
bility until later in the year. Even then, he may not want to get into all
the details. One possible candidate to be his deputy is Jim Leonard
from our UN Mission. He knows the Middle East well and is an experi-
enced diplomat.
—Appropriate US role. How active should we be? When should we
begin to lay out substantive positions? Cy prefers to hold back for a
while, letting the Egyptians and Israelis take the lead at first.
—Broadening Arab support. The positions we take on settlements,
Jerusalem and a dialogue with the PLO will be important signals to the
Arab world. The direction and timing of our moves will require careful
consideration.
—PLO. Most Arab governments are urging us to open a dialogue
with the PLO. This would cause an uproar in Israel. An alternative
means of attracting Palestinian support would be to stake out cred-
ible positions on settlements and the scope of authority of the self-
government. (S)

250.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Lebanon and Israel
115270. Eyes Only for Ambassadors Dean and Lewis from the Sec-
retary. Subject: Contacts With PLO/Fatah.
(S) Entire text
1. For Ambassador Dean: We have given further thought to the se-
curity problems in Lebanon which we discussed during your recent
consultation in Washington. We agree that the personal safety and se-
curity of you and all members of the Mission, along with private Amer-
ican citizens, makes it essential that all appropriate precautions are
taken.
2. In recognition of the decisive role that organized Palestinian
groups have played and could play in the security of our Mission and
the physical environment in which it must function, you are authorized
to initiate and maintain such contact with an appropriate PLO/Fatah
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
representative or person associated with those organizations as is nec-
essary to assure reasonable protection of your own security and that of
your staff and American citizens in Lebanon. You should pick one indi-
vidual for this contact. This contact represents a continuation of the li-
aison with PLO/Fatah for security purposes which was authorized for
Embassy Beirut in 1976 and has never been rescinded. We recognize,
however, that experience has shown that you must have discretion to
conduct exchange with associate or representative of PLO/Fatah who
may be accessible only to the Chief of Mission.
3. In the first instance you are authorized to conduct exchanges
with Basil Akl, if he is your choice, on the understanding that you will
inform us immediately if you believe it essential to be in touch with
others in PLO/Fatah.
4. Your contact must not rpt not stray beyond the understanding
we have with the Government of Israel, as recently reaffirmed in the
memorandum of agreement. Your contact, therefore, will at this time
relate to security and security-related issues within Lebanon. Your con-
tacts will not be construed as recognition of or negotiation with the
PLO/Fatah on issues going beyond security.
5. For Ambassador Lewis: You should not rpt not raise this issue
with Israelis but regard it as consistent with past policy in Lebanon
which has been publicly acknowledged. If asked you should cite past
practice and say you will query Washington. For your own back-
ground only at this stage, we would probably ask you to reply to such a
query along following lines:
A. The security of American personnel and institutions in Lebanon
depends on a large degree on the self-restraint of the various Pales-
tinian groups. (There are 56 Americans in the Embassy and several
hundred Americans working at the American University, American
schools, financial institutions, and businesses.) Our inability to prevent
incidents by routine measures was illustrated by the April 2 grenade at-
tack on the Embassy and the April 16 bombing of the cultural center.
Another example of the danger to Americans in Beirut was the threat
made in mid-April of 1979 against Ambassador Dean’s life by the same
group that assassinated Ambassador Meloy in 1976.
B. The Israelis will understand our vital security concerns and our
determination to take all necessary measures to protect our personnel
and citizens. They will recall our shared efforts to safeguard Israeli per-
sonnel in Tehran, when our concerns paralleled one another. They will
recall that our Embassy in Beirut had contacts with Fatah on security
matters in 1976. We have authorized our Embassy in Beirut—up to and
including our Ambassador—to maintain, as required, contacts with a
representative of PLO/Fatah or person associated with that organiza-
tion for the purpose of assuring a reasonable degree of safety for the
Ambassador, Mission staff and property, and American citizens in Leb-
anon. This contact, therefore, will relate to security and security-related
issues within Lebanon. This contact will be limited to only a single
person associated with PLO/Fatah.
Christopher

251.
Telegram From the United States Liaison Office in Riyadh to
the Department of State
718. From Charge Daniels. Subj: (S) Saudi Arabia Withdraws Offer
of Funding of F–5s for Egypt.
1. (S)-entire text.
2. Summary: In meeting just before his departure for Fez, Prince
Saud told me SAG saw no alternative but to withdraw offer of funding
for F–5s for Egypt. He added that Islamic Conference preparation com-
mittee had decided to propose “suspension” of Egypt at Fez.
3. Foreign Minister Prince Saud summoned me to meeting with
him at Riyadh airport just prior to his departure on May 7 for Islamic
Conference in Morocco. Meeting was also attended by Deputy Foreign
Minister Abd al-Rahman Mansuri and Abdallah Alireza, Embassy Po-
litical Counselor, and Chief USLO.
4. Prince Saud referred to Secretary’s letter to him, asking for
Saudi assistance in preventing expulsion of Egypt from Islamic Confer-
ence and other international bodies. He said he would of course be
cret; Immediate; Exdis Handle as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Rabat, Cairo,
and Jidda.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
sending formal response but meanwhile he wanted to give oral reply.
Saudi Arabia’s desire to maintain relations with Egypt has been and re-
mains very strong. Even at this time of greatest strain, SAG has tried to
keep as strong relation as possible. Unfortunately, maintenance of rela-
tions apparently does not meet the interests of President Sadat. Sadat
apparently saw some remaining links in the relationship and he
“chopped” them in his May Day speech. He has made it impossible to
maintain any relations or any of the commitments that SAG had made,
even in such areas as military sales. Prince Saud then said in low
solemn voice that he wished to inform me officially that HMG felt that
it could no longer keep its commitment to purchase F–5s for Egypt.
Commitments should be of equal importance to both countries. SAG
has tried to keep its commitments in the face of many obstacles, but
now SAG feels it cannot keep this commitment.
5. I said that I thought SAG position was that F–5 deal was consid-
ered to be completed transaction and that it would therefore be carried
through. Saud replied that indeed arrangement had been considered as
“completed” and thus outside boundaries of Baghdad decisions5 but
this was no longer possible.
6. I said that I was indeed sorry to hear this news. I remembered
that Crown Prince Fahd had told us on several occasions that SAG
wished to do all that it could to help Egypt. The way relations between
the two countries have deteriorated over the past few weeks has been
great tragedy. I was certain that SAG decision on F–5s would not be
taken lightly in Washington but would in fact cause great distress.
Prince Saud said that this was not situation that Saudi Arabia wanted
but it was one brought on by President Sadat.
7. I asked if SAG distinction between Egypt and Egyptian people
still remained in effect. Would SAG now take actions, for example,
against Egyptian expatriates in Saudi Arabia? Saud said distinction still
existed and Saudi Arabia would take no action against Egyptians in
Saudi Arabia but he did not know what actions Egyptian Government
might take.
8. I asked Saud how he thought Islamic Conference would turn
out. I pointed out, as Secretary Vance did in his letter, that ostracism of
Egypt could harm the interests of both Saudi Arabia and U.S. in area.

252.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, May 9, 1979
SUBJECT
Middle East Initiatives (U)
You asked me to think of steps that might be taken to assert our
commitment to the Egypt-Israel treaty and to the next stage of negotia-
tions. It seems to me that we need to be clear concerning the target of
our efforts. If we are trying to influence the Saudis, then public state-
ments may be the wrong way to proceed. If we create an anti-Saudi
mood in Congress, we may find that we have tied our own hands. If in-
stead we are addressing a domestic audience, a different strategy is
called for. (S)
Possible actions:
—If the Saudis are adamant in their refusal to fund the F–5Es for
Egypt, we could publicly state the facts of the situation and request that
million in FMS credits to cover the costs of the F–5E program. Simulta-
neously, to preempt negative Congressional action, we could say that
the F–15 program is under review.
—Approach both the Saudis and Egyptians privately for a frank
review of the dangers of letting their quarrel go further. Rather than
taking sides, we would do our best to get them talking again.
—Background briefings attributed to “high Administration offi-
cials” that are critical of the Saudis and which are strongly supportive
of Egypt, Israel, and the next phase of peace talks. Alternatively, an in-
spired Reston2 column.
—Tell the Saudis to withdraw one of their diplomats [1 line not de-
classified].
—Public statements by the State Department spokesman, Secre-
tary Vance, or the President. These have high visibility, but tend to re-
duce our flexibility.
—The Saudis are asking us to begin paying interest on the very
large account they maintain with DOD. This is now being examined.
There are several other areas in tax policy and other economic issues
where the Saudis would like us to take positions favorable to them. It
might be helpful for Mike Blumenthal or others to let the Saudis know
quietly that we are simply unable to move on these issues in the present
climate.
—It might be possible to persuade some of Saudi Arabia’s newly
found friends in Congress to talk to them privately or to write senior
Saudis expressing their concern and indicating the high cost of main-
taining a confrontational position. A campaign directed at Fred Dutton
might not hurt. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:
I see no merit in getting into a public argument with the Saudis.
We can say things in private that would be counter-productive if said
in public. After all, Sadat brought some of this on himself and we do
not want our policy toward Saudi Arabia to be set by Egypt. (S)
If the Saudis refuse to pay for the F–5Es, I would consider the idea
of seeking FMS credits to cover the cost (using the 10 percent guarantee
route) and placing the F–15 program “under review.” I would then say
nothing more in public about US-Saudi relations for a couple of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

253.
Summary of Conclusions of a Mini-Special Coordination
Committee Meeting
SUBJECT
Saudi Arabia
PARTICIPANTS
State
David Newsom, Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs
Defense
David E. McGiffert, Assistant Secretary of Defense, for International Security
Affairs
Robert J. Murray, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern, African, and
South Asian Affairs
Lt. General Ernest Graves, Director, Defense Security Assistance Agency, US
Army
JCS
General William Smith
Major William Cook
Robert Ames, NIO for Near East and South Asia
Charles Herseth, Office of Economic Research
WHITE HOUSE
David Aaron
NSC
William Quandt
Gary Sick
The Mini-SCC reviewed the background of the Saudi withdrawal
of their offer to finance the purchase of Egyptian F–5s2 and considered
next steps in attempting to reverse the Saudi decision. The group
agreed to recommend the following approach:
1. Assistant Secretary of Defense McGiffert will visit Egypt and
Saudi Arabia to discuss the issue with Defense officials in both coun-
tries. Precise terms of reference will be worked out with State. The prin-
cipal objective will be to sound out the Egyptians on their views of ac-
cepting the payment schedule previously proposed by the Saudi

254.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Saudi Arabia
120410. Subject: Letter to Khalid. Jidda for the Charge. Cairo for the
Ambassador.
1. Secret (Entire text)
2. Please arrange for immediate delivery of the following letter
from President Carter to King Khalid. Signed original being pouched.
3. Begin text. Your Majesty,
The spirit of friendship and respect that underlies the relationship
between our two countries requires that I bring to your personal atten-
tion a matter of great concern to me. As Your Majesty is aware, we have
consistently sought to coordinate our efforts with the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia on behalf of stability, security and justice in the Middle
East. While we have not always agreed on specific issues, I have felt
that our broad objectives are fully compatible, rooted as they are in our
national interests and our historic ties to one another. I am confident
that you share this view of the importance of maintaining the closest
possible relations between our countries.
4. It is thus with great concern that a statement3 has been attributed
to Foreign Minister Saud that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is no longer
prepared to assist Egypt in acquiring the F–5E aircraft that we have
agreed to sell. This report is particularly surprising in light of explicit
commitments and promises made by your government.
5. Apart from my personal concern for the effect that such a deci-
sion could have on US-Saudi relations, I am also deeply worried about
the encouragement such a decision could give to those who do not wish
good US-Saudi relations. Egypt, which remains committed to a com-
prehensive peace, will be further isolated from her Arab brothers and
may find it difficult to play an effective role in the next stage of negotia-
tions dealing with the question of the Palestinians. In addition, the So-
viet Union and its allies in the Middle East may try to capitalize on this
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Raphel; cleared by Saunders (in draft) and
Richard Castrodale (S/S–O); approved by Vance. Sent for information Immediate to
Cairo and the White House.
sential to her defense.
7. In closing, let me repeat that I am fully committed to cooperating
with Saudi Arabia in all fields. As friends, we have maintained a con-
stant dialogue on matters of mutual concern, and I am confident that
we shall be able to resolve our differences amicably.
8. With my best personal wishes for your health,
Sincerely,
(signed) Jimmy Carter
End text.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

255.
Summary of Conclusions of a Presidential Review
Committee Meeting
Subject
West Bank/Gaza Negotiations
Participants
State
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director
Harold Saunders, Assistant
John Helgerson, Assistant NIO for
Secretary, Bureau of Near
Near East and South Asia
Eastern and South Asian
White House
Affairs
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Michael Sterner, Deputy Assistant
David Aaron
Secretary, Bureau of Near
NSC
Eastern and South Asian
Robert Hunter
Affairs
William Quandt
Defense
STR
Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan
Ambassador Robert Strauss,
Robert Murray, Deputy Assistant
Special Representative for
Secretary, Near Eastern,
Trade Negotiations
African and South Asian
Ambassador James Leonard
Affairs
JCS
Lt. General William Smith
1. Objectives. Secretary Vance stated that the West Bank/Gaza ne-
gotiations would have critical importance for the stability of the Egypt-
Israel treaty and for the trends in the Arab world. Early progress will be
essential, despite the difficulty and unfamiliarity of the issues. (S)
2. Trends. Ambassador Strauss noted that nearly all the trends in
the Middle East are negative. Arab opposition to Sadat is deeper than
expected. Israeli settlement activity is likely to increase. We must do
something to reverse these trends. (S)
3. Settlements. It was generally agreed that the best issue on which
to take a stand is Israeli settlement activity. Secretary Vance said that he
would talk to both Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat about set-
tlements. Sadat might then raise the issue directly with Begin. Ambas-
sador Strauss emphasized the importance of preparing the way care-
fully in Congress and the American Jewish community first. Begin

256.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State and the White House
Secto 4053. White House to Dr. Brzezinski for the President from
the Secretary. Subject: Opening of the West Bank/Gaza Negotiations.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1. (S) Entire text.
2. The West Bank/Gaza negotiations began in Beersheva Friday
afternoon almost as planned with the one exception being the
last-minute absence of Prime Minister Khalil. While the opening state-
ments presented each side’s starting positions, the meeting was con-
ducted in a conciliatory and businesslike atmosphere. The principal
achievement is that the opening session is now behind us and with that
hurdle surmounted, it will probably be easier for the parties to get
down to work. The meeting concluded with agreement to meet next on
June 6–7 in Alexandria with efforts between now and then to work out
an agenda for that meeting, perhaps through a private meeting be-
tween Khalil and Burg in Egypt in the next few days.
3. The one development that marred the day’s events was Khalil’s
decision not to come. This had been developing since Wednesday
when Khalil told our Charge in Cairo that he would not attend the
meeting if Burg were going to chair it. When I got to Egypt, I found
Khalil firmly opposed to attending a meeting on the Palestinian issues
in Israel chaired by the Minister of the Interior rather than Prime Min-
ister or Foreign Minister. I believe he was concerned both about the re-
action in the Arab world and about Burg’s lesser rank against the back-
ground of Begin’s refusal to meet with him in Washington last
February. He suggested either a roundtable with no chairman or a
meeting chaired by me. Despite our late-night and early-morning ef-
forts to resolve the issue, Burg with Begin’s support ignored Dayan’s
efforts and held to the position that Sadat and Begin had agreed that
each meeting in this negotiation would be chaired by the host country.
The Israelis, for their part, were upset over Boutros Ghali’s action in a
meeting with Dayan in El Arish on Wednesday4 which seemed to the
Israelis to reverse Sadat’s commitment to Begin in Cairo to open the
border this weekend. When Burg insisted on chairing the meeting him-
self, Khalil sent General Kamal Ali to head the Egyptian delegation in
his place. Ali stated simply that Khalil did not come “for procedural

reasons” but would be pleased to host the next session in Egypt. Sadat
telephoned Yadin to send his best wishes for the negotiation, and that
probably helped smooth over the situation.
4. I have found both sides ready to get on with the negotiations.
Sadat told me he thought the Ministers ought to meet every week or, at
least, every two weeks in order to maintain momentum and project a
picture of steady work. Khalil and Boutros Ghali, for their parts, had
spent several hours working through with Sadat their proposal for
working groups each developing their own terms or reference to be ap-
proved by the Ministerial group. They are thinking of four working
groups to cover election modalities, powers and responsibilities of the
self-governing authority, security measures, and confidence building
measures (unilateral Israeli steps in the West Bank and Gaza). When I
met with Burg Friday morning, I found him receptive to the idea of
working groups and to the need in early sessions to sort out the issues
that each group will cover. Burg volunteered his own understanding of
Sadat’s need to show results and seemed quite perceptive in describing
it. The disagreement will begin as soon as they start talking about the
details of their agenda, but I was somewhat encouraged to find that
they both seemed at least to be approaching their work in ways that
should permit them to find agreement on an approach fairly early.
5. Both Ali and Burg in their opening statements expressed fa-
miliar hard positions, but in each speech there was an effort to say
things that each side knows is important to the other.
6. Kamal Ali made five points:
(1) Egypt and Israel are not negotiating to determine the future of
the Palestinian people. Self-determination is their God-given right. The
task in the negotiations is only to establish the powers and responsibil-
ities for the self-governing authority, the modalities for its election, and
steps for the transfer of authority.
(2) The negotiations must be based on the principle of the inadmis-
sibility of the acquisition of territory by war as specified in the pre-
amble to Resolution 242. This principle should be implemented in the
West Bank and in Arab Jerusalem. Arab Jerusalem will become testi-
mony to the ability of Jews and Arabs to coexist in peace.
(3) Resolution 242 in all its parts should be respected.
(4) The Geneva Convention applying to occupied territories means
that Israeli settlements have no legal validity. Israeli measures to annex
Jerusalem are null and void.
(5) The political rights and freedom of the Palestinian people in the
West Bank and Gaza should be respected. In all of these negotiations,
Ali concluded that the U.S. is expected to be a full partner.
7. Burg in his speech described the negotiations pretty much in
terms of the Camp David Framework, although he spoke in terms of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the administrative council to be set up. While recognizing the compli-
cations ahead, he wished that the elections might take place speedily.
The most difficult part of his speech for the Egyptians to swallow was
his statement that autonomy “does not and cannot imply sovereignty.”
He went on to reject an independent Palestinian statehood. Interest-
ingly, he changed his text from “never” to “not” in saying that Israel
will not agree to the establishment of a Palestinian state but after citing
Israel’s fear of such a state as a security threat, he turned back to a con-
ciliatory tone of trying to solve these problems together. He concluded
with the words from Ecclesiastes; “to everything there is a season, and
a time to every purpose under the heaven: a time to keep silence, and a
time to speak; a time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a
time of peace.”
8. My talk with Sadat Thursday evening, as you would expect, in-
cluded a review of the world situation. Analyzing the current state of
the Arab world, he saw as the main element the efforts of Iraq to be-
come the main Arab power. He saw Iraq’s efforts to seize the center of
the Arab stage as the main explanation of the Baghdad Conference. He
described his strategy over the coming months as trying to draw the
moderate Arabs away from Iraq, and he said he would be seeking our
help in doing this. He felt that the ceremonies at El Arish this weekend
would play a major role in beginning to change Arab minds about the
peace process. He felt that the dramatization of his getting important
territory back would force the Arab world to face up to the fact that
concrete benefits can be gained in this way. He felt that this would be a
major factor in his gradually beginning to win moderate Arab support.
9. Sadat also feels that he now understands better how to deal with
Prime Minister Begin. I would not be surprised to see him make an-
other grand gesture towards Israel this Sunday7 in connection with the
El Arish ceremonies in his effort to stimulate a forthcoming response of
some kind from Begin.
10. My talk with Begin in London8 concentrated heavily at first on
a number of emigration cases from the Soviet Union which he hopes we

257.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the
Department of State, Secretary of State Vance in Rome, and
the Embassies in Israel, Egypt, and the People’s Republic of
China
1753. Pass White House for Brzezinski, Beijing for Ambassador
Strauss from Saunders. Subject: El Arish-Beersheva Ceremonies—
May 27.
1. (S) Entire text
2. Since the Secretary left directly from the Negev for Rome, this
has not been cleared with him. Nevertheless, I want you to have a re-
port promptly on the assumption that he will add whatever he wishes
on his own talks with Begin, Sadat, and others during the day.
3. Sunday’s3 kaleidoscope events unfolded on three levels—the
symbolism of the events themselves, the substance of the public
speeches, and the private exchanges among the U.S., Egyptian, and Is-
raeli principals and delegations.
4. The symbolism lay in the dramatization of the first major steps
implementing the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty. The actual military
turnover of El Arish had taken place Friday—the day in which the West
Bank/Gaza negotiations began in Beersheva, the Egyptians alone had
celebrated the transfer from Egyptian military to civilian control on Sat-
urday. Today’s events were really an exchange of visits—Begin to El
Arish and Sadat to Beersheva—to dramatize the new relationship
across the now “open border, on top of the exchange of visits was the
inaugural flight in President Sadat’s aircraft with Sadat, Begin, Secre-
tary Vance and colleagues aboard opening the new direct air corridor
between Israel and Egypt.
5. One of the decisions made during the talks today was to an-
nounce that the Egyptian-Israeli border would indeed be “open.” Al-
though Begin and Sadat had announced this during Begin’s visit to
Cairo shortly after the treaty signing, the Egyptians in the past week
had told the Israelis they felt it would be premature to open the border
at this point. Thus it took another one of those decisions by Sadat to
overrule his staff to produce the announcement in El Arish that the
border is now proclaimed to be open. Having made that proclamation,
no one is sure exactly what will happen at the border tomorrow since it
is still possible that any workers who might want to cross into Israel to
their jobs on the Egyptian side might be stopped until border-crossing
procedures get sorted out. Indeed, news broadcasts this morning from
Cairo quote Khalil as indicating that many “technical” details need to
be resolved before the open borders policy can be implemented and no
one expects more than a trickle at the outset. Similarly, the air corridor
is now “open” and any government aircraft wishing to go back and
forth will use it, but for the time being most commercial carriers will
avoid it because of the probable Arab boycott.
6. Perhaps the most moving of the day’s events was also the sim-
plest. On their way to depart El Arish, Begin and Sadat with Secretary
Vance stopped in a meeting hall in El Arish for a brief ceremony with
wounded war veterans from both sides. The statements by Sadat and
Begin were very short and primarily on the theme of “no more war.” It
was plain from the expression on their faces that, to the veterans, this
was a most meaningful experience. Begin’s statement was used as the
platform for proclaiming that the borders would be open, that Presi-
dent Sadat had invited him to visit Alexandria the first week in July,
and that Israel would release a number of Ari’s prisoners in honor of
the occasion.
7. The main exchange of public statements began when the party
moved by helicopter to Beersheva. There were two separate events—
one at the town hall and a second at the Ben Gurion University of the
prisoners” in Israeli custody were released subsequent to Begin’s statement. (National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Negev—with speeches by Israeli President Navon, the Mayor of Beer-
sheva, Begin, and two by Sadat. The common themes of peace and
normal relations flowed through all of the speeches. However, Presi-
dent Navon, who undoubtedly thought he was doing a good thing by
giving his speech in excellent Arabic, used an Arabic word which Sadat
heard as meaning “give”; (i.e. “giving the Sinai back to Egypt”). This
caused Sadat to drop whatever prepared text he may have had and to
extemporize quite simply but eloquently. His main points were that se-
curity does not lie in land but in a relationship of friendship and that
peace can not come unless there is respect for the land of others. He al-
most explicitly said that sovereignty over the occupied lands belongs to
the Arabs and that Israel is not giving back the land but simply re-
storing the appropriate exercise of Arab sovereignty in it. However,
Monday’s Jerusalem Post reports that Navon had showed privately af-
terwards his actual text and the similarly sounding word in Arabic
meant “returned”. The Post says Sadat and Navon got on well and the
misunderstanding was put to rest. Later at an assembly at the univer-
sity it was Sadat’s turn to offend. He commented that the Arabs had
taken care of the Jews through their centuries of life in the Middle East.
And Begin, in an otherwise temporate speech at the university, brought
together in one compact paragraph virtually every negative statement
he has ever made about the “so-called PLO.” President Tekoah, of the
university, announced the university’s decision to establish a multi-
million dollar fund for research in areas related to desert development,
invited Egyptian scholars to participate and to join in the management
of the fund. While claiming substantial achievements for Israel in this
area, he graciously said that Israel has much to learn from Egypt and
his remarks were an elevated point in the day’s proceedings. In short,
all of the speakers were well-intentioned and for the most part man-
aged not to sour the atmosphere but, one way or another, introduced
enough sore points to keep the course from being completely smooth.
8. The day’s several meetings—from the Rest House at El Arish to
the 1-hour inaugural flight aboard Sadat’s aircraft—seemed to all of us
to enhance measurably the relationships between the two sides at all
levels. From what we can tell, a good deal of useful business was done,
although Secretary Vance will have to fill in some of the details in the
following:
—The Secretary and Sadat were alone for a time before Begin ar-
rived, and the Secretary intended to suggest that Sadat talk to Begin
about the problems for the peace process caused by some Israeli ac-
tions, such as new settlements, the crackdown in the West Bank, and
the bombings in Lebanon.

—Sadat, Begin, the Secretary were together for a time and then the
Secretary left the two of them alone for almost half an hour. It was
partly during this period that the two of them began mapping a polit-
ical strategy for the next couple of months which includes the regulari-
zation of negotiating sessions, visits to Egypt by Burg and Dayan, and
Sadat’s invitation to Begin to visit Alexandria the first week in July. The
hope is that out of the Burg and Dayan visits the new negotiations can
be put on a sound footing. Burg and Khalil both want to talk about the
precise organization of the negotiations by working groups. While
Dayan wants to stay away from talking about the new negotiations and
to concentrate on consolidating the Egyptian-Israeli relationship, Khalil
sees Dayan’s visit to Egypt as an opportunity to understand the polit-
ical dynamics of Israeli decision making on this subject and to explore
Dayan’s creativity on solutions in the autonomy negotiations.
—Burg and Khalil seem to be having a good private conversation,
apparently getting off to a reasonable beginning in their relationship as
heads of respective delegations. Burg and Khalil sat next to each other
at lunch and, while the substance of their conversation concentrated on
problems of scheduling the next negotiating sessions, they did get
acquainted.
—During the inaugural flight, Dayan got to talk with Sadat for
about twenty minutes. This came after talks with Boutros Ghali in
which Dayan was persuaded that the Egyptians genuinely wanted him
to come to Cairo. Dayan clearly does not want to get himself out in
front of Burg in discussing the autonomy negotiations and was clearly
suspicious of Egyptian motives in pressing him to come to Cairo.
9. The plan of meetings over the next two weeks as it now appears
probable has Burg going to Egypt at the end of this week, Dayan vi-
siting Egypt at the beginning of the following week, and the next nego-
Beersheva last Friday it had been agreed that the next session would be
June 6–7, but the Israelis in Sunday’s talks mentioned that the Herut
Party conference will not end until the night of the 6th so some slippage
will probably be necessary. On the other hand, by the end of Sunday’s
talks, Burg’s visit to Cairo was being described almost as a preliminary
negotiation, dealing at least with semi-substantive issues such as the re-
sponsibilities of working groups.
10. Jim Leonard will use the next few days in Israel to call on each
member of the Israeli negotiating team individually and to talk with
other Israelis who can give insight into Israel’s thinking on the West
Bank/Gaza negotiations. Assuming the schedule remains pretty much
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
as described above, he will probably stay in Israel long enough to talk
with Burg after his return from Cairo. Then he will move to Cairo and
go the rounds with the important Egyptian participants and then will
be ready to participate in the first substantive negotiating session. We
may begin to see how the negotiations will work more clearly after the
Burg-Khalil talks, but by the time the first session is completed, it
should be possible to begin to see how each of the issues will be tackled
and to see more clearly what approach to the issues makes most sense
for us.
11. The strategy we have already set for ourselves of letting Egypt
and Israel take the lead in organizing these negotiations is a valid one.
Although they have been slow in pulling their acts together, they now
seem to be getting together with hopes of having a sense of how to pro-
ceed by the second week in June.
Newlin

258.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, June 6, 1979
SUBJECT
Situation in Lebanon (C)
The situation in Lebanon appears to be deteriorating. Specifically,
there appears to be a growing risk of renewed internal conflict which
could trigger external involvement. (S)
The President would appreciate your analysis of the present situa-
tion and your suggestions of concrete steps we might take to minimize
the risks of a serious conflict and promote Lebanese stability. Please let
me have your comments by June 12, 1979. (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski

259.
Letter From Egyptian President Sadat to President Carter
Cairo, undated
Dear President Carter,
During the recent celebration of the restoration of Egyptian au-
thority to the capital of Sinai, El-Arish, the Egyptian people’s feeling of
pride and joy was equalled only by their gratitude and praise for the
unforgettable role you played in bringing about this happy event.
Without your thoughtful contribution, the conclusion of the Peace
Treaty would have been impossible. I have no doubt that this role will
continue until all remaining aspects of the conflict are tackled with the
same sense of determination and commitment. It is with this in mind
that we have been accelerating the pace of normalization of relations
with Israel.
It is in this spirit also that we are approaching the second phase of
negotiations. We are doing so with hope and optimism despite our re-
alization that we are still faced with many extremely difficult problems.
I firmly believe that we can achieve our common goal if we preserve the
coordination and consultation we have maintained since we started the
peace process. I am sure that Secretary Vance has conveyed to you
what took place in the past few days. I have also asked Vice President
Mubarak to put you fully in the picture3 with respect to recent develop-
ments as well as our conception of how to move next in order to make
meaningful progress promptly. As you know, I strongly feel that there
is an urgent need to produce tangible progress soon with respect to Je-
rusalem. I hope that Prime Minister Begin can demonstrate more flexi-
bility in this area as he realizes the favorable results this is certain to ef-
fect. The problem of settlements is another sensitive area to which all
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Arabs attach great significance. The statement4 which was issued a few
days ago by the U.S. Department of State on the illegality of these settle-
ments and the threat they constitute to the peace process was quite ap-
propriate and timely. You might also deem it suitable to take this issue
up with Mr. Begin in the near future.
In your forthcoming talks with President Brezhnev, it would be
helpful if you persuade him to be more cooperative with regard to ex-
tending the mandate of the United Nations Emergency Forces espe-
cially after having agreed to the same on the Syrian front. Their posi-
tion in this respect is rather weak and the arguments they are
presenting are unfounded. The Legal Adviser of the United Nations
Secretariat has concluded in a memorandum that the failure to extend
the mandate of the Forces would be contrary to the Charter itself, let
alone the difficulties it creates to the peace-keeping operation. If he re-
mains adamant on this point, it might be worth exploring to get his con-
sent to broadening the operation area of the United Nations Truce Su-
pervisory Organization. The mandate of this Organization does not
need to be extended and hence, a mere extension of the area of opera-
tion would be easier although the force is not equipped enough to
handle this responsibility.
In an attempt to facilitate your task of proposing the formation of a
multinational force in case your efforts to persuade the Soviet Union to
cooperate fail, we are currently considering the setting up of an all-
African force. It would be composed of friendly African nations that
have a genuine interest in the maintenance of security and stability in
this vital approach to their continent.
I am seizing this opportunity also to write to you about a matter of
major concern to us. Undoubtedly, you know the importance we attach
to the modernization of our armed forces with a view to enabling them
to discharge their awesome responsibilities. You are also aware of the
central role I assigned to them in the crucial field of transfer of tech-
nology in the era of reconstruction. I have emphasized the new role the
armed forces should play in adapting sophisticated technology to our
needs in the areas of housing, infrastructure, food production, agroin-
dustry and land reclamation. Hence, I reiterated before the Egyptian

people that the armed forces have a greater mission in time of peace
than their task at war-time.
On the other hand, the Soviet Union has been virtually excluded as
a supplier of weapons for several years. Thus, we are confronted with
the challenge of modernizing the weapons system at the same time we
are faced with the problem of replacing our dwindling stock of arms. It
was for these two reasons that we agreed on a new role for the United
States as a major supplier of arms and military equipment. You would
certainly recall that I told you that it was an absolute must to take
twenty steps forward in this direction. Promptly, you dispatched your
competent officials to coordinate with their Egyptian counterparts
plans for this supply.
In all candor, I must tell you that the results of these contacts have
not been satisfactory enough. While your representatives were quite
appreciative of our problems and needs, what we have been offered to
meet these needs was short of meeting our needs, both in quality and
quantity.
At a time when the financing of the purchase of the F5 planes by
Saudi Arabia is being blocked for reasons you well know, we have been
offered only 35 F4 planes and twelve air defense batteries. We might
understand the reasons why it is difficult to provide us with the more
16 of which to be delivered before October 6, is not the answer to our
needs. Our Air-Force command says that it is crucial to increase the
number of aircrafts and equip them with “Maverick” type of rocket in
order to ensure effectiveness.
Perhaps the position of the naval forces is more precarious. U.S. of-
ficials have offered to provide them with two gearing class destroyers
whose equipment and electronic gear are of a less sophisticated quality
than the Soviet destroyers which have been in use in our Navy for some
time. They also offered to sell Egypt a diesel-operated submarine which
is of the same quality more or less. You are aware of the priority I am
attaching to our naval forces in the light of the current situation in the
area. Serving our purpose would require providing us with more ad-
vanced types of destroyers, submarines and fast patrol boats equipped
with guided missiles.
On the other hand, the withdrawal of our three Arab partners from
the Arab Organization for Industrialization6 confronts us with some

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
problems. First and foremost, it could have a negative impact on the
manufacture of aircraft, the development of sophisticated anti-tank
missiles and our drive to introduce a higher degree of modern tech-
nology and know-how. I believe that you do not want to see this hap-
pening. I also believe that the United States can step in and take part
with us in this operation in one form or the other. To contain the nega-
tive impact of such reckless move on their part, we have turned the Or-
ganization into an Egyptian institution. Joint U.S.-Egyptian companies
could be founded to boost our strategic industries and build the techno-
logical base we have committed ourselves to establish in the context of
the post-war reconstruction. If this proves difficult at this stage, Amer-
ican companies could be encouraged to cooperate with our Organiza-
tion one way or the other.
I trust that you agree with me on the necessity of demonstrating to
our armed forces that our partnership in the peace process is mutually
beneficial and that there will be no weakening of our defense capabil-
ities whatsoever. This is so in the light of their realization of their role in
the coming few years as an element of peace and stability in the region.
Such faith in the future requires reassuring all our armed services that
their weapons system is going to improve rather than deteriorate as a
result of our bolstered friendship with the United States. It is equally
important to reassure the Egyptian people of the state of their armed
forces and their ability to bear their awesome responsibilities.
Needless to say that the absence of a genuine effort to remedy this
situation promptly would give rise to misinterpretations and adverse
reaction in the Arab World too. It will lend credence to the false allega-
tion that the signing of Peace Treaty will signal a weakening of Egypt’s
defense capability. Certain circles are fond of making comparisons be-
tween the Soviet readiness to saturate its allies with military equipment
and the United States more hesitant and cautious attitude with its
friends. We want to dispel these notions.
Vice President Mubarak will also discuss with you a few points re-
lated to our economic cooperation. I have no doubt that you will lend
our requests with regard to the “Carter Plan” your enthusiastic sup-

port. As you know, the success of our ambitious drive to rejuvenate our
economy depends heavily on the materialization of this plan. The
Summit8 which is scheduled to convene on June 29 in Tokyo would be a
golden opportunity to give this plan the push it needs at this junction.
Prime Minister Khaleel has submitted a memorandum9 to Secretary
Vance during his recent visit to Egypt on an additional five hundred
thousand tons of wheat and wheat flour equivalent. We received no of-
ficial reply to this request although it has been said unofficially that
there are certain problems involved. I trust your judgment and your
ability to overcome such problems, if any.
It is not at all my intention to add to your already heavy burden.
But I feel that through our special relationship we can achieve what is
good for our two peoples and for World peace. May God Almighty
grant you all the strength you need to translate all your dreams into a
living reality.
Best wishes and warmest regards,
Mohammed Anwar El-Sadat

260.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
Vice President of Egypt Mubarak
Vice President Mondale
Secretary Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

261.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Alexandria to the
Department of State
486. From Leonard USMEDEL 035. Subject: Alexandria Negotia-
tions: Discussion of U.S. Role.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Summary: Second session of Alexandria autonomy talks2 were
devoted almost entirely to Israeli questioning of U.S. role in the negoti-
ations, possible agreement(s), and implementation. (Dayan insisted
that although U.S. is “full and equal” partner in negotiations, agree-
ment under CDA must only come between Israel, Egypt and possibly
Jordan and Palestinian representatives.) Egyptians insist joint Sadat/
Begin letter3 to President effectively amends framework agreement,
making clear U.S. is “full partner” in all stages of the negotiations. I ar-
gued the philosophical question of our relationship to any agreement
coming from these negotiations need not be resolved at this time, and
urged parties to get down to real issues. Dayan demurred; Israel will
seek formal response4 from Washington on how we view our role. Rec-
ognizing Dayan may have good legal point in that our role is qualita-
tively different from that of Israel and Egypt, I, nevertheless, recom-
mend that our answer be couched in language which will not lead
Egyptians to conclude there will be any lessening of U.S. involvement.
Egyptians already fear Israel is trying to make these negotiations bilat-
eral, after having succeeded in isolating GOE within Arab world. It is
likewise important that Israelis be given no grounds for later chal-
lenging U.S. participation or initiatives in the negotiations. End
summary.
[Omitted here is the body of the telegram.]

262.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance and
Secretary of Defense Brown
Washington, June 12, 1979
SUBJECT
Military Assistance for Egypt (S)
In the light of yesterday’s discussions with Vice President Mu-
barak, it would be useful to have a prompt review3 of the practicalities
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
of enhanced U.S. military assistance to Egypt, perhaps stretched out
over a somewhat longer period of time. The President would like to
have the above by the time of his return from Vienna. (S)
Zbigniew Brzezinski

263.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, June 15, 1979
SUBJECT
Thoughts on the Next Round of Negotiations (U)
One of the first judgments that we will need to make is whether
Sadat really cares much about the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. My
guess at this point is that he does not. The Israelis also seem to be
reaching this conclusion. Unless Sadat is prepared to insist on some de-
gree of “linkage” between Egypt-Israel relations and the West Bank/
Gaza negotiations, the Israelis will have little incentive to make any se-
rious modifications in the “Begin Plan”. And without substantial
changes, we cannot expect a serious agreement. (S)
If Sadat does not care, I doubt if we will be able to carry the full
weight of the negotiations on our shoulders. Our relations with the
Saudis may suffer if we fail to produce movement on the West Bank/
Gaza, but without Sadat we will be unable to influence Begin. This
would put us in the position of needing a strategy for managing the re-
sults of Arab disaffection and radicalism, but without a creditable ap-
proach to peace talks. (S)
Assuming that we do conclude that the Egyptians are serious, then
we need to develop a negotiating strategy. Such a strategy could be
built around the following elements:
—Timing. Refrain from putting forward a US proposal until Egypt
and Israel have developed their positions. This should be done over the
next couple of months. The Egyptian proposal should be considerably
harder than what we expect an eventual compromise position to be. We
should become increasingly involved in the substance of negotiations
in October–November. Some positive results need to be shown by early
next year.
—US Role. The Israelis are trying to narrow our involvement in the
talks and to put us on the defensive. Ambassador Strauss will need to
establish his credibility with Begin from the outset. This may be un-
pleasant, since Begin has a tendency to test people by using some pretty
rough tactics. Strauss cannot let himself be intimidated. On the con-
trary, he may need to win at least one round with Begin on some issue.
I’m not a good enough politician to suggest how this can be done.
Hopefully he is.
—Concepts. According to the Camp David agreements, we are
trying to establish a transitional regime for the West Bank/Gaza built
around the idea of a freely elected self-governing authority which will
replace the Israeli military government in most areas except security.
At this point, we should not be talking about final borders, self-
determination, a Palestinian state, or any of the other issues that are
supposed to be left for a second phase of negotiations. The importance
of keeping the focus on the interim character of the next agreement is
that it may make it easier for all parties to accept less than their max-
imum demands. The key ideas should be that no party will be worse off
during the transitional period than they are today; final outcomes
should not be overtly prejudged; and some positive incentive must
exist to move from the present situation into the transitional arrange-
ments. A major objective of this stage is to create a representative Pales-
tinian leadership that will be able to participate in later negotiations
(hopefully at the expense of the more extreme elements in the PLO.)
—Substance. The most difficult issues in the negotiations will in-
volve land and security arrangements. I have tried to think of plausible
negotiated outcomes. The best I can come up with is:
—Land. Privately owned land in Israel and in the West Bank/Gaza
will be sold on a nondiscriminatory basis. Israel will not retain the right
to expropriate private property in the West Bank/Gaza. But the Israeli

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
military government will retain control of X percent of the public do-
main lands now under its control. In these areas, Israel can establish se-
curity installations and settlements. The remainder of the public lands
will pass under the jurisdiction of the self-governing authority. In
theory, Israel would not be required to give up the right to establish
new settlements, but as a practical matter the scope for new settlement
activity would be limited.
—Water. A joint water authority will be established with equal Is-
raeli and West Bank/Gaza representation. The situation prevailing at
the time of the establishment of the self-governing authority could not
be changed unless both parties agreed. In other words, the worst out-
come if no agreement could be reached would be a continuation of the
status quo for five more years. If new wells are to be dug, joint deci-
sions would be required. (This would establish a measure of equity
which does not now exist. If an Israeli settlement needs more water, it
would probably be necessary for the Israelis to agree at the same time
to allow an Arab village to dig a new well, which is presently not usu-
ally permitted.)
—Security. The Israelis have undertaken to withdraw some troops
and to redeploy those remaining into specified security locations. This
implies some limitations on the Israeli military presence. The stages by
which limitations will be set, however, are yet to be decided, and it
might be possible to define the type of presence that might exist after
three years without spelling out the intervening steps with great preci-
sion. It might be specified that the implementation of Israeli military re-
deployment will be discussed with the new self-government, along
with the initial division of responsibility between local security forces
and the Israelis. This is not an area where we and the Egyptians should
try to be too precise. (S)
Conclusions
I do not honestly believe that the negotiations for a self-governing
authority for the West Bank/Gaza are likely to produce positive results
within the one-year target date. At some point, it may be necessary to
revert to the earlier approach of trying to define the basic 242 trade-
off—peace, recognition and security in exchange for Israeli with-
drawal—with a staged process of implementation that might include a
transitional regime of some sort. Begin, of course, will reject this ap-
proach, but Peres supports it. It has the advantage of dealing frankly
with the principle of withdrawal, without which I see little likelihood
of an agreement. The main advantage of the Begin Plan is that it makes
Peres’ idea of territorial compromise look increasingly attractive to the
Arabs. I suspect we will find that “autonomy” will be a non-starter. Ei-
ther we forget about the West Bank/Gaza for a while, or we will prob-
ably have to find a way of anchoring the transitional concept to 242.
Unfortunately, we did not quite succeed in doing so in the Camp David
accords. (S)

264.
Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State
Vance
Tosec 50033/154608. For Secretary Vance from Saunders. Subject:
Response to Israeli Query on U.S. Participation in Negotiations.
1. (C) Entire text.
2. For Mitchell: Following is the text of the response we propose to
make to the Israelis on the U.S. role in the coming negotiations. The Is-
which we are repeating to you. Sam Lewis after discussions3 with
Confidential; Immediate; Stadis. Drafted by Saunders; cleared in draft by Strauss and
Leonard and cleared by Richard Castrodale (S/S–O); approved by Saunders. Sent for in-
formation Immediate to Tel Aviv and Cairo. Vance was in Vienna with Carter for the
U.S.-Soviet Summit and the signing of the SALT II Treaty.
tional side and the substance.” Lewis added that Dayan “regretted very much the fact
that at Alexandria there was so little private contact between the American and the Israeli
delegations, and that the Israelis all felt an intangible but very real atmosphere of
coolness between the delegations.” Lewis noted that the “atmospheric issue” needed U.S.
attention, since the Israelis “already are deeply suspicious that the U.S. and Egypt have
mapped out the game plan together in a direction which is very contrary” to their “de-
Central Foreign Policy File, D790270–1209) Lewis met with Burg earlier in the day, where
among the issues discussed was the appearance of an article in the Israeli newspaper
Ma’ariv, alleging that Leonard had been “unfriendly” to the Israeli delegation and that
the United States had “tried to dominate” the talks, charges Burg dismissed as “totally
Foreign Policy File, D790269–0287)

265.
Editorial Note
During the fourth plenary session of the U.S.-Soviet Summit held
in Vienna on June 17, 1979, which was devoted to a tour d’horizon of in-
ternational issues, President Jimmy Carter and General Secretary of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union Leonid I. Brezhnev discussed
their countries’ respective positions on the Arab-Israeli peace process.
Speaking first, Carter stated that, on the Middle East, “our two coun-
tries have had differences in the past and in the present.” Carter, the
memorandum of conversation recorded, “had tried to bring together
all parties in Geneva, including the Soviet Union, with a view to
finding a solution to the differences in the Middle East. This was some
two years ago, but Syria and a number of other countries refused and
no progress had been made. President Sadat had taken an initiative—
the President would add that this was without consultation with us—

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and went to Jerusalem. Much progress had been made by Israel and
Egypt. This was consistent with UN Resolutions 242, 338 and others, as
well as the Joint Statement between the U.S. and the USSR. It was a fact
that Israel was withdrawing from the Sinai. Israel was prepared to ne-
gotiate treaties with all its neighbors. Palestinian rights, under the
Camp David accords, would be preserved. Security of all states was to
be guaranteed.” Moreover, Carter “hoped that the Soviet Union would
give its support and encourage other states to join in this process. Total
Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai was part of a process as prescribed by
the UN. UN supervision was important. We would expect all Security
Council members to approve such UN supervision by UN emergency
forces. But the U.S., in the interests of a peaceful resolution of these dif-
ferences, was pledged alternative supervision if that was necessary.
However, our strong preference was for a UN force.”
In response, Brezhnev said he wanted to “re-emphasize” the “So-
viet position of principle in its appraisal of the U.S. policy.” “The fact
that the October 1977 Soviet-U.S. understanding on joint action in the
Middle East was violated and supplanted by an anti-Arab policy ar-
gued nothing good for the people of that region nor for the relations be-
tween us. Brezhnev thought that it was clear to everyone now that the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty had failed to tranquilize the Middle Eastern sit-
uation, but it has aggravated it. He called attention to the indignation
and determination of the Arabs and noted the war which Israel, pro-
tected by Egypt, was in effect waging in Lebanon. This could at any
time grow larger. It was necessary to prevent a resumption of armed
conflict along the lines of the 1967 war, to prevent a major conflagra-
tion.” “Therefore, unfortunately,” Brezhnev continued, “the positions
of the U.S. and the USSR were fundamentally different at this time and
not through any fault of the Soviet Union. To be frank, the Soviet Union
would resolutely oppose any efforts to use the UN to bolster the sepa-
rate deal between Egypt and Israel, be it by using the present UN
troops in the Sinai or any other manner. The position of the Soviet
Union with respect to the Middle East remained the same as it was all
along. The Soviet Union believed that there would be no firm peace
there without the complete vacating of the Arab territory occupied in
1967 and without an opportunity for the Palestinians to set up their
own state, without ensuring the security of all nations in that region, in-
cluding Israel. As before, the Soviet Union considered it desirable for
our two countries to interact on Middle East issues, using earlier UN
resolutions as a foundation.” (Memorandum of Conversation, June 17;
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presi-
dential Advisory Board, Box 75, Trip: Box 1)

266.
Memorandum From the President’s Senior Adviser on
Middle East Affairs (Sanders) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, June 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Israeli Settlement Activity
I am aware of the seriousness with which the President views the
recent Israeli settlement activity at Alon Moreh2 and I know that he is
considering various options. I am writing this memo to voice my
opinion that the best way to handle this problem is to continue a low-
key approach.
It is my view that both in Israel and in the United States there is a
serious debate going on concerning the propriety of settlements such as

267.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
Tosec 60064/165809. Exdis for Ambassador Lewis; Tel Aviv for ac-
tion only. Subject: Syrian-Israeli Air Battle Over Lebanon.
(S) Entire text.
1. You should get in immediate touch with Begin to deliver2 the
following as an oral message from the Secretary:3
—Today’s engagement4 between Syrian and Israeli air forces over
South Lebanon is a matter of most serious concern.
—At this time, when both the U.S. and Israel have committed
themselves to a new and vital phase of negotiations in the peace
process, and on the eve of the departure of Ambassador Strauss on his
first mission in connection with these negotiations, this incident is par-
ticularly troubling in the potential it holds for damaging the atmos-
phere surrounding our effort to make steady progress toward a wider
peace.
—We are fully aware of the threat posed to the Israeli people by
terrorist attacks planned and launched from locations in Lebanon. We
know as well the problems which the Syrian presence and role in Leb-
anon raise for Israel. At the present time, however, the internal political
situation in Syria is tense and uncertain in the wake of the recent mas-
sacre of Alawite cadets. Any outside action that appears challenging or
humilitating to Syria is likely to lead to countermeasures.
For this reason we now face the possibility that incidents such as
today’s air clash may seriously impair the negotiating effort. It could as
well destabilize the situation in Syria and lead to wider hostilities
which, whatever the outcome, could be detrimental to both our na-
tions’ interests.
—The Israeli Government’s policy concerning retaliatory and
preemptive attacks has long been a source of concern to the United
States in terms of our interest in a stable Lebanon and a wider peace
and we have discussed this with Israel on a number of occasions. Most
recently, on June 13 we raised with Minister Weizman6 the pattern of
Israeli military actions in and over Lebanon over the past two months.
We were assured that it was not Israel’s desire or intention to engage
Syrian aircraft in hostilities. Because of the likelihood of Syrian reac-
tion, we asked that Israel change its practice of significantly increasing
the number of overflights of Lebanon. We also approached Syria at that
time.
—Against this background we are again urging Syria to exercise
maximum prudence and restraint. We must ask Israel to do likewise.
Specifically, we urge strongly that Israel refrain from further bombing
attacks in Lebanon. Such actions cannot but be seen as carrying the con-
flict to a higher and more dangerous level. It is only fair to alert Israel to
the fact that actions such as these by Israel will make more intense
questions already raised in the Congress about whether the American
equipment used by Israeli forces in these actions is being properly and
legally employed.
Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
268.
Research Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, July 1979
[Omitted here is a map.]
Israel’s Goals in Southern Lebanon [handling restriction not declassified]
Key Judgments
The Begin government’s new search-and-destroy policy against
the Palestinians in Lebanon over time is likely to lead to an expansion
of Israeli control over all of southern Lebanon up to the Litani River.
To this end, the Israelis probably will try to bolster the effec-
tiveness of their southern Lebanese surrogates, the Maronite Christian
militias commanded by Major Saad Haddad.
Some Israeli military figures probably hope that the new Israeli
policy, combined with the provocations of Haddad’s forces, will lead to
the withdrawal of UN troops from the south and clear the way for ex-
panded operations against the Palestinians.
In the event of a terrorist “spectacular” within Israel, the Israelis
are not likely to be deterred by the presence of UN troops from aggres-
sively seeking out the Palestinians, including sending Israeli troops
into UN-patrolled areas.
Once installed at the Litani, the Israelis probably would refuse to
withdraw or to permit a meaningful restoration of Lebanese Govern-
ment authority in the near term.
Israel is not likely to be dissuaded from pursuing a more aggres-
sive policy in Lebanon by considering its effect on the autonomy nego-
tiations. Egypt would hesitate to take action in opposing Israeli moves
that might seriously jeopardize the negotiations or the Israeli with-
drawal from the Sinai.
[handling restriction not declassified]
[Omitted here is the body of the research paper.]

269.
Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State
Vance
Tosec 060166/169370. Subject: President Carter’s Response to Pres-
ident Sadat. Ref: State 163814.
1. (S-entire text.)
2. Reftel which is being repeated to you provides text of the Sadat
letter which Egyptian Vice President Mobarak delivered to the Presi-
dent on June 11. There follows the text of a proposed reply which has
been cleared within the Department (Ambassador Strauss, NEA, T, and
PM), and by OMB, DOD, NSC and the President’s speech writers. You
may wish to have the final version3 cabled directly to Cairo because
Roy Atherton expects to meet with President Sadat within the next few
days.
3. Proposed text:
Quote
His Excellency
Anwar al-Sadat,
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, Cairo.

270.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State, the Consulate General in Alexandria, and the Embassy
in Egypt
14348. Cairo and Alexandria for USMEDEL. Subject: Ambassador
Strauss’ Meeting With Prime Minister Begin July 2, 1979.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Ambassadors Strauss and Lewis met with Prime Minister Begin,
who was accompanied by Minister Burg and Begin’s aide, Yehuda
Avner, for approximately one and one-quarter hours on morning of
July 2. Minister of Justice Tamir joined for final ten minutes. Following
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
this session, Begin and Strauss met more formally with all members of
their respective delegations in adjoining conference room for what was
largely a ceremonial encounter.
3. Begin/Strauss meeting was continuation of their initial tete-a-
tete on previous day. Main subjects covered were Israeli settlement ac-
tivity in West Bank, increasing opposition to Israeli policies among cer-
tain segments of U.S. public opinion, impending meeting between
Sadat and Begin in Alexandria on July 10, prospects for the impending
round of autonomy talks at Alexandria on July 5–6, and the increas-
ingly dangerous situation in Lebanon in the wake of the aerial dogfight
between Israeli and Syrian planes on June 27.
4. On settlements, Begin said that he knew with certainty that set-
tlements are not a serious problem with Sadat, although he may raise it
during our meeting. (In this connection, I heard from another source
that Begin claims Sadat told him during their last meeting in Cairo that
he understood Begin’s problems about settlements and only wished he
would hurry and get things done as quickly as possible so as to get the
issue out of the headlines.) Strauss restated the U.S. position on the set-
tlements issue4 in response, stressing the damage that he believed it
was doing to the peace process.
5. On the Alexandria meetings, Begin urged Strauss to do what-
ever is necessary to reach agreement on the agenda, stressing the need
for a limited practical agenda which will permit the two parties to get
down to concrete business. Strauss assured him that we had every in-
terest in doing everything possible to get the talks moving on concrete
issues, and that he would do his best.
6. Begin told Strauss that he anticipated Sadat would make another
effort on the Jerusalem issue when they saw each other July 10. He an-
ticipated that would be the major topic on Sadat’s mind, but he gave
Washington,” and said that he had numerous reports from journalists
about what was being said by State Department officials. He particu-
larly resented the fact that the Department’s spokesman had issued a
public statement branding us as aggressors before he had even re-
ceived a report on the facts and on the Begin/Lewis meeting at which
the Secretary’s message5 was delivered and discussed. He asked Lewis
to take careful note and to make sure that Secretary Vance was in-
formed of his concern. He insisted that the Israeli actions in the air over
Lebanon were “a clear case of self-defense,” and then reiterated his po-
sition that Israeli actions in Lebanon are essential in the face of publicly
proclaimed PLO intentions to continue terrorist attacks against Israel.
8. Strauss intervened in Begin’s monologue at this point to suggest
as a personal idea that the Prime Minister should announce a morato-
rium on pre-emptive bombing for a fixed period (thirty, sixty, or ninety
days), or perhaps as an open-ended commitment, and then challenge
the PLO to halt its terrorist attacks in response. He stressed that this
would put the Israeli policy in a much more favorable light in the
United States, whether or not the PLO responded. There was lengthy
discussion of this idea, with Begin showing some interest in consid-
ering it but worried about the impact if the PLO bombings within Israel
continued after the moratorium had been proclaimed. He stressed his
overriding responsibility to try to avoid the bloodshed of his citizens.
He did not know whether he could conscientiously run the risks of
such an appeal and moratorium on Israel’s part not being heeded by
the Palestinian terrorists. (Note: Begin continues to be convinced that
Israeli bombing of PLO bases effectively stops many terrorist attacks
before they are launched.) This led to a long dissertation on the differ-
ence between “terrorists” and “liberation or freedom fighters,” with
Begin stressing the despicable nature of PLO tactics in deliberately at-
tacking innocent civilians and then “boasting about the murder of
women and children.” At the end of the conversation, Begin seemed to
be turning over in his mind Strauss’ idea. He assured Strauss he would
give it very serious consideration.

271.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts
(S-entire text)
1. Action addresses may use following to brief host government/
NAC on Ambassador Strauss’ visit to the Middle East July 1–7.
2. This was Ambassador Strauss’ initial trip to the Middle East in
his role as the President’s representative and chief US negotiator for the
West Bank/Gaza autonomy negotiations. Ambassador Strauss’ pur-
pose was to become better acquainted with the main players on the Is-
raeli and Egyptian sides, to gain first hand knowledge of the situation
on the ground and the main issues, and to attend the July 5–6 Ministe-
rial [garble] of the autonomy talks in Alexandria. He also visited
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent Immediate to all NATO capitals, Tokyo, Moscow,
Rabat, Algiers, Tunis, Kuwait, Doha, Abu Dhabi, Muscat, Sana, Khartoum, Beirut, Da-
mascus, Baghdad, Tripoli, Lagos, Monrovia, Dakar, Libreville, Lusaka, Brasilia, and
Dublin. Drafted by Korn; cleared by Draper, Richard Castrodale (S/S–O), Jeffrey C.
Gallop (EUR/RPM), and E. Walker (S/SN); approved by Saunders. Sent for information
to Amman, Jidda, Tel Aviv, and Cairo.

Jordan and Saudi Arabia to hear the views of the leaders of those coun-
tries and become better acquainted personally.
3. You may say that in talks with President Sadat and Prime Min-
Strauss was assured of the determination of both leaders to carry out
the provisions of the Camp David Framework, and the joint letter of
March 26, 1979, calling for the establishment of a self-governing au-
thority in the West Bank and Gaza in order to provide full autonomy
for the inhabitants. Suggest you give host government the text of the
joint statement issued at the close of the July 5–6 meeting (which we are
sending you by septel) and make following points:
—We are pleased over the outcome of this session and believe im-
portant progress was made.
—The decision to create working groups on election modalities
and powers and responsibilities in effect establishes an agenda for the
negotiations. These two working groups, and others which may be
created subsequently, will provide a practical forum in which to give
practical expression to broad principles and to define the full autonomy
for the Palestinians of the West Bank and Gaza which the parties
agreed upon last fall at Camp David. While we do not expect working
groups themselves to resolve all major substantive problems, they are
essential for preparing the ground for their resolution at the Ministerial
level.
—The presence and the efforts of Ambassador Strauss played an
important role in giving impetus to the talks and helping the delega-
tions reach agreement. Ambassador Strauss’ vigorous and successful
intervention in his first appearance in the negotiations demonstrates
the determination and the ability of the United States to assure progress
in negotiations.
—We are pleased also over the positive atmosphere that prevailed
in the July 5–6 Alexandria session. Israelis and Egyptians showed an
understanding of each other’s problems and both demonstrated a
sincere desire to move forward.

272.
Letter From Israeli Prime Minister Begin to President Carter
Jerusalem, July 16, 1979
Dear Mr. President,
My two days2 in Alexandria were good days. Wherever I went the
people received me with great warmth.
President Sadat and I had two talks in complete privacy. During
our first meeting we discussed several practical issues as follows:
I addressed myself first to the open borders. I cited the disparity
between the number of visa applications submitted and approved;
more than 200 Israeli citizens have applied for visas to visit Egypt but
20 only were granted. President Sadat said he was not aware of this and
he told me he would instruct the appropriate authorities to enable all
applicants to travel to Egypt. The same will apply on our part to Egyp-
tian citizens wishing to visit Israel. I spoke, in this connection, of an
immediate humanitarian problem regarding members of the Jewish
community. During synagogue services on the day of my arrival indi-
viduals approached me and expressed the wish, sometimes with great
emotion, to visit relatives in Israel whom they had not seen in almost
two generations. President Sadat assured me that all would be allowed
to pay such visits. Indeed, the first family flew into Israel from Alexan-
dria on our press plane.
A second matter that came up for discussion was the oil question.
This has been positively agreed upon. On November 26 we shall
transfer the oil wells along the Suez Gulf to Egypt. On the following
day Israeli tankers will take their oil cargo from those wells to Eilat. We
shall pay the market price as determined in the annex4 to the letter you
addressed to me, Mr. President, following the signing of the peace
treaty.
I raised with President Sadat the proposition of renewing the di-
rect railway link between Egypt and Israel as it had existed until 1948.
The President received the idea positively, both for the transport of pas-
sengers and goods. We will, in due course, invite a delegation of ex-
perts representing a railway construction consortium to do a survey in
our two countries.
President Sadat and I spent time reviewing the situation in the re-
gion and we were in full agreement as to the nature of the Soviet de-
signs in the Middle East and elsewhere.
During the second meeting on the following day it was President
Sadat who opened the conversation addressing himself to the main
issues concerning our mutual relations and other highly important
matters. Our exchange, as before, was conducted in warm amity.
The President spoke about the future of Judea and Samaria (in his
language, the West Bank) and the Gaza Strip. He said that the idea of
full autonomy was seen by him as a positive one. He wished to make a
suggestion about what will occur after the transitional period of five
years. He proposed that following the five year transitional period a
the Arab rejectionists.” (Telegram 611 from Alexandria, July 14; National Archives, RG
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Palestinian state be formed with an undefined link with Jordan. Under-
standing, so he said, Israel’s security problem he thought this could be
solved by demilitarization.
I put it to him that demilitarization is feasible and proper in the
context of the Sinai desert as we had agreed. I added: “Besides the fact
that we trust you there is an objective factor. In a desert demilitar-
ization is verifiable. In a populated area it is a hoax. One can keep a
katyusha in every garage and in every home.”
On the matter of autonomy, President Sadat said that we may start
with the Gaza Strip. When asked whether he meant that we begin with
an agreement in relation to the Gaza Strip he made it clear that the
agreement should be general and include, in his formulation, the West
Bank. But, he explained, the introduction of the autonomy for the in-
habitants could begin with the Gaza District first.
President Sadat turned to the matter of the settlements. He had
mentioned the issue the previous day using the expression: “it creates
difficulties” and “it is intimidating”. Now he added that he had told Dr.
Burg when they met a few weeks ago: “Even if you have the right to
build settlements it shouldn’t be done during the negotiations.” I re-
called my letter5 to you, Mr. President, on this issue, whose contents
were confirmed by the Secretary of State a number of weeks ago. About
Jerusalem he said: the city will not be divided. Part of the city where the
Moslem and Christian holy shrines are located will be under “Arab
sovereignty with a flag”. (He did not say what flag). The “Wailing”
(Western) Wall will be excluded. The city will be run by a common
council.
In the course of our second talk President Sadat again mentioned
an idea which he had first raised with me in private during our El Arish
meeting, namely the construction of a water pipeline from the Nile to
the Negev. He then went on to ask for an early return of Santa Kath-
erina to Egyptian sovereignty. His wish is that this occur a day before
November 18, the eve of the second anniversary of his visit to Jeru-
salem. Perhaps I will be able to give President Sadat a response during
his forthcoming visit to Haifa.
In replying to President Sadat’s presentation I said that a Pales-
tinian state would be a mortal danger to Israel. It would inevitably be a
PLO state, bringing with it permanent bloodshed. Furthermore, it
would be a peril to the free world turning in no time to a Soviet base,
menacing thereby Egypt itself.
I stressed that we have ahead of us, in fact, over six years during
which time the problem of sovereignty is left open. At the end of that
transition period we shall claim our right (as I have made clear time
and again). But, I added, also under Israeli sovereignty the Palestinian
Arabs should continue to enjoy autonomy in Judea, Samaria and the
Gaza District.
With reference to Jerusalem I said to President Sadat that we must
distinguish between any matter which carries with it material gain and
those questions which relate to spiritual, historic and moral values.
Therefore, I added, let us speak separately of a proposed water pipeline
from the Nile to the Negev and the question of Jerusalem. President
Sadat interjected saying: “I did not mean the water pipeline as a prize. I
only made this suggestion because it is important.” I willingly ac-
knowledged this remark. I read to him my letter to you, Mr. President,
written in Camp David, on Jerusalem. I also read to President Sadat
the two articles of the Israeli law concerning the Holy Places which I
hereby attach.
President Sadat spoke about Lebanon. He said he cannot agree to
any kind of partition of Lebanon, referring specifically to the southern
part of the country. He informed me that he was going to say this at the
joint press conference we were about to hold. I told him that I agree
unequivocally that the territorial integrity of Lebanon should be pre-
served. Israel has a grave problem of security there and what we do is a
matter of the defence of our people against repeated planned attacks.
President Sadat said that he will, as he put it, “condemn the settle-
ments” at the press conference. I asked him to state that on this issue
“we differ”. This was, indeed, the term he used in his statement to the
press and I, on my part, confirmed that on this issue “we agreed to
differ”.
One of the most important statements President Sadat made to me
was that we must continue the normalization process, that there will be
“love between Egypt and Israel”, and that the peace between our coun-
tries will endure. We agreed that our colleagues should continue with
the negotiations in the working groups which Ambassador Strauss
helped, with his initiative, to form.
Finally, we wound up our conversation with my extending to the
President an invitation to visit Haifa. He told me he would come by sea
the Camp David Accords, informing him of Jerusalem’s legal status as “one city indivis-
ible” and the “Capital of the State of Israel,” in line with the Knesset’s June 28, 1967, pas-
sage of a law empowering the Israeli Government to apply the law of the State of Israel to
any part of Eretz Israel. See Document 57.

273.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, July 17, 1979
SUBJECT
UN Resolution on Settlements (U)
This week, the UN Security Council will vote on a resolution de-
rived from the report of the Three-nation Commission on Settlements.
The first draft (with State’s technical suggestions) is at Tab I. (U)
The issue: Should we vote for a “good” resolution (close to the draft)
and incur the wrath of the Israelis (and possibly sidetrack the process of
questioning the settlements in Israel)? Or should we abstain, while
making a strong speech on settlements, thus minimizing the political
damage? (There is agreement that we stand to gain little from the Arabs
on this vote.) Of course, if the draft resolution is amended by the Arabs
to be totally unacceptable, we should consider vetoing it. (S)
Strauss, Saunders, and I met on this today. Strauss’ recommenda-
tion (which he discussed and agreed with Vance) is as follows:
1) We should trail, not lead, on this issue;
2) Strauss will find an occasion to discuss “options” with Evron,
and will “complain” that Israel’s settlements policy has led to the diffi-
culties posed by this resolution, thus complicating Strauss’ job;
3) If the resolution is “good”, we should probably vote for it, or
perhaps abstain. In either case, our man at the UN should make a state-
ment giving the opposite spin;
4) If we are forced to veto, Strauss would send messages to Hus-
sein and Fahd explaining that their Arab colleagues made this
necessary;
5) We should hope that the draft is awful. (S)
One consideration in this scenario, of course, is the likelihood that
the President would support our voting “yes.” (Otherwise, the gener-
ally preferred course of action would be to abstain—without being
pushed—and gain credit with the Israelis on an issue that has little
“plus” side.) (S)
Ed Sanders has urged abstention, with a strong anti-settlements
statement (Tab II). (S)
If you concur with the scenario (above), no further decisions are re-
quired until we see the outcome of consultations at the UN. (U)

274.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown and
Secretary of State Vance to President Carter
Washington, July 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Military Assistance for Egypt
You asked2 about the possibilities for enhanced military assistance
for Egypt. We conclude that it is important for the United States to
move beyond the immediate program of assistance agreed during the
Treaty negotiations.
As you know, during Mubarak’s June visit we undertook to de-
velop3 a longer term (five year) military assistance plan with Egypt. We
are now preparing for the first round of talks in Cairo on this plan,4
with the aim of completing the plan by October 1st. In the planning
process we will be reviewing Egypt’s force structure and missions as
well as equipment requirements. It will be our aim to encourage Egypt
to make reductions in its force structure and to limit equipment re-
quirements to those needed for replacement and modernization of ob-
solete or unsupportable Soviet equipment. We will severely discourage
force expansion.
Moreover, wherever possible, we will encourage Egypt to make
the most of the Soviet equipment it has now, and will offer technical
assistance for this purpose. We are looking at ways to help Egypt’s de-
ular military funding aid for Egypt outside the peace package. This aid
would be similar, to but less than, the annual aid to Israel.
We may have a problem with the public and Congress regarding
an enhanced program. If we should propose to provide $500 million a
year in further FMS credits beginning in FY 82, critics may argue that
our one-time package was authorized for the period through FY 82. In
addition, Israel might argue that our total economic and military assist-
ance programs for Egypt would be approaching parity with Israel’s
and, therefore, might seek new increments for itself. We believe these
are manageable problems.
We have also considered the terms on which FMS credits are of-
fered. At present we have agreed to finance military purchases over a
30 year period, with an initial ten year grace period on principal, but we
believe that debt service will be a growing problem, depending on how
quickly, if at all, the economy prospers. It is preferable that military
equipment be given second priority after Egypt’s economic develop-
ment needs.
So far as equipment releases are concerned, Egyptian requests for
modern tanks, antitank helicopters, and advanced fighter aircraft could
run into regional balance or arms control problems on the Hill. While
our sale of such articles to Egypt may not be advisable now, we may
have to consider them in the longer term. The Egyptians would see any
joint planning which omits such equipment as a serious indication that
the U.S. will not support Egyptian force modernization. The consulta-
tions we plan will give us an opportunity to channel Egyptian desires
in directions we can politically manage.
Our longer-term planning will take place within our previously
stated policy that the U.S. is prepared to provide a substantial amount
though such assistance could enable the Egyptians to prolong the useful life of such
equipment beyond previously scheduled retirement dates, such measures will do little to
reduce Egypt’s growing arms imbalance with not only Israel but also with Syria, Iraq,
and Libya.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services, Directorate of Intel-
quest for Information on Western Retrofitting of Soviet Military Equipment in Egypt)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
of Egypt’s military equipment needs, but not all. Egypt should be en-
couraged to develop perhaps smaller but nevertheless significant
supply programs with Europeans and others to complement our own
activities.
In carrying out this policy, we need to begin conditioning both
Congress and the public to the fact that Egypt has legitimate defense re-
quirements in addition to needs for support in its economic develop-
ment program and that both of these aspects of our effort serve U.S. na-
tional interests and are closely intertwined.
In our judgment, U.S.-Egyptian defense relationships are devel-
oping in productive ways, although the supply of equipment is natu-
rally not as extensive, as inexpensive, or as fast as Egypt desires.
—We will deliver before October 6 the first of the F–4 aircraft, plus
other equipment and, if Egypt makes a firm decision, a Gearing Class
destroyer. These first deliveries are a high priority for Sadat and we
have made every effort to make them available in time for this polit-
ically important date.
—We are exchanging a number of expert military teams on
Egypt’s high priority items, such as air defense.
—We have defined with Egypt the equipment priorities and de-
livery schedules for the full $1. billion already agreed.
—We are starting work on the longer term plan decided above.
While this will not initially provide commitments for financing and de-
livery, it will continue the military dialogue and help to cement defense
relationships between our two countries.
In addition we earlier promised Sadat and Kamal Ali that we
would welcome the opportunity for close defense consultations. To
that end we would expect to have annual meetings at the Defense Min-
ister level and periodic staff consultations during the year.
We believe we are well started on the road to enhanced defense re-
lationships with Egypt. We will have to consult closely with Congres-
sional leaders as we go along.
Cyrus Vance
Harold Brown

275.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt
189710. Subject: President’s Response to Sadat: SALT II and Tokyo
and Alexandria Summits. Refs: A. State 183955, B. Alexandria 06113
(S)-entire text
[Omitted here is the text of Sadat’s June 30 message to Carter, con-
gratulating him on the signing of the SALT II Treaty in Vienna.]
2. Please transmit4 the following response from the President to
President Sadat. No signed original letter will follow:
Begin text:
Dear Mr. President:
—I appreciate the very full report you gave Roy Atherton on your
meeting last week with Prime Minister Begin. This can prove to be an
important moment in the history of the Middle East, as you and the
Prime Minister create the basis for constructive achievements this year
and next.
—The Alexandria Summit has encouraged me in my belief that the
peace process can and will move forward, further testifying to the
courage and wisdom of your decision to go to Jerusalem only a year
and a half ago. As you continue your work towards the goal of a per-
manent peace in the Middle East, both you and Prime Minister Begin
will continue to have my strong support. Bob Strauss, with whom I
have shared Roy Atherton’s report, also stands ready to help in any
way he can.
—Mr. President, during my recent visit to Japan I raised with
Prime Minister Ohira—as I had during his visit to Washington in
May6—the subject of economic assistance to Egypt. The Prime Minister
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
reaffirmed his government’s commitment to continuing support of
your development program, but said this position can be sustained
only if it is handled with great political sensitivity. We must avoid any
suggestion that Japan’s decisions on aid to Egypt are in response to U.S.
pressure. The Prime Minister should be given latitude to announce
Japan’s commitments—which I hope will be increased—in his own
way and time.
—Finally, I want to thank you for your thoughtful message of con-
gratulations on the signing of the SALT II Agreement. I deeply value
your encouragement.
—This was indeed an historic event. The SALT II Treaty is an im-
portant part of the evolving mosaic of a peaceful world order. Because
of the destructive power of modern weapons, it is essential that the
United States and the Soviet Union overcome the mistrust and tension
which have affected our relations for too long. The Treaty limiting stra-
tegic arms signed at Vienna represents our continued commitment
toward that goal.
—Again, please accept my thanks for your comments on the Alex-
andria Summit, and my best wishes for your continued success and the
welfare of you and the Egyptian people.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
His Excellency
Anwar al-Sadat
President of the Arab Republic of Egypt
Cairo
End text.
Vance
II limited the total of both nations’ nuclear forces to 2,250 delivery vehicles and placed a
variety of other restrictions on deployed strategic nuclear forces, including MIRVs.

276.
Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President
for National Security Affairs (Aaron) to Vice President
Mondale
Washington, July 23, 1979
SUBJECT
Middle East
The following is some up-dating requested today by Denis Clift:
UNEF. The Soviets informed us last week2 that they would defi-
nitely veto a renewal of UNEF when it comes up for renewal on July
24. They would, however, accept the use of UNTSO, provided it
would not be seen as a “replacement.” Waldheim could work out de-
tails (and said he would want to about triple it, to around 250–300). No
U.S. or Soviet forces would be involved. (C)
This all seemed pro forma. Egypt concurred. But the Israeli cabinet
on Sunday4 rejected UNTSO (too lightly armed; distrust of the UN).
The Israelis are confusing the pledge we made for a peacekeeping force
for after their withdrawal, and the interim phase. We are pressing the
Israelis, but Dayan is holding fast to his line that we must provide some
non-UN alternative now—perhaps through U.S.-initiated talks with Is-
rael and Egypt. The Egyptians will also press Israel on UNTSO (they
are willing to go ahead with UNTSO on their side of the line). (S)
Settlements. At the UN Friday, we abstained on a Security Council
resolution on the report of the Settlements Commission, but made a
strong statement against the policy. The stated reason for abstaining
was that refugees and Jerusalem were shoe-horned in. There was also a
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
sense of not being party to yet another useless UN gang-up on Israel—
while making our own position clear. Begin had wanted us to veto. (S)
Begin. The latest (unconfirmed) report is that the blood clot in a
brain artery has cost him 25% of his vision in one eye, 10% in the other.
Strauss and the President have sent messages. (U)
Palestinians. The UN Security Council is about to consider a resolu-
tion on Palestinian rights. Through the Kuwaitis, we have been told
that the PLO is prepared to endorse 242 (our condition for talking with
them). This subject will be the centerpiece of a “non-PRC” at 3 p.m. on
Wednesday. Your attending would be of great benefit. (S)
Lebanon. From June 27 until Sunday, the Israelis had not used air-
craft to strike at PLO bases in Lebanon. The Sunday strike10 was partic-
ularly bloody. State has put out a statement of disapproval. There are
also growing signs of a possible major Israeli military action in Leb-
anon, though no hard information. Strauss suggested to Begin that he
consider a moratorium. Begin said he would talk about it further when
Strauss next goes to Israel. This subject—in broad context—will also be
discussed on Wednesday. (S)
Autonomy Talks. Since Strauss’ visit, we have been working with
the Egyptians and Israelis on the setting up of the two working groups
(modalities of elections, and powers and responsibilities of the Self-
Governing Authority). Each will have two members (Jim Leonard will
be on both for us). Some Israeli members of the full talks wanted to at-
tend, but we and the Egyptians have wanted to put the level down a
notch, to give the groups a chance to work. We hope they can get to
their three-day (three-hour) summit11 (Strauss helped prepare the
ground by relaying the positive comments each made to him about the
other). They kept off really sensitive subjects, and agreed to disagree on
settlements and on Lebanon. They agreed that Israel could begin
buying Sinai oil the day after the field is returned; that they would see
about reopening the Egypt-Israel railroad (there are some indications
of Canadian backing); and there would be better processing of applica-
tions by Egyptian Jews to visit Israel. Not much; but the atmospherics
were good, and the “routine” nature of meetings was established (the
next to be in Haifa right after Ramadan). Remarkably, the Begin and
Sadat reports to the President were almost identical. (C)
Strauss. He currently plans to go back to the area at the end of Au-
gust, immediately after Sadat’s yacht trip to Haifa (after Ramadan). At
the same time, he will in general seek to keep from being sucked into
the day-to-day haggling at the Autonomy Talks. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

277.
Summary of Conclusions of a Senior Level Meeting
SUBJECT
Middle East (U)
PARTICIPANTS
State
Cyrus Vance (Chairman)
Secretary
Harold Saunders Assistant Secretary for Near East and South Asian Affairs
OSD
Harold Brown
Secretary
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Personal Representative of the President
Ambassador Robert Strauss
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
David Aaron
NSC
Robert Hunter
1. Palestinian Resolution. The meeting discussed the forthcoming
UN Security Council debate on a resolution on Palestinian rights, in
the context of which we are informed that the PLO will issue a state-
ment accepting UNSC Resolution 242, in exchange for (as a minimum)
recognition of the Palestinians’ right to self-determination. (S)
It was agreed that the United States should take the lead on this
issue in order to seek an outcome that will preserve the primacy of the

278.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Lebanon and the White House
193868. Special encryption for Ambassador Dean. Subject: Mes-
sage to President Sarkis From President Carter.
(C) Entire text
1. Please deliver2 as soon as possible the following message from
President Carter to President Sarkis in response to the latter’s hand-
written letter to President Carter of July 4. (There will not be a signed
original to deliver.)
2. Begin text: Dear Mr. President:
I was deeply touched by your confidential and handwritten letter
to me on July 4. I appreciate fully the friendship and concern which led
you to write to me with such candor.
I want you to know, Mr. President, that I have been deeply trou-
bled by the many tragedies which have befallen your country and your
people, including the bombing attacks last Sunday afternoon. I grieve
over the terrible toll in innocent human lives, and the suffering im-
posed on your nation. Like you, I am also very much concerned over
the risk of further confrontations in the air between Israeli and Syrian
aircraft, and about the situation on the ground in southern Lebanon. I
agree with you that these dangerous trends must be reversed, and that
the integrity of Lebanon must be restored and respected.
Mr. President, as I work to help bring about a permanent and com-
prehensive peace throughout the Middle East, the special tragedy of
Lebanon is very much on my mind. I believe it is imperative to build
upon the foundation that was laid at Camp David and which has con-
tinued with the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty and the negotiations on au-
tonomy for the West Bank and Gaza. In the coming months, I will re-
double my efforts to see that effort through to a successful conclusion.
It is in that context that I foresee the best chance also for bringing
an end to strife and bloodshed in Lebanon, and for making possible
the reestablishment of your government’s authority over your entire
country.
While the best hope for a final end to conflict in Lebanon may lie in
the success of efforts to build a broader peace, so too these efforts them-
selves depend upon doing whatever is possible to reduce the spillover
of conflict into your country. Since I received your letter, I have given
new thought about the best means for achieving this vital goal. As a re-
sult, we will again approach Israel to stress the human suffering, the
dangers of wider conflict, and the risks to the peace process posed by its
continuing military actions. We will again do what we can to gain its
restraint. At the same time, we will work even more intensely with the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
United Nations and the governments contributing troops to UNIFIL, as
well as with Saudi Arabia and Syria. We will also be consulting with
the Congress about the best course of action to take. Meanwhile, it will
be important for us to persuade other quarters which contribute to the
provocations and the cycles of violence to exercise restraint, and to
cease terrorism.
Mr. President, all of these steps will take time and hard work; but I
am committed to doing what I can to hasten the day when Lebanon will
no longer be threatened by strife and conflict, and when you will be
able to devote your energies solely to rebuilding your country and ad-
vancing the lives of your people.
I want to keep in touch with you, Mr. President, on these issues of
great concern to us both. My heart will be with you as you shoulder
your heavy responsibilities.
With warm personal regards,
Sincerely, Jimmy Carter. End text.
3. For Ambassador Dean: Since you have to carry the message per-
sonally to President Sarkis, we believe you should either try to deliver
it Thursday, July 26, or telephone Sarkis as far in advance as possible of
your planned meeting-dinner with him on Friday, July 27, to say that
you have a response from President Carter, explain that, under the cir-
cumstances, it would be better for us if we did not have to deal with an
“open letter.” Say to Sarkis that we very much understand and appre-
ciate the domestic political problems he is facing, and the need to be
seen as doing something about the problems Lebanon faces. In this con-
nection, you might note that the U.S. made a strong statement con-
demning Israeli air raids and has taken a firm stand—publicly and pri-
vately—against the recent series of Israeli ground incursions into
UNIFIL’s areas of operation. Ambassador Tueini has also registered a
strong message of protest over Israeli actions in the Security Council.
4. FYI. While we do not yet have report, we understand from se-
cure voice telephone call with Tel Aviv that there may have been a
useful exchange Wednesday, between Viets and Weizman on Lebanese

280.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State
16882. Subject: (S) The U.S.-Israel Relationship and U.S. Support
for the UNSC Resolution on Palestinian Rights: The Price. Ref: USUN
31872 and previous.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Summary: As the proposed UNSC Resolution on Palestinian
Rights comes to the top of the agenda, Israeli suspicion and anxiety
over U.S. Middle East policy and goals—ever-present beneath the sur-
face of our bilateral relationship with Israel—is building towards a
climax. We recognize that a broad range of U.S. national interests will
be considered and weighed by Washington3 in its deliberations on this
resolution and we are not recommending a vote for or against. How-
cret; Immediate; Nodis.
draft of the resolution on Palestinian rights. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790349–0177)

ever, we do want to alert the Department to the impact on this society
and on U.S.-Israeli relations of the various options we may select.
—As long as we do not give the GOI assurances that we will veto a
Palestinian rights resolution, as Israelis insist we are committed to
doing, the GOI will accuse us of being prepared to violate our solemn
commitments as it becomes, in an ironic and cynical exchange of roles,
the defender of the sanctity of Resolution 242.
—Israeli reaction to a U.S. vote for or abstension on any repeat any
Palestinian rights resolution will be strident, but so long as the U.S.
stopped short of endorsing a Palestinian state explicitly or implicitly,
we believe Israel would hold back from the most provocative actions
which we expect would follow passage of a “maximal” resolution.
However, even in the former instance, the damage to U.S. credibility
would still be serious and we should not expect a quick return to
business as usual. There is little we can do to soften the blow in Israel
should a Palestinian rights resolution be adopted. Although the pur-
pose of the exercise might be to broaden and quicken the peace process
by bringing the PLO into it, few Israelis really want negotiations with
the PLO under any circumstances. They would not be persuaded that
we have enhanced the chances for a comprehensive peace. Our going
along with a resolution which would be seen as “amending” 242 by
specifying Palestinian rights—whether “national” or “legitimate”—an
exercise which we have assiduously avoided until now, would galva-
nize a vocal national consensus which the GOI, carried along by its
most hawkish elements, would manipulate to the hilt. Regardless of the
policy we decide to follow, there are steps we should take to reduce Is-
raeli suspicions over the period ahead as we grapple with the Pales-
tinian rights resolution problem. It is in our interest to maintain a dia-
logue on this question with the Israelis as intensively as possible over
the days ahead, in order to achieve the dual purpose of allaying as
much as we can Israeli fears that we are up to a double game and
pre-empting charges that we are violating our commitment to consult
with them. Should we begin negotiations on the text of a draft resolu-
tion, we should provide drafts to the Israelis on a timely basis and brief
them in as much detail as practical on the signals we are receiving and
on the American position as it emerges. Such steps, however, will not
prevent the storm of vituperation, possibly backed by provocative ac-
tions destructive of the peace process, which our support of a Pales-
tinian rights resolution—or even lingering suspicion as to our inten-
tions between now and August 24—would bring on. End summary.
3. Israeli suspicion and anxiety over U.S. Middle East policy and
goals—ever-present beneath the surface of our bilateral relationship
with Israel—has been mounting steadily in the wake of the UNEF/

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
UNTSO flap, a more activist U.S. role in the autonomy negotiation,
and new proposed U.S. arms sales to Jordan and Saudi Arabia. Against
this background, U.S. involvement in the postponement of the UNSC
vote on the Palestinian rights resolution and what is seen here as the
latest U.S. effort to draw the PLO into the peace process and establish a
U.S.–PLO dialogue have set off a wave of emotional questioning of
American constancy. The chain reaction has been given momentum by
the ominous local interpretation of President Carter’s August 1 com-
ments5 to the New York Times on the plight of the Palestinians (“Carter
Equates PLO, U.S. Civil Rights Groups”, as one Israeli newspaper ten-
dentiously headlined its report). Israelis now believe that the U.S. is
moving in the direction of supporting or at least acquiescing in a Pales-
tinian rights resolution which will supersede and, to use the Israeli
phrase, “empty Resolution 242 of all meaning.” Hodding Carter’s state-
ment6 the same day that the U.S. is willing to “build upon” Resolution
threat even to themselves.” (Leonard Silk, “Carter Expects Rise in Joblessness; Believes
242 only heightened these fears. Coming all at once, these perceptions
of sharp turns in U.S. policy generate growing doubts about U.S. will-
ingness to honor its commitments to Israel—as defined by the GOI.
Emotion is rising to a crescendo, and only a U.S. pledge to veto the Pal-
estinian resolution in the SC will calm the Israelis.
4. Of all their many concerns, Israelis are perhaps most obsessed
by the prospect of an international consensus on a solution to the Pales-
tinian problem sharply diverging from Israeli requirements. Thus,
failure of the U.S. to block the passage of a Palestinian rights resolution
would result in an Israeli reaction that could have profound conse-
quences for U.S.-Israeli ties and the Middle East peace process. We rec-
ognize that a broad range of U.S. interests will be weighed and consid-
ered by Washington in its deliberations on this resolution and we are
not recommending a vote for or against, acknowledging the limitation
imposed on our judgment by our special vantage point. This message is
only intended to alert the Department to the impact of the various op-
tions we may select on this society and our relations with it.
5. Cabinet dynamics. As we have seen over the past few weeks,
Begin’s hospitalization has not inhibited—and perhaps has even con-
tributed to—the clashes we have had with the Israelis on a number of
issues. The GOI’s normal combativeness has been enhanced by the in-
ternal maneuvering of various Ministers who have been exploiting
Begin’s absence in order to expand their influence in key foreign
policy/security issues. Unfortunately, the best way to win popularity
points in this Cabinet and to a certain extent with the Israeli public is
through rigid adherence to “principle” and uncompromising tough-
ness in response to perceived “violations” of commitments. Thus,
while any Israeli Government would go all-out to keep the U.S. from
embracing a Palestinian rights resolution, many Ministers of this Cab-
inet are waiting—in some cases eagerly—for confrontations which can
be turned to their personal political advantage.
6. The GOI and U.S. commitments on Resolution 242. As long as
we do not give the GOI assurances that we will veto a Palestinian rights
resolution, as Israelis insist we are committed to doing, the GOI will ac-
cuse us of being prepared to violate our solemn commitments as it be-
comes, in an ironic and cynical exchange of roles, the defender of the
sanctity of Resolution 242. Indeed, the press reports Begin’s personal
advisor, Yehiel Kadishai, as saying that U.S. credibility has already
been shattered by its failure to adhere to its commitments. We will be
accused specifically of violating our commitment under the 1975 mem-
orandum of understanding7 to oppose any attempt in the UNSC to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
change Res. 242 and 338 in ways “incompatible with their original pur-
pose.” The Israelis would no doubt claim, in addition to their other crit-
icisms of a Palestinians rights resolution, that a new text treating the
Palestinian issue as other than a refugee problem would be incompat-
ible with the original purpose of 242—and therefore “changed”—even
though the GOI committed itself to a much broader interpretation at
Camp David.
7. The GOI and U.S. commitments on the PLO. The Israelis recog-
nize that the immediate purpose of a new Palestinian rights resolution
is to clear the way for the initiation of a direct U.S.–PLO dialogue. The
GOI would without doubt view PLO acceptance of a Palestinian rights
resolution, even if it included within it references to Res. 242 and 338, as
insufficient to meet the U.S. commitment under the 1975 memorandum
of understanding. The Israelis would call “foul”, assert that these
two Resolutions stand on their own, and reject our acceptance of this
“package deal” instead of explicit and unencumbered PLO acceptance
of Res. 242 and 338 and Israel’s right to exist.
8. A “maximal” resolution. Israeli reaction to failure of the U.S. to
veto any Palestinian rights resolution will be strident, but U.S. accept-
ance (even by abstention in a SC veto) of a “maximal” resolution (one
postulating Palestinian national rights) would probably elicit sharp re-
taliatory measures and touch off a major crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations.
There is not a paragraph in either the preambular or operative parts of
the present draft text in reftel which does not contain language the Is-
raelis will find unacceptable. The worst in Israeli eyes is, of course, op-
erative para. 1, which “affirms that the Palestinian people should be en-
abled to exercise its inalienable national rights of self-determination,
including the right to establish an independent state in Palestine.” Even
if the explicit reference to a Palestinian state were dropped, any text
using such euphemisms as “right to political independence” or even
“self-determination” would be totally unacceptable. Failure of the U.S.
to veto such a resolution would be considered by the Israelis as an out-
right violation of our 1975 commitment. It would also be seen as a nega-
tion of the Camp David Accords, in that it prejudged the outcome of
the autonomy and final-status negotiations, and would be cited as
proof of the dishonesty of President Carter’s statement that the U.S. did
not favor a Palestinian state.
9. The Cabinet, with or without Begin, would react violently and
punitively. It is important to remember that there are those in the Cab-
inet who are seeking to transform current GOI positions in a number of
areas into “red lines.” Within the range of possible Israeli responses are
the following kinds of retaliatory actions:
—an outright freeze on the autonomy negotiations;
—public announcement of an extreme, “final” Israeli position on
autonomy which would torpedo the negotiations;
—a rash of new settlements in sensitive areas;
—measures which would further tighten the Israeli hold on East
Jerusalem, such as the transfer there of more GOI offices;
—a law providing for the blanket acquisition of land when needed
for settlement in the territories;
—approval of the right of Israelis to purchase land in the
territories;
—additional moves toward the annexation of the Golan.
10. We cannot assume that concern over Israel’s relationship with
Egypt will necessarily inhibit such GOI moves. Those Cabinet
members who would advocate this kind of sharp Israeli riposte believe
that Egypt’s own interests dictate continued adherence to the peace
process. The issue would be played as U.S. support for a Palestinian
state and a threat to Israeli security; it would be argued that any resul-
tant damage in the Egypt-Israel relationship could in any case be con-
tained. For its part, the Labor opposition is unlikely to have a moder-
ating effect on the Israeli reaction. It has already expressed its concern
over the new U.S. approach to Res. 242, although it has placed responsi-
bility on the Likud for mishandling the issue, damaging both the
U.S.-Israeli relationship and Israel’s political position.
11. A “minimal” resolution. We do not know if a resolution that
uses Camp David-style language such as “legitimate rights” or “partic-
ipation in determination of their own future” and does not posit Pales-
tinian national rights would be acceptable to the Arabs. As far as the Is-
raelis are concerned, such a resolution would not be seen as much
better than the maximal language. The initial reaction is likely to be not
much different than that to a “maximal” resolution, but as long as the
U.S. stopped short of endorsing a Palestinian state explicitly or implic-
itly, we believe Israel would be inclined to refrain from the most pro-
vocative actions. Still, our support of or failure to block even a “min-
imal” resolution would have a traumatic effect on Israelis and seriously
damage U.S. credibility. The wound on the Israeli psyche would be a
long time healing.
12. Softening the blow. There is little we can do to soften the blow
in Israel should we either endorse or abstain on a Palestinian rights res-
olution. There is no way we will avoid a crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations.
Aside from a few cheers from the ultra-dovish side of the Israeli polit-
ical spectrum, our bringing the PLO into the peace process will not be
seen as a constructive act by the Israeli Government or public. Indeed,
it is this eventuality that they most fear. And even if they recognized it

281.
Editorial Note
On August 15, 1979, Ambassador to the United Nations Andrew
Young announced his resignation during a press conference at the De-
partment of State in the wake of revelations that he had met with the

Palestine Liberation Organization’s Representative to the United Na-
tions Zehdi Terzi at the residence of Kuwaiti Representative to the
United Nations Abdullah Bishara on July 26 in contravention of U.S.
policy of avoiding meetings with the organization. (Telegram 213698 to
all African Posts, August 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790379–1221) President Jimmy Carter was informed of
Young’s actions on August 14 and noted in his personal diary: “I
learned that Andy [Young] has gotten himself into serious trouble by
meeting with the UN PLO representative. This is understandable be-
cause Andy is president of the Security Council, but when interrogated
about it by the State Department he told them a lie. Later he told the Is-
raeli ambassador the truth and the Israelis very unwisely made this fact
public, although Andy’s meeting with the PLO was certainly designed
to help the Israeli cause. This is an almost impossible problem to re-
solve without Andy leaving.” The same day, Carter met with Secretary
of State Cyrus Vance, Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher,
Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan, and White House Press Secretary Jody
Powell at which Vance stated “in his opinion Andy would have to
leave.” Carter wrote: “Cy’s implication was that the choice was be-
tween him and Andy.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 351) Earlier, on
August 13, Department of State Spokesman Thomas Reston publicly
denied that Young had had a “business” meeting with Terzi claiming
instead that Terzi had “arrived unexpectedly and that Young departed
after observing “social amenities.” The following day, an official pro-
test from the Israeli Government over the Terzi meeting was trans-
mitted to the Department of State in telegram 17487 from Tel Aviv.
Following the protest, and the revelation that Young had given a “more
accurate account” to Israeli Representative to the United Nations Ye-
huda Blum, Vance reprimanded Young for the meeting; a second De-
partment of State statement then acknowledged that Young “knew that
Mr. Terzi would probably be there” when he went to Bishara’s resi-
dence and that while there Young and Terzi “discussed the question of
postponing the Security Council vote scheduled for July 31 on the Ku-
waiti resolution” on Palestinian rights. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance
Chides Young for Holding Talks With P.L.O. Official,” The New York
Young resignation, and the circumstances leading to the event, see For-
eign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XXV, United Nations; Global Issues.

282.
Telegram From the Embassy in the People’s Republic of
China to the Department of State
5526. Literally Eyes Only for Tarnoff from Maynes for delivery
COB. Subject: Statement by Ambassador Young.
1. S-entire text.
2. I do not recall Andy ever using the phrase “official version” as a
preface to his account to me of his meeting with Terzi.
3. During our conversation Andy was initially fuzzy about the cir-
cumstances of the meeting. At the beginning of the conversation he
made some reference to being “set up.” When I asked him whether
Bishara acted in bad faith, he replied that on reflection he did not think
so. He mentioned that he was out walking with his boy and decided to
drop in on Bishara. On the basis of my conversation with Andy, I con-
cluded that he thought that Bishara might try to set up a meeting with
Terzi but that Andy honestly did not know Terzi would be there in part
because Andy, not Bishara, according to the account I received decided
when he would visit Bishara’s apartment. Moreover, Terzi was not
there when he arrived.
4. I specifically asked what was discussed. There was no mention
of any discussion with Terzi about postponing the Security Council
meeting. Andy initially told me that Terzi was largely silent during the
meeting. He subsequently mentioned that Terzi when he did speak, de-
nounced our vote on the settlements resolution and contended that the
assassination in France of a top PLO leader4 was evidence that the U.S.
was working to wipe out the PLO. I asked whether we could definitely
say that Andy had not “negotiated” with the PLO. The answer was yes.
I then reviewed with Andy the account of the meeting which the De-
partment subsequently put out5 and said that this would be the official
version.
5. I took notes6 on this conversation. I would have to refer to them
to give you a fuller account.
Woodcock
haved exactly in accord with standing policy of the United States Government.” (Tele-
gram Tosec 70012/209859 to the Secretary’s Aircraft and all Near Eastern and South
0226) The same day, Maynes telephoned Evron to inform him that this guidance had
Foreign Policy File, D790365–0346)

283.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State and the White House
17880. Special encryption for the President from Bob Strauss. Cairo
for Strauss. Subject: Strauss’ Initial Meeting With Prime Minister Begin.
1. Secret-entire text.
2. The two hour initial meeting with Begin August 17 took place in
warm low key atmosphere with uncommon scarcity of PriMin’s emo-
tional rhetoric. Result, however, was stalemate.
3. With only Ambassadors Evron and Lewis present, I gave Begin a
friendly but unvarnished assessment of your concerns, including your
resentment over unwarranted personal attacks by Dayan and others.
Stressed unwavering nature of your commitment to Israel and its secu-
rity, and urged Begin to help produce positive achievements which
could breathe some credibility (with the Arabs) into Camp David
process.
4. Begin made lengthy, reasoned argument for strict adherence to
SC 242, 338, and Camp David Agreement (CDA) plus joint letter, as au-
thoritative guidance for autonomy negotiations. He cited examples
from recent Alexandria working group meeting of alleged U.S. support
for Egyptian ideas which contradicted CDA, (e.g. “legislative council”).
I told him both you and I agreed thoroughly that CDA was our man-
date to be closely followed.
5. I then described problem we face re Palestinian resolution in
UNSC, and probed persistently for any hint that Begin might acquiesce
in a U.S.-sponsored resolution—with total lack of success. Begin said
repeatedly and absolutely categorically that Israeli Cabinet stood
unanimously behind its recent decision, i.e., if any repeat any new
UNSC resolution dealing with the Arab-Israeli conflict were adopted
anytime before full implementation of CDA is completed, it would con-
stitute a modification of SC 242, which was explicitly accepted at Camp
David as the “agreed basis” for CDA. Inevitable result would be to
make “null and void those CDA passages which refer to 242. Though
Begin would not be drawn out further as to consequences, clear impli-
cation was that GOI might withdraw from or suspend its participation
in autonomy negotiations. Begin said USG should carry out its 1975
written commitment, and that required veto of any and all new SC res-
olutions which treat the Palestinian or Arab-Israeli issues.
6. After having done everything possible to spread salve on the
various latest abrasions in the U.S.-Israeli relationship, I elicited Begin’s
judgment that key step now needed to dispel ugly rumors and distor-
tions would be for U.S. and Israel to agree that CDA and joint letter
must be carried out in their entirety, to the letter, and to act in the nego-
tiations accordingly.
7. At end of meeting, I told Begin that we had an honest disagree-
ment about the question of a new resolution. We had tentatively de-
cided to put forward a positive resolution of our own, not to amend 242
but to build on it. Gave him our rationale for going this route to avoid
having to consider veto of resolutions put forward by others. Stressed
any U.S. resolution would reaffirm 242 and 338 and contain essential el-
ements from CDA concerning Palestinian problem. I did not repeat not
show him any text.
8. Begin was rocked by this unpleasant news. He said he deeply re-
gretted what I had told him, asked me to inform you that it would pro-
duce the most negative developments for all of us, and asked that you
reconsider the tentative decision. He said again that any new UNSC
resolution would, in the unanimous5 view of the Cabinet, cause “the
agreed basis” of the Camp David Agreement (i.e. 242) to collapse.
Later, Lewis and I agreed he was genuinely shocked and disturbed.
9. Over all, meeting was difficult but not mean or petty. Begin’s
parting words to me were: Quote: Bob, I can only appeal to you and
President Carter. Please reconsider your initiative to change the agreed
basis for the Camp David Agreement. After all the effort we and you
invested at Camp David, and after all our sacrifices to carry out the
Agreement, to change the “agreed basis” now would be destructive of
all we have done. We were never forewarned at Camp David that a

285.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
16863. For the President from Ambassador Strauss. Tel Aviv/Jeru-
salem for Ambassador Strauss. Subject: Strauss Meeting With Sadat.
1. (S-entire text).
2. I met for an hour and a quarter in Ismailia Saturday2 night with
President Sadat, with only Vice President Mubarak and Atherton
present. Sadat had clearly consulted with Mubarak and Khalil fol-
lowing my meetings with them earlier that day. I nevertheless re-
viewed briefly the background for my trip and the strategy we are pur-
suing to deal with the Palestinian rights issue in the Security Council, to
make certain that Sadat understood our position and the reasons for it.
3. After a relaxed and somewhat rambling preliminary discussion,
Sadat with increasing animation came directly and firmly to the point.
He said he understood the need to do something to help Saudi Arabia
“save face” but left no doubt he was deeply concerned that our decision
to put forth a Palestinian rights resolution in the Security Council
would “scare Israel” and upset the peace process.
4. As we talked, Sadat clearly stated that he fears our present ap-
proach for dealing with the situation in the Security Council will derail
his strategy as he has described it to us on previous occasions. He reit-
erated very precisely that the way to bring Israel along is to move step
by step, to show understanding of their security concerns, to give them
time to work their way through their problems, and to proceed without
hesitation to fulfill all commitments under the bilateral Egyptian/Is-
raeli Treaty. He repeated several times that we must not “scare Israel”
and at one point said, “let’s first complete this step with Israel.” He
made clear that by “this step” he meant the present autonomy negotia-
tions. Although at one point he reflected some anxiety about what
would happen if no agreement were reached in those talks within the
allotted 12-month period, Sadat basically exuded confidence that “we
cret; Cherokee, Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Niact Immediate to Tel
Aviv and Jerusalem.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
will succeed.” With an almost mystical confidence, he said that at
Camp David “we jumped over obstacles to new horizons.” If the Pales-
tinians were to join the autonomy talks at this stage, Sadat said, we
would reach no agreement, just as we would have reached no agree-
ment at Camp David if Hussein had been there. It is important first to
complete the autonomy negotiations with Israel; then if the Pales-
tinians refuse what we have achieved for them, this will be their re-
sponsibility. Their entry now would “doom the peace process,” he
stated.
5. Recalling his report to us following his last talks with Begin in
Alexandria, Sadat expressed confidence that by the end of this year
there would be agreement on full autonomy and a solution to the Jeru-
salem problem. This agreement could then be carried out in Gaza and
Jerusalem, leaving the West Bank aside for the time being because of its
particular sensitivity to the Israelis and because this would provide an
opportunity for Israel and Hussein to come to an understanding with
respect to the West Bank. Sadat stated confidently that, when the
present phase of negotiations with Israel is completed by the end of this
year, Hussein would join the negotiating process and, by working with
Israel, could arrange a plebescite whereby the Palestinians would agree
to join Jordan rather than insist upon an independent state.
6. To make certain that I had understood precisely Sadat’s posi-
tion, I put certain questions to him towards the end of our meeting:
—I first asked how concerned Sadat would be if we vetoed an
Arab resolution in the Security Council, thereby undermining our cred-
ibility with the other Arabs and reinforcing the Baghdad front. Sadat
repeated that this would not harm Egypt or the autonomy talks but
would harm the United States with Saudi Arabia.
—I next asked what Sadat’s views were on a milder resolution
which would not call for a Palestinian state, which would basically
draw on language we have used in the past, and which would be sup-
ported by the U.S. I told Sadat that in my talks in Israel it was clear that
even such a resolution would be opposed by the Israelis. Sadat re-
peated that when Israel is frightened, this will harm the peace process.
—I then asked his reaction to a U.S. resolution which would be op-
posed by the Arab world but would, on the basis of my talks with Is-
rael, still be opposed by them. Sadat repeated that anything which
frightened the Israelis would be bad for the peace process.
7. When I described the Israeli position (characterizing it as unrea-
sonable and asking for his advice) that any new resolution was unnec-
essary since the peace process is being implemented and progressing
well on the basis of Resolution 242 and 338 plus the Camp David
Framework, and that any new resolution would unbalance the Camp

David Framework, Sadat strongly differing with me said, “they are
right.”
8. At various points during the conversation, Sadat reflected preoc-
cupation with the Saudi position, saying he did not fully understand it
and reiterating his sense of grievance with the Saudis generally and
Prince Fahd in particular. He would, however, rise above this and was
prepared to fulfill his commitments, in cooperation with the United
States, for security in the Arabian Peninsula and Persian Gulf. In this
connection he repeated his earlier offer of “full facilities” for the United
States to cooperate with Egypt in maintaining stability and security in
the Gulf and in the Sudan. If the United States has a problem with
Saudi Arabia in connection with the forthcoming Security Council de-
bate, Sadat said, we should try to handle this in our bilateral relation-
ship with the Saudis. He stressed that he fully supports strong
U.S.-Saudi relations and that we should do what we need to in order to
reassure the Saudis in our bilateral relations. Above all, however, we
must be cautious about any move in the Security Council which could
frighten the Israelis.
9. Noting Sadat’s repeated references to the Saudis, I took this
opening to make the point to him that it would be helpful to us if he
could avoid criticisms of Saudi Arabia. Sadat said he would refrain
from such criticisms and, what is more, would repair his relations with
them when that became possible, despite all that they had done to him.
10. Following our meeting and after our brief remarks to the press,
I took Sadat aside to make certain he fully understood that our present
position was to move ahead immediately with a U.S. resolution in the
Security Council, if possible with the Israelis but if necessary without
them, to pre-empt a harder line Arab resolution which we would have
to veto and which would risk strong reactions from the other Arabs.
11. In reflecting on Saturday night’s meeting, I must admit to
having been unprepared for Sadat’s almost total preoccupation with
not “scaring” the Israelis, his confidence that there can be a break-
through by the end of the year as a result of our support and his per-
sonal efforts with Begin, and his assumption that we can contain the
Saudi reaction to a U.S. veto in the Security Council. He bases the latter
on his conviction that the Saudis know they depend “100 percent” on
us for their security, and on a basic assumption that we have already
made a deal with the Saudis, although I did my best to disabuse him of
this. Atherton and I were both convinced that he believes firmly that
our basic reason for going forward with a resolution is to fulfill a deal
we made with Fahd. I do not believe we ever convinced him to the
contrary.
12. It is relevant to the foregoing to report that in a call on a senior
Foreign Ministry official earlier Saturday afternoon, Leonard was told

286.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the
White House and Department of State
2656. For the President from Bob Strauss. White House please pass
Amb. Strauss’ Aircraft (86971). Subject: (S) Strauss’ Wrap-up Meeting
With Prime Minister Begin. Ref: Cairo 16863.
1. S-entire text.
2. Summary. In a cordial two-hour meeting with Begin on
Sunday, I reviewed with him our approach to tabling our own UN res-
olution, and Sadat’s negative reaction. Begin was surprised and
pleased by Sadat’s views, and he visibly relaxed—I surmise because he
sees that he is not long in opposition to us. He pressed me to recom-
mend to you that we change our position. Politely but firmly, I told him
I could not do that; but would faithfully report to you Begin’s and
Sadat’s clearly stated objections to our initiative, and their emphasis on
moving ahead with their own relationship instead. Finally, I prevailed
on Begin to say a few positive words to the press about the strength of
U.S.-Israeli relations. End summary.
3. After returning from Cairo I met for about two hours with Begin,
accompanied by Ambassadors Lewis and Evron. Begin was markedly
cret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo and Tel
Aviv.
fresh and vigorous considering the fact that he had chaired what was
apparently a fairly difficult Cabinet meeting for much of the day.
4. I gave Begin a very brief summary rundown on my meeting Sat-
urday night with Sadat (reftel), stressing Sadat’s statements to me that
his relationship with Begin is much better than before and that he looks
forward to their pending meeting4 in Haifa for even more improve-
ment. I told Begin that I explained to Sadat the rationale behind our po-
sition on putting forward a resolution of our own in the Security
Council, and that I told Sadat of Begin’s disagreement with our pro-
posed course of action. Sadat’s response, I said, was that he agreed with
Begin’s view and that any resolution would complicate the picture for
the autonomy negotiations and distract from the progress which Sadat
was confident would be made before the end of the year. I told Begin
that Sadat had given as his reasoning for opposing any new resolution
his “high hopes” that—as he and Begin talked further about the
issues—they will gradually find solutions to most of the outstanding
problems, and that any UN action would complicate this process. I con-
cluded by telling Begin that I would now return to Washington and re-
port to you and to Cy Vance both his (Begin’s) and Sadat’s reactions to
our proposed view and strategy. There was no reason to avoid telling
Begin of Sadat’s attitude because Sadat in a speech delivered after our
meeting had expressed his concern and negative attitude.
5. Begin was clearly pleased to learn that Sadat agreed with him. (I
had previously suspected that they had talked by phone before I had
seen Sadat; however, I now doubt that for it would have been almost
impossible for Begin to feign the degree of surprise he registered when
he heard my report.) He then said that it was all the more obvious that
we should reconsider our course of action and drop the idea of any new
resolution. He summarized the decision already taken Sunday by the
Israeli Cabinet in support of his initial negative reaction to me on
Friday. He again asked that you review your decision in light of my ad-
ditional findings in Egypt.
6. During this discussion, I did not deviate from the position I had
taken with Begin on Friday: that while our decision is still tentative, I
would be less than candid if I did not say that this is the direction in
which we are now moving.
7. I then asked Begin whether he was optimistic about the course of
the autonomy negotiations. Begin said that he believed the approach
was the correct one. As was the case before Camp David and during the
Treaty negotiations, there were obviously major difficulties ahead.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
However, he was convinced that the basic elements of agreement on
autonomy had been hammered out at Camp David and that it should
be possible to reach agreement on how to implement those elements, so
long as the whole agreement is treated as an entity and no effort is
made to separate it into various “chapters”. Begin went on to say that
he agreed with Sadat that their relationship had greatly improved, be-
ginning with their meeting in Washington the night before the Treaty
was signed (March 25). He then reviewed at some length the ups and
downs in their personal rapport. He seemed both pleased and some-
what bemused by the fact that Sadat and he were now able to disagree
sharply about the issues without it affecting their friendship.
8. After some further discussion of Sadat’s personality and their in-
creased ability to communicate with one another, Begin again said that
since we had now heard both from him and Sadat strong objections to
our proposed course of action, the whole idea of a US sponsored reso-
lution should be dropped. He counted on Secretary Vance’s statements
to Ambassador Evron and to Senator Stone that the Kuwaiti resolution
would be vetoed if put forward. He said that we should continue to
work energetically in the working groups and plenary on the various
autonomy issues and put aside all UN action. He then asked me what I
would recommend to you when I returned.
9. I told him I would report faithfully his views and Sadat’s to you
in detail, along with the suggestions from both of them that we
abandon our resolution option. However, I could not say that I would
recommend a change in our position on the resolution. I left Begin in no
doubt that that position still stands and that I could only assure him
that I knew you would give careful thought to his views and to Sadat’s.
Begin then reverted to the subject of his relationship with Sadat, de-
scribing in some detail their discussion in El Arish, and more recently
in Alexandria, about Jerusalem. He took considerable satisfaction in the
fact that in Alexandria he had been able to explain in detail the Israeli
view of the Jerusalem problem without exacerbating their personal re-
lationship, and that indeed it was after Begin’s explanation that Sadat
had insisted that Begin and he use first names with one another (I have
now heard this account from both Sadat and Begin. Sadat sounds as if
he believes an arrangement on Jerusalem is nearly within reach; Begin
on the other hand talks about their positions as being far apart but takes
pleasure in fact that they can be frankly discussed without rancor.)
10. Begin also raised with me the subject of oil supply, describing
the original commitment Sadat had given him in Washington which
was covered in your letter. He said that the Israelis were now anxious
to try to pin down in an aide memoire more details about quantities,
prices, etc. He intends to raise this subject with Sadat at Haifa early next
month since Modai and Hilal have not reached any agreement on these
details and time is beginning to run out. I told him that Khalil had also
raised the oil issues with me and wanted you to be informed of Egyp-
tian concerns, just as Begin had wanted you to be informed of Israeli
worries. I explained that the price issue is a complicated one, but said I
would get into the subject and see if it cannot be resolved.
11. Our meeting concluded with a long discussion about what he
and I might say to the press. Begin tried to persuade me to say that I
would recommend to you reconsideration of our position. I told him
that I would not get into any possible recommendations to the Presi-
dent and said to the press only that I had encountered serious reserva-
tions both in Cairo and Jerusalem, that I would report faithfully what I
had heard to you, and that I was certain you and Cy would take into
consideration the views of both Israel and Egypt. I impressed on Begin
the increasing annoyance in Washington about the steady stream of un-
fair critical comments from Israel about the United States, our relation-
ship with Israel, and the strength of our commitments. After some dis-
cussion, including some criticism by Evron of statements made in
Washington about Israel, Sam and I succeeded in persuading Begin to
join me in front of the cameras and to make a supportive statement
about the US-Israeli relationship.
Newlin

287.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, August 20, 1979
SUBJECT
Middle East Trip: the Way Forward (U)
As you will have seen from Bob Strauss’ reporting cables to the
President, the trip produced even more negative reactions to our UN
Resolution plan than we expected in calculating the price to be paid.
The Israeli reaction went about as far as thought; but all of us were
unprepared for the vehemence with which Sadat flatly opposed the
idea of a U.S.-introduced resolution—or indeed any resolution at this
time. Strauss had an Ambassador with him at all times who later pre-
pared the cables for his signature. (S)
Sadat’s reasoning was as follows:
—any resolution which scares the Israelis is a mistake—and the
U.S. resolution would do so;
—there is a good chance for progress in the autonomy talks, and in
the Egyptian-Israeli relationship which needs to underpin anything
else, provided they are left alone and the process is not disrupted by
our (unnecessary) actions; and
—even if a resolution were accepted by the PLO, this would not be
desirable, since it would lead to the entry of disruptive elements into
the talks themselves before they are well-established; in fact, Sadat
said, this (acceptance of the resolution) might be the worst outcome of
To be sure, Israel and Egypt have different interests from us in this
process (and in major respects from each other). But to be opposed pub-
licly and forcefully by both Camp David parties increases the dangers of
the Resolution course (while, ironically, making it somewhat easier to
get off this course—if that were desired—since this is in fact, if not in
perception, no longer just an “Israel vs. U.S.” issue). (S)
Conversations with our local Ambassadors (Atherton, Lewis,
West, and Veliotis) also helped to cast doubt on 1) the likelihood of PLO
acceptance of any resolution we could reasonably support—especially
following the PNC meeting in Damascus; and 2) the benefits to be
achieved with Jordan and Saudi Arabia (though, to be sure, the costs of
a UN veto with these and other Arab countries remain). (S)
Bob Strauss has left Begin and Sadat with the understanding that
we are at the moment going forward with a resolution that will indicate
support for 242 and 338, affirm Palestinian rights, and deal with the ref-
ugees in some general way. (Despite press reports to the contrary,
Strauss impressed upon Begin that he could not promise to recommend
to the President against moving forward). Both, however, have high ex-
pectations that their own personal appeals to the President will have an
effect, in getting our position changed. Both appealed for a face-to-face
meeting with the President (Khalil, Begin) before we proceed; and both
urged that the President not destroy through this act what he has built
up in the Camp David process. (S)
What next?
I discussed with Bill this evening the thinking that went on today
in Washington. It parallels ours on the plane, to wit:
—we should not go forward with a resolution of our own;
—we should seek to get the UN business behind us this week, in-
stead of trying to stretch it out. (S)
Bill’s three options seem best (and parallel to ours):
—seek a postponement (the attached cable4 indicates an inclina-
tion in Beirut on that point as well; if your meeting Tuesday5 morning
goes in this direction, following up on this conversation with Tueni
should be done urgently);
—Go for a neutral “consensus” statement out of the UNSC;
—simply veto. (S)
My own sense is that we should pursue them in the order
Strauss’ inclination is to give a press conference tomorrow, indi-
cating that we will not put in a resolution (indicating that we had been
exploring several, but met negative reactions in both Israel and
the August 12 meeting of the Palestinian Central Council in Damascus. (National Ar-
versation he had with Tueni in which Tueni stated that he had called on Arafat on August
19 to “probe his receptivity” to a postponement in UN consideration of a resolution on
Palestinian rights. Tueni told Dean that he had found Arafat “very receptive” to a post-
ponement “in the event nothing constructive could be achieved at this time.” (National

288.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
18212. Subject: Oral Message From President Sadat to President
Carter About Haifa Talks With Prime Minister Begin.
1. (S-entire text).
2. At Vice President Mubarak’s instruction, Foreign Ministry
Under Secretary Osama El Baz called me to Foreign Ministry Friday
morning, September 7, to convey following oral message from Presi-
dent Sadat to President Carter.
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Tel Aviv and the White
House.

—Begin message
3. President Sadat held talks with PriMin Begin on September 4
and 5. President Sadat found the talks satisfactory. The attitude of
PriMin Begin and other Israeli officials was by and large positive. They
seemed to realize the necessity of achieving some progress on the Pal-
estinian question. President Sadat emphasized the necessity of
reaching agreement on certain key points in the coming few months to
give the negotiations on the self governing authority the shot in the arm
they need at this point.
4. President Sadat also emphasized the need for achieving
progress on the question of Jerusalem. He indicated that the present
status of Jerusalem was not acceptable to 800 million Muslims and
many Christians. He added that it should not be impossible, however
difficult, to reach an agreement that would meet the aspirations of
Muslims and Arabs while maintaining a united city. In the absence of
such an arrangement, Jerusalem would remain an explosive point of
hot contention and would cloud the peace making process.
5. PriMin Begin reiterated his views but was not as forceful as be-
fore. President Sadat noticed that PriMin Begin’s health was failing and
that he was not in his best shape, so President Sadat did not want to
press him harder on this issue at this point. But President Sadat left
PriMin Begin with the impression that this is a sine qua non for
progress and a point on which Israel must reach the necessary
decisions.
6. President Sadat told PriMin Begin that they cannot reach a com-
prehensive peace without a solution to Jerusalem. Any solution per-
petuating the status quo would be rejected by all Arabs, most Muslims
and many Christians. President Sadat also said that East Jerusalem
should be under the jurisdiction of the self governing authority as a
first step, without prejudging the issue of its permanent status. Other-
wise, most Palestinians would be reluctant to cooperate with the Camp
David formula.
7. With respect to negotiations for the self governing authority,
President Sadat told PriMin Begin that the Israeli conception of the
powers and responsibilities of the self governing authority is too
narrow and quite inadequate. He emphasized the need for giving the
self governing authority real powers and responsibilities, without jeop-
ardizing Israel’s security. President Carter will notice that President
Sadat made a point of mentioning in his public speeches during his

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
visit that realization of the national rights of the Palestinians does not
place Israel’s security or interests in jeopardy.
8. PriMin Begin said that, as the negotiations develop, we would
sort out points of agreement and disagreement about the jurisdiction of
the self governing authority and would see what can be done to give
the negotiations the push they need.
9. These two points were subjects of disagreement, but the dis-
agreement was not as sharp or tense as in the past.
10. On bilateral issues, PriMin Begin raised two points: the supply
of oil, and the stationing of forces in the Sinai. With respect to oil, Israel
had two demands: (1) a written Egyptian commitment to supply Israel
2 million tons annually; and (2) to sell this amount at the OPEC base
price—about 24 dollars a barrel. There was some disagreement be-
tween Egyptian and Israeli officials (Oil Minister Hilal and Energy
Minister Modai) on these points. Israel also seeks this supply from the
Alma field on the ground that it is now producing 1. million tons an-
nually at the rate of 38000 barrels per day. Our officials think that this
rate of production is detrimental to the Alma field and is causing a high
level of attrition, and that production from Alma should be reduced to
one million tons annually.
11. President Sadat agreed to provide an aide memoire to Israel to
the effect that Egypt will supply Israel with two million tons annually
without specifying the area of production from which it would come.
With respect to price, President Sadat insisted that Egypt cannot give
Israel a privileged position which would then have to apply to other
buyers of Egyptian oil. Egypt cannot discriminate between customers.
President Sadat indicated to PriMin Begin that if Egypt followed this
practice, it would incur a loss of over 600 million dollars annually.
PriMin Begin accepted the view of President Carter that the price
should be left to the market. In other words, the prices charged will be
the going prices at the time each contract is concluded.
12. With respect to the forces in the Sinai, this subject was dis-
cussed between President Sadat and PriMin Begin, and in parallel be-
tween Minister Weizman and Minister Kamal Hassan Ali. Weizman,
who was opposed to UNTSO, met with President Sadat. Since Israel is
opposed to UNTSO and is pressing for joint Egyptian-Israeli patrols,
President Sadat indicated there was a need for U.S. participation. Presi-
dent Sadat instructed General Ali to take the position that we should
follow the procedures provided for in the Peace Treaty, namely the es-
tablishment of a multi-national force, and should meanwhile resort to a
temporary arrangement as follows:
—The U.S. would supervise Zone A, either through increasing the
frequency of its aerial surveillance or through the use of representatives
of the American Military Attache Office in Cairo.

—For Zone B, an Egyptian-Israeli-U.S. joint commission should be
established consisting of one representative of each country. The Amer-
ican member could be from the Embassy staff and should preferably be
a civilian or, if military, should not be in uniform. The joint commission
would be on call to conduct inspections in Zone B at the request of any
party.
—In the buffer zone, Egypt and Israel agreed in general that there
should be observer posts, either with U.S. participation or manned by
the two parties. There would also be a requirement for checkpoints, ei-
ther with U.S. participation or bilateral, at points of entry into the buffer
zone. The U.S. should supervise the Israeli technical installations in the
buffer zone.
13. Egypt made clear that it prefers U.S. participation in all the ar-
rangements. These arrangements would continue during the interim
period until final withdrawal or until a multi-national force is
established.
14. PriMin Begin and President Sadat agreed to meet again but did
not specify a time. President Sadat feels it will not be soon because of
PriMin Begin’s health.
15. Finally, Israel agreed to withdraw from Santa Katerina a few
days before November 19, and President Sadat agreed that tourist visits
there could continue from the time of Israeli withdrawal. End message.
16. Comment: El Baz dictated the foregoing from a sheaf of notes in
Arabic. When he reached his notes on the Sinai supervision arrange-
ments, he found they were not clear, and he and I at that point spoke to
General Ali on the phone to seek clarification. That portion of the oral
message on dealing with this subject was then reconstructed from our
conversation with Ali. It is still not entirely clear how many of the de-
tails of the Sinai arrangements have been agreed with the Israelis and
how many represent Egyptian preferences. For example, in saying that
U.S. supervision of Zone A could be carried out by more frequent aerial
surveillance, General Ali said, “If the Israelis agree.”
17. I reminded both Ali and El Baz that, on instructions, I had in-
formed the Vice President that we were opposed to a U.S. role in po-
licing the Sinai (State 231510). They both acknowledged that Mubarak
had told them this but thought the arrangements they were now pro-
posing might not be a problem for us since they did not involve full-
time U.S. involvement in joint patrols on the ground. Of going more
than half way to meet Israeli concerns on bilateral issues, has given up
Egypt’s former strong insistence on a continuing UN role in the Sinai
eign Policy File, P840163–0475)

289.
Letter From Egyptian President Sadat to President Carter
Cairo, September 9, 1979
Dear President Carter,
In keeping with our tradition of consultation on all matters of
common interest, I have asked Vice President Mubarak to see you2 and
discuss with you a few issues that would interest you. I have no doubt
that this practice would cement our relations which are already a
model to be envied by many nations. The commitments we share are so
vital, not only to the promotion of stronger ties between our two coun-
tries and people, but also for the maintenance of world peace and
security.
As you well know, the Middle East is still witnessing much tur-
moil because of the events which are taking place at the instigation of
outsiders. The situation in Morocco is a case in point. Thousands of for-
eign soldiers are being amassed near the border between Algeria and
Morocco and used in combat. The purpose is not only to topple the
moderate regime of King Hassan, but also to tip the strategic balance in
the entire area. It is an undisputed fact that Algeria has renounced any
territorial claim in the Sahara. The late President Boumedienne stated
that in the most unequivocal terms at the Arab Summit held in Rabat in
1974. Therefore, the reopening of the issue at this point and the intro-
duction of more tension and violence should be attributed to another
factor, namely foreign intervention. It is mainly for this reason that we
have responded positively3 and without delay to King Hassan’s re-
quest for military assistance despite his government’s acquiescence to
the unprincipled policy of Arab rejectionists. Within two days from his
request, Morocco received some badly needed light arms and ammuni-
tion. We are currently reviewing with them other requests for defense
material.
The situation in the horn of Africa is also a source of concern. The
Soviets are trying to consolidate their grip on Ethiopia and South
Yemen, thus threatening the Sudan and the Arab Peninsula. The use of
Cuban soldiers and East German experts is growing steadily. Other
countries in the region are watching these developments with
apprehension.
On the other hand, both Iran and Afganistan are witnessing up-
heavals that border on civil war. The situation there requires vigilance
and scrutiny. It is an aggravating factor to many governments, espe-
cially those of the Gulf-States where any degree of tension is apt to in-
crease the sense of uncertainty and insecurity that is in existence
already.
I believe that these events and any other developments which may
take place in the future can be confronted effectively however alarming
they might be. I believe that the Egyptian people, with their inherent
moral and spiritual strength, together with their resourcefulness and
historic awareness, are most capable of bearing that responsibility. We
have a bright record of struggling against adverse influence in the most
difficult circumstances.
When it becomes an established fact that Egypt is strong enough
militarily, the forces of aggression and subversion are deterred. A
greater measure of stability occurs. Both of us would avoid many com-
plications which would have consumed much of our energy and re-
sources. I have no doubt that this is your reading of the geopolitical re-
alities involved. It is incumbent upon us to increase our preparedness
to meet such situations before it becomes too late. We can not wait and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
see because the other side is seizing every opportunity to be on the of-
fensive all the time.
On the other hand, enhancing our defense capabilities and raising
the standard of our armed forces is an important element domestically
as well. These forces are called upon to perform many functions for im-
proving the quality of life in Egypt. To fulfill this mission, these forces
must acquire the latest technology in many fields. We need your help in
this respect. Your assistants have been cooperative and sensitive to our
needs. They see the situation and read the consequences the same way
we do. Their Egyptian colleagues are cooperating with them fully. Ex-
haustive studies have been made and I believe that we are approaching
the final decision on the issue. I have asked Vice President Mubarak to
render you any assistance as you make the decision. He is accompanied
by competent officers representing the three branches of our armed
forces and they are instructed to cooperate fully with your officials. I
have no doubt whatsoever that you make the decision that would reas-
sure us and all your friends, not only in the Middle East, but also in Af-
rica. I need not emphasize to you the necessity for making a long term
arrangement for maintaining our military capability.
Other aspects of the bilateral cooperation are proceeding smoothly
too. In the economic field, a marked improvement has taken place.
Matters are settled expeditiously and promptly. Necessary adjustments
are being made at the request of both parties. We have requested an in-
crease of half a million tons in the amount of wheat and wheat flour we
get under PL480. Vice President Mubarak will discuss this matter with
Secretary Vance and I am certain that you would be most responsive to
this request. You are aware of the considerations which prompt us to
request this increase. It is so vital, under the present circumstances, to
fulfill our needs in this regard. Machinery and other commodities are
equally important to give our economy the shot in the arm it needs. As
you know, we have been able to keep our economy in good shape in the
face of all odds and despite tough challenges. We are determined to
persevere.
The Sudan requires your attention too. Subversive intervention,
conducted by the Soviets and executed by the Libyan unenlightened re-
gime, is confronting the Sudanese leadership with a tremendous chal-
lenge. The country is unable to cope with inflation and the scarcity of
many vital commodities. Naturally, this constitutes an element of pres-
sure on President Numeiri and his colleagues. Arab countries which
traditionally assisted that country are now withholding their aid to
force the regime to follow their line of policy. Under such circum-
stances, you would certainly give the Sudan a high priority among the
recipients of your aid.
Having said that, I would like to share with you some thoughts on
the peace efforts we have started together since we met in Washington

290.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State and the White House
18416. For the President from Strauss. Subject: Strauss Meeting
With President Sadat.
1. (S-entire text).
2. Following a relaxed hour and a half private chat with Prime
Minister Khalil, in which he foreshadowed what I would hear from
President Sadat, I met for an hour and twenty minutes with Sadat at his
Pyramids Guest House Sunday2 night. Only Vice President Mubarak
and Atherton were present. Sadat was relaxed, expansive, and confi-
dent, and reflected this mood in his comments to the press afterwards.
Sitting on the balcony, overlooking the Pyramids with a full harvest
moon shining, I was sufficiently impressed and emotionally moved to
buy whatever he had to sell. Sadat took delight in contrasting the sta-
bility in Egypt with the disarray in the Arab world. He predicted confi-
dently that the present negotiations would ultimately succeed in laying
the basis for comprehensive peace and that Syria, Jordan and the Pales-
tinians would join the negotiating process. With respect to the Pales-
tinians, he said they were welcome to join anytime but it was not neces-
sary for them to participate at the present stage. His description of the
Haifa meeting3 with Begin was somewhat rambling and contradictory
in places, but one message came through clearly: he has built a sound
personal relationship with Begin and is fully committed to consoli-
dating the Peace Treaty but now needs our help to make progress in the
autonomy negotiations by the end of the year. In saying this, however,
Sadat did not convey any great sense of urgency that matters had to be
brought to a decisive head by that time.
3. Among the principal themes which ran through Sadat’s com-
ments, I was struck by his repeated expressions of concern about
Begin’s health and political problems at home. In view of Begin’s health
and other problems, Sadat said he did not press Begin on the issues of
full autonomy and Jerusalem; he merely reaffirmed that his views re-
mained as he had stated them in Alexandria in July. At one point,
Sadat said he was not sure Begin would survive for more than a matter
of months. Sadat reiterated several times his deep feelings of friendship
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
for Begin and his admiration for Begin’s political courage, interspersed
with admonitions that we should not harass Begin in present circum-
stances. He said that even on issues where they disagreed, Begin was
amiable but seemed fatigued. They had not agreed on a specific time
for a next meeting, Sadat said, but he had invited Begin to stop in Egypt
on his way back from the U.S. in November and Begin had accepted the
invitation. Sadat spoke in glowing terms about his reception in Haifa
by both Jews and Arabs, describing Haifa as a model for coexistence in
the region.
4. In discussing the future, Sadat made several points which he de-
scribed as important and asked that we note carefully. Saying that he
and Begin had not reached any agreement on the basic issues of full au-
tonomy and Jerusalem, Sadat said, “until now I have built bridges with
Begin; now is the time for the United States to take over.” At another
point, he asked us to note carefully his comment on Israeli television
that “instead of conflict, we now have differences of opinion.” Sadat
said he and Begin agreed that Camp David and the peace treaty are the
cornerstones for comprehensive peace and should be “consolidated
every day.” He said he had told Begin, “let us agree that, no matter
what, we will stick to Camp David and the Peace Treaty; we cannot go
back.”
5. Toward the end of the meeting, stressing that we should note
this carefully, Sadat said: “I ask you to resume your full partnership
role. You should start convincing Begin, but you should not press him.”
Sadat said that as our friend and partner, he advised us to try to help
Begin. We should ease Israeli suspicions. It is necessary, Sadat said, to
give directives to the delegations in the autonomy talks so that they can
make progress by the end of the year. Begin had said, though “not in an
aggressive way”, that he was not yet ready for this and in any case the
negotiations have until next May to achieve results. Sadat said that he
and Begin alone cannot agree on such directives, but this could be ac-
complished if the United States would help Begin. The United States,
he said, must put forward its plans; the time had come for the United
tails of the September 9 Strauss-Sadat meeting. Atherton noted that during the meeting,
Sadat said he had told Begin in Haifa that once Israel had withdrawn to the interim line,
travelers from Gaza to Egypt would no longer need the Red Cross to serve as an interme-
diary in facilitating travel. Sadat also described a conversation with Weizman while
passing over Qalqilya during his flight from Haifa to Ben Gurion airport. Weizman,
Sadat said, had “pointed out the narrow strip of Israel between Qalqilya and the sea as an
example of Israel’s security problem with respect to the West Bank. Sadat commented to
Strauss that Weizman was right; ‘You can throw a stone from Qalqilya to the sea.’ Sadat
then commented that minor rectifications of the border are possible under Resolution
242, and this area is mainly where such rectifications should take place.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 43, Robert Strauss, Middle

States to take the whole matter into its hands; he and his people were
ready to work with us.
6. In response to my probing, Sadat did not reveal any specific
ideas about how to move the negotiations forward. He reiterated his
earlier concept that there should be agreement on full autonomy for the
West Bank and Gaza and on Jerusalem, but that implementation in the
West Bank should be postponed because of its sensitivity for the Is-
raelis, while going forward in Gaza and Jerusalem. He acknowledged
that Jerusalem is also a sensitive issue but stressed its importance for
winning support of the Muslim world. Sadat also repeated his familiar
position that Israel wants King Hussein to take the West Bank and that
Israel and Hussein together could work this out, but that it must be
done in a way which permits the Palestinians to make their choice.
Somewhat contradictorily, Sadat said at another point that he had told
Begin that self-determination and an independent Palestinian state in
the West Bank and Gaza were inevitable but that this could be pat-
terned on the Austrian treaty providing for full neutrality and need not
be a threat to Israel. When I asked how Hussein might be brought into
the negotiations, Sadat said it was up to us to find a way but, in his
view, the key to Hussein was Saudi Arabia.
7. In view of Sadat’s emphasis on the need for the United States to
“take over,” I thought I should inject at the end a note of caution that,
while we must continue the effort, we had not found the answer to
making a breakthrough on the autonomy talks. I said I did not believe
anyone could convince Begin to modify his position at the present time.
I also took the occasion to emphasize strongly your full commitment to
the peace process and my commitment to continue my efforts unabated
as your representative, and to put to rest reports of any problems in the
personal and working relations between Cy Vance and myself.
8. While the bulk of our meeting was devoted to the subjects out-
lined above, Sadat also described the agreement reached with Begin on
forces in the Sinai, which differs in important respects from the version
we have had from General Ali but seems to accord with Begin’s ac-
count. On the other hand, Sadat’s description of the agreement reached
with Begin on the supply of oil to Israel7 conforms to what we have al-
ready heard on this subject from other Egyptian sources and from the
the agreement struck with Begin on observer forces in the Sinai. (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 43, Robert Strauss, Middle East,
his agreement with Begin on Egypt’s supply of oil to Israel. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790415–0160)

291.
Message From the Special Representative of the President for
Middle East Peace Negotiations (Strauss) to the Department
of State and the White House
Subject: Strauss’ Visit to Israel. For President Carter from Ambas-
sador Strauss.
1. Secret-entire text.
2. Summary. Day visit to Israel has resulted in more progress on
two fronts than I would have expected. Our bilateral relationship is
much calmer than it was in August, and I have the sense that last
month’s storm has passed, although substantial suspicion of the U.S.
will undoubtedly boil up periodically as long as negotiations on
Palestinian-related issues continue. In the autonomy talks, I believe we
have established that the negotiations will move into “second gear” by
the end of the month with the existing working groups. Only on Leb-
anon have we not made much progress, but even there I sensed greater
Israeli concern about the course they are on than their formal position
reveals. Coupled with my talks in Egypt, this visit brings us into transi-
tion to a new and more active phase in the negotiations and on the
broader Middle East stage. End summary.
3. My meetings2 with Begin were, of course, the centerpiece of the
talks here, and Sam Lewis is sending a more detailed report on those
two meetings. I deliberately spent a good deal of time conveying to
Begin Sadat’s strong, positive feelings about his meetings with Begin in
Haifa3 and Khalil’s apparent newly heightened commitment to the
success of the autonomy talks. Naturally, Begin and his colleagues are
very pleased by Sadat’s understanding of the Israeli Government’s po-
litical problems. They were also relieved in my several meetings here to
be assured that we are not going to press them to face the more difficult
issues in the negotiations in the next couple of month. They agree to use
the next three months for broadening and intensifying preparatory
work on the most complicated issues in order to “tee them up” for the
Ministerial group to address toward the turn of the year. I also assured
Begin of your continuing deep personal commitment to the Camp
David process and Agreements, and to Resolutions 242 and 338. Begin
acknowledged the existence of an enhanced personal relationship with
Sadat and expressed his pleasure that everyone strongly adheres to the
target date of next May for the autonomy negotiations, and he was ob-
viously pleased that press accounts of an American effort to force the
pace on negotiations seemed unfounded.
4. On the other hand, my strong presentation4 on the importance of
Israel’s taking the initiative to help achieve a lasting truce in South Leb-
anon met with no positive response. Later, however, with Dayan and
with Justice Minister Tamir during my ride with him to the airport, I
found more concern about Israel’s course than came out in my talk with
Begin. Their problem is that they feel trapped and do not know how to
change course.
5. I hit hard on the negative impact Israeli actions in Lebanon are
having on U.S. public attitudes. He listened, but then insisted that he
cannot change course unless all terrorist attacks cease, including

292.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
243592. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With Weizman.
1. (Secret entire text.)
2. Secretary and Weizman met for about hour and one-quarter late
afternoon September 14, following meetings at Pentagon2 that lasted
through morning and early afternoon. With Weizman were Evron,
General Tamir and Col. Tehila. With the Secretary were Ambassador
Strauss, Saunders, Draper, Hunter and Korn. Following are main
points of the discussion.
3. Weizman opened with discussion of Israel’s need to assure itself
of modern fighter aircraft and tanks for the 1980s and its desire to pro-
duce the F–18 or an Israeli equivalent thereof. This, Weizman argued,
makes sense not only for Israel but for the US, since Israel’s producing
its fighter aircraft would ease the political burden on the US; for ex-
ample, if Israel hadn’t produced the Kfir3 it would have had to ask the
United States to furnish an equivalent number of aircraft. Israeli pro-
duction of aircraft would also reduce Israel’s need for US financial
assistance. Secretary thanked Weizman for his presentation and said he
would be discussing the matter with Brown.
4. Turning to autonomy negotiations, Weizman said that as we
knew “I’ve been autonomous on autonomy.” He had not been very
happy about the way the negotiations were being conducted. GOI
wants to carry out what it signed but the country is in a state of “in-
ternal crisis” and there is a lot of doubt and negative feeling about the
idea of autonomy. Israeli public is uneasy and suspects that the whole
point of Camp David as the Americans see it is to get Israel out of the
West Bank and Gaza and set up an independent Palestinian state there.
Noting that position taken by the Egyptians at Haifa was “rather mild,”
Weizman said he expected Israel would have fewer problems with
Egypt in the negotiations than with the United States. Weizman said
the course to take is to stick to Camp David and make it work. Secretary
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Korn; cleared by Stapleton (S/S–O) and Draper; ap-
proved by Saunders. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo, Jerusalem, Beirut, and the
White House.

and Ambassador Strauss said we agree entirely; our common objective
is to make Camp David work. Secretary pointed out that Israeli fears
that the US is trying to make the West Bank and Gaza into an independ-
ent state are unfounded and reviewed history of negotiations that led
up to the accords.
5. Secretary said he would like to discuss Lebanon. Weizman said
he expected that and asked if he could lead off. Obviously primed for
the subject, Weizman then launched into a long and impassioned dis-
course. Fact that situation is currently quiet in southern Lebanon is
mainly result of Israel’s policy, Weizman argued, though efforts of US
had contributed. Basic problem is that there is no authority in Lebanon.
Lebanese Government doesn’t control the country, Palestinians have
wrought havoc and Syrians are in occupation of large areas; order
reigns only in the Haddad area, Weizman said, terming Haddad a
“genuine nationalist” and a “great man.” On top of all this there are ten
to fifteen thousand armed Palestinians in Lebanon and when bombs go
off in Israel terrorist headquarters in Tyre, Sidon and Beirut claim
credit. What, Weizman asked, can you do with a country that harbors
thousands of armed terrorists and allows its territory to be used freely
to attack its neighbor? Haddad was doing a good job but couldn’t stop
all attacks on Israel. UN was doing its best but there were 500 armed
PLO in their area; and Israeli forces were working overtime to prevent
attacks. In the past four months Israel had gone out and gotten the ter-
rorists, and for that reason terrorists had not managed to carry out any
major actions against Israel during that period. As a result the PLO had
taken out its frustration on Haddad and “made life miserable for him,”
Weizman said.
6. The question for Israel, Weizman said, is what does it do when it
gets information that a terrorist group is getting ready to hit it? Should
it wait and try to catch them or go out and get them? After returning to
this point several times, Weizman said that if terrorists keep quiet, Is-
rael will too. But if it learns that terrorists are on their way to kill Israelis
he would not recommend to the cabinet that the IDF simply wait for
them to arrive. Weizman repeated that in his view the current quiet is a
direct result of the hard hitting done by the IDF.
7. The Secretary said we don’t question Israel’s right to defend it-
self but realistically both the Israelis and we know that Israel has been
hurt badly by the devastation it has wrought in Lebanon. The war in
Lebanon has been covered on prime time TV both in this country and in
Europe, and people’s attitudes have been seriously affected by what
they’ve seen. Secretary stressed that Israelis must find some different
way to deal with the terrorist threat. Secretary explained that we have
mounted a major effort to bring about a truce, a lasting end to the vio-
lence, and that we have been dealing through third countries in an ef-

293.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Mubarak Meeting
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
President Jimmy Carter
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Robert Strauss, Personal Representative of the President
Robert Hunter, National Security Council
Egypt
Vice President Husni Mubarak
Ambassador Ashraf Ghorbal
The President began by saying that he had had good phone calls
this morning with both Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat.
They were both in good spirits. There is growing trust and mutual re-
spect between them, and a developing friendship. Both Begin and
Sadat had pledged their commitment to a comprehensive settlement,
and to resolve autonomy questions. To Begin he had said that the big
impediment was the settlements. Begin acknowledged that this was a
problem. He did not say when, or all of it, but it could be put in the past
and resolved. It was a good talk. The President had called from Camp
David. Begin’s (?) attitude had been friendly and constructive in his as-
sessment. He (The President) hopes and prays that there can be move-
ment without delay on settlements. What does the Vice President
think?
Vice President Mubarak said that he wants to convey President
Sadat’s best regards. He looks forward for good results of the au-
tonomy talks by the end of the year. He has three points: first of which
is a message from President Sadat. (President Carter read it.)
The President said that it was a good message.
Vice President Mubarak said that he had three issues to discuss, and
had done so with Vance, Brzezinski, and Strauss: political problems,
economic questions, and military equipment Egypt needs. Beginning
with economics: he would present their requirements. After the Treaty,
Egypt has had no source of currency except for the U.S. The Arabs are
not providing them with hard currency. There is no other way but the
U.S. He has asked for some requirements like wheat. He talked with
Vance had said that the U.S. can afford 100,000 more; but that is very,
very difficult for Egypt. He has talked with Khalil and Sadat; they said
to speak with the President and his Administration, since this is vital: it
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
is the food of the people. If Egypt could buy it elsewhere it would do so,
but it can’t. On maize, he asks for 100,000 tons more; 20,000 tons more
of edible oils; frozen chickens, 5,000 tons more; and animal fats, 40,000
tons more. They have asked for rice since their population is increasing,
and they must send some to Sudan, which is in a crisis. He had a mes-
sage from Numeiry’s aides asking for wheat and sugar; Egypt has to
send it from time to time when it is needed. So, he is asking for 60,000
tons of rice. Also about 250,000 tons of iron. If it were a gift—as with the
Japanese—this would be even better! These are nearly the whole re-
quirements, and are very vital for the Egyptian people. He has talked
with Vance and Strauss and Brzezinski. He told Vance that he would
not leave here without a solution! Where can they buy it? So he in-
sisted! (Note: all this with humor.) President Sadat two days ago had
told him to tell of the urgency of increases, that they have no money to
buy these commodities elsewhere.
The President asked what the level of wheat shipments to Egypt
had been over the past five years.
Secretary Vance said that Egypt is getting about one-third of the
world-wide total. It is very large. Shipments to other countries are in
dollars; Egypt gets its in terms of quantity. Therefore Egypt gains the
benefit that it does not have to worry about fluctuating prices.
The President asked how much was shipped three–four years ago.
Ambassador Ghorbal said it was one million tons. Last year it was 1.
million. Now they badly need to have 2 million tons.
Vice President Mubarak said that this was the point: Egypt has a dif-
ficult situation on wheat. It has no relations with the Arabs; if it did,
then it could buy elsewhere. But it can’t find it.
The President asked whether other Egyptian aid programs could be
reduced to provide more here. What about their CIP program?
Secretary Vance said that he would take a look at it, but there are
difficulties there. Therefore we hadn’t gone forward.
Vice President Mubarak said that he had talked with Khalil: this is
difficult. Egypt needs all the items, and their sources are limited. This is
a problem for this year.
The President said that he understood. The total is difficult, with the
budget, the Congress, and our other aid programs.
Vice President Mubarak said that they can’t find the money
anywhere.
The President said that he understood.
Vice President Mubarak said he would stay until he gets it!
Ambassador Strauss said that if his wife stays, as well, that is ok.

Vice President Mubarak said that the second issue is military. He
had talked with Harold Brown and David McGiffert on two items: the
Air Force and the Navy. They had discussed the long-term plan. First,
there are the 35 F–4 Phantoms. Then there would be other modern air-
craft, starting in 1983. This puts the Air Force and Egyptian power in an
awkward position. They have had no replacements since 1973. They
had some MiG–23s, but they are all grounded or transferred to the
States (sic!). The bulk of their planes are Mirages. These are not suffi-
cient for their pilots and stability of the air force. There is Afghanistan
and Aden; there is trouble involving Kuwait and Bahrain (which they
had expected long ago). He has talked with Saudi Crown Prince Fahd
about the Soviet position in Aden, which is dangerous. The situation
could lead to a cancer in the Arabian Peninsula. It could be carried to
the Gulf and oil. The UAE is open; Kuwait is open. Only Oman is strict
enough in letting people in. With the others, it is easy for the Commu-
nists to work and build themselves up there. Therefore there is trouble
in Bahrain and Kuwait. Two years ago, Bahrain froze its Parliament
with six Communist members. They are afraid of the situation. Trouble
has started. With regard to Sudan, the U.S. knows the problem, linked
to Libya. Ghaddafi is doing what he can to remove the Sudanese re-
gime. This means getting at Egypt, and means a Soviet plan. If they
“reach” Egypt, they will push Communist groups, and find other coun-
tries easier to act against. On Morocco, Hassan asked for Egyptian help.
Egypt sent four C–130s, each carrying eight tons of arms. They did this
in secret, on request. Morocco wants to carry on relations, but secretly.
So many Africans are against Morocco dealing with Egypt. So they
have sent 27 tons and are contracting for other arms, with the Arab Or-
ganization. They said ok, and Morocco should send transport, to limit
the amount of arms (?). Also, Somalia and Chad have asked Egypt for
ammunition and machine guns. And these demands on Egypt affect
the power of its armed forces. If the Soviets feel its power is going
down, particularly in the Air Force, and the Soviets feed elements to
other Air Forces, then there will be an imbalance. Egypt has 74 fighters;
Egypt has 1,700 tanks. In the correlation of forces, Libya alone has more
arms. This doesn’t mean it will dare do anything to Egypt, if they use
Libyan crews in the tanks. But others are there—the East Germans and
the North Koreans (which are said to be only for training, not for con-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
flict with Egypt). But Libya has more planes and tanks. He said to Ha-
rold Brown on the Phantoms: 35 is not a fair number. That means no re-
placements, and there will be nothing else until 1983. But what about
spare parts? Therefore they ask for more Phantoms: it is easier to get
said that the U.S. could speed up some F–16s, before the end of 1981.
Egypt needs more modern aircraft; and the quickest way to cover that
is with F–4s, just to face what is going on in the area. If they have to wait
for the F–16s, what can they do in these two years? With regard to
Libya, the Soviets push from time to time. Egypt must face this, and
help stability; it can’t just sit on its hands.
With regard to the Navy, there was a plan for two destroyers.
Brown had agreed that they are very old. One can get to Alexandria
safely, but it is not sure that it can carry on; and the other one might not
get there. This would create a very bad image in Alexandria. The So-
viets would seize the opportunity to point that out. Egypt is keen to
keep the image of the United States in good shape. He told Brown that a
worsening image would be detrimental to both of us. The Arabs would
raise hell; and the Soviets would point to it—therefore, there would be
a bad image. Brown was convinced, and talked with Defense Minister
Ali. There could be two frigates; but these are too costly—$800 million
each. The Defense Department is looking for a solution in lighter ships,
on the condition that they would have enough range, to reach places
like Oman.
There has been no answer on the Phantoms. Brown had said that it
would be difficult to take them from the U.S. Air Force. This could not
be in 1980, as Sadat had asked, but maybe a few. Egypt would consider
this very vital. They need more Phantoms now. They need to train on
them. They can’t go to 1981–82 without covering this period with active
airplanes.
His third point is what Sadat did in Haifa. He has sent this mes-
sage. There is one other thing: Sadat found Begin not to be in good
shape. He put no pressure on Begin at Haifa. Sadat says that he will
build bridges, and prepare the floor, to give the President a chance to
act in the good atmosphere which Sadat is working to create. Now
there is the role of the U.S. Sadat is doing as much as he can in pre-
paring the way for the U.S. Sadat says he knows the President will do
his best. Sadat does not want to have heavy U.S. pressure on Begin
now. The U.S. needs to start convincing Begin of the importance of the
full autonomy issues. The U.S. should be talking issues now, building
to the end of the year, to reach a precise conclusion.
Ambassador Strauss said he wanted to make the record clear. Do the
Egyptians want a completion of Powers and Responsibilities by the end
of the year? Our record shows that Egypt wants to start at the end of the
year with possibilities.

Vice President Mubarak said that Sadat had said the U.S. should
start convincing Begin now, and push the Powers and Responsibilities
negotiations. By the end of the year, more pressure should be created.
There should be increasing pressure and by the end of the year some-
thing precise, so that the Arab world (the Saudis and other moderates)
would know something is being done. They wait for results by the end
of the year. It is very important to start the convincing, and applying
pressure after November 19. Sadat is therefore doing his best with
Begin, building bridges, and preparing the ground for the President to
go forward.
The President said that he appreciated that Vice President Mubarak
could see Vance, Vice President Mondale, Brown, Strauss, and Brze-
zinski. It has been a constructive visit. He hopes the Vice President has
learned of some of the limits on what we can do in our aid programs to
Egypt, Israel, and others. The Vice President and Sadat know of the
enormous demands on us from Asia, NATO, as well as the Middle East
and parts of this Hemisphere. We have to balance what we can do with
the Congress versus what we want to do to honor requests from our
friends. He committed himself to Sadat, when they first met, to make a
substantial increase in food. We have honored our commitment, with
mutual benefits in our friendly relations. He wants Egypt, Sadat, and
the Vice President to see us as their friend. We treat Egypt as a special
friend, despite our worldwide obligations on aid, with other countries
being even poorer. One-third of our PL–480 goes to Egypt. All other
countries get allotments in dollars. If the price goes up, the quantity
goes down. Egypt is special; it gets no tonnage cuts. He approved an in-
whether that can be increased. He will work with Vance, and consult
with leaders in Congress to see if that can be modified in some degree.
He doesn’t want to mislead the Vice President: we are approaching our
limit with Congress in this next year. On the other items, Vance should
consider them, and report7 back to him (the President).
Secretary Vance said that some money is unspent. Only on rice
would we have to go back to Congress. He thinks we can help, despite
the limits, and work our way through.
The President asked if this means a short-fall on wheat and rice.
Secretary Vance said that rice can be handled.
The President said that we will do the best we can. He thinks that
we will not meet the full Sadat request, but he will see about modifying
the 1. million tons in wheat.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
On military issues, he had not heard a report yet on the Vice Presi-
dent’s meeting with Harold Brown. He knows that it has always been
the Egyptian attitude that the Gearing class destroyers might not be ad-
equate. In Alexandria, he had proposed that the Egyptians take a
cruiser, but they had said no. If they decide they want small, more
modern ships, and no Gearings, then he will honor what Harold Brown
recommends. There are increasing difficulties with the reduction of our
F–4s. There is a feeling that the F–4 level is now minimal for us to have
adequate reserves. He will wait for Harold Brown’s assessment before
responding.
On peace, President Sadat has been heroic. The Vice President
should tell him that the President appreciates his good wishes. We will
continue to work with Sadat in harmony. It is important that Egypt and
the U.S. be close in the talks. We need to know Egypt’s negotiating atti-
tude, so we can honor the desires of Sadat. Sometimes it is difficult for
him to be more forceful—as in protecting Palestinian rights, promoting
the autonomy talks, preventing settlements—than is Sadat. It is hard
when we take a strong position, and Sadat is more accommodating. We
need to keep in touch, and keep our attitudes in a common approach. If
Sadat is too sensitive about upsetting Begin, and expects him (the Presi-
dent) to be the only tough negotiator, then that is difficult for him (the
President).
Secretary Vance said that he had talked with Ezer Weizman about
Lebanon, who said that Sadat had not taken a strong position.
Vice President Mubarak said that Sadat did talk about this to the
Israelis.
The President said that speaking about it, and being forceful, are
different. On several occasions—concerning settlements, Lebanon, and
the talks—he has tried to be forceful, but Israel says that the U.S. is
being tougher than Egypt. He knows the need for good Sadat-Begin re-
lations, but we also need to carry out Camp David. Begin is stubborn
and courageous. He will say no if he means no; he will say yes if he
means yes. On several occasions, we have been more forceful in car-
rying out the Camp David Accords than has Egypt. Israel takes advan-
tage of the weaker country. Therefore, there is a need for us and Egypt
to work more closely together.
Vice President Mubarak said that Sadat does not want the U.S. to be
in an awkward position.
The President said that he does do it. We need to know beforehand
if Sadat wants us both to be soft. It is no good for Sadat to be soft, and
expect him (the President) to be hard. We need to deal with difficult
issues—such as Jerusalem, settlements, and a comprehensive settle-
ment. We both need to be forceful, in public and in private. Jews in
America constantly say: why are we tough, when Sadat doesn’t care?
Therefore, there is a need to talk more closely and be more in concert—
not only a part vs. Israel, not one weak and one strong.
Vice President Mubarak said that sometimes Sadat makes easy rela-
tions with Begin, so the President can get a good attitude from Begin in
order for the U.S. to push forward. He does not want to put the U.S. in
the position where it has to be forceful, and is in a corner. Sadat does
not want to put the U.S. in any critical position.
The President agreed, but said that that is the result.
Ambassador Strauss said that Weizman had bragged on the Presi-
dent as a peacemaker, but had greater difficulties with the President
than with Egypt. He (the Ambassador) told the Vice President this
morning that this is a problem, and makes matters difficult. We agree—
Khalil, Israel, the U.S.—on moving the autonomy talks. It is a little diffi-
cult to have no hard push until December, or after November 19. There-
fore no positive results can be had on January first, if the pushing starts
on December 15. Results will only come in the spring, if we are fortu-
nate. The pace started with the Vice President, Sadat, Khalil (?) and him
(the Ambassador). He sold this to Israel, to work at lower levels. This
will take all of us to be successful.
The President said that it wasn’t hard to get the Israelis to delay. He
referred to the Israeli cabinet decision to permit Israelis to buy Arab
land in the West Bank. What is the Egyptian position? We don’t know.
He assumes no Arab will like it.
Vice President Mubarak agreed.
The President said that if we speak, and Egypt is quiet, this will be
difficult for us. If we make this most important, then there may be a
problem with the talks. Therefore, it is important to have more consul-
tation. He told Begin this morning that the settlements are their most
difficult policy. Lebanon, as well. Both hurt Israel throughout the
world.
Secretary Vance said that both cause trouble in the Arab world and
in general. Unless we and Egypt work together, it will be tough to get
our objective of a real truce in Lebanon. It takes time to get progress in
the autonomy talks; if there is a Lebanon truce, that will buy time.
The President said that this discussion had been helpful. Most of the
Egyptian requests we can accommodate, but not all. Vance and Brown
will talk about it. He thinks there will not be much increase in wheat.
We will look at the budget worldwide.
(The meeting ended at 2: p.m.)

294.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
246210. For Ambassador Leonard from Saunders. Subject: Alterna-
tive Approach to Powers and Responsibilities. Ref: State 243600.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. This telegram conveys to you the non-paper that we have been
discussing with you and a message from Bob Strauss conveying it to
you. The letter is self-explanatory, but I want to underscore for you
Bob’s desire that we put this paper forward in as informal a way as pos-
sible so as to avoid getting ourselves locked permanently into its con-
tents. Given Bob’s desire to approach this informally as described in the
letter, we have therefore changed the lead-in to the document itself to
establish in the text the informality of the paper. This message autho-
rizes you to go ahead and give our non-paper to Burg Wednesday3 as
we have discussed. If you feel the need to discuss it further, you could,
of course, tell Burg that it will be arriving shortly and that you will have
the paper Bob Strauss promised delivered to him as soon as it arrives,
even though you may have departed for Egypt.
3. In addition to the non-paper, following is the text of a message
from Bob Strauss to you which, as the text states, he feels you might
wish to give or show to Burg and Khalil in order to underscore the in-
formal nature of this exercise.
4. Begin text: Dear Jim:
You will recall that I told you before I left Israel that I was going to
get Ned and Ralph5 to take some notes I made and prepare a number of
informal suggestions regarding the question of powers and responsi-
bilities. I have attached these suggestions but want to make it clear to
you and ask that you make it clear in turn to the Egyptians and Israelis
that even I have questions about some of the ideas contained in these
suggestions. I am aware that you will probably have similar reserva-
tions about some points as will the other two parties. I do hope, how-
ever, that at least a substantial part of these suggestions will be found to
be useful by you and by our Egyptian and Israeli colleagues as we at-
tempt to make progress over the next few months.
I would be grateful if you would make it clear to your partners that
they need not worry about any formal response to these ideas which
are suggested to serve as a basis for discussion. When you distribute
the following, you should make clear the very informal nature of this
non-paper. If it would help you to make this point, you should feel free
to distribute copies of this letter to your colleagues. Sincerely, Robert
Strauss. End text.
5. Begin text. Alternative approach to powers and responsibilities
as a result of many conversations and after much staff work, we believe
both sides might welcome informal thoughts on how to approach the
subject of powers and responsibilities in further meetings. It is not ex-
pected that either Egypt or Israel will necessarily accept these sugges-
tions in their entirety. Indeed, there may be aspects which may prove
very difficult for one side or the other. They do, however, attempt to
build on certain areas of agreement reached thus far and, in particular,
on the common desire to move this portion of our negotiations forward
so that we may begin to deal with these issues in greater detail at a tech-
nical level.
Under this approach, the plenary would authorize the formation
of technical committees, composed of experts from each side, whose
work would be guided by the working group and who would report to
the plenary through the working group.
2495)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Several such technical committees might be formed at the outset,
corresponding to the general areas represented by the spheres of ac-
tivity on which there is presently agreement:
1) Economic affairs (for example, finance, trade, agriculture, in-
dustry and labor).
2) Social affairs (for example, education, culture, religion, social
welfare, housing, transportation and health).
3) Local affairs and public order (for example, municipal adminis-
tration, administration of justice, and local police).
A fourth technical committee might be formed to discuss the struc-
ture, composition and seat of the elected body, in light of the agreement
to negotiate those subjects. This committee could also discuss those
functions specified as responsibilities of the elected body in the appro-
priate portions of section A of the Camp David Framework (for ex-
ample, representation on the continuing committee).
Either party should be free to raise any subject in the working
group or its committees. Additional spheres can be discussed and addi-
tional committees can be formed if necessary, it being understood that
each party must agree to any decisions taken.
The work program of the technical committees might include, but
need not be limited to, the following:
—Identification and accumulation of the data required to discuss
each sphere of activity with objectivity and in detail.
—Description of the major tasks that will have to be undertaken by
the elected body in each sphere.
—Description of the major problems with which the elected body
will be faced in carrying out those tasks.
—Examination of the existing laws and regulations pertaining to
each sphere of activity, and identification of those which will remain
relevant to accomplishing the tasks and solving the problems in each
sphere during the transition period.
—Identification of those tasks and problems which will require ad-
ditional measures during the transitional period.
Each technical committee could report the results of its work to the
working group in accordance with a schedule decided by the plenary.
The working group could then forward each report to the plenary, to-
gether with whatever comments it might choose to transmit.
The working group could also review the powers and responsibil-
ities held in all spheres by the military government and its civilian ad-
ministration under the present arrangements and report to the plenary
a comprehensive listing of these powers, responsibilities and spheres.
This would be undertaken without prejudice to the views of either

295.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Israel and Egypt
247541. Subject: Tripartite Talks on Security Supervision in the
Sinai.
1. (Secret-entire text)
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Sterner; cleared in S/S–O; approved by Saunders.
Sent for information Immediate to Jerusalem, Amman, USUN, Sinai, Jidda, Riyadh, Da-
mascus, Beirut, London, Paris, and the White House.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. The talks with Egypt and Israel2 on peacekeeping arrangements
in Sinai ended this afternoon with an agreement, subject to approval3 of
the respective governments and in the case of the US, the approval of
Congress, on the following points:
—With respect to Zones A and B, we would agree to assume the
supervision and observation function during the interim period to en-
sure compliance with the treaty terms. Both sides accepted our position
that we could only consider undertaking this role if it could be per-
formed with a contingent of civilian personnel which did not exceed
the presently authorized size for SFM.
—We also agreed to increase the frequency of Olive Harvest flights
to an average of one per week.
—With respect to the buffer zone, both sides have agreed to work
out arrangements jointly between themselves without U.S. involvement.
3. We had several exchanges with Kurt Waldheim during the day
to try to work out a letter from him which would enable the Israelis to
accept UNTSO as the supervising mechanism for Zone B. Unfortu-
for the tripartite talks have not been found. A memorandum of conversation for a Sep-
tember 18 bilateral meeting between the Israeli and U.S. delegations during which Vance
outlined the requirements for any U.S. role in the peacekeeping arrangements in the Sinai
(all U.S. personnel should be civilian and unarmed, the total number should not exceed
present complement of SFM, the United States must obtain congressional approval be-
fore participation, some form of UN presence should be sought), is in the Department of
State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, NEA Front Office Subject File
duced a draft aide me´moire on Sinai peacekeeping arrangements, based upon the trilat-
eral negotiations on September 29. See footnote 3 below.
“asked specifically” that the United States avoid such language in the aide me´moire. He
concluded that the new U.S. draft aide me´moire, dated October 19, “meets Israel’s needs
and that, together with the language in the previous aide me´moire, it fully reflects what
was agreed to in Washington.” Sterner’s memorandum, along with all three draft aide

nately, Waldheim felt unable to make any statement in the letter indi-
cating that UNTSO’s mandate would be to supervise the Treaty, and
Dayan remained insistent that without this Israel could not accept
UNTSO as having responsibility for verification in any of the zones. At
the end of the day, however, Dayan indicated that he would be willing
to recommend to the Cabinet that an UNTSO “presence” could be “in-
tegrated” into the peacekeeping arrangements. He and General Ali
agreed that this “presence” (not spelled out in any detail) would be pri-
marily in the buffer zone but could also extend to Zones A and B if the
Egyptians agreed and we found it useful—and providing it was under-
stood UNTSO would have no repeat no responsibility for supervision.
As a first step, we are seeking clarification from Waldheim as to
whether he would be willing to have UNTSO play this kind of limited
role; the second step would be for Dayan to recommend this to the Is-
raeli Cabinet as part of the overall package.
4. Dayan pressed hard for further U.S. commitments about the per-
manent arrangements at the end of the 3 years. He stated his position
several times that Israel would not be expected to begin its withdrawal
from Zone C until the multilateral force was in being. He also said he
would be approaching us shortly with a proposal for the size and func-
tions of this force. We made no commitments on these points, although
we did agree to sit down with the Israelis a year before the completion
of final withdrawal and begin to plan for the formation of that force.
5. Copies of memcons and associated documents will be pouched
to Tel Aviv and Cairo ASAP.
6. The next few days will be a delicate period during which Dayan
and Weizman will be putting this proposal to the Israeli Cabinet; Ali
will be taking it to President Sadat and we will have to go through our
own decision making process here, including consultation with the
Congress about our own involvement. Therefore, you should not go
into detail in discussing these terms with others beyond what you will
have seen in the Secretary’s remarks to the press following the conclu-
sion of our meeting today.
Vance

296.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting
Subject
Egyptian Military Supply Relationship (U)
Participants
State
David Newsom (chairman) Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Lucy Benson, Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Science and Technology
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
OSD
Secretary Harold Brown
Graham Claytor, Deputy Secretary
David McGiffert, Assistant Secretary, International Security Affs.
Robert Murray, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Near Eastern African, and South
Asian Affairs
JCS
Lt. General John Pustay, Assistant to the Chairman
Admiral Stansfield Turner
Robert Ames, NIO for Near East and South Asia
OMB
John White, Deputy Director
Bowman Cutter, Executive Associate Director for the Budget
ACDA
Spurgeon Keeny, Deputy Director
Barry Blechman, Assistant Director, Weapons Evaluation and Control Bureau
White House
David Aaron
NSC
Robert Hunter
Gary Sick
Robert Kimmitt
The PRC recommended (with OMB to comment separately2) that a
U.S. delegation resume talks with the Egyptians in early November.
This delegation should be authorized to discuss a five-year U.S.-
Egyptian military supply relationship based on a proposed level of U.S.
support as follows:
2. Cash flow financing of the Egyptian program.
Discussion
Secretary Brown reported to the PRC on the results of the high-
level delegation3 which visited Egypt in mid-August for discussions
with the Egyptian military leadership, and on subsequent discussions
he had conducted with Vice President Mubarak in Washington. It was
his judgment that Egypt has very substantial legitimate security needs.
Given the withdrawal of Arab financial support from Egypt, the fact
that Sadat has in effect burned his bridges by turning to us, and our
own political commitment to Egypt as part of the on-going peace
process, he saw no alternative to the United States accepting a major
program of support for Egypt for some time to come. This analysis was
endorsed fully by the Department of State, the JCS, and the NSC. Ad-
miral Turner added that, without substantial U.S. support, Sadat might
be in trouble domestically. (S)
Secretary Brown noted that Egypt was previously reported to be
receiving $800 million per year from Arab sources. That funding was
assumed to be available when we proposed the $1. billion, three-year
“Peace Package” for Egypt. Although Egypt has requested at least $8
billion of military equipment, our own analysis of Egypt’s security
needs indicates that it requires a military program of about $4 billion
through FY 86. He proposed that the United States consider a program
million per year. He also noted that some additional assistance would
be required before FY 82 in order to permit Egypt to begin working out
its military priorities and to begin placing orders. Otherwise, there
would be no tangible progress on the Egyptian program during the
next two critical years. He proposed that this be accomplished in two
ways:
—That we agree to finance the Egyptian program on a “cash flow”
basis. This procedure, which is now used with Israel and Jordan,
permits available credits to be used to cover actual expenses in a year,
with the implicit understanding that additional credits will be available
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
in future years. (The Egyptian program is now handled on a “full
funding” basis in which credits are set aside from the start to cover the
entire cost of a program.) By shifting to the cash flow basis, some of
Egypt’s credits under the $1. billion “Peace Package” would be freed
to cover start-up costs on additional programs.
—That an additional $350 million in credits be added to the FY 81
budget. This additional increment, plus cash flow funding, would smooth
out the two-year gap until additional funds became available in FY 82.
If this course of action were adopted, we would have to explain to
Congress that the withdrawal of Arab support from Egypt required us
to request additional funds before the end of the three-year period pre-
viously anticipated for the “Peace Package.” It would also provide lev-
erage for Israel to request an increase in its own funding level. (S)
All agencies except OMB agreed that this level of funding was con-
sistent with Egypt’s needs. OMB representatives stated that they would
want to take a much closer look at the concept of cash flow funding.
OMB indicated that they would submit their comments on this and the
budgetary implications of this very large proposal to the President sep-
arately since they had not had time to study it sufficiently. (S)
OMB questioned the need to seek a decision on this issue now,
rather than during the regular budget review process in December. Sec-
retary Brown noted that we had promised General Ali to resume talks
in early November. At that time we would have to be able to provide
some indication of the size of the program we were prepared to offer. It
was also noted that the proposed sums—although very large—re-
quired an appropriation of only ten percent of the total amount as a
credit guarantee. (S)
The PRC reviewed the list of items which Egypt has requested. All
agreed that we could not support its request to purchase F–15 aircraft at
this time. However, all agencies, including ACDA, supported the
OSD/JCS proposal that we indicate our willingness in principle to sell
APCs, air defense, ships, etc., did not pose a significant problem in
terms of arms transfer policy. The exact number, mix, and timing of any
purchases would have to be worked out with Egypt. This program
would not permit Egypt to purchase as much as they had requested,
and further negotiations would be required to permit them to work out
their own priorities. (S)
All agreed that consultations should be undertaken with the
Congress as soon as possible after the President had had the opportu-
nity to review the PRC recommendation and take a decision. We would
probably wish to inform President Sadat personally of the President’s
decision at approximately the time we begin consultations on the Hill,

297.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State and the Embassy in Jordan
Secto 8020. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With King Hussein.
1. S (Entire text)
2. Summary: Secretary and King Hussein reviewed Mid East de-
velopments and King discussed at length, though in little detail, his
goal of seeking Arab consensus which would bring the Palestinians/
PLO to a position with which they, other Arabs, United States and
eventually Israel could live. Hussein said that PLO ready now to talk
about future of Palestinian-Jordanian relations, perhaps a confedera-
tion, and that PLO also seeking Jordanian advice on broader questions
of PLO relations within and beyond Arab world. Jordan’s current pos-
ture is to respond to PLO proposals. Secretary welcomed Hussein’s de-
scription of these developments and stressed his view that what Hus-
sein was suggesting was not necessarily in conflict with what U.S.,
Egypt and Israel now doing. Challenge is to assure that they do not be-
come contradictory but converge later in time. Key to success in this re-
gard will be timing: what we are now doing concerns transitional pe-
riod, which we all are agreed is needed, and what King is engaged in
concerns shape of eventual final settlement. Our process will continue
to go forward and as King develops his concepts it should be as parallel
track with view to eventual convergence of the two in most helpful
way. On Lebanon, King agreed that improvement there critically im-
portant and said that he would be as helpful as he could; he welcomed
suggestion that we keep in touch to assure that our Lebanon efforts are
complementary. Secretary and King touched also on tank sales—King
said deal with U.K. should be completed in week or so—on Maqarin
Dam and on regional security. End summary.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
3. Secretary met with King Hussein Sept. 24 for hour and a half.
With King were Court Chief Abdul Hamid, Minister Hassan Ibrahim
and Ambassador Salah. Secretary was accompanied by Under Secre-
tary Newsom, Assistant Secretary Saunders, Ambassador Veliotes and
Country Director Cluverius. Secretary welcomed King and said it had
been too long since their last conversation. King expressed his pleasure
at renewing their friendship. Secretary then expressed his interest in
idea of Jordan-West Bank/Gaza confederation which Anwar Khatib
had publicly espoused recently in Amman. King simply said such ideas
have been around for a time and moved on to put them in context
which he described as willingness of PLO to take a fresh look at
Palestinian-Jordanian relations. King said he has been working to bring
the Palestinians and PLO to a course with which all, including US
and eventually Israel, could live. He said he wanted to bring Arafat to
political maturity and he felt Arafat was ready now to discuss future
Palestinian-Jordanian relations and wanted to know King’s views.
Hussein said he had told Arafat that, on the contrary, it was up to Pales-
tinian/PLO to tell him how they felt future relations should be shaped.
Hussein continued that PLO does want dialogue “across the board”
and he of course is ready to hear them out. Sharaf interjected that
Anwar Khatib’s statements about a united Arab kingdom apparently
were inspired by his Majesty’s meetings with Arafat.
4. Secretary then described Romanian envoy’s report to him of Ar-
afat’s view which included PLO acceptance told Arafat that, on the con-
trary, it was up to Palestinian/PLO to tell him how they felt future rela-
tions should be shaped. Hussein continued that PLO does want
dialogue “across the board” and he of course is ready to hear them out.
Sharaf interjected that Anwar Khatib’s statements about a united Arab
Kingdom apparently were inspired by his majesty’s meetings with
Arafat.
4. Secretary then described Romanian envoy’s report to him3 of Ar-
afat’s view which included PLO acceptance of Israel within pre-1967
borders and, specifically, Arafat’s conclusion that ultimate solution is
confederation. Hussein said Arafat had told him that Ceaucescu had
made some suggestions and added that Ceaucescu had access in useful
places and could make a contribution. Hussein said Arafat was con-
cerned about motives behind apparent and seemly increasing USG de-
sire to deal with PLO. Is USG doing it to involve PLO in a genuine way
or as device to discredit PLO? PLO is worried that USG may be seeking
contacts in order to keep PLO quiet. Nonetheless, King Hussein said,

there are USG–PLO contacts, particularly in Vienna, and at Arafat’s re-
quest Hussein was prepared to advise PLO on how he might handle
the situation. Secretary said he had to clarify one point: Vienna contacts
have been casual and not at all substantive. There are no substantive
USG–PLO contacts. Hussein said he had the impression there were.
Secretary said there definitely are not.
5. Secretary asked if Arafat is serious about confederation and, if
so, how does King see it. Hussein said Arafat appears serious about
seeking real cooperation with Jordan, including the peace process. In
this respect in response to Arafat’s request for his views on the future
relationship between the PLO and Jordan King had said he wanted Ar-
afat to provide a detailed proposal which Jordanians could study. Sec-
retary said that confederation idea is not inconsistent with what we,
Egypt and Israel are now doing and, indeed, is fully consistent with
long-standing USG position that some kind of formal relationship be-
tween Jordan and West Bank/Gaza seemed to us to be most workable
final arrangement. In context of discussion on subject, Hussein sug-
gested Jordan and the PLO might be able to come to agreement on fu-
ture relationship between Jordan and West Bank/Gaza by the time of
the Arab summit planned for the end of the year. (Sharaf later noted the
timing of the summit might slip).
6. Secretary then expressed his thanks for Jordanian role in de-
laying the vote on Palestinian rights resolution and turned conversa-
tion to Lebanon. He said we have gone to Israelis in strongest possible
terms and, so far, ceasefire is fragile but holding. We have told Dayan
and Weizman of our concern, and spent a great deal of time discussing
it with them during their recent visit here. It is critically important that
we move situation beyond ceasefire to real truce and build on truce to
achieve some improvements on the ground. Saunders explained that
we have a series of steps we intend to take toward this end. We do not
have one grand design but a number of packages of steps to put for-
ward over a number of months, perhaps beginning in a week or two.
Saunders said Lebanon deserves this attention on its own merits—
what is happening there is difficult for all of us to live with—and be-
cause of its inevitable effect on the peace process. Hussein agreed that
help for Lebanon is critical and Arab summit on Lebanon is being con-
sidered. (Later Jordanians said Lebanon would be one item on agenda
of summit expected in November or December). First, however, there
needed to be some Arab agreement on what should be done. He said he
is pressing hard for this and has raised issue with Palestinian, Lebanese
and Syrians. Veliotes asked if discussion with Syrians had included
idea of timetable for Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon. Hussein did not
respond directly but said Assad wanted to get out of Lebanon and
would do so under the right conditions, and that such a timetable
would be needed eventually.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
7. Hussein turned discussion back to peace issues and said goal is
to work out with PLO and key Arabs an agreed Arab position on major
issues which would, in effect, provide PLO an Arab cushion for steps
toward peace which it must take at some point. This would include
agreement on what is needed to change SC Resolution 242 to be accept-
able on Palestinian rights. Arabs must be agreed before a position can
be brought to the world. Sharaf said an Arab consensus is needed to
support PLO on such difficult issues as mutual Israel-PLO recognition
and language of any new SC resolution. PLO is considering all of this
and Hussein said that Arabs need such agreed positions whatever out-
come of USG efforts and that USG might need this Arab consensus if its
efforts do end in stalemate which is likely in his opinion due to Israel
intransigent attitudes and harmful actions.
8. Secretary asked if King had any timetable on these inter-Arab
consultations. Hussein said process, which Sharaf interjected are not
yet really formal consultations, should be completed in two–three
months. Sharaf said that first question other Arabs ask is what would
U.S. view on these ideas be. Secretary said that of course depends on
how they come out. What we are now working on is arrangements for
transition period, which we all agree is needed, and what King is dis-
cussing with other Arabs is a vision of what should happen at the end
of that period. They are not inconsistent. Saunders interjected that what
is needed as we proceed along parallel tracks is mutual acceptance that
what the other is doing is sincere and well-intentioned. We need a
meeting of the minds and way to reach it is through mutual respect for
the other’s concerns. Hussein said there is no doubt of President
Carter’s sincerity and commitment but that peace process had gone
astray and is headed for stalemate. Saunders said that of course we do
not believe this is the case but, even if it is at some future point, there
can be ingredients in a stalemate which can be used to move ahead.
9. Under Secretary Newsom wondered if King was confident that
inter-Arab discussion would be completed before the issue of a new
resolution comes up in the UN. Hussein said that ideally it should be
and Sharaf added that Kuwait, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Syria have heard
his Majesty’s ideas. PLO is seeking King’s advice and guidance and has
a great interest in a new SC resolution which would put Palestinian
issues in truer perspective. PLO needs something major in this regard
to justify acceptance of 242 and Israel. PLO also needs Arab support for
such a move and this support is his Majesty’s goal. Secretary said that
Romanian reports of Arafat’s position, about which he wanted Hussein
to be fully informed, was that what Arafat needed is resolution accept-
able to U.S. and Israel which would recognize Israel’s right to existence
within secure and recognized borders and the Palestinians’ rights to
self-determination would not be further defined in the resolution but it

was Arafat’s position that it should be understood to mean confedera-
tion. Sharaf said Arafat also wanted a conference to settle this. Secre-
tary said that this was true, according to Romanians but not very spe-
cific. Newsom said he understood it meant a conference to handle those
Arab-Israel issues which are not yet settled. Sharaf asked if this was Ro-
manian view or Arafat’s? Secretary interjected that all this was more
than Arafat seems to have shared with King; USG would be following
this closely.
10. Ambassador’s comment: Hussein appeared taken aback by
Secretary’s detailed description of Arafat’s position as reported by Ro-
manians. He might really be ignorant of any such specific, serious PLO
positions; it is more likely he was unaware of such a detailed exchange
and surprised Arafat would jump the gun with the Romanians on such
sensitive issues before they were settled by other Arabs. On the other
hand, Hussein might conclude that Arafat is doing his usual thing—
telling different people different things. In any case, Hussein should
react by becoming even more wary about how far he can trust Arafat as
they go down the road of cooperation and address the—for Jordan—
jugular issue of Jordan’s future relationship to the West Bank and Gaza.
In discussing this and related subjects in subsequent conversation,
Sharaf made clear Jordan’s cautious approach to this subject—i.e. will-
ingness only to respond to PLO suggestions, was calculated as best way
to proceed for both tactical and longer range strategic reasons. Without
being specific, Sharaf was clearly signalling that Hussein sensed he
might be on threshold of achieving goal of Arab legitimacy for at least
shared mandate re negotiating on behalf of Palestinians and he is going
to be very cautious in next few months. End comment.
11. Newsom asked how King saw Assad’s position. Hussein re-
plied that his position is not good but that he is in no immediate
danger. Lebanon is in part cause of his troubles. Secretary asked if Hus-
sein thought, as we did, that Lebanese Army is gaining strength and
cohesion. Both Hussein and Sharaf replied that Lebanese leftists and
Palestinians are still not satisfied with Army’s confessional balance.
Hussein said that some major Lebanese factions are still opposed to
GOL, that Syrian presence in Lebanon is lowering effectiveness of
Syrian Army, but that major problem in the situation is Israeli behavior.
12. Secretary said he wanted to raise Maqarin Dam. He was
looking forward to report of new AID Administrator Bennet’s talks in
Amman on Maqarin and other aid issues, noting he had recently testi-
fied in the Congress to assure that the funding for the Maqarin project
is carried over. Secretary said he felt that the project was in good shape
as far as Congress is concerned. Hussein said talks with the Syrians are
moving along but that a different Syrian Prime Minister would help;
present incumbent not really attentive to business.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
13. Secretary said he wanted to mention the tank sale, which we
hoped to move forward soon to Congress. He said he wanted King to
understand that it would cause us no problem if King chose British or
American tanks; whatever his decision, it is fine with us. Hussein said
that, frankly, there are problems with U.S. offer: lead time is very long
and tanks would not be equipped with sights which others (read Is-
raelis) already have. In any case, deal with U.K. probably will be com-
pleted in a week or ten days. Saunders asked how many British tanks
might be purchased. Hussein said one division at least. Veliotes noted
that this might mean a U.S. purchase of about one hundred M–60s.
King agreed. Veliotes added that an early decision of chieftains will
help us with the Hill since the rather vague number we have been using
has given some congressmen the impression that we do not know what
we really want to do. Hussein, Sharaf and Veliotes agreed that it would
be useful if all this was settled by time of October joint military commis-
sion meeting.
14. Newsom asked for King’s views of Jordanian-Saudi coopera-
tion in Yemen and of situation there. Hussein said there had been no
real change in Yemen since situation there rather static. He had dis-
cussed it with Prince Sultan in Geneva enroute to New York. King said
contingency planning is needed and that SAG and GOJ should look
ahead to potential dangers and plan together how to meet them. Hus-
sein said he shared Saudi doubts about Salih and felt his regime disor-
ganized particularly in comparison with much better organized gov-
ernment in Aden. Veliotes said that King’s officials had responded
positively to Doug Bennet’s discussions in Amman re need to
strengthen North Yemen’s institutions and that Jordan could play a
helpful role. Hussein and Newsom agreed that much would depend on
Saudi view of Salah which is not good at the moment. Hussein turned
to broader aspects of regional security and said that Syria is not yet
ready to participate and Iraqis feeling squeezed between events in Iran
and Israeli threat. They are increasingly anti-communist, however, and
this is to the good. Noting he realized he sounded like the late King
Faisal, Hussein said Arabs felt themselves at present under pressure
from Communists and Zionists.
15. Secretary wondered what King planned to say to the General
Assembly. Hussein said he felt it would be positive and, hopefully,

well received. Sharaf said his Majesty was not going to attack Camp
David but simply explain Jordanian position had direct attention to the
needs of the future. Sharaf said there was always chance one or two
points might be misinterpreted by media. Veliotes quipped that those
points should be dropped. Secretary said his speech5 would include the
need to solve the Palestinian problem in all its aspects and would stress
the need to resolve the Lebanon crisis. He would give added emphasis
to Lebanon in backgrounders.
16. Sharaf asked how President Sadat felt about changing SC Res
242. Secretary said Sadat looked at it in terms of timing. He did not feel
time was right now. Once Israelis had moved back to El-Arish-Ras Mu-
hammad line Sadat probably would be more comfortable with the idea
of a new resolution. Sharaf asked how Secretary felt peace process
would proceed. Secretary said he expected that by end of year we
would have 50–60 percent of the powers and responsibilities of the
SGA agreed, but not the tougher issues such as legislative authority
and control over public lands. In answer to question, Secretary said he
did feel, personally, that we would have agreed by end of year that East
Jerusalem Arabs could vote for SGA. Meeting closed with brief ex-
changes on US-Cuban relations, SALT and the recent NAM Summit.
Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

298.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, September 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Military Assistance Program for Egypt (U)

299.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter
Washington, October 1, 1979
SUBJECT
A Course of Action on Lebanon
THE DECISION
This memorandum lays out for approval a concrete plan of action
designed to transform the present ceasefire in South Lebanon into a
longer lasting truce (a detailed scenario is attached). In the process we
would seek to accomplish these specific additional objectives:
—enable the Lebanese Government to take several further steps to
enhance its authority, particularly in the south, as part of the contin-
uing implementation of Resolution 425;
—return internal Lebanese refugees to their homes and undertake
an international program of rebuilding in limited areas of the south;
—strengthen UNIFIL’s role and capability in partial preparation
for the later day when it may be asked under Resolution 425 to help the
Lebanese Government secure the Israeli-Lebanese border;
—lessen the likelihood of an Israeli-Syrian confrontation in the air;
—produce a token demonstration of Syrian willingness to begin
withdrawing its forces while the Lebanese take increased responsibility
for security in central and northern Lebanon;
—begin turning the Palestinians from a military to a diplomatic
strategy (through which terrorist attacks in Israel might be curbed
substantially.)
THE PLAN IN A NUTSHELL
The centerpiece of the proposed program2 is an umbrella agreement
which would provide for the following:
—All parties will observe strictly the ceasefire.
—No element of the PLO will attack Israel by any means from
bases in Lebanon. No element of the PLO will attack the Lebanese mi-
litias in southern Lebanon.
—The Lebanese militias will not attack Palestinian or Lebanese
targets.
—Israel will not attack targets in Lebanon. Israel will assure com-
pliance by the Lebanese militias in southern Lebanon with these
arrangements.
—No party will attack or harass UNIFIL.
—Ceasefire violations will be the responsibility of UNIFIL and UN
representatives to resolve. Communications to UNIFIL or UN repre-
sentatives about ceasefire violations will be reported through appro-
priate means—including radio hotline—by Israel, Lebanon, the Arab
deterrent force, the Lebanese militias in southern Lebanon, and the
PLO. All parties will respect recommendations made by the UN repre-
sentatives and UNIFIL to resolve conflict. (We will discuss with the UN
and troop contributors how UNIFIL can be strengthened.)
Under that umbrella, working through different channels we
would seek implementing and complementary agreements in four areas:
—Reduction and eventual elimination of Palestinian and Lebanese
militia fighters from the UNIFIL area. UNIFIL would be given greater
freedom of movement in the area held by the Lebanese militias, while
upgrading its surveillance and detection capacities. (We would discuss
the possible need for additional manpower.)
—Establishing and expanding stage by stage a “zone of peace,” be-
ginning with the city of Tyre. Palestinian and Lebanese leftist fighters and
offices would be withdrawn from Tyre, and a Lebanese military and
civil presence would be established there.
—A
de
facto
arrangement
to
forestall
Israeli-Syrian
aerial
confrontations.
—Further staged withdrawals by Syrian forces from key areas in
Beirut, with Lebanese Army units replacing them.
OVERALL STRATEGY
The detailed program of action outlined here is intended to estab-
lish for our own use a concept and the stages through which we would
logically move in order to reach our objectives. We would not intend,
however, to make all details and aspects of this plan available to any of
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the parties (although we would share more details with Waldheim and
one or two of his closest associates, because of their central role). To go
into details, for example with the Israelis, could lead to an insistence
that the details of the last stage of the plan be agreed upon before the
first step is taken.
Our strategy would involve tailoring our initial presentation to the
role which we foresee each party playing in the process and to antici-
pate—and thus to avoid—some of the difficulties which particular
parties will have with certain aspects of the plan. As we proceed, we
would retain the flexibility to refine or change some of the later steps
we envisage.
THE ISSUES
Because there are so many actors, we have had to consider a
number of issues that will arise in the implementation of this plan:
1. Management. We have reviewed various possibilities for the
management of this program and have concluded that the U.S. will
have to provide the motor to keep this effort going but will need to
work in an almost co-manager relationship with the UN Secretary Gen-
eral. Ambassador Dean can well handle the U.S. role in Beirut. An im-
portant element in the UN’s ability to play its role will be its ability to
field a personality who can be a focal point for the negotiations among
the parties in Lebanon. Both of us, of course, will work closely with the
Lebanese President and Prime Minister.
It may prove useful at some point for Waldheim to send a special
representative to the area for this purpose. We, the Lebanese, and the
Arabs generally have supported Waldheim naming the just-retired UK
Ambassador in New York, Ivor Richard, to this position. Neither the
Soviets (because Richard is from a NATO country) nor the Israelis have
been keen on the idea. If the Richard appointment does not materialize,
we may be able to make use of an excellent Pakistani, Ambassador Ak-
hund, who is now about to arrive in Beirut to coordinate UN develop-
ment and reconstruction programs in Lebanon.
2. Parties Involved. Within Lebanon and in support of this plan we
will need to marshal the support of the following parties:
—Secretary General Waldheim and the UN Secretariat generally.
(We will resume consultations with them after you have agreed to this
general approach.)
—Israel. (In both Washington and Tel Aviv, we would fill them in
at an early stage on the broad outlines of our proposal, urge their coop-
eration, and promise to keep them informed of progress.)
—The Lebanese Government. (The U.S. and UN would jointly put
forward a proposed course of action.)
—The PLO. (We would seek their cooperation through third
parties primarily, but the UN would carry the major burden.)

—Syria. (We might use a special U.S. envoy such as Phil Habib.)
—Saudi Arabia. (We would use John West primarily and the Saudi
Ambassador here, but we might want to send an envoy to Riyadh also.)
—Jordan. (Hussein has shown a great deal of interest and has a
working relationship with Arafat.)
—The Vatican. (We will discuss Lebanon during the Pope’s visit
and encourage him to call for a moratorium on violence. Ambassador
Wagner would remain in close touch.)
—France. (Through normal diplomatic channels in Paris, Wash-
ington, and Beirut. It is probably the key European actor.)
—Kuwait. (We would work closely with the useful Kuwaiti Am-
bassador to the UN. Kuwait, with the Saudis, has a watching brief on
behalf of the Arabs.)
—UNIFIL Troop Contributor Governments. (We would work particu-
larly closely with the French, Dutch, Norwegians, and Irish.)
—UK. (We stay in close touch with the British on all Middle
Eastern matters.)
The Soviets should be briefed at some stage, since they will become
aware of the details of the initiatives in any case. A briefing may reduce
the chances of Soviet mischief-making. We will wish to ensure, how-
ever, that they do not become engaged in the process, since this could
hurt the chances of gaining Israel’s cooperation and also hurt general
Middle East peace negotiations.
3. A Focal Point for the Negotiations. In order to make everyone feel
that this initiative is not just “more of the same,” we believe there may
be a need to create some new forum, either to promote negotiations or
to formalize the understandings reached. We do not envision a conven-
tional conference with all interested parties coming to the same room
because that would quickly degenerate into a stalemate. We have con-
cluded that perhaps the formation of a “Consultative Group” in Leb-
anon might provide a sense of new dynamism while allowing us the
flexibility to engage in separate negotiations with the parties until
agreement on the proposal has been pretty well worked out. Specifi-
cally, it seems to us that a group in Beirut consisting of the following
would serve this purpose:
—The Lebanese Prime Minister, the UN representative, the Papal
Nuncio, and the Ambassadors of the U.S., France, Saudi Arabia, The
Netherlands, the UK, and perhaps Italy.
Early on, after we have talked with the UN Secretariat, we may
wish to set up a consultative mechanism in New York. We have in
mind a small group (but not a formal “contact group” as in the Namibia
case) which could meet periodically. Membership might include: the
UN Secretariat, US, UK, France, a representative of the UNIFIL troop
contributors (Norway and Netherlands) and a representative of the
Arab group.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
4. U.S. Contact with the PLO. Initially, we will probably be able to
steer clear of any contact with the PLO apart from our normal security
contacts in Beirut, which are publicly known. (The UN, the Lebanese
Government, and members of the consultative groups in Beirut and
Lebanon would have direct contacts right away with the PLO.) At some
point, however, it may be necessary for us, if the potential gains are
high enough, to decide to have contact with the PLO in the Lebanese
context for the purpose of achieving an end of terrorist attacks on Israel,
not only those launched from Lebanon but also those coming from
within the occupied territories. The latter would be a particularly hard
objective to achieve, but we believe we must try.
The Israelis would, of course, react sharply to any contact and
charge that we had violated our Sinai II commitment. Any contact
would have to be justified on the following grounds: (a) It is an exten-
sion of our publicly announced security contacts. The objective is to en-
hance the security of the American mission and the people of southern
Lebanon. (b) The “Sinai II Commitment” was made in a Memorandum
of Agreement entitled “The Geneva Peace Conference” and relates en-
tirely to the peace process. Contacts in Lebanon on Lebanese problems
were not addressed, nor were they intended. Israel has never objected
to our contacts on security in Lebanon. (c) The Israeli argument that
contact constitutes recognition is not tenable; governments, including
Israel’s, often have contacts which they acknowledge do not constitute
recognition (e.g., Israel with Jordan). The issue would not be contact
but the purpose of the contact. In the Lebanese context, contact would
not constitute recognition of the PLO in the peace process and would
not in any sense involve negotiation on issues related to the peace
process. Nevertheless, we would have to expect strong Israeli objec-
tion. Our defense would lie in whatever success we achieved in ending
violence.
5. Dealing with Israel. We will clearly have to keep the Israelis fully
involved in an effort to encourage an evolution in their thinking. How-
ever, as noted above, we will also probably have to delay until later dis-
cussions with Israel on specific elements of the plan. Initially, we would
set forth general targets for a moratorium on attacks on Israel, and our
overall purpose of carrying out Resolution 425 (which Israel has ac-
cepted).
At
the
moment,
Weizman—perhaps
without
Cabinet
backing—has modified Israel’s preemptive strike strategy by saying
that Israel would not hit the Palestinians if the Palestinians did not hit
Israel. It seems unlikely that we will get more from the Israelis in the
near future until we are able to describe the readiness of other parties to
make certain commitments. At some point, however, we will have to

seek an Israeli commitment not only to refrain from its own attacks but
also to assure certain actions by the Lebanese militia forces under
Haddad in the southern Lebanese buffer area.
6. Risks and Pitfalls. Achieving the objectives of this plan will be ex-
tremely difficult, and some may be impossible in the end. A particu-
larly difficult handicap is that the PLO does not control certain radical
Palestinian and Lebanese leftist groups and may not agree to do so
through the use of its enforcement apparatus unless it has been given
major incentives (e.g., increased international respectability and con-
tacts). A major terrorist incident in Israel could undo totally at any mo-
ment what we may have accomplished in the meantime. We will have
to monitor very carefully the timing and execution of our various steps
so that we do not damage the autonomy negotiations or undermine Is-
raeli confidence in our intentions. Soviet involvement could stimulate
Israeli opposition to our overall strategy. As mentioned above, any di-
rect U.S. contact with the PLO could be particularly risky and it would
be even more of an issue if our contacts failed to bring about the objec-
tives we would be seeking.
On the other hand, because of inherent dangers in the Lebanese sit-
uation, we would in any event be trying to do many of the same things
contained in this plan of action, even if we stopped short of seeking our
most ambitious objectives. The high risk of a major Israeli-Syrian con-
flict and a possible Israeli long-term occupation of southern Lebanon—
if we did any less—makes a major and sustained effort essential.
7. Financial Implications. At an early point, we would have to ana-
lyze the financial implications for the U.S. and UN of an international
relief program and expanded capacities for UNIFIL.
LAUNCHING THE INITIATIVE
If you approve, we will be pursuing this initiative through the se-
quence of steps shown in Attachment 2.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

300.
Letter From the Israeli Ambassador to the United States
(Evron) to President Carter
Washington, October 8, 1979

301.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Senior Level Meeting: Lebanon
PARTICIPANTS
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary for Near East and South Asian Affairs
Philip Habib, Senior Advisor to the Secretary
Ambassador Robert Strauss, Personal Representative of the President
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Hamilton Jordan, Chief of Staff
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Robert Hunter, Staff Member National Security Council
(David Aaron and Hamilton Jordan joined the meeting while it
was in progress; Zbigniew Brzezinski left before it was over.)
Ambassador Strauss noted that little progress is likely to be made in
the autonomy talks by May. And either Begin and Sadat will be em-
bracing one another by then, or there will be a total breakdown in their
relationship. He is totally convinced that there is no chance of Egypt’s
and Israel’s moving on the West Bank. Sadat does not even know what
is going on; Khalil doesn’t want it; and Begin won’t move.
Dr. Brzezinski said that this means the situation is a mess.
Secretary Vance said that there is a lot to what was being said. On
Lebanon, he said it was never our intention to get out in front, and to
beat the drums on a Lebanon initiative. The effort goes back to a Khalil-
Strauss conversation, when Khalil said that peace in Lebanon would
buy added time for the peace process. Lebanon appears ready to do
something, and is better able to do so. But how far can it go? He can’t
say. Saudi Arabia would like greater stability, and would be of some
help. Syria is interested in something happening, if it would increase
stability and not be humiliating to it, so that it would be easier for it to
wrestle with its internal problems. With Israel, how can it take care of
its northern border situation and at the same time cut down on ter-
rorism? With the PLO, indications are that it is becoming more sophisti-
cated. It might see that more stability would advance its cause. The UN
and UNIFIL want stability. Therefore, there may be the ingredients for
something to move toward stability. For us, everytime Lebanon flares
up, we have domestic problems as Israel over-reacts. The problem we
must deal with is about dealing with the PLO. The President clearly
can’t have this happen now. But the Lebanese and others might try to
get the PLO to make some advance on terrorism to satisfy the Israelis.
Will it work? He doesn’t know. Much of it is for Israel to decide. In ad-
vancing U.S. work, we would not be out front, but would work with
others, and push others to advance the interest in getting more stability.
Ambassador Strauss said that, looking at the State Department plan
in a vacuum, there would be no problem. But we really need something
else, otherwise we will be blamed for failure. He doesn’t like the
paper—though it is crafted well—because it looks duplicitous: it starts
us on the course inevitably towards the PLO, without saying so.
Second, if we say that we are not dealing with the PLO, the President
might think this would get him by (and it could be technically stated),
but this is not a technical issue, and the facts would appear to be dif-
ferent. It would get him in trouble. These are political considerations.
He (Ambassador Strauss) has no answers. If the President had no polit-
ical considerations, then few changes to the plan would be needed. But
if he wants something politically—like in Florida—he can’t do both, or
explain it away. If the PLO is in the equation, it is difficult. Therefore
there is a basic decision, like the Sadat fiasco on the UN resolution in
August. At the UN, we got into a position that wouldn’t fly. We need a
fail-safe idea, though even that might doom us. He (Ambassador
Strauss) could say to the Israelis: you are portrayed, fairly or not, in a
negative light, which is getting worse and worse. This impacts on the
peace process. He has shown polls to Begin which bear out what is hap-
pening here to Israel’s popularity. He can try to convince the Israelis to
find positive things which it can do (and Begin is crippled politically).
A cease-fire? A six-month moratorium on settlements? He (Begin) an-
swers in the negative. He can’t do these things. There is less of a gov-
ernment in Israel than one thinks. It hasn’t got one. Therefore it can’t
take positive steps. Therefore can we get a fail-safe mechanism? He
(Ambassador Strauss) may go to see Begin in London about 17 No-
vember. He could also go to Sadat. There is a problem in raising expec-
tations. He could try to convince Begin to take the lead. He could lay
the approach out to him, and give him assurances to get him involved
as a leader with us. This will help Begin in Europe and here. He (Begin)
could do this without political loss in Israel, or to Israel’s security.
Secretary Vance asked whether Ambassador Strauss could see
Begin before November 17. If not, would it be possible to split off the
PLO piece of the plan, and work on others, in order to get something
more solid?
Ambassador Strauss said he is looking for alternatives to progress
on the autonomy talks. Is Jordan it? No. The autonomy talks are a
fraud. It can be kept up until June, through the primaries. We might get
to then. But if we want something positive, then it is difficult. Begin has
shown he won’t let this happen; Begin is through. Therefore he might
grasp at something on Lebanon.
Secretary Vance asked whether Ambassador Strauss could see
Begin sooner, without raising expectations.
Ambassador Strauss said that this is the problem, of doing it without
having another U.S. initiative fail. Eppy Evron will say it can’t be done.
Secretary Vance said that Eppy will say the approach is ok only if all
terrorism stops.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Strauss agreed, but added that that doesn’t just mean
terrorism mounted from Lebanon.
Ambassador Habib said that Eppy sees Israel’s loss of image each
time Lebanon blows up. He (Evron) worries about a rising tide of
opinion, that could even lead to anti-Semitism. Therefore Eppy is not as
negative.
Ambassador Strauss said that Eppy thinks Ambassador Habib has
great credibility.
Ambassador Habib asked what would happen if Lebanon takes the
lead—and Begin gets what he wants, which is the PLO (issue?) off his
back?
Ambassador Strauss said that he wants Begin to bless our effort, and
give us some room to maneuver. That means we must clearly be seen as
if it isn’t likely to succeed. Therefore we need a political structure.
Ambassador Habib said we could give assurances to Begin on the
PLO.
Ambassador Strauss said yes, since we can’t do anything with the
PLO anyway, unless the President says he doesn’t want to run for
re-election.
Ambassador Habib said that we do not want that flexibility anyway.
We can set limits within the existing framework.
Ambassador Strauss said that if we go this route, the American press
will look back, and say that Hal Saunders and the State Department
have used Lebanon to do what they have always wanted: to deal with
the PLO. Lebanon will be seen as an excuse. Therefore we would be on
the defensive. Does Hal agree?
(Assistant Secretary Saunders nodded yes.)
Secretary Vance said it was never our theory to undertake our plan
without Israel’s ok. The lead must be taken by the Lebanese.
Ambassador Strauss said that Hal Saunders is on the right track only
if what he (Ambassador Strauss) says is done.
Ambassador Habib said that we have to understand our limits with
the PLO, irrespective.
Ambassador Strauss said that these limits are not clear in the State
paper. He would restructure this effort differently—and back up. This
would improve its chances of succeeding.
Ambassador Habib said our effort should not be dramatic, but
low-key.
Secretary Vance agreed; otherwise it is doomed.
Ambassador Strauss asked why.

Secretary Vance said that if there is a spotlight, it will be harder to
do.
Ambassador Strauss asked whether the spotlight would actually
help.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether the Israelis want a settlement in
Lebanon.
Secretary Vance and Ambassador Strauss said yes.
Dr. Brzezinski asked why.
Secretary Vance said the Israelis see that they are losing over Leb-
anon, that it is hurting them. Weizman and Dayan and some others
know this. The polls show that Israel sees it is being hurt.
Dr. Brzezinski said that Begin could see that Israel has a security
zone in Lebanon under Israel’s control; Lebanon is kept divided, and
the Syrians off balance; and Begin keeps the PLO as a rallying symbol.
If this is a tacit thing, then it will defuse the situation.
Secretary Vance said that in practical security terms, this is right.
But it has gone beyond that now. Israel is worried about its image with
its friends, like the Netherlands, England, even the U.S.
Ambassador Habib said that nothing in the plan takes away these
benefits. Haddad will still be there as a buffer. There is no security
threat to Israel (the threat is really terrorism). The communal divisions
in Lebanon that are useful to Israel would still be there. But Israel
would gain in its capacity to gain support for what it does with regard
to a Lebanon truce.
Dr. Brzezinski said that for Begin, it is important to maintain the
distance between the U.S. and the PLO. If this were reduced, there is
the political danger that the Israelis would stick it to the President.
Ambassador Habib said we could define limits, which would not
create difficulties. He would like to see this done.
Ambassador Strauss said he will not go for the plan until this is
done. Before starting, we should say where we will not go. Say it and
mean it.
Secretary Vance said that this is fair.
Ambassador Strauss said we need to be forthright about it, so the
President will not get trapped.
Ambassador Habib said that Hal Saunders wants to protect the
President.
Ambassador Strauss said that this plan is a stepping stone to the
PLO. We need to guard against that. Maybe he should get in a plane, go
to Israel, and talk about an initiative on Lebanon. And why not say that
some progress has been made?
Secretary Vance said that it needs to be a little quieter.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Strauss said he could say he is getting their thoughts.
The problem is not to see the others. If he goes to Israel, he has to say
why he is doing so.
Dr. Brzezinski said that if the approach is quieter, why would Israel
be interested. It will see the U.S. inching towards the PLO, whatever we
do. One they stop; second they will stick it to us here.
Secretary Vance said this might be right. But Israel sees damage
from past Lebanon actions, and will again if the cease-fire breaks down.
Dr. Brzezinski said that there is a trade-off. It is after Cambodia, it is
an ugly situation, and politically and morally something should be
done. There would be an impact in the Arab world if we did nothing.
Ambassador Strauss agreed.
Secretary Vance raised the question of how to do something, and
stick to it, on the PLO. It is up to Lebanon, Syria, and the UN to affect
the PLO.
Dr. Brzezinski suggested the UN.
David Aaron said he had thought the PLO was interested in getting
legitimacy.
Secretary Vance said that if we can’t do that, how do we do some-
thing. Maybe we can go part way on a truce plan; then in time go on.
David Aaron asked why the situation is calmer now. Is it because
we have this initiative going? Israel is worried that something might
happen. Then should we just let it simmer, and keep the effort moving
to keep the situation quiet?
Ambassador Habib said that this is a good point. Therefore we
should move on a gradual, phased basis.
Secretary Vance said that we need movement on a phased basis—
e.g., how can we get movement on Tyre? How can we get the LAF into
Tyre? Therefore we need some understanding on how to do it. Pieces
like that can be moved. Maybe we can do that without being incon-
sistent and without dealing with the PLO.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how great the U.S. role should be.
Secretary Vance said that we should first move to talk with the Is-
raelis—and not see it slide past them.
Ambassador Strauss said we have to go to Begin first, and get him as
a co-conspirator.
Secretary Vance said that second we should go to Lebanon and say
that it must do more. Therefore, we should ask them what they will do.
We should go to Syria and ask them what they will do—e.g., pulling
some forces out of Beirut and the airport.
Robert Hunter asked what the incentives would be for the PLO to
cooperate.

Secretary Vance said that they see progress, and are more sophisti-
cated politically. Therefore they will take what looks like a constructive
position, and they will get stronger. Eventually, they want a dialogue
with the U.S. But they see this as realists, that it will not happen now.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how constructive the PLO would be. Would it
be tacit? A cease-fire?
Secretary Vance said that complicated arrangements need to be
worked out. The Lebanese should take the lead. We and others should
help lead this to a more stable situation.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if there would be understandings.
Secretary Vance agreed.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if the understandings would be written.
Secretary Vance said he didn’t know.
Ambassador Habib said that some things were clear. The UN would
need an expanded role. The UNIFIL role should be increased.
Dr. Brzezinski asked who would negotiate with the PLO.
Secretary Vance replied the UN and Lebanese.
Ambassador Habib suggested Syria.
Assistant Secretary Saunders suggested Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
Secretary Vance said that we would not negotiate with the PLO.
Ambassador Habib said that the PLO has not met our terms, so that
there would be no contact.
Ambassador Strauss said it isn’t what we start out to do that matters,
it’s where we would get, and how the press puts it. It would take skill
to assure the American people, the Jewish community, the Congress
what we will not do. Therefore, is this worth it?
Assistant Secretary Saunders said we should see Lebanon on its own
merits.
Ambassador Strauss said that if we say we will talk with the PLO in
the Lebanon context, we will still get screwed.
Ambassador Habib said that we should have limits not to go that far.
If we set limits we are ok.
Ambassador Strauss said we need a protective coating.
Secretary Vance said we must talk with the Israelis next.
Ambassador Strauss added that we should tell them the truth.
Dr. Brzezinski said that this (talking with Israel) seems to be a
change from the State paper, which says that Israel should be brought
in at some point.
Ambassador Habib said this should be before the initial phase.
Secretary Vance said that first we have talked with the UN about the
role it will play; second we have talked with Lebanon about its role;
third we should talk with Israel now.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
David Aaron asked what this will do for them. They see that we are
putting them on the spot over Lebanon. If they say no, they see
problems. If they say yes, this is the slippery slope to the PLO. We need
a plan, if they say no, not to leave this problem at their doorstep. We
can’t let this effort come to grief in Jerusalem. We need a plan for Begin
that will not crowd the Israelis.
Ambassador Strauss said that if we go to the Israelis, we must have
in our options one that we know they can accept—e.g., to do what they
are now doing. We need an option they will accept.
Secretary Vance said we could lay out why they should be involved.
He is not sure; this could put them on the spot.
Ambassador Strauss asked what he meant.
Secretary Vance said he meant on the autonomy talks.
Ambassador Strauss said that we did this before. It was bad. We
need a little forthrightness, with an option the Israelis can say yes to,
even if we don’t like it.
Secretary Vance said he has the idea of dealing with this in small
pieces—e.g., Tyre. Can we devise steps?
Ambassador Habib said that if the cease-fire is maintained, it could
be done. If not, the PLO will not let Tyre be neutralized.
Secretary Vance suggested acceptance of the cease-fire as ok, even if
fragile. Then on to the next piece. How can it be put together?
Ambassador Habib said that once Lebanon is there (Tyre) it would
be hard to change. The PLO will have to agree to lots before we get to
that point.
Secretary Vance said that it is at least a piece.
Ambassador Strauss said we should go back to premises. It is given
that, for the PLO, there is nothing in it for them that we will give. With
regard to Israel, there is damn little in it for the PLO to warrant their
getting in, to crunch on a deal. Therefore there is nothing in the plan for
the Israelis. Therefore how do we get them in? First, we could give
them something; but we can’t. Second, there is world opinion—this is
the only thing. It is something positive, with low costs, and is a positive
step towards peace in the world. This needs a bit of escalation of pub-
licity. The only thing we have is that this is something positive for Is-
rael, with low risks, and assurances of what we will not do. Then it
reaches the launch pad, with political security and support here.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how this would be done.
Ambassador Strauss said we should say to Begin: you won’t do any-
thing on the autonomy talks or on settlements—for good reasons, etc.
But Israel must take a positive step for world opinion. Therefore, here
Israel can be on the side of the angels. The problem is in being crowded
into dealing with the PLO. We would publicly say we would not do

this. This approach would probably fail, but it is our only chance.
Maybe David Aaron is right, we should just let it bubble along.
Secretary Vance said we couldn’t let it bubble along.
David Aaron and Ambassador Strauss said we should do something.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether Ambassador Strauss should go to Is-
rael now.
Secretary Vance said that to go would be good.
Ambassador Strauss said that is why he thought of London.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if we can wait that long.
Secretary Vance said the situation will break before that.
Ambassador Habib said the visit should be before then. There will be
an Arab foreign ministers meeting and a summit, with Lebanon as the
number-one item on the agenda. The summit is set for November 17.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how we should proceed.
Secretary Vance said that Boutros Ghali said we should play it softly
until Egypt gets its land back, and then work Israel over (Note: side
comment on the autonomy talks).
Dr. Brzezinski asked how we should proceed.
Secretary Vance said first, is this worth pursuing further. He be-
lieves we can’t drop it. The situation will blow up, and we will be
blamed. Yet it will not do for us to be visibly in front. Therefore how
should we structure how Ambassador Strauss will approach Begin?
Second, what little piece is there—e.g., Tyre or Beirut—to keep the mo-
mentum going, to give a better chance that it will not fall apart in a) a
Syrian-Israeli air battle; or b) some terrorist action in Israel mounted
from the West Bank (since it is doubtful that the PLO would launch one
from Lebanon).
Ambassador Strauss said that any PLO fool could commit a terrorist
act.
Secretary Vance said that, to be specific, would Saunders, Strauss,
and Hunter join forces on a couple of issues. How should we structure
this, and what can we get out of it if Ambassador Strauss is to go soon?
Ambassador Strauss said going soon is possible, not good, but he
will try to improve it. Tentatively, he is to meet Khalil and Burg in
London soon.
Dr. Brzezinski asked about talking with Dayan.
Ambassador Habib said that Dayan would not want to get into this.
Secretary Vance agreed. It has to be Begin.
Ambassador Strauss asked, if there were a bust in the ceasefire,
would that be a better or worse time to move?
Ambassador Habib said it would be worse. The Arabs would sit still
for an initiative now. Lebanon embarrasses them.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Strauss said that there could be a quick fact-finding
trip, including Israel.
Ambassador Habib said that this is an idea for himself; he will not
draw as much fire.
Ambassador Strauss suggested that Ambassador Habib go to Israel.
Ambassador Habib agreed. If he goes to Syria, he must go to Israel
anyway.
Ambassador Strauss said it would be ok for Ambassador Habib to
go to Begin. This would be better than himself. Would it be possible for
him to go to three or four countries, and end up in Israel? If it looks like
success, then he (Ambassador Strauss) could join him, and bring Eppy.
Ambassador Habib noted that Eppy is sympathetic.
Secretary Vance said that if this is fact-finding, what do we have in
mind? What would Ambassador Habib look for?
Ambassador Habib said it would be to see whether the Lebanese
have guts. Will Syria back them? The UN in New York will do so.
Secretary Vance asked if he would go to Syria to ask them to pull
out of Lebanon.
Ambassador Habib said that Syria can’t do that.
Secretary Vance said that if he (Ambassador Habib) could talk with
Syria on reducing its presence. That would be a real selling point in
Israel.
Ambassador Strauss agreed.
Secretary Vance said that this is the one thing Israel wants to see.
Then we have a chance of Israel’s encouraging this effort.
Ambassador Strauss said that we have to structure it. For Begin, we
can expect nothing from the PLO. But maybe we can get something
from Syria. We could say that this is a non-risk gamble: for Israel and us
this is no risk.
Ambassador Habib said that therefore this changes nothing on the
Israeli-Lebanese border.
Ambassador Strauss said that Syria would be first. Therefore this is
the plus for the Israelis.
Secretary Vance said that he raised with the Syrians the question of
withdrawing from downtown Beirut and the airport. They said that
this depends on the Lebanese. If they say they will do it, and can pro-
vide security, the Syrians will talk.
Ambassador Habib said that the Syrians don’t believe this. They are
devious in dealing with Lebanon.
Secretary Vance said that at least we can talk about it.
Ambassador Strauss asked about the way to structure it.

Secretary Vance said that we should seek to do two things: extend
the sovereignty and control of the Lebanese government; and deal with
the Syrian aspect.
Ambassador Habib said that the PLO would have to pull back under
this plan.
Robert Hunter suggested that we offer to speed up arms deliveries
to the Lebanese as part of Ambassador Habib’s trip.
Secretary Vance said that this issue was raised by the Lebanese in
New York. If we could move stuff faster, it would be a plus.
Ambassador Habib said he needs to have it in hand—by the last
week in the month. This would give the Lebanese more guts.
Ambassador Strauss said that this is not a neat orchard.
Secretary Vance said that some help is required. Talking with the
Lebanese, Syrians, and Israelis is needed to start with. Therefore
fact-finding is the best we can do.
Ambassador Strauss said he has not signed off on this approach.
Secretary Vance said we should see what we can think of.
David Aaron said we should also look at the question, if we suc-
ceed, of what the PLO incentives are: to cooperate, or to blow it up?
Secretary Vance asked Hal Saunders and his colleagues to develop
an outline5 of an approach.
(The meeting ended at 10: a.m.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

302.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, October 18, 1979
SUBJECT
Letter from Begin on Oil Negotiations with Egypt (C)
At last Friday’s breakfast, you decided that we should not get in-
volved in mediating on oil prices between Israel and Egypt, in response
to Begin’s request (Tab B). (S)
Subsequently, Dayan has come to us with a renewed plea for a
positive response. Bob Strauss has suggested—and Cy and I concur—
that we try a middle course that is still designed to keep us at a dis-
tance, without making your response a flat turndown. This would be to
suggest a list of internationally-respected experts in the field, from
which Begin and Sadat could choose one or more to help. Begin would
have the responsibility for selling Sadat on the idea. (S)
This approach would put the ball back in Begin’s court; though we
should be under no illusions about the stakes involved, and the possi-
bility that Begin will come back to us again in an effort to get us to as-
sume responsibility. (S)
At Tab A is a message to Begin. The key element (paragraph 3) was
drafted by Bob Strauss. The rest is a State draft. The speechwriters
have cleared. (The cable will include talking points on our skepticism
that this sort of mediation can work.) (C)

303.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Lebanese Truce Initiative (C)
At Tab A is a memorandum from Cy2—incorporating Bob Strauss’
views—to implement the discussion of the Senior Level Meeting on Oc-
The approach contains two safeguards:
—the need to get Israeli support—or at least acquiescense—
through a direct appeal to Begin. Otherwise, the effort has little chance
of any success; and
—a low-key fact-finding trip by Phil Habib to the area (Beirut, Da-
mascus, Riyadh, Amman, Jerusalem, and the Vatican), so that he can
take to Israel whatever Lebanon and Syria are prepared to do. We
would then review developments, to determine our next steps. (S)
With Begin, Habib will stress four main points:
—we will not deal with the PLO; others would have to exercise
leadership in this area;
—we will not try to do away with the militia enclave on Israel’s
border;
—the need for Israel to improve its image by taking part in a truce
effort (in the process, we will not try to make the PLO an equal with
others); and
—humanitarian considerations. (S)
If you approve of this general approach, we would take the fol-
lowing steps:
—Ambassador Dean will talk with Sarkis and al-Hoss on our gen-
eral thinking, and about their taking the lead;
—Habib will go to the area and find out how far Lebanon and
Syria will go and, on that basis, what Israel is prepared to see happen;
—we will also be in contact with other parties, while keeping our
role flexible (Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Kuwait, Egypt, UK, France, Hol-
land, Norway, UN, Vatican);
—close involvement of Waldheim; and
—further review here. (S)
This approach is not risk-free. But if we keep our efforts low-key at
the start, and we are attentive to the need to gain Israeli support, we
have the best chance of achieving at least some partial strengthening of
the cease-fire. (S)
RECOMMENDATION
That
you
approve
the
Lebanese
truce
approach
outlined

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

304.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, October 29, 1979
SUBJECT
London Meetings (U)
The meetings2 with the Israelis and Egyptians went better than ex-
pected. For the Egyptians, the talks took place against the background
of Sadat’s expressing optimism in contrast with press reports of
Strauss’ testimony—i.e. the effect Strauss was trying to achieve. Khalil
continues to be impressive, and his seriousness about the process is
now complete. (C)

305.
Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat and
Saudi Crown Prince Fahd
Washington, November 1, 1979
I am writing the same letter to both of you because you must act
together if you decide to honor a very important request from me.
One of my most serious problems as President is the lack of under-
standing and harmony between you, the leaders of Egypt and Saudi
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Arabia. This situation is very damaging to me politically and also
creates a major obstacle in the achievement of a comprehensive peace
in the Middle East. We should be acting in concert, but instead we are
divided.
I realize that some sharp differences will remain between you re-
garding what should be done immediately to make progress, but there
is no doubt that we share common goals and purposes. My hope and
prayer is that, either directly though your own emissaries or through
me, you will explore every possible way to minimize the adverse con-
sequences of those differences and to restore the mutual respect, con-
sultation and understanding which should exist among the three of us.
You have my personal best wishes and my standing offer to help
in any way possible to resolve this most serious matter.
Your friend,
Jimmy Carter
P.S. Give my love to Jehan and your family.

306.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 5, 1979
SUBJECT
The Lebanese Situation (U)
At Tab I is a memorandum from Habib to Vance reporting on his
trip. In summary:
—there is something approaching consensus among the Arabs on
several points: strengthen the cease-fire; strengthen UNIFIL and UNSC
425; in principle, re-establish a Lebanese presence in southern Leb-
anon (especially Tyre); talk about the issue at the Arab summit; get the
PLO to give some cooperation to the Lebanese; see Lebanon out in
front; get the PLO to stop taking credit in Beirut for any attacks that do
take place in Israel;
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Begin had an almost pro forma meeting with Habib, stressing the
need to a halt to attacks on Israel; the Israelis apparently accepted that
the Habib effort is not a back-door approach to the PLO; they are skep-
tical but open-minded; Weizman will suspend the preemptive strategy
for now, but will keep options open if attacks resume; and Israel will
get Haddad out of the UNIFIL area if the PLO and Leftists leave it;
—France is trying to get a statement out of the PLO prior to the
Arab summit, on Lebanese territorial integrity, the temporary nature of
the PLO presence, extension of Lebanese authority, support for the
cease-fire, and praise of the UNIFIL role. The sweetener (provided the
statement came before the Arab summit) would be an Arafat visit to
Phil is thus “reasonably optimistic” about the chances for moving
forward. Formal written statements and all-party conferences are out.
A modus vivendi might be possible, and he sees a “surprising degree of
Arab confidence that Arafat would cooperate.” Given what is hap-
pening, there is no need for us to take a more prominent role. (S/S)
Where Next? Habib sees the near-term as important in seeing what
the Lebanese can and will do to follow up—in thinking things through,
developing details of an initiative, and securing Palestinian approval of
next steps. The Arab summit could be crucial. (S/S)
Phil has asked for approval of a number of steps (pages 7–8). These
are essentially non-controversial, except:
—should we talk to the Saudis, Kuwaitis, Moroccans, and Suda-
nese about supporting some effort through ambassadors, or send
Habib out (the former minimizes risks of being seen as trying to inter-
fere in the Arab summit; the latter has more chance of getting some-
where); and
—should we tell the Israelis about French thinking (yes: to keep
from being accused of holding back; no: that we might be asked to
turn-off an Arafat visit). (S/S)

307.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, November 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Long-Term Military Relationship with Egypt (C)
At Tab A is the State-Defense decision memorandum on longer-
term military assistance to Egypt, which you requested after the PRC
met on this subject. I have held this memorandum awaiting Jim McIn-
tyre’s comments, but they are still not available, and I think that a deci-
sion is needed now. (C)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The State-Defense memorandum provides the technical informa-
tion you need to make the crucial decisions required, so I would like to
address myself to the larger picture. With these decisions, we have the
opportunity, and in my view the obligation, to cement a relationship of
vital importance to the United States. President Sadat has nowhere else
to turn for military assistance. He is in this position by virtue of turning
away from the Soviets and moving closer to the United States and Is-
rael—steps of unprecedented benefit to our interests in the Middle
East. Our failure to support Sadat militarily at this critical juncture
could have disastrous effect on our overall peace effort. (S)
It is important to stress that we have taken responsible steps to
keep the assistance package at a reasonable level. We received a larger
and more expensive list from Sadat, but we pared that list by pro-
jecting smaller, yet more sophisticated, Egyptian armed forces. Further,
we are working with the Egyptians to build up their indigenous arms
production base, and, if the moderate Arabs move closer to the peace
process, we hope to encourage their resuming contributions to Egypt’s
defense. (S)
I strongly agree that we need to provide more assistance and pre-
ferred financing terms in FY 81, and that this funding should be in ad-
dition to the already strapped FY 81 security assistance budget. We do
not want an arms delivery gap to occur during the next two critical
years, nor do we want to affect adversely vital interests elsewhere as
we move to protect the interests at stake here. (S)
Finally, I think that sufficient facts are presented here for you to
make a decision at this time, rather than to wait until after the budget
cycle runs its course next month. Sadat is expecting a reply shortly, and
delaying the decision until December could affect the Strauss/Linowitz
visit on November 17. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve each of the five recommendations in the State-
Defense memorandum at Tab A. (U)

Tab A
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and Secretary
of Defense Brown to President Carter
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Long-Term Military Relationship with Egypt
Issue for Decision
You asked7 for a decision paper examining the implications of a
long term military assistance program for Egypt along the lines pro-
posed by the PRC, and alternatives. In this paper, we have taken into
account the budget impacts of continuing security assistance for Egypt,
as you requested.
BACKGROUND
Following Vice President Mubarak’s visit last June, you wrote to
President Sadat9 suggesting that our two governments work closely to
plan a longer-term military supply relationship, in order that Egypt
could satisfy a greater proportion of its military equipment needs over
the next several years. You also indicated at that time the hope that
Egypt would assign highest priority to economic development rather
than to military programs. DOD began the planning process with
Egypt in August. Based on its report of the results of this first ex-
change, the PRC met on September 20 to consider the issues and make
some recommendations.
The DOD report validated Egypt’s priority military needs for the
defense of its homeland. The analysis showed that whatever assistance
we could provide within feasible financial assistance levels would not
meet all their needs and would not create a significant threat to Israel;
Egyptian force structure would in fact be less than that in the 1973–79
period. It is also clear that, with the cessation of Soviet assistance earlier
and Arab assistance at the time of the Peace Treaty, the US is seen by
Egypt as not only chief supplier of military equipment but practically
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the only source of substantial credit assistance. In view of present polit-
ical circumstances and Egypt’s economic situation, the US is likely to
remain in this position for a while to come.
Our decisions on the scope of a longer term arms supply relation-
ship thus have significant political content. This is true not only of the
size of the program, but also its pace. The deliveries in the current
“three-year” program are front-loaded. Therefore, if we simply phase
in a five-year program after “the three-year program,” we will have a
severe interim “delivery gap” of 2–3 years which will put a serious
strain on our overall relationship.
The PRC recommended a multi-year security assistance program
million annually for the five years thereafter, FY 1982–86, borrowing
earlier starts of selected new programs in order to minimize the gap in
deliveries of equipment, and relying on future appropriations to ensure
full funding of approved programs. The PRC also recommended that
few more F–4Es (i.e., about 15) if necessary.
There are several issues that require your decision:
—The multi-year nature of the US commitment;
—Annual funding levels;
—Whether to begin additional funding in FY 1981;
—Use of “cash-flow” financing;
—Sale of F–16 aircraft and M60 tanks.
The Nature of the US Commitment
With the Peace Treaty, the $1. billion FMS program, and your de-
cision to enter into joint planning, we are already well on the road
toward a long term security assistance relationship with Egypt. To
move the planning process beyond this point, we need to indicate to
Egypt what level of credits we might provide in future years.
Given extensive and pressing Egyptian modernization needs, and
important programs with a single year’s credits, nor delay the start of
programs till the requisite credits had been accumulated. This means
we must start selected major programs with available credits, e.g.,
drawing upon the unspent portion of the $1. billion program, taking
the risk that Congress will appropriate in subsequent years the credits
necessary to continue those programs (this is called the “cash-flow” ap-
proach). Nevertheless, we do not propose a formal multi-year budget
commitment. Rather we recommend that we continue the planning
process with Egypt, indicating the specific level of FMS financing we
intend to seek from Congress in FY 1981 and FY 1982. We would make
clear that financing is subject to annual Congressional authorization
and appropriation. We would point out that we do not have a formal
multi-year commitment with Israel. We would indicate that we intend
to request substantial levels for the out-years, suggesting we use the FY
82 figure (and by implication its extension in future years) for planning
purposes only. As programs are planned by the US and Egypt together
under these sums, the US would carefully control the flow of letters of
offer to them in order to avoid overcommitment.
FY 82 Funding Levels
We have studied Egypt’s military needs and priority equipment
requests in great detail. We examined alternative annual funding levels
to see what militarily justified types and quantities of equipment could
be bought by Egypt with our credit assistance. Illustrative alternatives
are as follows:
—$500 million a year would permit purchase over five years of
list of vehicles and other equipment, and no additional air defense. This
is well under the quantities Egypt has said have priority and which we
believe are justified from a military point of view.
—$650 million a year would allow us either to add somewhat to the
numbers of aircraft or tanks Egypt could buy or to offer a more substan-
tial amount of the smaller equipment items the Egyptian services
would like so much to have and we believe they urgently need.
—$800 million a year would permit purchase of the full quantity of
no more aircraft and no more air defense weapons. This amount would
neatly replace Arab military aid, which was $800 million a year.
—$1 billion a year—President Sadat’s request and the same as Israel
now receives—would permit the purchase by Egypt of 80 F–16s, the
full priority complement of 900 tanks, additional air defenses, but no
additional aircraft or frigate-type ships.
The PRC recommended $800 million a year.
None of these alternatives meet all of Egypt’s needs or priority re-
quests. They would, however, provide some of Egypt’s requirements
for advanced weapons (which we support) over the next six years.
Nonetheless, the lower alternatives shown above would result in con-
siderable delays in the delivery of equipment, because of the slow pace
of programs required. While we are also embarking on a program of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
limited production assistance to Egypt, it will have minimal impact in
satisfying Egyptian requirements for the foreseeable future.
The budgetary impact differential among these annual funding
levels is not great, assuming no “forgiveness” (grant aid) is involved.
For FMS credits extended by the Federal Financing Bank, the annual
appropriation must cover only the guarantee fees, which equal 10% of
the loans. Thus, the budget appropriation would range from $50 mil-
lion to $100 million a year. OMB already assumes, in its budget projec-
tions for FY 1982, credit funding at the $500 million a year level. (The
possibility of FY 1981 funding is discussed below).
We are sensitive to the “proportionality” of the annual funding
level to that of Israel. As it approaches Israel’s $1 billion, Israel will un-
doubtedly feel the case for additional security assistance it has sub-
mitted is even more justified. They have asked for an additional $800
million a year, but we do not believe the accelerated pace of military
equipment deliveries which this would imply is necessary, and we
have not encouraged them to think they will get it or even a portion of
it. An increase for Israel, assuming that it contained the usual 50% for-
giveness, would add greatly to the budget impact; e.g., an additional
$800 million a year for Israel would require an additional budget ap-
propriation of $440 million. If this initiative with Egypt did result in our
also increasing assistance for Israel, we would want to strongly resist
extending any forgiveness in that increase.
We do not recommend forgiveness for Egypt. Egypt’s external fi-
nancing deficit appears just about balanced by the external assistance
they receive. Egypt should be able to manage the interest and subse-
quently the principal repayments if we offer the same terms provided
for under Peace Treaty package—10 year grace period and 20-year re-
payment of principal thereafter. By the same token, however, we do not
recommend that Egypt directly fund a major portion of approved pur-
chases from their own resources. It would merely divert resources from
priority economic development. In our judgment, these recommenda-
tions would not lead to a requirement for an increase in currently pro-
jected U.S. economic aid levels to Egypt.
FY 1981 Funding
The original $1. billion treaty package was supposed to cover a
three-year period, but it is already committed and it satisfied only a
small portion of Egypt’s priority needs. If we do not begin the new
assistance program until FY 1982, we would face a politically difficult
two-year gap before we can even announce a new sale to Egypt, and a
three or four-year gap between completion of major deliveries from the
$1. billion program and the start of new deliveries. In the meantime,
Egypt’s Soviet equipment will be seriously deteriorating, with attend-
ant decline in Egyptian military morale.

There will be unspent credits remaining from the $1. billion
we could draw upon those to start new programs for Egypt (“cash
flow”). However, we would have to pay them back out of subsequent
years’ appropriations.
Therefore, the PRC has recommended some new funds be made
available in FY 1981 to permit a transition to be made to the new longer-
term program. The PRC specifically suggested $350 million for this
purpose.
Additional credits for Egypt in FY 1981 could have serious impli-
cations for the overall FMS credit program. State and Defense have re-
treaty commitments to Spain, Philippines, and Panama; $250 million is
for Turkey, leaving only $879 million for Greece, Jordan, Thailand, and
numerous smaller but crucial programs around the world. A program
for Egypt cannot be undertaken with the security assistance financing
levels cited above. A decision to begin a regular program of FMS fi-
nancing for Egypt means the level will have to be raised by the amount
earmarked for Egypt, for FY 1981 and beyond.
Alternatives for FY 1981 funding are as follows:
—No new credits in FY 1981. We could make some minor new pro-
gram starts by borrowing from the unspent portion of the $1. billion,
but this alternative would probably be insufficient to start any major
program, like F–16. Egypt would see cash flow financing alone as
simply an accounting sleight of hand. Some new U.S. resources need to
be committed to meet our foreign policy objectives.
—$225 million in new credits in FY 1981. This would make available
a total of $545 million in credits in FY 1981, permitting some new pro-
gram starts. However, at the pace these amounts would permit, the de-
livery gap could be reduced in perhaps only one major program. The
—$350 million in new credits in FY 1981. This would make available
up to $670 million, and would allow substantial new starts and acceler-
ation of deliveries to close the delivery gap. It would impose less of a
“cash flow” payback burden in FY 1982 and thereafter. The budget im-
pact would be only $35 million (10%) additional. The PRC recom-
mended this alternative.
Use of Cash Flow Financing
The foregoing alternatives for FY 1981 funding have assumed the
use of cash flow financing to minimize the deliveries gap. Objections to
cash flow financing, which we utilize in the Israeli program, have been
raised because of the financial risk to the US involved unless a long-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
term FMS financing program at substantial levels were established. Be-
cause of this risk we do not recommend cash flow financing across the
board; rather we propose this method of financial implementation only
on a selected basis to begin important programs in FY 80 and 81 and
only drawing on committed but not yet spent funds from the original
$1. billion program. We believe that limiting the use of cash flow fi-
nancing in this manner meets previous objections and limits our finan-
cial exposure to an acceptable level. Cash flow financing (up to $320
million) would make available up to $545–670 million to begin new
programs in FY 1981. This will help bridge the gap until a more sub-
stantial program can begin in FY 82.
Equipment
Only F–16 aircraft and M60 tanks pose policy issues. Their release
poses no serious arms control or arms transfer issues given the quan-
tities under consideration and the quality of equipment in neighboring
countries. We have sold identical or superior equipment to other
friendly nations in the area. Tactically, Israel could object in hopes we
will provide it more equipment and we will need to conduct extensive
consultations with Congress before any formal proposal is made. Be-
cause of production line problems the tank sale may have to be notified
to Congress relatively soon. F–16s might wait, although we need a deci-
sion in principle to permit us to continue our discussions with the
Egyptians.
We have looked at less capable equipment such as F–4s and
M48A5s from the U.S. inventory, but have concluded we cannot strip
U.S. forces without adversely affecting U.S. combat capability. We
back M48s from Jordan. This may change over time and we will keep
the situation under review.
Congressional and Israeli Implications
A substantial continuing FMS program for Egypt will come as no
surprise to either Israel or to the Congress. Israel will probably not ob-
ject as long as the program does not threaten its security—which any
feasible programs do not—but it will certainly bring pressure to in-
crease its own security assistance level. Congress has been supportive
of our security assistance to Egypt. We will have to guard against Con-
gressional attempts to wedge the Egyptian program in under the
overall level or to cut crucial programs in other countries. Once we
have your decisions, we plan to consult closely with key members and
committees about the emerging program.

Recommendations:13
1. That we continue our five-year planning discussions with Egypt,
without seeking a multi-year appropriation from Congress, on the
basis of anticipated annual FMS credit amounts of up to:
—$1 billion (equal to Israel)
—$800 million (recommended by PRC)
—$650 million
—$500 million
2. That we begin new FMS financing in FY 1981 at:
—$350
million
(budget
impact
$35
million)
(PRC
recommendation)
—Other
3. That the amount of financing for Egypt in FY 1981 and in subse-
quent years be added to the projected FMS financing level.
facilitate selected new program starts and sustain the momentum of
programs.
tanks.
Cyrus Vance
Secretary of State
W. Graham Claytor
Secretary of Defense

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

308.
Memorandum From the Special Adviser to the Secretary of
State for Middle East Affairs (Sanders) to Secretary of State
Vance
Washington, November 9, 1979
SUBJECT
General Assembly Resolutions on Israeli Settlements
In casting our votes, I feel that we should be mindful of the strong
possibility that the Israeli 1978 reaction to our vote may not be an accu-
rate barometer of their 1979 response.
It is important to remember that the domestic political situation in
Israel today is extremely delicate—unlike a year ago—and that the fact
that Israel raised few objections last year to these resolutions does not
mean that they will not become the subject of heated debate this year.

309.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 13, 1979
SUBJECT
Arab Summit
The Arab Foreign Ministers meet in Tunis Wednesday and
meeting this morning on the subject. The following were the
conclusions:
—Lebanon: The Lebanese want this to be the first agenda item, to
get some serious consideration for their initiative. The Saudis will not
get out in front on this question, which they see as foundering on the
future of Haddad. They are more concerned with using the Summit to
mediate between Algeria and Morocco (which is unlikely to succeed).
Boutros’ meeting in Damascus5 over the weekend did not give much
basis for real optimism. So far, we have stayed low-key, approaching
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
only the Saudis. We should consider slightly more involvement, perhaps
with talking points to selected Arab participants. This can be judged on the
basis of the Foreign Ministers meeting.
—Rejectionists: They will no doubt try to put together some rhet-
oric, if not some concrete action. They will set the tone of the meeting.
Saudi Arabia, lacking a consensus among the moderates, is inclined to
be passive. The pressure to move to consensus, however, is on the hard-
line side, not the moderate side (as was true at Baghdad I and II). We
should make this point to Saudi Arabia and other moderates, in order to try
shifting rhetoric, and also to give Lebanon a better chance of being a
focus of attention instead.
—Israel: A key factor in the Summit will be the impending deporta-
tion of Mayor Shaka. There is a consensus in Israel on this point, and
not much give. But if it happens, the likelihood of stronger rhetoric out
of the Summit, and coalescence around hardline positions, will increase
considerably. The peace process will be damaged on the West Bank.
Newsom is talking to Nehushtan; we should consider going to the Vance/
Strauss level immediately. Revelation of their settlement plan before
the Summit will also have a serious effect.
—Oil: Even with Iran, it is unlikely that any new steps will take
place on oil at the Summit, although 1) Ghaddafi is almost certain to
raise it; and 2) there is a good chance that there will be a declaration on

oil in relation to the future—e.g. the exchange of Israeli and Egyptian
Ambassadors in February.
—Sanctions against Egypt: New steps are unlikely to be taken; how-
ever, there is a good chance of a declaration listing a series of punitive
steps following the exchange of Ambassadors.
—Eastern Front: It will probably be raised by Syria and/or Iraq and
the PLO, but is unlikely to be established. At most, there will be a decla-
ration of intention. If it does get serious consideration, it will sink the
whole Lebanon initiative.
—Hussein initiative: It is essentially dead at the moment; in partic-
ular, Arafat has cancelled his trip to Amman this weekend (presumably
because of Iran), and Hussein can’t move without coordination with
the PLO. Failure of this effort leaves the moderates without an issue
around which to coalesce.
—Hostages: Iran will no doubt be discussed privately. If the hos-
tage issue is still unresolved, it is possible that the Summit could take a
position (most likely privately conveyed); we should consider asking
Waldheim to send a message to the Arab League Secretary-General if the situa-
tion is not resolved this week.
—Iraq: It will work hard to dominate the Summit and drive it in a
hardline direction, but might be disposed to be more moderate if we
were to have a preliminary discussion about common problems with Iran. This
should not even be considered until the hostages have been released, and then
balanced against the risks of our later being associated with any Iraqi action
against Iran.
—Sadat: We should suggest to him gently that he say nothing publicly to
inflame the Summit. (S/S)
In general, Arab Summits are not helpful to our interests. We are
helped, however, by the number of items on the agenda (also including
the Euro-Arab dialogue and aid to Jordan, PLO, etc.), and a lot of dis-
array among the rejectionists. (S)
We also discussed the potential impact on the Gulf Arabs of the
Iranian situation. The consensus was that we will be better placed for
low-key discussions with countries like Saudi Arabia on security, and
that the Iran situation would continue the Saudis’ drift back to us (as

310.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Special Representative for
Middle East Peace Negotiations-Designate (Linowitz)
Washington, November 14, 1979
SUBJECT
Middle East Negotiations (U)
You take over2 at a time of deep skepticism about the possibilities
for success of the talks:
—the Begin government is on the edge of paralysis and, even if it
survives, is unlikely to become much stronger; at the same time, the
election/government-forming process in Israel is measured in months,
not weeks;
—the Shaka affair3—if he is indeed expelled—threatens a collapse
of any local government on the West Bank, deep disillusionment, and
serious problems for the Egyptians at the Talks; and
—although the President is committed to the process, election de-
velopments here are leading to skepticism, heightened by the shift of
command in our delegation;
—in any event, the Israelis are reluctant to make the concessions
needed to have a Self-Governing Authority that is more than a hollow
There are some major factors working in our favor, however:
—the President’s deep personal interest and proven courage on
this issue;
—the self-interest of the parties in not seeing Camp David
collapse;
—Sadat’s continuing optimism, his developing personal relation-
ship with Begin, and the “sea change” in Egyptian and Israeli attitudes
about one another;
—the fact that there are signed documents, with Begin’s signature
on them, and real debate and uncertainty in Israel about the conse-
quences (both in the West Bank/Gaza and in relations with Egypt) of a
failure of the Autonomy Talks to reach agreement on a Self-Governing
Authority; and
—the political possibility of slipping the date for completion of the
talks (May 24), provided they are seen to be serious and basically on
Status of the Process (U)
The goal of the Autonomy Talks has been to get agreement on a
Self-Governing Authority that would contain enough to induce resi-
dents of the West Bank and Gaza to go to the polls. If they don’t vote, in
effect the process fails—or at least goes into a holding period until
something else can be worked out. As noted above, the May 24 date is
not immutable; and ways could be found to finesse it for a time. The
pressures would mount, however—in terms of a recrudescence of
Sadat’s isolation, an increasing squeeze on oil, and a delay in repairing
our relations with a number of Arab states. Needless to say, President
Carter’s achievements so far would be tarnished. (S)
The talks are still in a “working up” phase. Publicly, we justify this
in terms of the need for the political processes in Egypt and Israel to get
used to dealing with the concept of autonomy, and the need to prepare
issues for political consideration. All this is true. In addition, Sadat has
asked that the talks proceed at this pace. Outside observers see in this
his desire to get as much land (and oil) back as possible before reaching
the crunch with Israel on Autonomy. He and Khalil argue, however,
that the timing really relates to: a) the developing relationship with
Begin and Israel; b) continuing proof to the rejectionists that Israel is
meeting each of its Sinai commitments on time, and thus can be in-
duced to meet its West Bank/Gaza commitments (and, by implication,
that Egypt is getting land back while the rejectionists are getting

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
nothing); and c) the passage of time in weakening the rejectionist
There is a school of thought which holds that Egypt will “turn” on
the Israelis as soon as the Interim Line is reached (January 25). Khalil
specifically dismissed this thought at the London meeting; and Egypt
has publicly pledged that the exchange of Ambassadors will take place
on February 25, whatever is happening in the Autonomy Talks. (S)
Thus the Egyptian preference is for the real issues to be met at the
political level beginning next month or early January at the latest. How-
ever, they have argued that we should take the lead in pushing Israel,
against the background of the “favorable climate” Sadat has engen-
dered. In his meeting with Mubarak, President Carter firmly rejected
this division of responsibility, and also stressed that we cannot be out
in front of Egypt on issues like settlements. (S)
Sadat’s future role is a key mystery. He has shown himself capable
of dramatic action (and turning on Israel is one such possibility); he has
floated ideas like a new international conference in El Arish (though no
one has taken him seriously—rightly, so far); and he constantly talks
about the deal he will cut with Begin. Sadat keeps focussing on Jeru-
salem as the lead for such a deal (Begin, meanwhile, congratulates him-
self on his forebearance when Sadat raises the subject). And Sadat has
floated the idea of diverting Nile waters to the Sinai and Negev—at
first in exchange for a deal on Jerusalem, until Begin reacted harshly to
this connection. (CIA tells us that this idea would be very expensive, ig-
nores Egypt’s own water needs, and would be politically costly). (S)
From our standpoint, the Sadat-Begin relationship is central—
which is one reason someone of your political stature on our side is
vital to moving the process on with these two key leaders. Ultimately,
agreement has to come “top down,” rather than “bottom up.” The Is-
raeli delegation is deliberately weak politically—a factor contributing
to Dayan’s resignation. On the Egyptian side, Sadat will ultimately call
the shots; but Khalil is now firmly on board, and increasingly demon-
strates his capabilities and importance in the process. (S)
We are doing what we can to protect Sadat’s domestic position. To
be sure, there is not much concern for the Palestinians on the part of the
Egyptian people; but there is popular concern to see that “peace pays.”
Thus Bob took businessmen to Egypt to work on high pay-off projects
(shirts, pumps, soy protein for bread and milk). We have stretched our
aid dollars, providing Egypt with nearly one-third of PL-480 (and de-
nominating the commitment in tons, not inflatable dollars). We have
sent Doug Bennet, Irwin Miller and others to Egypt. We press the Euro-
peans and Japanese—even those not behind Camp David—to try
easing Egypt’s isolation with development aid and investment. At
some point, there has to be an Egyptian payoff for peace if Sadat is to
continue to be secure. (S)
Egypt’s isolation is harder to deal with. Only Oman and Sudan
support Camp David-with Morocco tacitly there. Thus we have put in
some effort to support all three countries (though for other reasons as
well). And the President has been personally involved in trying to stop
the mutual recriminations between Sadat and the Saudi leadership. So
far, Sadat has not been wrong in his predictions about the weakness of
the “steadfastness front”—as witness the collapse of Syrian-Iraqi unity
efforts. The Arab Summit on November 20 may repair the front some-
what—though probably more in rhetoric than in action. A far more im-
portant date is February 25—the exchange of Ambassadors. Then,
there will be intense pressure to boycott the Suez Canal and Sumed
pipeline, cut travel arrangements, and end worker remittances—which
together (with oil) now make Egypt slightly better off in foreign
earnings than before Camp David. (S)
We are not meeting all Egypt’s aid requests, however. The Presi-
400,000 short of the “minimum” requested by Sadat and Mubarak, and
which they again pressed upon Bob Bergland. (The Egyptians have not
been told this yet; it was held up pending some basically “good news”
on the military side—but that military aid decision has now been held
up at the behest of OMB). This aid relationship will clearly be impor-
tant as we move forward, and your input will be vital. (One school of
thought holds that Sadat wants a relationship with us equivalent to that
of Israel: hence, the demand for aid and the squabble with Saudi
Arabia. Whether or not that is true, we clearly can’t finance such a rela-
tionship). (S)
In Israel, the Palestinian issue is now clearly a subject for debate—
and it won’t go away. The psychological momentum—however
halting—is in the direction of doing something to deal with the
problem. But it (and other factors) may tear the Government apart even
before the tough issues at the Talks are broached at the political level.
From our perspective, however, having Labor in might not be a
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
blessing. Not only is there the time needed to put a new government in
place; but also “autonomy” is Begin’s concept (though he didn’t go
very far with it). Labor has favored territorial readjustment, the Allon
Plan, etc., and it will not be easy for Labor to shift gears. Because of
Begin’s personal commitment to Camp David, having a strong Begin
government would probably be best from the standpoint of the talks—
but this may now be a pipedream. (An alternative school of thought
holds that Begin’s leadership on peace is played out anyway, and that
only an alternative political constellation can now move forward). (S)
The choice for Israel is fairly stark: between having five more years
of effective “control” over the West Bank/Gaza—with the legitimacy of
Camp David (as far as it goes)—or a breakdown of a framework for
dealing with the Palestinian issue, further isolation in the world (where
Israel is probably at its low point) and even more terrorism. The nature
of this choice is added reason for trying to get a Self-Governing Au-
thority more or less on time: thus preserving some “framework,” in-
stead of seeing diplomatic anarchy again. (S)
One angle is worth exploring—though not much weight can be
put on it: that this is probably Begin’s last chance to make peace for his
nation, and to assure his place in Judaism’s history. (S)
We should also not rule out the possibility that Dayan will
re-involve himself in the peace process (provided his health9 holds
out). He played a key role in Camp David, etc., and is never without
The Begin government may collapse in the near future10 (the smart
money gives him only a few more weeks; yet the sizeable Labor lead in
the polls will concentrate Likud and NRP minds, and creates a strong
incentive for soldiering on). If the government does collapse, imple-
mentation of the Egypt-Israel treaty will most likely proceed on
schedule. But it is unrealistic to expect the Autonomy Talks to make
any progress (though the form and actual meetings will most likely
proceed). The timetable will almost certainly slip, though we must not
rule out Israeli political ingenuity (e.g. a government of national unity
that could take some decisions). (S)
The aid relationship with Israel will be important. It gets $1. bil-
lion now (in effect, “straightlining” for the past three years, discounting
the special $3 billion peace package). This means real erosion from in-
not expect to get that (and may realistically not hope for more than an
Bank/Gaza will vote. (If they do not, Sadat could claim he did his best
and wash his hands—but that is a risky course; he is more likely to
stretch the process out until/unless he were sure the Self-Governing
Authority were at least credible). Here, the role of the PLO is impor-
tant—if not vital. During recent months, two schools of thought were
current in the U.S. government: a) to try resolving the question of our
talking with the PLO, perhaps through a UN resolution, which would
give it “legitimacy” sufficient for it to give a green light to Palestinian
voters; or b) to get a Self-Governing Authority good enough to attract
voters, and perhaps even to challenge the extent of PLO veto authority
in the territories. There were indications over the summer of PLO
movement in a direction that might have made course a) possible; but
that never really had a firm base in the politics of Israel and Egypt, as
Sadat worked to build his special relationship with Begin and to de-
velop the “sea change” in Israeli-Egyptian attitudes. Sadat confirmed
that in rejecting the idea of a compromise U.S. resolution (“making
Begin’s arguments better than Begin,” in Bob’s words). And the USG is
now committed to course b). However, it is possible we will face other
UN resolutions, and other suggestions within the government to try
course a). Whatever the political traffic might have borne in August,
however, it will clearly not bear course a) between now and May. (S)
Camp David does provide for a Palestinian role in the Talks. This
will not happen; however, some form of informal consultation might
be possible. It is also possible that King Hussein could work out some-
thing with Arafat that would be a “complement” to Camp David, in
terms of the future of the West Bank following the autonomy period.
There have clearly been some soundings; but little progress. (S)
Hussein has still not recovered from his anger and disillusionment
with us and especially Egypt over Camp David. His not seeing the
President during his visit to the UN did not increase his willingness to
play a constructive role, though in his conversation with Cy Vance11 he
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
did play with the idea of a complementary initiative. We could en-
courage an initiative along the lines of a federal or confederal relation-
ship between the West Bank and Jordan, which Hussein has advanced
in the past. The Begin government would not accept it (it has residual
claims to sovereignty over the West Bank); but it is consistent with the
Labor approach. The important thing is to seek progress in the Talks
that will increase the incentives for Hussein to be involved in the West
Bank in some way during the next few years, to avoid being frozen out
by an autonomy regime in which he has no part. At the moment, this is
a long-shot. (S)
In the next few months, Saudi Arabia will also be important, both
in showing confidence in the possibility of some success in the talks—
by keeping oil production up; and in trying to play a moderating role in
Arab politics (beginning with the Arab Summit on November 20). In
general, the Saudis have been reluctant to use oil in politics; with the
exchange of Ambassadors—or outright failure of the Talks—it might
not be able to sustain that position. (At the same time, economically
Saudi Arabia probably wants to sustain at least an 8. million barrel a
day output, and it will see its oil production decisions in the context of
its total relationship with us). We should keep up our discussions with
the Saudis on the peace process, while continuing efforts on Saudi mili-
tary problems, Gulf security, etc. (S)
At some point, Bob had intended to go to Syria. The object was to
keep Assad informed, and also to indicate the ways in which comple-
tion of Camp David could lead in the direction of a comprehensive
peace. The Syrians would not receive him in the context of Camp
David; it is unlikely that they would soon receive you, either, though it
is something to keep in mind (the Saudis could be helpful in arranging
The Talks
State will be briefing you on the detailed issues. Suffice it to point
out here the tough problems, which include:
—the status of East Jerusalem (for purposes of voting), where
some sort of dual voting might be possible;
—the voting status of returnees from 1967 (as provided for in
Camp David);
—the “legislative” vs. “administrative” character of the Self-
Governing Authority;

—land and water (including settlements);
—the source of authority for the Self-Governing Authority; and
—both internal and external security. (C)
The issue of supervision of elections was more or less resolved in
London—but that was child’s play compared to the other issues. (C)
In terms of your role, there are a number of steps, which you un-
doubtedly have already thought about:
—talking with Evron, Ghorbal, the other Arab Ambassadors, se-
lected regional UN Ambassadors, and Waldheim;
—visiting Egypt and Israel soon, and establishing contact with
Sadat, Khalil, Begin, Burg (and other Israeli leaders); attending an early
meeting of the Talks;
—meeting with American Jewish leaders, the Hamilton Subcom-
mittee, and the Stone Subcommittee;
—working towards meetings with non-PLO Palestinians;
—meeting with Habib on Lebanon.
Because of the interplay of issues in the Middle East, there are
other issues where your involvement will be important, so that every-
thing stays on track, including:
—Lebanon. The “initiative” is being pursued in terms both of Leb-
anon itself, and of preventing a recurrence of violence from damaging
the Autonomy Talks. (Sadat has not let the talks be affected by past
Lebanese incidents, but might not be able to sustain that position). Our
position rules out any dealing with the PLO (there was some opinion in
the Administration to use the Lebanon initiative to resolve the larger
problem of talking with the PLO). The initiative is low-key, and de-
pends on Lebanese leadership and effectiveness with the Arabs. Yet its
course will have an impact on your work;
—Settlements. How we play this issue in our ongoing diplomacy is
important, in addition to any effort we consider to try getting a
“good-will” freeze on settlements. It is important that you be in the
loop on USG approaches to Israel and public statements on this subject
(as on others, such as any resumption of strikes in Lebanon);
—Aid. As noted above, you are the key person to work with Cy
and Zbig in helping the President relate levels of aid to Egypt and Israel
to the peace process;
—Arms sales. These are important with regard to Jordan and Saudi
Arabia, both politically and concerning the stance these countries take
towards Camp David;
—UN Resolutions. As noted above, we may have to face one or
more new resolutions on the PLO. (Khalil has played around with an
Egyptian initiative, which Bob has tried to turn off);

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Collateral peace issues. These include oil (now hopefully resolved,
though the terms of the agreement have been reported to us by the two
sides in different terms), Sinai observer arrangements, etc. (S)
311.
Briefing Memorandum From the Senior Adviser to the
Secretary of State (Habib) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, November 17, 1979
SUBJECT
Lebanon—Discussion with Dobrynin
As instructed, I called on Dobrynin today to inform him of our
views on the situation in Southern Lebanon and our support for the
Lebanese initiative in that regard. I outlined for him the nature of the
Lebanese initiative and its purpose, emphasizing that we believed it
was worth supporting for humanitarian as well as political reasons. I
noted the existence of a fragile ceasefire which we sought to make per-
manent, the relationship to Security Council Resolution 425, and the
dangers of confrontation and escalation if the situation in Southern
Lebanon was to heat up again.
I then gave him a brief account of my recent visit4 to the region and
ended up by referring to the forthcoming discussion of this problem at
the Arab Summit meeting in Tunis.
Dobrynin had obviously been informed of Soviet conversations on
the subject with the Syrians and with the PLO. He said that the Syrians
to some extent, and the PLO to a much greater extent, were suspicious
of the proposals. Both were concerned that the initiative was some sort
of U.S.-Israel-Lebanon scheme to produce a Lebanese Camp David.
That is, having in mind another partial settlement in the Middle East in
place of dealing with a comprehensive peace in which the Palestinian
question would be to the fore. The Syrians were also suspicious that the
initiative was designed to reduce their influence and bring about an
early end of their troop presence in Lebanon.
In describing the PLO position Dobrynin stressed their view that
the initiative was also designed to squeeze them out of Lebanon, or to
limit their presence there, before they had anywhere else to go and be-
fore the overall Palestinian question had been resolved. He said the
PLO considered it important to be able to maintain pressure in and
from Lebanon as a means of assuring that the overall issue of Palestine
would not be forgotten internationally.
In response to my counter-arguments he pointed out that he had
outlined the views of the Syrians and PLO, but he did not indicate that
the Soviets disagreed or had in any way sought to dissuade them. He
did confirm that the Lebanese had spoken to the Soviets, seeking sup-
port for their initiative which they described in the same manner as I
had outlined to him.
He said he would inform Moscow of our conversation and left it
that we would now await the results of the Arab Summit meeting.
Comment: I came away with the distinct feeling that the Soviets are
not inclined to be helpful, although to what extent they may have stim-
ulated the Syrian and PLO reaction is unclear. On balance, I would
think they did not need to be stimulated. The various aspects will have
to be thrashed out first at the Arab Summit, where hopefully the Leba-
nese can make some limited gains. Once we know the results we can re-
view the matter and decide what needs to be done next. I do not think
we need to conclude at this point that the prospects are all bleak, al-
though it is probable that the suspicions on all sides will be such that
progress will be slow and in small increments.

312.
Memorandum From the Ambassador to Egypt (Eilts) to
President Carter
Washington, November 21, 1979
This supplements my series of reports from the field (attached).
EGYPTIAN/SAUDI RELATIONS
First Talk With Sadat (November 14)
During my first meeting, I told Sadat that you had asked me to
visit Cairo and Jidda in order to transmit to the Saudis Sadat’s letter to
Fahd. You had been very appreciative of Sadat’s quick and positive re-
sponse. I planned to leave for Jidda the following day in order to meet
with Fahd and wondered if Sadat had any additional thoughts that he
might wish me to convey.
Sadat asked if I had read his letter to Fahd, and I said that you had
shown it to me. Sadat then asked what I thought of the letter. I said that
it was certainly a constructive initiative on his part and that I knew that
the views expressed were a true reflection of his pertinent thinking. At
the same time, my estimate was that Fahd would react negatively, es-
pecially to the long recital of Egyptian complaints of Saudi actions. (In
saying this, I made it clear that I was speaking for myself and not sug-
gesting any criticism on your part of the letter.)
Sadat was slightly taken aback, and asked what I thought should
be said to Fahd. I told him that I would carry whatever he wished, but
that in my view the recital of past complaints should be dropped. Sadat
responded that he wanted to “shock” Fahd. I said that I realized this,
but I could only tell him, as a friend and as someone who knows Fahd
well, that the effect would be counterproductive. Sadat then said that
the circumstances had changed since sending you his original letter. He
had thought that you would first send the letter to Fahd and that this
would be followed by the visit of a special representative. Since these
two actions were now taking place simultaneously, it seemed reason-
able to change the letter. What would I suggest?
I told him that I would suggest something to the effect that he,
Sadat, understands the Saudi position and respects it, that he hopes the
Saudis also understand the Egyptian position, that the moratorium on
public attacks ought to be reestablished and that some kind of direct di-
alogue be reestablished between Egypt and Saudi Arabia. I said it was
important to show that Sadat did not wish to embarass Fahd or the
Saudis and that any communication between Sadat and Fahd would
not be published.
In this connection, the last several pages of his original letter were
just the kind of constructive language that is needed.
Sadat thereupon gave Mubarak general instructions on rewriting
the letter along the lines that I had suggested, but said he also wanted
included a series of questions about the area situation which should be
of concern to both countries. Wagging his finger under my nose, he did
turn down my suggestion that he say he respects the Saudi views. He
did not respect the Saudi view, but I did not have to tell them that. I told
him I had no intention of doing so.
Sadat asked me to pass on two additional oral points to Fahd.
(a) Despite the differences between the two countries, he is pre-
pared in the event of a security threat to Saudi Arabia to help in any
way possible, and
(b) With respect to the Saudi interest in amending UN Resolution
242, Camp David had already enabled this situation to be “jumped

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
over.” The current West Bank/Gaza negotiations aim at obtaining “full
autonomy” for the Palestinians and a satisfactory resolution of the Jeru-
salem problem.
The revised letter was in fact prepared by Osama Al-Baz and given
to me late that night. The original English translation prepared by Al-
Baz is attached to this report. The Arabic version was in a sealed enve-
lope and I could not therefore check it, but I have no reason to question
that it corresponds to the English translation.
Talk With Fahd (November 17/18)
The greater part of my four-hour meeting with Fahd focused on
Egyptian/Saudi relations. Fahd remains leery of any direct or indirect
contact with the Egyptians, is deeply suspicious of Sadat, thinks Sadat
has deliberately betrayed the Arab cause at Camp David and that
nothing will come out of the West Bank/Gaza autonomy talks. He is
also convinced that, despite Egyptian promises, they will leak any mes-
sages between the two countries.
I first told him that you are concerned that a continuation of the
Saudi/Egyptian contretemps makes it more difficult for you politically
to move ahead in a meaningful fashion in the Middle East peace effort.
It is unhelpful to have the two Arab countries with which we have the
closest relations be so publicly at odds with each other. I recalled your
messages to Fahd and Sadat and said Sadat had sent you a letter in
reply, enclosing a letter to Fahd and asking that you arrange to deliver
the letter. You had asked me to undertake this mission. I then gave him
the letter and suggested it would be useful if he read it so that we could
use it as a starting point for our discussion. He did so, sometimes
nodding in slight approval, but otherwise making no substantive
comment.
He then gave me an hour and a half litany of his complaints
against Sadat very much along the lines of what he had said to me in
Rome last May, but updating it to include more recent Sadat attacks.
The thrust of his complaints was that Sadat had lied to him, that Sadat’s
earlier protestations of wanting to go to Geneva4 had been a sham as
evidenced by the sudden Jerusalem trip, that Sadat was not authorized
by anyone to speak for the Palestinians and that, judging from what he
could tell from Israeli settlement policies, nothing meaningful would
come from the current negotiations. He went to great lengths to defend

his actions at Baghdad5 and insisted Saudi policy is not dictated by any
sense of fear of Palestine or anyone else.
When I finally had a chance to say something more, I tried to set
him straight on the history of the efforts to get to Geneva, stressing that
the Syrians had pulled the rug out from that effort. I told him Sadat is
determined to get a Palestinian self-governing authority with wide
powers and responsibilities and a satisfactory solution of the Jerusalem
problem. Fahd might disagree with Sadat’s tactics, but I could assure
him that their objectives are very similar.
Fahd thought that only a statement from you to the effect that
there must be an Israeli withdrawal to the June 1967 borders with
minor rectifications and that Jerusalem must be returned to the Arabs
would help. If Sadat succeeds in his negotiations in achieving these two
objectives, he, Fahd, would be the first to applaud and to urge the other
Arab states to support the peace effort. But he doubted that this would
happen. I told him that you are determined to do your utmost to move
the peace process forward, that we should all by now recognize that
public statements do little to achieve this objective. I urged that he have
confidence in your purposes and support them. Fahd said he has full
confidence in you, but as for Sadat—that was something else.
We then went to the question of a possible dialogue. He turned
down Sadat’s suggestion of a meeting with Mubarak in Washington—
either bilateral or with an American present—or even of having some-
one else do so. What is first needed, he said, is a “period of tranquility,”
i.e., a cessation of mutual public attacks. He said that he was happy that
Sadat agrees with this, but charged that Sadat is the guilty party. I said I
was not seeking to blame anyone, but noted there had also been un-
helpful Saudi press articles. Fahd said that he had given instructions to
the Minister of Information to muzzle the press and not allow attacks
on the Egyptians.
Since you had authorized me to try out what I thought might be
useful, I then suggested the establishment of a hot line between the
two. Fahd didn’t like that, and noted that they already have a secure
channel between them. I said that I assumed he was referring to the in-
telligence channel, but noted that Mubarak had told me a message sent
four months ago had not yet been answered by the Saudis. Fahd simply
shrugged his shoulders. (It may be that Fahd’s growing doubts about
Turkibin Faisal make him uninterested in the intelligence channel.)
I told Fahd that the mischievous efforts of ill-wishers on both sides,
who were seeking to spread disinformation, could only be curbed if
some kind of a channel between Egypt and Saudi Arabia exists and is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
used. This would permit charges and rumors to be checked out before
they escalate to a point where they result in public attacks. I mentioned,
as an example, the article in the Egyptian opposition newspaper, Al-
Sha’ab, that the Saudis are financing the Kennedy campaign, an article
which had prompted Fahd to issue a public denial. This kind of thing
could be checked out before it becomes a public issue. Fahd agreed in
principle, but made it very clear that he does not trust the Egyptians.
They will at some point leak news of any such direct dialogue, however
secret it may be.
After we had gone round and round on this for a time and he
would not budge, I suggested that perhaps this kind of checking out of
malicious gossip could be done through our embassies. He seemed
agreeable. Again, however, he spoke of a “period of tranquility” of sev-
eral months after which the matter of an indirect dialogue could again
be considered. (I am convinced that he will do nothing on reestab-
lishing a dialogue with Egypt, direct or indirect, until after the ex-
change of Egyptian/Israeli ambassadors in later February and after the
inevitable ensuring flap has abated. He is scared and considers himself
vulnerable in the eyes of the other Arabs.)
Fahd said he will reply to your letter after he gets back from Tunis
and, with a little pressing, he also agreed to reply to Sadat’s letter. I
urged him to make his replies as constructive as possible and not to
give a long recital of past complaints. He gave me no commitments, but
said he would consider carefully what I had asked him to do. We shall
see.
Second Talk with Sadat (November 18)
I briefed Sadat in Ismailia about the results of my talks with Fahd. I
frankly put the best face possible on them, but made it clear that Fahd is
not yet ready to resume any kind of dialogue. I also made it clear that
Fahd believes the Egyptians will leak any such dialogue.
Sadat took it very philosophically. He said that he had not ex-
pected anything more to come from the talk with Fahd, but was glad
that Fahd had agreed to the need to reestablish a moratorium on public
attacks. He assured me that he will honor it. He also agreed that our
embassies be used to try to prevent any misunderstandings from esca-
lating to a point where they become public attacks. (Sadat will have to
be carefully watched on this, since he tends to get carried away when
he is making a speech.)
Fahd, Sadat said, is afraid. He feels himself vulnerable before the
other Arabs. Fahd will do nothing, Sadat opined, until after the ex-
change of ambassadors and the resultant flurry. Even then, Sadat
thought, Fahd will be very leery. This should not trouble us, Sadat

added, since there is nothing that Fahd or the Saudis can do to impede
the peace process.
Sadat said that it is important that the United States retain the
closest possible relations with Fahd and the Saudis in order to prevent
them, as he put it, from collaborating with the Iraqis or Libyans in ac-
tions against our allies. He mentioned the Japanese and Europeans, but
did not spell this out. If we retain such close relations with the Saudis,
Sadat said, this will suffice for him. We can all look at the situation
again early next year.
OTHER MATTERS
Middle East Peace Process
Sadat felt pleased with the way things are going. He was on cloud
nine about the return of St. Catherine6 and his visit there. He said that
during his last meeting with Begin, he had told the latter not to fight the
Jerusalem issue or self-determination. To his surprise, contrary to
Begin’s earlier “hysterical” reaction to any such suggestion, Begin had
this time simply said, “The time is not right.” When Sadat had spoken
of Begin’s brave deed in giving up the Sinai settlements, Begin had
commented, “I will take those settlements to my grave.” Sadat re-
mained optimistic about how things are working out. He had asked
Ezer Weizman to repeat his ideas to Begin, but acknowledged that
Begin may still be reluctant.
Sadat spoke of the desirability of getting the autonomy and Jeru-
salem questions resolved by the end of January. (His objective is clearly
to find a way to make an exchange of ambassadors the following
month a little more palatable to the Arab world.) He said that he is
pressing the Israelis, but thought that perhaps the time had come for
the United States to apply a bit of pressure on Begin on this matter.
Since it was not my mission to discuss the peace process and Bob
Strauss was scheduled to be there the following day, we let it go at that.
Ambassador to the Soviet Union
Sadat asked me to tell you that he is sending an ambassador to
Moscow. It will be Samih Anwar, the present Egyptian ambassador in
London. (Anwar, who is a former minister of state and was once a
counselor of the embassy in Moscow, is a very responsible and able
man. I have known him for many years and he has always been helpful

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and cooperative.) Sadat said he is doing so in an effort to see if he can
improve relations with the Soviets. He recalled there has always been a
Soviet ambassador in Cairo. This action on his part, he wished you to
know, will in no way change the Middle East peace process in which
you and he are engaged.
CONCLUSIONS
(a) Sadat remains strong, self-confident and optimistic. In contrast,
his Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs are less so. Boutros
Ghali is speaking of the need for a “mini-crisis” around the end of Jan-
uary because the autonomy negotiations will not have gotten very far.
This would be useful, in his view, as a smoke screen for the exchange of
ambassadors. Although Sadat does not seem worried about the ambas-
sadorial exchange, Khalil and Boutros Ghali are very worried about it,
especially in the absence of progress on autonomy. Sadat did say the
Egyptian ambassador will not go to Jerusalem, only to Tel Aviv.
(b) Fahd wants to be helpful, but is not anxious to be counted in at
this stage of the game. I do not think he should be pressed too hard,
though he should be continued to be reminded of the facts of the
Middle East peace effort and who prevented going to Geneva. After
yesterday’s Mecca incident, he will be even more cautious about
sticking his neck out.
(c) Our embassies in Cairo and Jidda should monitor closely so
that the moratorium on public attacks (including press) is honored.
(d) A follow-up should take place in a few months.

313.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, November 26, 1979
SUBJECT
Assessments of Israeli Political Developments (U)
At Tabs A and B are State’s assessments2 of Begin’s prospects and
the potential of a Labor government, as you requested. (C)

314.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State
25310. For DAS Draper from Amb. Lewis. Subject: Lebanon After
1. (S-entire text)
2. It seems to me that, in the wake of the Tunis Summit, some high
level U.S. contact with the GOL is needed concerning where the “initia-
tive” can go from here; without such contact, the U.S. risks being seen
as abandoning its effort to help the GOL move toward a stable peace. A
visit by Phil to Beirut following his Pakistan trip thus has my support.
N790009–0444. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Amman,
Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, Jidda, USUN, and the White House.
three Lebanese objectives for the Tunis Summit (see footnote 3, Document 309), the out-
come of the Summit “as it now appears from here is that Palestinian positions south of
the Litani will remain, with no undertaking to curtail infiltration into the UNIFIL AO nor
to refrain from launching the major external threat to Israel: seaborne attacks.” Moreover,
while a “statement of support for GOL sovereignty and LAF deployment emerged, so
did an assertion of the Palestinian’s ‘right of resistance’ against Israel on all fronts, and a
statement blaming Israel for the problems of South Lebanon.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D790544–0535)
Summit provided “a few elements which, if effectively implemented, could be basis for
some further progress in South Lebanon” and suggested that Habib could be made avail-
able to return to the Middle East following a scheduled visit to Pakistan on December

Should a visit to Beirut eventuate I also think that Phil should come
here—to do otherwise would feed Israeli suspicions that we are
cooking up something behind their backs. In addition, while Israeli re-
straint in the aftermath of the November 18 Palestinian seaborne at-
tack6 indicates that the lid Weizman put on the IDF is still firmly in
place, Phil’s presence here could only be helpful in reinforcing the cur-
rent Israeli policy of “not hitting until hit.”
3. This being said, however, such a visit would need to be handled
carefully, and keyed just about as low as possible. As in the case of
Phil’s late October visit here, it will be difficult at first to turn the
GOI—and contain the Israeli media—from the suspicion that the pur-
pose of the visit is not “fact-finding”, but to advance a substantive U.S.
initiative. And those we do convince will again be likely to scorn our ef-
fort as bereft of accomplishment or solid prospects for progress in any
way that can benefit Israel’s security. Although the Israelis are not yet
as informed as we about the events or outcome at Tunis, they have di-
gested enough of its product to have concluded that, at the least, the
PLO gave up nothing while GOL hopes to bolster its integrity and
authority were rebuffed. While it may be useful to explore with the
GOL whether there is anything positive that can be built upon the
“few elements” cited in ref A, I believe we should be very circumspect
about presenting these to the Israelis as causes for even slight opti-
mism. From what we now know of the Arab Summit’s handling of the
Lebanon problem it does not appear even remotely in line with the four
foundation-stones of “the Lebanon initiative” as understood by the Is-
raelis: an evolution from cease-fire to truce; removal of PLO and unau-
thorized fighting elements from UNIFIL’s AO; a measured expansion
of GOL authority; and no impingement on Haddad’s area for the time
being. An illustrative footnote to the Israeli attitude is the statement
which Ciechanover and others made during Phil’s last trip: that it
would help if the PLO in Beirut would cease taking credit for terrorist
attacks initiated inside Israel. This idea was put forward as something
that would, in the context of an initiative such as that sketched above,
help Israel maintain the ceasefire as part of an overall movement
toward a truce. In context of the negative Tunis Summit outcome, how-
poned pending “indication” from the Lebanese “that such a trip would be useful.”
piloted by Palestinian infiltrators off the Israeli coast near Nahariyya. In the exchange of
fire which followed, two Palestinians were reportedly killed and two captured. (Tele-
Policy File, D790532–0996)
ment 306.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ever, PLO acceptance of this point looks more like public relations
one-upsmanship and is being seen by Israelis as a way for the PLO to
heighten international criticism of future Israeli retaliation against such
terrorist attacks.
4. All in all, then, it seems from here to be a good idea for Phil to
proceed to the Middle East after Pakistan. If this is the decision, I defi-
nitely feel he should come—at the end of whatever itinerary is
chosen—to Israel. But we should be most careful in my opinion not to
characterize this swing as an attempt to build upon the Arab summit,
but rather as an opportunity for Phil to be briefed by those who partici-
pated at Tunis and get the reactions of those affected by the outcome as
it pertains to the Lebanon problem.
Lewis

315.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt
311093. Subject: Responses to President Sadat’s Message to Presi-
dent Carter. Ref: State 293463.
1. Secret-entire text.
2. In a manner and at a time you deem most suitable, please convey
the following oral response3 on behalf of the administration to Presi-
dent Sadat’s letter of September 94 (assistance to Egypt). Septel5 pro-
vided like talking points in response to Sadat’s October 6 (Soviet/
Cuban security threats) letter.
3. Assistance to Egypt:
—The various aspects of U.S. assistance for Egypt have, of course,
been the subject of a continuing dialogue between our two govern-
ments. A number of the points raised in President Sadat’s letter were
discussed with Vice President Mobarak during his September visit,7
not only by the President but also by other senior officials. And we in
the Embassy have similarly had frequent contacts with you and others
here on these matters.
—On the subject of our longer-term military supply relationship,
Vice President Mobarak’s visit was very useful, coming as it did in the
immediate wake of Dave McGiffert’s Mission to Egypt8 and during the
initial course of the decision-making process in Washington. This latter
process has taken longer than we had hoped, but future programs for
Egypt cannot be considered in isolation—the relationship to other bud-
getary requirements and the need for congressional support, to cite but
two examples, must be considered.
—President Carter and his top advisers are taking a careful look at
your requests for military assistance. We hope in the near future to hold
discussions again in Cairo with Minister Ali and General Bedawi which
will allow you to prepare definite plans.
—As Vice President Mobarak noted, your needs are great. On the
one hand, we will not be able to do all that you might desire, particu-
larly in the short term, because of budgetary ceilings. On the other
hand, there have already been pluses, such as our achievements in get-
ting some of the F–4s and APCs to Cairo in time for the ceremonies on
sponded to an October 1 message from Carter, informing the former of the measures the
administration would take in response to the Soviet combat brigade in Cuba. In the letter,
Sadat proposed four measures to counter “the exploitation by the Soviet Union of unjust
situations still prevailing in various areas of the Middle East, in Africa, in the Far East,
and in Latin America:” 1) a “long range” program of economic and military assistance to
the countries “most directly affected by the Soviet efforts at penetration and destabiliza-
tion;” 2) “increase the capabilities of countries willing to take a firm stand against the So-
viet plans;” 3) “increase efforts to solve the international problems which are exploited by
the Soviet Union;” and 4) support “genuine liberation movements who should not be left
in a position where they feel that their only support comes from the Soviet Union and
other Soviet-leaning countries.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
October 6. We will do our best to meet your critical needs and look to a
continuing relationship which will enable us to do more in the future.
—In that connection, we welcome the signing last month of the
memorandum of understanding10 covering future cooperation that we
may be able to undertake with your domestic defense industry. This is
a complex field and we need to work carefully together to ensure that
our efforts are fully successful. But it is also an area which offers the
possibility of sustained benefits not only to your military but with pos-
sible application to the civilian side as well.
—On the economic front, we are pleased that you perceive an im-
provement in the area of economic cooperation, a subject which, as you
know, was a major focus of conversation in Washington with Vice Pres-
ident Mobarak. Here too, while we may be unable to respond as com-
prehensively and swiftly as you might desire, Egypt’s needs are a
matter of prime concern to us.
—In the wake of Vice President Mobarak’s visit, we have reconsid-
ered what we could do to help you finance Egypt’s wheat imports. Our
desire to be helpful is, as you know, limited by the absolute necessity to
restrain the large U.S. budget deficit and the compelling needs of many
developing countries. Nevertheless, we have proposed to the Congress
that we raise our provision of wheat to Egypt under the PL–480 conces-
sional credit program in the current U.S. fiscal year from the originally
lion in shipping cost subsidies. This means an increase by 100,000 tons
to 1. million tons.
—Our PL–480 assistance to Egypt is by far our largest in the world.
We took dols 60 million from our food aid planned for other countries
in order to maintain the planned 1. million ton program for Egypt this
year against grain price increases, and we have asked the Congress for
dols 17 million more to provide the extra 100,000 tons. In the current
fiscal year, Egypt will receive about one-third of our worldwide food
aid provided on concessional credit terms.
—Our total economic assistance to Egypt is today over dols 1 bil-
lion a year. We have provided over dols 5. billion in such assistance to
Egypt since 1974.
—Looking to the longer term, aid has obligated dols 200 million
for various agricultural programs which, when combined with steps
your government is considering, should facilitate increased yields, thus
promoting more effective use of Egypt’s land and water resources. My
government is now studying how we might best facilitate cooperation
between your public and private sectors and American companies in
the development of new agricultural lands as well.
—As for the other commodity requests which Vice President Mo-
barak presented during his Washington visit, these have been carefully
studied, and the President has asked me and members of the Embassy
staff to discuss with your ministers opportunities that exist for making
the best use of resources already in hand or now being programmed.

316.
Editorial Note
Following the formal approval of his appointment as the Presi-
dent’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations by

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on December 4, 1979, Am-
bassador Sol Linowitz paid his first “get-acquainted” visit to Egypt and
Israel in his new capacity December 8–13. Linowitz provided an overall
summary of his trip in an un-numbered telegram to multiple posts, De-
cember 13. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
in Cairo on December 8, Linowitz initially met with Egyptian Prime
Minister Mustapha Khalil and Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat.
Characterizing these talks as “very good and helpful,” Linowitz re-
ported to President Jimmy Carter and Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
his impressions of both men and their respective outlooks on the peace
process. Sadat, Linowitz noted, “remains fully committed to the negoti-
ating process in which Egypt, Israel and the United States are engaged
and believes that things can fall into place,” despite his view that the
moment “when difficult issues in the negotiations must be addressed”
was “now approaching.” The Egyptian President “defines the ‘big
issues’ which he wants to see resolved as Jerusalem, full autonomy and
self-determination,” attaching particular significance to Jerusalem “in
light of its significance to the whole Arab world from which he feels un-
derstandably isolated.” In contrast, Linowitz continued, Khalil viewed
Palestinian self-determination as the key issue and “has a definition of
this controversial term which he obviously hopes we can be persuaded
to agree to—not an independent Palestinian state but the right for the
Palestinians to determine their own future through a freely-accepted
link with Jordan.” Khalil “agreed that if this concept were accepted al-
most all other problems—including those of South Lebanon and the
PLO—would fall into line.” (Telegram 3944 from Jerusalem, December
1585) Linowitz reported on further conversation with Egyptian Min-
ister of State Boutros Boutros-Ghali on December 8 in telegram 25140
from Cairo, December 9. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
held with Egyptian Minister of Defense Hassan Kamel Ali.
From Cairo, Linowitz travelled to Tel Aviv for his first meetings
with Israeli officials. His first meeting was with Israeli Minister of the
Interior Josef Burg on December 10, which he summarized in telegram
nowitz met with Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, who Li-
nowitz found “responsive and even effusive at times,” for one and
three-quarters hours. Linowitz reported to Carter and Vance that while
his main objective “was to establish a rapport of friendship and confi-
dence,” he also wanted to “start a process of suggesting new ways of
thinking about some of the key issues.” “On the matter of Begin’s con-
cern that autonomy might lead to an independent Palestinian state,” Li-

nowitz wrote, “I pointed out that Camp David gives no authority for
such a development. I suggested, however, that if he had any doubt
about this perhaps we could reach some form of agreement on the
issue. Begin showed interest in the idea and he also responded when I
reminded him that the Camp David Accords guarantee Israel a say in
the determination of the final status of the West Bank and Gaza. I told
Begin of the importance that President Sadat attaches to a solution on
Jerusalem and suggested that we as lawyers might try to find ways to
express the ingredients acceptable to both parties. Though he bridled
when I mentioned a Moslem flag, Begin did not reject my suggestion
that we explore ways of drafting language on Jerusalem that would
meet the needs of both sides.” (Telegram 3968 from Jerusalem, De-
cember 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P850074–1575) The same day, Linowitz met with the Foreign Affairs
and Defense Committee of the Israeli Knesset, where the membership
gave their views of the Middle East situation. (Telegram 3975 from Je-
rusalem, December 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, P850074–1566)
The following day, December 12, Linowitz convened a meeting of
the heads of the negotiating delegations to the Palestinian autonomy
talks in Cairo. The discussion among Linowitz, Khalil, and Burg cov-
ered the pace of normalization in relations between Egypt and Israel,
election modalities and the powers and responsibilities to be invested
in a new Palestinian polity. Linowitz cabled a summary of the conclu-
sions of this meeting to the Department of State in telegram 26219 from
Tel Aviv, December 13. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
more fulsome account of the course of the conversation is in telegram
321978 to Cairo and Tel Aviv, December 14. (Ibid.)

317.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President
Carter
Washington, December 10, 1979
SUBJECT
US Access to Facilities in Egypt (U)
(TS) By your note on the report of the 30 November meeting be-
tween Ambassador Atherton and Egyptian Vice President Mubarak,2
and separately in a telephone conversation with me, you asked for a re-
port on how the US could, and whether we should, help develop naval
and air base facilities for Egypt on the Red Sea, usable by the US in fu-
ture emergencies. This memorandum contains a preliminary analysis.
(TS) Recent events reinforce my conviction that an expanded US
military presence in the Middle East/Persian Gulf/Indian Ocean re-
gion is a strategic necessity. In the long term, the appropriate level of
such presence will require access to a small number of selected air base
and port facilities in the area. I will shortly submit my proposals on
these broader measures to enhance our flexibility for rapid deployment
and sustained operations in the area.
(TS) In the shorter term, as you know, we are in the process of ob-
taining a very modest foothold in Egypt by virtue of the limited access
to Wadi Kena Air Base extended by the Egyptian Government. We
have proceeded quietly to insert a base warm-up team and necessary
equipment to support operations by two E–3A AWACS aircraft. We
will soon withdraw the personnel but leave behind under Egyptian Air
Force caretaker status, the modest support infrastructure items now in
place at this Egyptian field. Thus, we will be able to introduce E–3As
into Wadi Kena with supporting personnel with little notice and be
able to conduct operations shortly after arrival.
(TS) During our consultations with Vice President Mubarak re-
garding Wadi Kena, he repeated President Sadat’s earlier suggestion of
the desirability of having the US upgrade the Red Sea port/airfield
complex at Ras Banas (Berenice). Preliminary information (see attach-
ments) indicates that this complex is very austere and would require a
substantial effort to develop a permanent base. Both the port and air-
field lack a potable water source and a reliable fuel supply system. The
Egypt 1979. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent via Alpha Channel. A copy of the memorandum
was sent to Vance.
mote, but more developed air facility such as Wadi Kena. I will be able
to give you a more definitive recommendation in this regard after we
have analyzed the findings of the facilities survey team which I recently
sent to Egypt with Vice President Mubarak’s concurrence.
(TS) Further, we should recognize that there are likely to be signifi-
cant political limits on our use of Egyptian bases which we will need to
weigh against the costs of making those bases useful to us. My conver-
sations earlier this year with President Sadat and Vice President Mu-
barak lead me to believe that they wish to avoid the permanent pres-
ence of US personnel. They have emphasized to me the political
liabilities associated with foreign presence and their desire not to re-
peat the experience with the Soviets, who sent a large number of mili-
tary personnel to Egypt. Their concept has been that the US would im-
prove Ras Banas for Egyptian use in normal times and US use in an
“emergency”. We will need further to explore whether these limits to
their political tolerance for our presence still apply.
(TS) In the near future, I will provide in cooperation with the De-
partment of State a detailed proposal for how we should respond to the
Egyptian suggestion.
Harold Brown

318.
Letter From the Israeli Ambassador to the United States
(Evron) to President Carter
Washington, December 12, 1979
My dear Mr. President:
I have been asked by Prime Minister Begin to transmit to you the
following message:
“Dear Mr. President,
I thank you for your letter of December 6, delivered to me by Am-
bassador Sol Linowitz. Your generous words of appreciation are very
dear to me.
In the course of his visit, Ambassador Linowitz had the opportu-
nity to meet with my colleagues3 and received detailed information on
the various aspects of the negotiations relating to the autonomy for the
Arab inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District. These negoti-
ations continue apace and we are all hopeful that we shall succeed in
overcoming the difficulties and reaching agreement.
On January 7, 1980, I am scheduled to travel to Aswan at the invita-
tion of President Sadat for a direct personal exchange of views between
us. Meanwhile, here in Jerusalem, Ambassador Linowitz and I held a
lengthy private talk which we both concluded was immensely useful
and enjoyable.
Permit me now, Mr. President, to turn to you with an urgent per-
sonal request.
As you are aware, Israel has, over the years, been confronted with
objective difficulties in the economic domain emanating mainly from
the fact that we are compelled to expend some thirty percent of our
GNP on defence. This year our problem has increased substantially.
In your letter to me you were kind enough to make reference to the
significance of the transfer of the Alma oilfields to Egypt which is, in-
deed, one of the greatest sacrifices we have made in the cause of peace.
With this, we must buy every drop of oil from abroad at rising prices,
having now to expend an annual outlay of hundreds of millions of
extra dollars for the supplies from the Suez gulf. Simultaneously, we
have been compelled to undertake stringent measures to curb a very
high rate of domestic inflation. In so doing we have abolished subsidies
of the most basic commodities and have sharply reduced public ex-
penditure across the board. These measures, in their totality, naturally
create additional burdens in the daily life of our people.
It is in this context that the Government of Israel submitted its re-
quest for additional aid from the United States. Given the objective
facts, which I have described only in part, our submission for increased
aid is most urgent and objectively unavoidable.
I therefore respectfully ask of you, Mr. President, to give your per-
sonal attention and support to this request, the fulfillment of which will
help Israel through an exceptional period of economic strain arising,
inter-alia, from the sacrifices we have made—and which we do not re-
gret—for the sake of peace.
May I thank you in advance for addressing yourself to this, my ap-
peal, on a matter so crucial and urgent. I venture the belief, Mr. Presi-
dent, that you will give it your sympathetic and positive consideration
based upon your deep understanding of our problem and your friend-
ship for Israel.
I cannot conclude this letter without reiterating the sentiment I ex-
pressed to you in my previous message of our profound feelings of
identity, support and admiration for your steadfast courage and lead-
ership in this time of trial as you work unsparingly for the speedy and
safe return home of the American hostages in Iran.
Yours respectfully and sincerely,
Menachem Begin”
Sincerely yours,
Ephraim Evron
Ambassador

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

319.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, December 13, 1979
SUBJECT
My Lunch with Ambassador Evron
The Ambassador told me that Begin is extremely concerned about
the proposed U.S. military aid package for Egypt, on which he was
briefed by Sol.
I explained to Evron that we have no intention of scaling it down
because we have legitimate long-term interests in Egypt that we need
to protect, and that these interests are also to Israel’s advantage. More
specifically, I said:
1. That Israel’s qualitative edge over Egypt will be preserved in the
years ahead in part because of what the U.S. is doing for Israel and in
part because of what the Israelis are doing for themselves. And we are
confident of this;
2. That the U.S. has to make certain that there is a wider constitu-
ency in Egypt favoring U.S.-Egyptian ties, and it is especially important
that the military be part of that constituency. The Egyptian military ca-
pabilities have become degraded and the Egyptians cannot help but
notice that the Soviets are providing very advanced equipment to Syria
and Algeria. It would be damaging to all concerned if the only basis for
Egyptian-U.S. ties and for further progress of the Camp David peace
accords were Sadat himself;
3. That we are encouraging the Egyptians to redirect the focus of
their defense efforts away from Israel and toward regional stability—
including the Sudan and perhaps eventually some contingencies in
Saudi Arabia. This is clearly also in Israel’s interest.
Evron is going home for Christmas and he would like to be able to
convey the above as an authoritative expression of U.S. thinking. He
says he has spoken about this to the Vice President and he hinted that

320.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President
Carter
Washington, undated
Subject
Following up on Prince Bandar’s Approach
The Issue
Prince Bandar saw the President secretly on December 52 and
made a two-part proposal:
—In return for a U.S. statement of his policy toward the Middle
East along lines he specified, The Saudis would be willing to lift the
boycott, provide recognition to Israel, engage in a comprehensive re-
gional economic plan (with a figure of up to $20 billion being men-
tioned) and assure a freeze of oil prices for a couple of years.
—In return, the U.S. would make a statement on its policy (which
Bandar apparently had someone draft) in which the U.S. would
(a) state its commitment to protect the integrity and security of Israel
within [approximately] her [pre-1967] secure3 borders, (b) call for an Is-
raeli end to military occupation with safeguards in the context of Arab
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
recognition of the integrity and security of Israel and agreement to es-
tablish normal diplomatic relations, and (c) state its readiness to accept
“a Palestinian entity on the West Bank and Gaza provided it and any
negotiators on its behalf first agree to accept the existence, security, and
integrity of Israel within its 1967 boundaries and to undertake a perma-
nent non-aggression agreement with all of the existing states adjoining
it.” In connection with the last point, there is a statement that the
United States would prefer that such an entity be confederated with
Jordan or Egypt for a period of at least five years, but the U.S. would
abide by any reasonable solution acceptable to the states adjacent to
such an entity.
It is significant in the Bandar approach that there is no mention of
Jerusalem, although that may be subsumed in the commitment to the
1967 borders.
Analysis
[1 line not declassified]
—On the one hand, the idea of close Saudi-U.S. collaboration in
some sort of Middle East Marshall Plan has been in Saudi minds for
several years, and we have heard it on other occasions. Also, the fact
that the Saudis are asking for U.S. support for a Palestinian entity asso-
ciated with Jordan and Israel’s returns to lines approximating those of
1967 is not surprising.
—On the other hand, the idea that the Saudis would shift to open
support of the U.S.-Egyptian-Israeli approach to an Arab-Israeli settle-
ment and acceptance of Israel would be a major and important shift in
Saudi policy. Doubts are raised because none of Fahd’s recent commu-
nications to you, including one just a few days ago, indicates that the
Saudis are ready for such a shift. It is true that the Mecca Mosque take-
over4 is a new factor in their thinking, and only that would seem to ex-
plain such a sharp change in their position, if any, since Hermann Eilts
visited Saudi Arabia just a month ago.
[1 paragraph (4½ lines) not declassified]
Nevertheless, the approach is important enough to be investi-
gated. Hermann Eilts’ visit to Saudi Arabia in early January would pro-
vide an opportunity to probe [less than 1 line not declassified] (Hermann
will leave for Cairo the evening of December 27 to receive an honorary
degree at Cairo University and could be in Saudi Arabia at the end of
the first week in January.)
Before giving Hermann instructions to do more than probe [less
than 1 line not declassified] however, you will want to consider seriously
whether you really want to deal with such a Saudi proposal of these di-
mensions in the next few months.
—Saudi support for the peace process and recognition of Israel
would be a major endorsement of the success at Camp David and,

through Saudi encouragement of Jordan and the Palestinians, could
spell the difference between further delay in the West Bank/Gaza ne-
gotiations and Palestinian/Jordanian acceptance of a modest outcome
of those negotiations. We have to keep in mind, though, that such a
Saudi shift would also arouse fear in Israel because some there would
not trust the Saudis and would see such a move as a further tightening
of the Arab noose around Israel. Depending on timing, Israelis would
also argue that we were “abandoning” Camp David. The autonomy
talks would become even more difficult, if not impossible.
—The difficult side of Bandar’s proposition for us is that it would
require U.S. endorsement of a Palestinian entity—albeit in association
with Jordan—controlling the West Bank virtually up to the 1967 lines.
This has been the U.S. position quietly for a number of years, but to take
it openly would provoke widespread opposition in Israel and among
Israel’s supporters here. The Labor Party in Israel has never accepted
the 1967 lines as secure, and the Likud coalition wants to keep open Is-
rael’s right to assert its claim of sovereignty on the West Bank. Moving
in this direction would produce a major crisis of confidence with Israel
and a political issue in the U.S.
Bandar’s offer to roll back oil prices provides an additional dimen-
sion that would be attractive to many in the U.S. if it could be carried
out on the Saudi side. Our judgment, however, is that the Saudis do not
have the capacity any more to swing the OPEC price levels. Also, an
equation of oil for Israeli withdrawal would fuel the domestic charges
that we are selling out Israel’s security for oil.
How to Follow Up
It seems to me at least questionable whether we could move as far
as Bandar’s approach suggests in our public posture at this point—[less
than 1 line not declassified] Therefore, we might want to see whether
there would be some intermediate step whereby we might accept this
proposition as where we would agree to come out in 1981 but to see
whether there might be some intermediate step whereby the Saudis
would quietly urge the Palestinians and Jordanians to support the au-
tonomy negotiations.
The intermediate step we have in mind could be to probe the Saudi
position by placing the Arab-Israeli issue in a wider context. The Saudi
concern is not just to help us deal with the Arab-Israeli conflict, or to
help them get off this particular hook with its Arab allies. More impor-
tant are Saudi concern with its own security and overall position in the
region. Since the loss (in Saudi terms) of both Iran and Egypt in a single
year, the connection with us has assumed new importance—with new
fears and doubts, but also new opportunities if we play it right. The
Mecca Mosque takeover may also have sharpened their concern about

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the internal situation. The posture we strike as we come out of the hos-
tage crisis will have an important and long-lasting impact on the
Saudis, and on their willingness to look to us for the long term.
Thus Hermann’s mission could usefully get to the Bandar ap-
proach by indirection, by emphasizing the overall context of our policy
towards the region. Indeed, if his presentation (and our policy) is cred-
ible in terms of overall Saudi interests—centering on security, the Saudi
connection with us, and the overall future of the region—then any
move on the Arab-Israeli problem would assume its rightful place, and
we will be better able to relate what Fahd may have in mind to what
Bandar told us.
We recommend therefore, that the Eilts mission to begin with
focus on our overall strategic thinking for the region. He would use this
to probe Fahd’s thinking about Arab-Israeli questions, without himself
raising the particular points (and contentious issues) in the Bandar ap-
proach. If Bandar speaks for Fahd [less than 1 line not declassified], then
Fahd can speak for himself. Elements of this approach might include:
—Our views on the strategic importance of the region, including
the Soviet dimension, Gulf security, nature of regional friendships, the
flow of oil, the cooperative international framework on energy and eco-
nomic issues. Hermann would indicate that the Arab-Israeli dimension
(as well as concerns for Egypt and countries as far removed as Turkey,
Sudan, and even Morocco) is a vital factor in this overall picture.
—Our attitudes about the importance of some U.S. involvement
and the role of power (in its largest sense). The Middle East (as a whole)
will be central to our global strategy; our efforts are directed to inte-
grating our policy into an overall strategic conception with our friends.
—We will want to work closely with Saudi Arabia—in ways that
make sense to it. We recognize the dangers of stop-and-go policies and
approaches, or of trying to impose forms and methods that do not ac-
cord with Saudi Arabia’s own conception of regional problems. We
must pursue our interests and relationships; but we want to take into
account the interests of our friends.
—There are a number of areas in which we would like to continue
an active dialogue: some directly U.S. military (recent Murray mission;
fleet deployments, Rapid Deployment force); some indirect support
(FMS, role of particular countries in military supply support for re-
gional nations—e.g. Sudan, Yemen, Morocco); a political framework
for thinking about the region; possibilities (if any) for regional security
cooperation (where of course Saudi Arabia’s views will be the most sig-
nificant); economic cooperation (both within the region and in terms of
the Gulf States’ involvement/responsibility for the international eco-
nomic system).

322.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, December 20, 1979
SUBJECT
Longer-Term Security Assistance to Egypt (C)
I have reviewed the memoranda of Jim McIntyre2 and Cy and Ha-
rold3 on security assistance to Egypt in the context of the stringent
budget guidance you have given. I believe that you should approve a
middle ground between their positions, one that provides Sadat with
essential near-term support but that moderates the long-term budget
At the outset, I wish to state my unequivocal support for a longer-
term security assistance relationship with Egypt. Sadat’s courageous
decision to join the U.S. and Israel in seeking a lasting peace was an
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
event of unprecedented importance for our interests in that vital area.
Temporarily at least, the decision has left him with nowhere else to turn
for much-needed security assistance. While we should strive to mini-
mize the cost of that assistance, I believe that costs we do incur are justi-
fied because they will contribute to the eventual realization of a major
U.S. foreign policy objective. (S)
Sadat’s greatest need at this critical point in the peace process is for
major assistance in rebuilding his obsolescent armed forces. Even with
some of the items we have provided, his forces still are relying pri-
marily on deteriorating Soviet equipment. In my view, a central threat
to Sadat’s stability is from military leaders who are becoming more and
more dismayed with Egypt’s second-class readiness state. These mili-
tary men convinced Sadat to request over four times the amount
of assistance we are discussing here, but we told the Egyptians that
this amount was clearly excessive and that force reductions, coupled
with equipment modernization, would be a better and less-costly alter-
These facts lead me to support fully the near-term items recom-
million in FMS credits in FY 82, and approval in principle of F–16s and
M–60s. I might note that approval of the F–16s does not exclude consid-
eration of the F–X fighter if you approve its development, since a mix of
F–16 and F–X fighters might best fit Sadat’s needs. However, to turn
him down on F–16s while Israel and Saudi Arabia are obtaining more
advanced F–15s, and possibly F–18s, would be a severe blow. (S)
Sadat’s longer-term needs are less clear at this time, however. I
would thus join Jim McIntyre in recommending cash flow financing
only through FY 81 (with program amounts to be determined by your
decisions on equipment and FY 81/82 funding levels), and informing
the Egyptians of the FY 82 planning level without committing the U.S.
to similar amounts in succeeding years. By so doing, we will encourage
Sadat to consider less-costly alternatives for his future needs, as well as
to seek other sources of assistance if moderate Arab countries move
closer to the peace process. (S)
These levels of assistance are well within the tolerance of the
Egyptian-Israeli balance. Israel will receive qualitative improvements
that Egypt does not get, and Israel must understand the importance of a
U.S.-Egyptian military relationship (within reason) as being in its own
interest. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:

323.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, December 23, 1979
Subject
Following up on Prince Bandar’s Approach (S)
At TAB A is Cy’s memorandum2 for you on this subject, developed
at State and NSC. In summary:
—[less than 1 line not declassified] the Bandar approach is a highly
significant step on the part of Saudi Arabia: offering to recognize Israel,
lift the boycott, freeze oil prices, and underwrite a Marshall Plan for the
Middle East—in exchange for our calling for an end to Israeli military
occupation to about the 1967 lines (with safeguards for Israel), and our
calling for a West Bank entity, preferably confederated with Jordan or
Egypt for at least five years;
—however, the Bandar presentation has been reflected in no other
communication from Saudi Arabia, including Fahd’s rather negative
response to the Eilts mission, sent to you a week after Bandar was here;
and
—there are inherent problems, including Saudi Arabia’s limited
capacity to swing oil prices; a predictable (and justified) Israeli percep-
tion that we were shifting away from Camp David before the au-
tonomy talks had failed; and the risks of a political confrontation with
Israel if we publicly endorsed the idea of a Palestinian entity—albeit
one in association with Jordan. (S/S)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Cy therefore proposes—and I agree—that we test the Bandar prop-
osition with an intermediate approach, centering in the first instance on
a visit Hermann Eilts is paying privately to the area (he leaves for Egypt
this week; but will not arrive in Saudi Arabia until January 8). This ap-
proach would be to put the Arab-Israeli conflict in the broader context
of U.S. strategy and involvement for the Middle East, thus showing
that we are prepared to discuss (and to respond to) key Saudi concerns
about security of the region. This would a) go to the heart of Saudi pre-
occupations—where the Bandar approach is only one means to an end;
and b) enable Eilts to smoke Fahd out [less than 1 line not declassified] of
the Bandar approach, without committing us to steps which, at the very
least, would provoke a political crisis with Israel and cause problems
for the autonomy talks. (S/S)
The draft instructions we have prepared for Eilts (appended to
Cy’s memo) would also give coherence to a number of efforts we are
considering (or you have decided) for a long-range Middle East
strategy. His visit would thus be a first effort to bring Saudi Arabia
along—a key step in our effort to seize the initiative in Middle East
policy as soon as we come out of the Iranian crisis. (S/S)

324.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
26218. For Ambassador Linowitz From Atherton. Subject: Au-
1. (S-entire text).
2. You already have my views, conveyed by Jim Leonard to Ned
Walker over secure phone, about a Presidential phone call to Sadat and
Begin. This message sets forth my thoughts about how we can help ad-
vance the negotiations, as requested by you in reftel.
3. I start from the premise that the Egyptian and Israeli negotiators,
even at the plenary level, will not be able to resolve any of the basic sub-
stantive issues in the negotiations until there is agreement at the Sadat/
Begin level on how they should do so. My second premise is the ob-
vious one that it would be desirable for something to come out of the
negotiations prior to the exchange of ambassadors [at] the end of Feb-
ruary and, preferably, prior to the beginning of normalization and the
establishment of Embassy offices in Cairo and Tel Aviv the end of Jan-
uary. Since it is not realistic to expect sufficient results in this timeframe
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
to persuade any representative Palestinians to join the negotiating
process, it seems to me our objective should be to produce sufficient ev-
idence that things are moving in the negotiations to defuse Arab and
third world reaction to normalization. In other words, we should try to
have enough to show after eight months of negotiations not only to
demonstrate that we take seriously the May target date but to give
pause to the Saudis and other moderate Arabs, including moderate Pal-
estinians, about launching new efforts to further isolate and punish
Egypt.
4. Proceeding from these premises, my conclusion is that we need
to take a hard look at ways in which we can help make something
happen at the Sadat/Begin summit. Therefore, while I subscribe to
much of Sam Lewis’ analysis (Tel Aviv 26726), I do not agree that we
can wait until after the summit to decide whether and how we can
begin to inject some substance into our full partner role.
5. Trying to influence what comes out of the summit can admit-
tedly be a tricky exercise. We cannot get out in front of Sadat or appear
to be pressing him to move more rapidly than he is prepared to do. This
would be dangerous vis-a-vis the Israelis, and could also arouse Egyp-
tian expectations that we are prepared to deliver more than may be
possible through our own efforts with the Israelis.
6. At the same time, Vice President Mubarak and Prime Minister
Khalil have independently suggested that President Carter communi-
cate with President Sadat about the need to seek concrete progress at
the summit. This suggestion results from their concern, based on the
experience of the last two Sadat/Begin summits, that Sadat will again
be reluctant in the intimate atmosphere of the summit to introduce a
note of controversy and will, in fact, end up making further gestures to
Begin on bilateral issues (e.g., accelerating the pace of normalization
beyond what is called for in the peace treaty) without getting anything
in return. An additional consideration is that, even if Sadat decides to
press Begin harder this time than he has before, he will do so in such a
summit between Sadat and Begin, concluding “we should not jump the gun by priming
either of the parties for action. If, however, Roy and others close to the world of Sadat
conclude that autonomy really is not on his agenda for the summit—which I find hard to
believe—then a message urging that substantive issues be addressed there should go to
Sadat, not Begin. And, finally, that if a call is made to Sadat, one should of course be made
to Begin, but that specifics should be avoided, and no suggestion of U.S. pressure should
be imparted. The message left with the Prime Minister should be simply this: that the
second stage of the Camp David process is, if anything, even more important than the
first in bringing about a settlement for the Middle East conflict and a lasting peace for Is-
rael, and that President Carter continues to watch closely how it is evolving. The un-
spoken message will be heard clearly: ‘If things don’t begin to move, I will have to get

general and eliptical way that the point will be lost on Begin, or that
Begin’s response will be at such a level of generality that it will have no
practical relevance for the specific nuts and bolts issues the autonomy
negotiators are grappling with. This is a real risk, since Sadat has taken
little interest that we are aware of in the specific issues under discus-
sion in the autonomy talks and probably does not have a very precise
picture of the specifics.
7. Despite the impatience of Sadat’s advisors, his tactic of not
pressing Begin has probably been the right one up to now. If Sadat de-
cides to let another summit go by without bringing any of the issues to
a head, there is nothing we can do about it. But given the problems it
will create for our own position in the area if the autonomy talks con-
tinue to be perceived as getting nowhere, it seems to me that at a min-
imum we need to take the initiative to compare notes on strategy with
Sadat and plant a few ideas with him. I believe there is a way to do this
without the risk of seeming to get out in front of Sadat or of being seen
to press him to move faster than he desires. I have in mind the fol-
lowing two-part approach:
—First, I believe it would be desirable for the President to send
letters to both Begin and Sadat which should be similar if not identical
in content. In such letters, the President could note Ambassador Li-
nowitz’s impressions from his recent visit to the area that all concerned
feel the time has come to step up the pace of the negotiations. The Presi-
dent could say that he agrees this is desirable and note that if Begin and
Sadat come to this conclusion in their meeting, the U.S. stands prepared
to make its contribution to early progress in the negotiations.
—Second, I could be equipped with points to make orally to Sadat
when delivering the President’s letter. This oral presentation could
note that after both the Alexandria summit (Alexandria 0611) and the
Haifa summit (Cairo 18416) Sadat had asked that President Carter be
informed that the time was coming when he would ask us “to resume”
our full partner role, that this third summit (then foreseen for October)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
could be decisive, and that the U.S. should be ready when the time
comes. The objective, Sadat said on both occasions, was for he and
Begin to reach agreement on giving directives to their negotiators.
Against this background, we could ask Sadat if his comments after the
last two summits still represent his views and how he plans to proceed
in the January summit since, if he is looking to us to play a role, we
need to know what his strategy is and what he expects from us. As part
of such an oral representation, we should be prepared to note specific
issues in the negotiations where we believe attention at the summit
could usefully be focused with some hope of reaching agreement on
appropriate directives to the Egyptian and Israeli negotiating teams.
8. I have given considerable thought to what those specific issues
should be, and have also discussed this question with Jim Leonard and
with my senior political section staff who have participated from the
beginning in the autonomy talks. I agree with Jim Leonard (Cairo
26211) that it would be desirable to encourage specific agreement at
the summit in three areas: something in the autonomy negotiations,
something on Jerusalem, and something for the Palestinians. I also
agree that the best issue to focus on arising out of the autonomy negoti-
ations would be the size of the elected self-governing authority. (Inci-
dentally, Boutros Ghali singled this out as one of the three issues on
which he believes there should be an effort to reach early agreement;
the other two were amnesty for Palestinian prisoners and giving an in-
ternational flavor to the commission that would supervise West Bank/
Gaza elections). I also agree with Jim that, so far as something for the
Palestinians is concerned, the idea of a return of deportees is better than
seeking Israeli agreement to amnesty prisoners who have been tried
and convicted for security crimes.
9. With respect to Jerusalem, I have reservations about Jim’s fall-
back idea of suggesting discussions between Israel and representatives
of the Christian and Muslim faiths about the holy places. My own view
is that this would be perceived as accepting the long-standing Israeli
position that the only questions related to Jerusalem that are open to
discussion are those pertaining to the status of the holy places. My own
preference would be to go for agreement on the right of Arab residents
of East Jerusalem to vote in and stand for the elections to the self-
governing authority. (Boutros Ghali is concerned that this would be
seen as accepting the Israeli position that autonomy applies to people
but not to land. I consider this a legalistic argument outweighed by the
political symbolism of giving the vote to East Jerusalem Arabs.)
eign Policy File, P840157–2099)

325.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Israeli Defense Minister Ezer Weizman
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Israeli Defense Minister Ezer Weizman
Ambassador Ephraim Evron
Mr. Illan Tehila, Israeli Notetaker
The President began by discussing Afghanistan, noting that the So-
viets had tried to blame their actions on intervention by a third country.
Asked who this could be, they could not think of one.
Minister Weizman said he was glad there were no Soviets in Egypt!
The President (laughing) said that he hopes Pakistan and India will
feel this way.
Minister Weizman said there could be this feeling in Syria later,
which is now getting T–72s and the MiG–25.
The President said that Iraq may clear out the Soviets.
Minister Weizman said he hoped so.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the Iraqis had shot 21 Communists in recent
months.
Minister Weizman said it is a nice area he lives in.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said he had noticed.
Minister Weizman said he called it the Muddle East.
The President said that you have the situation well in hand. We ap-
preciate how you control the situation.
Minister Weizman said that Lebanon is quiet.
The President said that this is good news.
Minister Weizman said he would try to keep it that way.
The President asked about the Iranian troops in Lebanon.
Minister Weizman said that they are still in Damascus. Neither the
PLO, Syria, or Lebanon want them in Lebanon. They are doing their
best to keep the troops from moving there. He personally is not particu-
larly worried about them.
The President asked how Israel is getting on with Egypt in the peace
discussions.
Minister Weizman said that they could and should do better. He is
not active in them, and thinks that this is a good tactic. Eventually he
will probably get into them. The next Sadat and Begin Summit is very
important.
The President mentioned the 7th of January.
Minister Weizman said it would be in Aswan. He will go to Egypt
afterwards, at the end of January, to see Minister Ali and Sadat. Sadat is
a great fellow, courageous and clever. Last month he had a half hour
alone with Sadat, and two hours with other Egyptian leaders. Sadat
said to try something on Gaza first, and to see if a solution is possible on
Jerusalem. There is nothing new about that. He (Weizman) hopes at
Aswan they will find a way to carry on. Afterwards he will see what he
should do. What has been done, despite pitfalls, and less than the Presi-
dent would have liked to see done, he thinks is so strong that nothing
can change the course, even though there are ups and downs. Between
the two militaries, there are no problems. The interim line will be
reached at the end of January. It is working out nicely. There will be no
UN, and no US troops. It is a neat and clean withdrawal to the interim
line.

The President noted that both sides are accommodating to one
another.
Minister Weizman said that with Minister Ali he has no problems.
He called Gamasay in New York, and will see Ghorbal while he is here.
The President said that this weekend or Monday5 he will telephone
Sadat and Begin, for end of the year greetings. He will compliment
them on their heroic progress towards peace. He will have a word on
expectations for Aswan, and encourage them to move forward. If Min-
ister Weizman has any thoughts about what should be said in these
phone calls, would he pass them to Eppy for Zbig. This applies to both
phone calls.
Minister Weizman said he saw Sol Linowitz for lunch yesterday,
and will see him again. He thanks the President for seeing him. He
knows he is busy with Afghanistan and Tehran. He came here to try to
influence, convince the President, share his thoughts, on what interests
have changed from a few months ago. He does not like trips to ask for
an increase in aid.
The President said he knew.
Minister Weizman said he prefers to say what he can do to help, and
would like to be able to help with Tehran, etc. This would give him
more than the greatest pleasure. Their feeling is that they are giving up
a lot, especially on oil.
The President said he understood.
Minister Weizman said he has a photo which he will send, in color,
taken by some Israelis in Sinai, of a sign saying “we did not withdraw,
we handed back this land for peace.”
The President asked him to send the photo through Eppy.
Minister Weizman said an Army unit did this. Israel is now doing
what it should have done two years ago: it is taking the bull by the
horns, and making difficult economic decisions. The President will un-
derstand this, too. The new Israeli Finance Minister7 is tough. He is the
first to speak neither English nor Yiddish, but only proper Hebrew!
(The President laughed). The new economic laws and measures8 are
good. It most likely picks on the defense budget. In the last two and a
half years, he (Weizman) has reduced the budget by 10%. Part of this is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
because of peace with Egypt. He will be a little happier with that
border. He hopes and prays there will be no war. The economic meas-
ures are tough. Pilots have taken a 20% cut in salary.
The President said that this is important symbolism.
Minister Weizman said exactly. With the military budget, he will try
to get a voluntary 5% reduction in salaries in the armed forces. 100%
inflation is terrible. He prays that within the next five years he will be
able to cut their aid request by $500 million.
The President (laughing) asked what role the Minister would be in
at that time.
Minister Weizman (laughing) said he hopes he will be defense min-
ister. He asked to come here as Defense Minister and as a member of
the Cabinet, to ask whether a way can be found on aid. He knows U.S.
problems and the President’s desire for a balanced budget. Israel wants
him to succeed.
The President said there is no way he can get a balanced budget,
though he would like to.
Minister Weizman said that, without going into facts and figures,
there is U.S. inflation and reduction in the value of the dollar. M–60 A–3
He has no problems with Harold, and none with Cy either. Israel’s mili-
tary forces are going down, but there are heavy burdens. Their oil is
gone, and will cost $2 billion a year. They have not gone to rationing,
but have put the price up. They could go to rationing, but he doesn’t
think so. For the first time, the Cabinet has asked Israelis to tighten their
belts. In parallel with this, and in parallel with the peace process, if a
little more U.S. aid could be provided . . . He was asked in Israel if he
could get $3. billion. He said the answer was obviously “no.” He re-
peated on Israel Television that between Haifa and Tel Aviv there is a
half-way point. He is making no suggestions to the President, only
asking. He had a lot of misgivings in coming here. For Israel, an in-
crease in aid would help them through a difficult period, and would
keep the army in good shape. There is no argument about 600 planes (?)
divisions, but Harold Brown and he had cut this down. Therefore, he
asks whether there is anything the US can do. It would be a great help if
the US did give something, especially understanding the situation.
Egypt and Israel are trying to be steady. This is not political or military,
but economic. He is sure Israel’s economic measures are right. For 2 to 4
months more, inflation will go up; then it will level off; and then he
hopes it will start to go down. They will produce, work, and export
more.
the phone with Italian Prime Minister Cossiga).

The President said that he had not yet met Prime Minister Cossiga.
He (the President) thinks we will call for a North Atlantic Council
meeting this weekend.
Minister Weizman said he only had a few words. One thing that has
been a pleasant surprise has been public acceptance in Israel of the new
restrictions. They have ended subsidies on some foods. He worries that
people will forget the peace process, and say that, if there is peace, why
does milk cost me so much? It is the same in Egypt. Khalil has talked
with him about this. Israel worries about Egypt; they are in the same
boat. But with a little bit more, Israel can get over the hump. He will do
what he can to cut down the size of the military. He will try keeping
Lebanon quiet, unless there is trouble there, which he hopes not. Egypt
and Israel are working well together. He will go to Aswan in February.
The best Ambassador in Egypt is his wife! Israel will not get 2 or 3% off
the course we have talked about. The two sides are happy; and this is
needed. It is good for Israel, Egypt, and the US.
The President said that he is totally committed to the peace process.
It looks now like a time of assimilation, discussion, and implementa-
tion. The basic process has a positive trend. A key date will be with the
diplomatic exchange. He has intervened personally with Saudi Arabia
and Egypt, to try to assuage their difficulties, and hold down public
condemnation of one another. We have had some interesting messages
from Saudi Arabia recently, possibly reflecting a change in attitude on a
Middle East peace, and increasing awareness of the benefits of a strong
Egypt and Israel and future improved relations between Saudi Arabia
and Egypt and Jordan, at least. His current aloofness from the peace
process is temporary. He does not want to mislead the Minister: part of
this is because of the election year; and part is because Israel and Egypt
need to go as far as they can. But he will be there, even in an election
year. He is not timid or fearful about being involved. If he is re-elected,
then one of his life’s major commitments will be to the completion of
the peace process. He will stake his reputation as a leader and as a
statesman on its conclusion. Along with that, he will pursue a strong,
peaceful Israel, accommodating, in a way suitable to Israel, with its
neighbors. He will expend as much time and effort as is needed when it
is appropriate, as at Camp David and on his trip to the Middle East. It is
not finished yet; progress is needed. It is more than likely that his role
will be needed. If it were not, that would please him. But if so, that is all
right. He needs the trust of Israeli and Egyptian leaders, and has mod-
erate trust, though it goes up and down. When he weighs in, he thinks
he will be successful, and the Minister can depend on that. We will not
be able to do anything substantial on aid to Israel. However, as part of
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the Peace Package, he will try to make some modifications. He will talk
with Harold about it this weekend. By Monday, we will tell Eppy. It
would be a mistake to expect much. We have an extremely tight
budget. This is not Israel’s fault. The Soviet threat has gone up, and we
have had to increase the defense budget (partly in relation to the SALT
debate). We will put a higher profile on our commitment to the Persian
Gulf region, which will help Israel some, as well. Therefore he has had
to cut down funds for social programs below what they would have
been—for the aged, the poor, for education, though they will be ade-
quate. Foreign aid has suffered severely. But he is determined not to cut
aid to Israel or Egypt. Jordan, Syria, Greece, Turkey—including some
good friends—will be cut back in dollar amounts. In addition, the
dollar is decreasing in value. This will not happen to Israel. He will
try—and he believes he will succeed—in getting a little more than a
symbolic amount. This will increase the value of the Peace Package. He
cannot be more definite now, and doesn’t know the amount. He will
meet with McIntyre on it. He understands Israel’s problems, and
wishes we could be more generous.
Minister Weizman asked if there is anything he can do. Some people
in Israel said that he should shut up on the peace process!
The President said he doesn’t know what will happen with com-
bined developments in Iran and Afghanistan. Maybe there is a silver
lining in the clouds. He has a sense that many of the so-called mod-
erates are deeply concerned about the consequences for them. If the So-
viet Union moved into Pakistan; if the Iranians tried to unsettle the
ruling family in Saudi Arabia; if there is Iranian-Iraqi violence, over the
three islands11 or otherwise—then the importance to them of having a
strong and stable Israel and Egypt would greatly increase. We see the
strategic importance of a friendly and strong combination of Egypt and
Israel. This can be a stable rock, about which the waves of the region
swirl. The last time he talked with Giscard, he began to see for the first
time the value to France of a strong and friendly Israel. He (Giscard)
was always the most critical of Israel, because of historical ties to Leb-
anon and other factors. He (the President) does not condemn Giscard
for this. But France has begun to change its attitude toward Israel. The
most serious aggravation in the entire world is the settlements. He un-
derstands the Israelis need to do something, but for us in dealing with
the French, the Japanese, and the Moslem world, they are no help. They
are a constant aggravation to us. It is hard to say to the French that Is-
rael works for peace if it builds settlements. He knows that the number
of settlers is small. The settlements have symbolic importance for Israel;
but on the contrary, they have extreme symbolic importance as well.
He has had a long-standing argument with Begin and others about this.
Begin has seen public opinion polls for the US, that indicate that the
support and esteem for Israel have gone down, because of a few dozen
settlers. This (reduction in esteem) is of great concern to him (the Presi-
dent). He doesn’t know how important the settlements are for Israel:
for the majority coalition, yes, but in popular opinion he doesn’t know,
he is not a good judge. But for him, for the Europeans, and for the mod-
erate Arabs it would be easier to reach the ultimate objective of peace if
this obstacle were overcome. Jerusalem is something to be dealt with
down the line. The Saudis would protest, but must accept, the Camp
David paragraph on Jerusalem, perhaps modified. The Minister should
not underestimate Sol Linowitz’s ability. He is superb. He is a highly
qualified negotiator and lawyer. He (the President) would guess that
Begin and Sol would find it easier to deal with one another than Begin
and Strauss.
Minister Weizman said he believes this is right.
The President said that Sol sees both sides. He works to bypass
catch phrases that are difficult. In the next month or so—up to the ex-
change of ambassadors—Sol will be a student, and can make some
progress. Later, his work will pay rich dividends. On this side of the
ocean, Sol is more compatible with Cy and with the State Department
than Strauss. He wants to tell the Minister this so that there will be no
feeling in Israel of a reduction of interest because he put Linowitz in
place of Strauss. There is no lessening of commitment or interest, and
Eppy will agree with that. He (the President) is available.
Minister Weizman said he knew Sol from the time he was in
business.
The President said that he is a top man.
Minister Weizman said that he had lunch with Sol.
The President said that Sol is quiet, does not brag, and is willing to
give credit to others.
Minister Weizman said that Sol is a clever man.
The President said that Sol has a way with words. We would never
have got the Panama Canal Treaties without him.
Minister Weizman said it was good that Sol was not at Camp David,
or they would only have been able to be there a week!
The President said that Panama took 14 years. In part, this was be-
cause his predecessors didn’t bring them to conclusion; they couldn’t
find the right words. Sol is a treasure.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Minister Weizman asked about Bob Strauss’ being in the re-election
fight.
The President said that he is good at it, and this was what he wanted
to do.
Minister Weizman said that maybe he should give Bob Strauss some
ideas, since he ran the Likud election campaign two years ago.
The President said that this was one of the great surprises in the
world. Perhaps Begin will give the Minister a vacation so that he can
come here to help Bob and him (the President).
Minister Weizman said anytime. He has bet some cases of whiskey
on the President, and did so when the polls were down. He would cor-
rect something the President said—“if” he wins. He would say “when”
the President wins.
The President said that he is pretty confident.
Minister Weizman said that he appreciates that he cannot expect a
substantial increase in aid. It is important to Israeli morale that the
President took time to see him.
The President said he will let Eppy know no later than Monday.
Minister Weizman said he will be on Face the Nation Sunday.
The President said he would watch it. He said that we are making
good progress, in part because of what they are doing together.
(The meeting ended at 12: p.m.)

326.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Israel, Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia and the Consulate
General in Jerusalem
3230. For the Ambassadors and Consul General from Amb Lino-
witz. Subject: Approach Toward the Negotiations.
1. (Secret-entire text)
2. I want to outline my present thinking about the negotiations in
which we are engaged to give you an opportunity to challenge my ap-
proach or improve on it.
3. My basic concern is that we seem to be trying to back our way
into the critical issues. I do not think we can succeed in this way, and I
fear that we are spending valuable time on peripheral issues which
will in any case defy resolution until the fundamental questions are
resolved.
4. An example of this is the number of representatives for the tran-
sitional authority. It seems to me that Egypt wants it to “look” like a
legislature—this may be possible—but only if Israel is first convinced it
will not “act” like a legislature. The issue here is not the number but the
powers. Once we have established the latter, the former may more
easily fall into place.
5. I think similar arguments can be made on the other key issues
which remain outstanding on modalities: East Jerusalem and the elec-
toral system. Frankly, it would not discourage me in the slightest if we
were to mark time on modalities while we focused almost exclusively
on powers and responsibilities.
6. In the area of powers and responsibilities, I am also concerned
about our approach. We seem to be gearing up for a yet another cloning
process of creating sub-groups as a substitute for a clear idea of what
we are trying to achieve. The conventional wisdom seems to be that in
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Walker; cleared in NEA and by Calvin Konner (S/
S–O); approved by Linowitz. Printed from a corrected copy.
gram 763, January 12. All telegrams are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Jidda was not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
order to attract the Palestinians we have to produce a detailed program
for life on the West Bank with all the relationships between Israel and
the SGA spelled out. I question that assumption and, in any event,
question whether we could possibly accomplish such an ambitious
program by May, or even soon thereafter.
7. It seems to me that we should be striving to establish a number
of guarantees and some limitations for both sides and set up an equi-
table framework wherein the inhabitants of the West Bank can order
their own lives and establish their own interrelationships with Israel
and Jordan. My thinking is that we should strive to accomplish the
minimum agreement that has a better than even chance of drawing in
the Palestinians.
8. With this objective in mind, I wonder how much fact gathering
and expertise we need and, more important, how much time we must
spend on this process. It seems to me that we already know the Israelis
are prepared to transfer full authority in a number of spheres subject to
the restraints that will be necessary to protect the security of Israel and
the economies of both Israel and the West Bank/Gaza under conditions
of open borders. I do not see that it is necessarily our business to detail
those restraints—instead, should we not put our energies into devising
an equitable framework whereby both the Israelis and the Palestinians
can, in the transition phase, work out their interrelationships confident
that their interests will be protected?
9. All of this leads me to think that our energies over the next
month should be devoted to attaining a statement at the next plenary
along the following lines: the three delegations have agreed that full
authority over internal policy formulation and implementation shall be
transferred from the military government to the transitional authority
in at least, but not limited to, the following spheres: education, trans-
portation, etc. (to include as many spheres as possible). The delegations
recognize that within these spheres certain economic and security
questions may arise which affect the mutual interests of the transitional
authority, the Government of Israel and other governments of the area.
The three delegations have therefore instructed the working group on
powers and responsibilities to develop equitable mechanisms for re-
solving such questions which will protect the rights and interests of all
the people in the area.
10. I would welcome your comments. Obviously this message is
not all inclusive and I look forward to your suggestions as to how we
might build on it for the future.
Vance

327.
Editorial Note
On January 7, 1980, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin ar-
rived in Egypt for a four-day official visit to the country. The center-
piece of the visit was Begin’s summit meeting with Egyptian President
Anwar al-Sadat in the Egyptian city of Aswan, the ninth since Sadat’s
1977 trip to Jerusalem. The two leaders held three substantive conver-
sations spread over two days. At the first, the two leaders agreed to
proceed with the normalization of relations, including the exchange of
ambassadors, the establishment of an air transport link between the
two countries, as well as the opening of telephone lines and postal ser-
vices. The second meeting was concerned with the current state of the
autonomy negotiations, with considerable differences emerging over
the interpretation of the proposed Palestinian self-governing authority
and the future status of Jerusalem. Moreover, no agreement to increase
the pace of negotiations was reached. Sadat and Begin also discussed
the impact of political developments in Iran and Saudi Arabia, as well
as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, upon the Middle East, agreeing
that these developments posed dangers for the region. Although it was
not discussed, the Egyptian Minister of Defense, Kamal Hassan Ali,
had earlier stated in an interview with The Washington Post, that the
United States would be allowed to use Egyptian military facilities on a
“temporary basis to defend any Arab state,” but would not allow any
permanent U.S. bases in his country. (“Egypt Offers Bases for Limited
Upon his return to Israel, Begin telephoned President Jimmy
Carter to provide the President with his impressions of the summit. Ac-
cording to the President’s Daily Diary, the two leaders spoke from
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials) Although no memorandum of
conversation of this meeting has been found, Carter’s handwritten
notes from this telephone conversation are in the Carter Library, Plains
11/81. Begin provided Ambassador to Israel Samuel W. Lewis a more
substantial briefing in a meeting on January 14, in which Begin con-
veyed his disappointment that no agreement on “moving the negotia-
tions ahead” had been made, but stated that he and Sadat had a
“common language” on strategic issues. Lewis provided a summary of
this meeting to the Department of State in telegram 846 from Tel Aviv,
January 14. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P880145–0625) Similarly, Sadat provided the Ambassador to Egypt, Al-
fred L. Atherton, Jr., with his impressions of the Aswan summit in a
meeting between them on January 12. During the course of the
meeting, Sadat stated that he had told Begin that Egypt and Israel

328.
Telegram From the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to the
Department of State
1. Secret-entire text.
2. Ambassador Eilts, Special Counselor Sabbagh, and I met with
Crown Prince Fahd at his home in Jidda for nearly two hours on the
evening of January 9 to comply with instructions reftel. Fahd was most
cordial although he expressed strong disappointment and great con-
cern at the continuing attacks by President Sadat. He singled out the re-
cent article in “October Magazine” as causing great concern through-
out SAG. He stated that it was extremely difficult to restrain his editors
and newspaper writers from replying to the attacks but he had given
specific instructions that no rpt no attacks on Egypt or President Sadat
would appear in the Saudi press. He reiterated throughout the
meeting, at times in almost emotional tones, that he wished Sadat
success; that he would be the first to call and congratulate him if he
were able to find a solution to the Palestinian and Jerusalem problems.
He added that he prayed each day for President Sadat’s success despite
the abuse which continued to come from Egypt.
cret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis.
Foreign Policy File, P900086–2281)

3. Fahd discussed the general strategic situation in the area, in-
cluding both the plight of the hostages and the Afghanistan invasion.
He expressed concern about the hostages, SAG’s continuing will-
ingness and desire to help, and admiration for President Carter’s han-
dling of the problem.
4. With respect to Afghanistan, he added that this was simply a
continuation of the Soviets’ aggressive moves and he was glad to see
the U.S. recognize the danger. He stated that he had encouraged So-
malia to cooperate with USG in the granting of base facilities.
5. With respect to the steps that the U.S. should take for a compre-
hensive Middle East peace, Fahd reiterated the familiar theme that USG
must take a strong stand with respect to Israel; that we should not con-
tinue to provide unlimited economic and military support as long as Is-
rael continued its expansionist policies. He stated he welcomed Am-
bassador Linowitz’s coming visit and hoped that some progress could
be made in the autonomy talks, although he remained extremely skep-
tical in the absence of a major shift in USG support policies for Israel.
6. Ambassador Eilts has not seen this message. He will give a more
detailed report3 to the President and the Secretary upon his return to
Washington.
7. Department please pass to AmEmbassy Amman for Ambas-
sador Eilts.
West

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

329.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance and
Secretary of Defense Brown
Washington, January 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Longer-Term Security Assistance to Egypt (C)
The President has approved in principle the sale to Egypt of F–16
aircraft and M–60 tanks, and this decision should be communicated to

330.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Egyptian Vice President Hosni
Mubarak
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Gary Sick
Egyptian Vice President Hosni Mubarak
Secretary Vance opened the discussion with a quick review of his
discussion with Vice President Mubarak the previous day2 where they
had discussed the progress of the autonomy talks and the need for
some pressure to make it move forward. We are fully in agreement on
this. Secretary Brown had met with Vice President Mubarak today.
The President said there must be more progress between now and
May. The end of this month marks a major turning point and it must
not be upset. Before we get to the next stage, we must compare plans on
how to speed up the process on Jerusalem, the West Bank, Gaza and
Palestinian rights. The President had just talked with Prime Minister
Suarez of Spain4 and he thought that European countries will be willing
to play a stronger role in the coming months in support of efforts to get
resolution of the Palestinian and related issues. Since the Iranian revo-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
lution and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan5 there has been a
growing realization of the need to cooperate more closely among the
moderate Arab nations and also Israel. There is now an opportunity to
make real progress.
The U.S. needs a closer relationship with Egypt even than in the
past few months. Ambassador Linowitz is the best negotiator in our na-
tion. He is a strong, capable, intelligent man. He will be able to take po-
sitions which are unpopular in our country if he is convinced they are
in the interest of peace. Once normalization has occurred, it would be
useful for Egypt to present its case against settlements and for Pales-
tinians to participate more strongly. We will do the same. In the Presi-
dent’s view, the majority of the people in Israel support that, including
many of the people in leadership positions.
We are grateful for Egyptian friendship, especially the help which
has been offered in the Iranian situation. The air support given to our
planes strengthens our determination to persevere. We also appreciate
your encouraging other Moslem nations to condemn the Soviet inva-
sion of Afghanistan. Even if the leaders of those nations do not profess
friendship, they listen carefully to Egypt as the dominant economic, po-
litical and military power.
We appreciate Vice President Mubarak’s coming here to try to per-
suade the North and South Koreans to settle their conflict. We are
always ready for a three-country meeting if the North is willing to ac-
cept the political leaders of the South. It is necessary for each of us to
keep the other fully informed on this.
Vice President Mubarak said that he had met with Secretary Vance
yesterday and with Secretary Brown today. He had informed Secretary
Vance fully about the recent negotiations6 with Prime Minister Begin—
perhaps in greater detail than Ambassador Atherton had reported. He
said that he had a hand-written report7 on the talks written by Presi-
dent Sadat following the meeting and wondered if the President would
like to read it.
The President took the document and read it while the conversation
among the others continued.
Secretary Vance said we had gone back to the Sudanese after the
message from the Egyptians.
Vice President Mubarak interjected that the Sudanese had now
pulled out their Ambassador to the UN on the grounds that he had vio-
lated his instructions. He noted that he had not been satisfied by his
talks with Secretary Brown.
Secretary Vance wondered if the problem was related to the kinds
of equipment, delivery dates . . .
Vice President Mubarak said both. He said there was tremendous
pressure in his country for arms. Secretary Brown had said the F–16s
would not be delivered until 1984. What were they going to do all this
time? He noted that Qadhafi had recently met with an Egyptian general
who had been taking a course in London and who went secretly to
Libya. Qadhafi tried to persuade him to “do something” in Egypt. The
generals came and told them about the meeting, which took place three
weeks ago. Qadhafi promised many things. Secretary Brown said he
could not offer the F–15.
The President said that he had had a call from Prime Minister Begin
which was a much more positive report than the one he had just read.
Prime Minister Begin always emphasizes the things on which there
was agreement or perhaps ignores or minimizes the areas of disagree-
ment. However, there is no way to avoid the questions of autonomy
and Jerusalem.
Vice President Mubarak said that solution of these issues would
solve all the problems of the Middle East. President Sadat cannot un-
derstand why Prime Minister Begin spends all of his time talking about
normalization. He talks for hours about normalization and leaves out
the other problems.
The President said that some people know how to filibuster. We
must recognize that Prime Minister Begin has a serious political
problem in Israel and he does not want to talk about Jerusalem, au-
tonomy and the Palestinian question. In the President’s own judgment,
the paragraph in the Camp David accords will have to be the basis for
agreement. Ambassador Linowitz wants to explore some reference to
sovereignty and religion. On the Palestinian question, it needs PLO rec-
ognition of Israel’s right to exist and a statement of acceptance of Reso-
lution 242. The Moslem nations must see evidence of some progress
otherwise the U.S. position in the area will be damaged.
The United States will try to expedite the delivery of F–4s and
F–16s. It is not desirable to propose F–15s at this time. The Congress
would react adversely. The President was aware of Egypt’s desire to
have the F–15, but he asked President Sadat to trust his judgment on
this question. The President said he would consult with Congress
about allocating additional grain for Egypt, although it might be corn
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
rather than wheat. He noted that in the South where he grew up,
people ate almost as much corn as wheat.
Vice President Mubarak said he had discussed the negotiations yes-
terday. When full autonomy is reached, it will be a good solution to the
whole problem. Egypt and the U.S. must work together. He said he had
recently gone to Tunisia for a meeting with an Islamic group. He had
also traveled to Malaysia and to Oman. In Oman he had met with
people coming secretly from Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and the UAE. There
was only one question: what did you do in Jerusalem? This is the vital
question. Prince Fahd and the King know only Jerusalem. The Presi-
dent was right when he said some months ago that none of the Arab
leaders really wants an independent Palestinian state. They are terri-
fied of the Palestinians. They are afraid the Soviets will go there. Arafat
has sent a private message. Every time he is going to make a public
statement which is critical, he sends a message and says he must say
this for Assad or for Qadhafi, and he asks for understanding. Egypt
always gets the same message. He is trying to get some money from
them, but still he is a leader who, when he finds the train is starting to
leave, he will get aboard. For that reason, he has left his representative
in Cairo. They have been trying to get him to take his representative
out, but he leaves him there. Qadhafi has kicked out the PLO repre-
sentative in Libya. In Oman, Vice President Mubarak met with the
Chief of Cabinet of Shaikh Zayid of the UAE who had come from Pak-
istan to Oman to meet him. He said please convey to President Sadat
our appreciation for all the steps he has taken, but ask his under-
standing that we cannot say it publicly. This is also what we hear from
the Saudis. Not from the King. He knows nothing of politics, only Jeru-
salem. They need a way to save face. The object is not to kick the Israelis
out of Jerusalem.
The President wondered if Vice President Mubarak had recently
read the Jerusalem language in the Camp David accords? Was that lan-
guage satisfactory to Sadat?
Vice President Mubarak said yes it is. Egypt wants something fin-
ished. Sadat told Begin nearly the same language as the Camp David
language. Both he and President Sadat had said the same thing to
Weizman: let us live all in peace. Jerusalem is a religious thing. We
need only a small Council (Consulate?) with a flag. Weizman said
Begin would not be able to accept the flag. But it is only something
symbolic, he would see in time.
The President recalled that he had once spent two days with Begin
talking about flags.

Vice President Mubarak said they (Israelis) would have access and
be able to move freely. Time would make everything disappear.
The President asked Secretary Vance if Ambassador Linowitz was
ready with his language.
Secretary Vance said yes, he would take it out with him. It is based
on Camp David plus mention of religious sovereignty.
Vice President Mubarak said this is very important. It is something
that is felt by all Moslems. He had spent a whole day in Tunisia on
nothing but Jerusalem. They never mentioned the West Bank or Gaza.
It is as if God stays in Jerusalem.
Secretary Vance noted that the next withdrawal occurs on the 26th
of January. That is the last step until the final withdrawal.
The President said that after the 26th all of us will need to show each
other our plans and try to put them into effect in order to get maximum
influence. Ambassador Linowitz is good here at home and with Begin.
He communicates with Begin better than Ambassador Strauss.
Vice President Mubarak replied that Begin is hard to get along with.
He noted that Begin recently talked about Golan and how it would
always remain Israeli territory.
Dr. Brzezinski recalled that Begin had told him at one time that he
would give up an eye, part of his arm, before he would part with the
Sinai. He says one thing, but later he changes.
Vice President Mubarak noted that Israel had said it was ready to ne-
gotiate with the Syrians. If some agreement could be reached, it would
be very good to stop the Russians. The Soviets are doing their best with
the Syrians. President Assad knows that it would be a disaster for his
regime if Sadat succeeds in getting something. He knows he would
have to follow.
The President remarked that lately Assad had been worse than
Qadhafi. He was more subservient to the Soviets.
Vice President Mubarak said the situation was boiling internally in
Syria.
Secretary Vance said that once we are past the 26th, it will require
pressure by both Egypt and the U.S. If we are not together, Begin will
try to drive a wedge between us.
Vice President Mubarak said that the recent meeting between Sadat
and Begin was just to pave the way for pressure later. President Sadat
feels 100% the same way about U.S. and Egyptian pressure. He wanted
to pave the way with Begin psychologically and make it easier for the
United States. Without the efforts of President Carter later on and with
tremendous effort, we will get nothing.
The President smiled and said he would prefer to remain in the
background but that he was available if it was essential.

331.
Editorial Note
Speaking to a conference of Jewish-American reporters in Jeru-
salem on January 18, 1980, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin
stated that the Egyptian delegation to the Palestinian autonomy negoti-
ations had attempted to “distort the Camp David accords” with its pro-
posals for Palestinian self-rule. The Prime Minister called for a new tri-
partite summit to address the issue. “If President Carter will ask for a
three-day summit to discuss matters of autonomy, Israel will go along
with it,” Begin stated. (“Begin Raps Egypt, Suggests U.S. Convene New
Specifically, Begin’s criticisms were prompted by a deadlock over
the specific powers and responsibilities to be accorded a Palestinian ad-
ministrative council, as the Egyptian and Israeli delegations had re-
jected each other’s proposals. A verbatim transcript of the January 16
morning session of the Egyptian-Israeli-U.S. working group meeting
on the powers and responsibilities of the autonomy committee, held at
Mena House in Cairo, at which Egypt rejected the Israeli draft pro-
posal, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
to the Middle East: 1/80.

332.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee Meeting
Subject
Iran, Afghanistan/Soviet Sanctions, Pakistan, Persian Gulf, Intelligence, Sinai
Mission
Participants
The Vice President
State
White House
Deputy Secretary Christopher
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Harold Saunders
Hedley Donovan
Richard Cooper
Lloyd Cutler*
Jody Powell**
Defense
Hamilton Jordan*
Secretary Harold Brown
Henry Owen
Graham Claytor
NSC
CIA
David Aaron
Robert Ames
William Odom
JCS
Gary Sick
General David Jones
Thomas Thornton
Lt. General John Pustay
*Present first ten minutes
**Present last ten minutes
[Omitted here is discussion of topics unrelated to the Arab-Israeli
dispute.]
8. Sinai Field Mission. Mr. Saunders briefed the group on the status
of negotiations. Israel demanded a formal agreement on the status of
the Sinai Mission, then took three weeks getting cabinet clearance on
the negotiating document. We have no problem with the Israeli-
approved document. Because of the Israeli delay, the Egyptians re-
ceived the text of the agreement only a few days before the deadline for
withdrawal this weekend. Israel is now insisting that the agreement
must be formally completed before withdrawal can proceed. Our posi-
tion is that the Egyptians should be given time to consider the agree-
ment and that in the meantime withdrawal should proceed and we
will carry out the terms of the agreement as if it had been signed.
Mr. Saunders raised this since we may be getting a lot of messages
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
from the Israelis asking us to bring pressure on Egypt to expedite the
agreement. (S)
[Omitted here is discussion of topics unrelated to the Arab-Israeli
dispute.]

333.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State and the White House
1813. Subj: Letter From President Sadat to President Carter on
Egypt’s Military Supply Requests.
1. Secret-entire text.
2. Vice President Mubarak summoned me to meet with him at 1800
local today2 (Saturday, January 26) to hand me the following letter from
President Sadat to President Carter. Signed original will follow by
pouch.
3. Begin text:
Dear President Carter:
I have received a detailed report from Vice President Hosny Mou-
bark on his last visit to the United States and his extensive talks with
you and with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense and other
personalities of the administration.
I am gratified to know that we share the same analysis of the inter-
national situation and the dangers with which we are all confronted as
a result of the new Soviet offensive which must be checked if the
peoples of the world, and of our area in particular, are to live in peace
and freedom, and contribute their full share to the welfare of the inter-
national community.
Based on this common analysis, I remain confident that you will
continue to support our efforts aimed at establishing an era of just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.
Dear President Carter,
I do not need to reiterate the friendship and confidence which my
people and I feel towards you personally as well as the great American
people, and our determination to strengthen our relations and our co-
operation in furthering our common aims, while maintaining the tradi-
tion of frankness and candour which has always prevailed between us.
It is in this spirit that I wish to tell you of my disappointment with
regard to the reaction of the administration to our requests concerning
weapons and in particular aircraft.
The importance of Egypt in any real effort to oppose the commu-
nist threat in the Arab world and in Africa is an irrefutable reality.
Despite the apparent success of the Soviet-inspired efforts to iso-
late us, Egypt remains the only power which, if properly helped, can
oppose attempts to destabilize and to impose communist domination
in our region. No other country in the area can assume this responsi-
bility. Especially not Israel, as the lessons of the history of the last
decades clearly show. Everytime the Western world has allied with her
to defend its interests, this alliance has been counterproductive.
Dear Friend,
In the light of all these considerations, which I am sure that you
share, I must ask you to give personally your most serious and urgent
consideration to our demands concerning the acquisition by Egypt of
the F–15; the increase in the number of F–16s which are to be provided
and the speeding up of their delivery; and the spare parts of the F–4’s
which have had to be grounded for lack of spare parts.
In the present circumstances, this is the way to strengthen Egypt’s
position in its determination to fulfill its national obligations which
coincide with those of all peace and freedom loving nations who feel
duty-bound to oppose all attempts to impose Soviet hegemony.
Yours truly,
Mohamed Anwar el Sadat
End text.
Atherton

334.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
1978. For the President and the Secretary of State from Ambas-
sador Linowitz. Subject: Meeting With King Hussein January 26.
1. Secret-entire text.
2. This is to report that I delivered your invitation to Hussein
morning January 26 and that he was visibly delighted and gratified by
it. In our subsequent conversation Hussein sought to show under-
standing for our Middle East peace efforts and to assure me that he did
not want to do anything to make our task more difficult. The King was
warm, friendly and positive throughout the talk, and I believe he re-
garded your invitation and this meeting as having established a bridge
between himself and us closing a period of estrangement with which
he was obviously uncomfortable.
3. Hussein and I met alone at the outset during which I extended
the invitation, (after consulting with Ambassador Veliotes and giving
further thought to the matter I decided it would be best to lead off with
the invitation.) I said you had asked me to tell him that you would be
very pleased if when he is next in the United States he would come to
Washington for an informal chat. Hussein brightened immediately and
asked me to convey to you his thanks and warmest regards. He said he
plans to be in the U.S. in May. I said if Hussein should plan to come ear-
lier he would be welcome even before May and he replied that perhaps
there might be an earlier opportunity.
4. Following this warm and very friendly exchange, which set the
tone for the rest of the conversation Amb. Veliotes joined us. Hussein
led off and spoke at length about Jordan’s place in the peace process,
Resolution 242, his relationships with the Israelis, his reason for not
joining the autonomy negotiations, and his relations with the US. Most
of what the King had to say on each of these subjects is familiar to us.
What he was obviously trying to do in going over this ground was to
convey the impression that he had not deliberately taken a stance at
variance with ours but rather that from his point of view at least there
was good reason for what he made. He mentioned, for example, that he
had followed Israeli politics closely and had had various contacts with
Israeli leaders (he named Peres). He had consistently been disap-
pointed and had concluded that on the matter of a peace settlement
there is no real difference between Begin and Peres. In his only expres-
sion of criticism during the entire meeting, Hussein said he had been
disappointed in the US. He had hoped to work closely with us. Then
Camp David came along and he wasn’t told of what was happening ei-
ther by us or by Sadat. When the Agreement was signed he had “felt
betrayed” by Sadat who had assured him that he would let him know
in advance. He said people wondered why he hadn’t gone along with
the Camp David Accords; it was because he felt himself on the outside.
Hussein acknowledged that his stance had affected his relations with
the US and President Carter but said he felt he had been misunder-
stood. The President had interpreted his actions as challenges, which
was not at all his intention.
5. When Hussein finished this discourse I briefed him at some
length on our efforts in the autonomy negotiations. I said broadly
speaking it seemed to me we have a choice of two courses in dealing
with the Palestinian issue, either to proceed through the plan of Camp
David to gain autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza and thereby fur-
ther the lot of the Palestinians, or to go back to confrontation. I said we
were not asking Hussein to support the Camp David Accords but we
do hope to have his understanding for our efforts and would like to be
sure he won’t interpose objections or create problems.
6. Hussein assured me that he wanted to be helpful and had no in-
tention to create problems. I said under the circumstances it seemed to
me that our work under the Camp David Accords deserves Jordanian
understanding and at least no opposition, since some sort of future
linkage between the West Bank/Gaza and Jordan would seem to be in
Jordan’s interest and not inconsistent with our mutual objectives after
the transition period. Hussein agreed that linking the West Bank/Gaza
with Jordan might be the right solution. I said it seemed to me therefore
that we are on parallel rails and in the end our courses may merge in
the same rail. Hussein again assured me that he would not do anything
that would hamper our efforts. Our dearest wish is that the negotia-
tions succeed, he said. Hussein did say, however, that it would be im-
portant to him that the US come out and state its position on the issues
clearly. He felt it important that the US say what it means, even if
achievement of its goals may take a long time. He was not specific be-
yond a reference to 242.
7. Hussein then spoke of his concern over trends in the region, de-
scribing developments particularly what he described as the very wor-
risome situation in Saudi Arabia. He described Saudi leadership as

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
bankrupt, corrupt and incapable of action. Fahd lacks the ability to run
the country effectively but he said the younger group such as Saud
might be able to. Hussein said he had tried to warn the Saudis that they
face trouble. He was obviously very disturbed by the situation in Saudi
Arabia and by Soviet actions in the area, both of which he saw affecting
his own position.
8. I asked about the PLO’s refusal to accept Resolution 242 and Is-
rael’s right to exist. Hussein said he thought the PLO could eventually
be brought around on both these issues but it will take time. The PLO
will have to prove itself worthy of the Palestinian people. Perhaps, he
said, the PLO could recognize Israel and Israel the PLO at the same
time. Hussein said there must be self-determination for the West Bank
and Gaza, to assure a stable result, but significantly he made no men-
tion whatsoever of an independent Palestinian state.
9. Throughout our conversation Hussein was relaxed, gracious
and lively. He told me that he hoped we could keep in close touch and
that I would be welcome in Amman at any time. He was obviously very
pleased with the meeting and your invitation which I think he sees as
imparting a sense that the US values him and wants to build back
toward a close relationship. Clearly he is concerned about his own posi-
tion in the Arab world and will be careful in his public pronounce-
ments. But he obviously feels that he has now renewed his line of com-
munication to us after an uncomfortable period of estrangement. My
guess is that if we can make real progress in the autonomy negotiations
he will find some way to participate even if peripherally.
Linowitz

335.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter
Washington, January 28, 1980
SUBJECT
Expedited Deliveries of Equipment to Egypt (S)
As we discussed at breakfast on January 25, Defense has analyzed
the options for expediting delivery of F–16 aircraft and M60 tanks to

336.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of Dr. Brzezinski’s and Mr. Christopher’s Meeting with Prince Saud of
Saudi Arabia
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
U.S. Ambassador to Saudi Arabia John West
Eugene Bovis
Gary Sick
Arnie Raphel
Jerry Schecter
Robert Proctor
Prince Saud
Mr. Mansouri
Ambassador al-Hegalan
Abdul Aziz Thunayyan
Notetaker
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
[Omitted here is discussion of regional issues unrelated to the
Arab-Israeli dispute.]
[Prince Saud:] One area on which there is no consensus with the
United States is the problem of Israel. That problem has made the both
of us unable to make the kind of response to the Soviets that we would
like. We have tried not to make this a fundamental contradiction in co-
operation with the United States but it does come into effect with re-
gards to the Soviets. Of course we want U.S. help. We see no U.S. threat
to our independence. We have no fear of the United States which
would act as a constraint on our actions. Our past strategy was based
on alliance between Saudi Arabia and Egypt that worked for a decade.
The Soviets lost ground in this area for the first time. They lost their po-
sitions in Egypt, Iraq, and Syria, which was capable of continuing to
maintain its independence. However, the split between Egypt and
Saudi Arabia has broken that without providing us with any alterna-
tive strategy to replace it. We have not been able to persuade Egypt and
they have not been able to persuade us. We hope that the U.S. will be
contributing to remove the reasons for this split. The Middle East
problem is central at all levels. These thoughts reflect the situation as it
is here. It is something that we live with. It is never far away from us. It
is the way we face challenges to our independence and our way of life.
Now we must devolve a way to meet these challenges.
Dr. Brzezinski said this raised the truly fundamental questions and
very difficult questions that you and we face. In the talk with Prince
Fahd yesterday we were very much in agreement about the nature and
the scope of the threat. It is very real and there is very little time left.
With regard to U.S. strategy the President’s State of the Union message
represented a point of departure. It was a very important statement and
in many respects it was a historical affirmation of the new realities we
face. After World War II we established a permanent presence in
Western Europe and linked our security with theirs. This was followed
by treaties in the Far East. We now appreciate that events in this region
also affect these other regions and the United States, so at present we
have three strategic zones: Western Europe, the Far East, and the
Middle East. The conditions in these three areas are very different. It
would be a mistake to try to deal with this region as if we were re-
clared that the United States would use military force if necessary to defand its national
interests in the Persian Gulf region: “Let our position be absolutely clear: An attempt by
any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault
on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled
by any means necessary, including military force.” The text of Carter’s address is in
“Transcript of President’s State of the Union Address to Joint Session of Congress,” The
Foundations of Foreign Policy.

playing the old formal alliances of Europe. Rather we intend to create a
framework of enhanced security. We envision six levels for directions
of U.S. activity in the region. First on the Arab-Israel front, we recog-
nize the pernicious effects of this problem in radicalizing the region.
We are straining our resources. We are risking the President’s political
capital to try to resolve this issue. Ambassador Linowitz has just been
here3 so you should have some idea of our strategy. We believe that au-
tonomy for the West Bank and Gaza will lead to a new situation. We
recognize that the Palestinians are a people and they must find a way to
express this in a way which is acceptable to the Israelis. This process is
underway and is moving fast enough for Egypt and that is something.
However, we must also focus on Jerusalem. Once Ambassadors are ex-
changed4 we should be able to move with greater energy. We hope we
can use the special religious character of Jerusalem as an opening
wedge. We would like at a minimum to reduce the polemics between
Saudi Arabia and Egypt and develop some tacit understanding on se-
curity issues recognizing that open relations are probably going to be
very difficult. Sadat is very emotional (Prince Saud interjected so are
we but we do not talk as much). We would hope that at least some tacit
cooperation between Egypt and Saudi Arabia would be possible
dealing with the questions of Sudan and Yemen as these become more
acute. Three, we will try to obtain military facilities—not bases but air
and naval facilities which will permit us to project power into the area
effectively, quickly, and decisively. We are also considering landings
by marines or an airborne brigade. We need to work out the details
with the host country. It might be Egypt, it might be Oman. If it is con-
venient for Saudi Arabia, that would be another possibility. Four, we
want to cooperate with Saudi Arabia to reinforce Somalia and Oman.
Both of us have a stake in the security of these two countries. We must
talk to you more concretely about facilities and their security needs.
This is especially important if we need to seal off Yemen. Cooperation
is very important. We must also move forward on the Yemen issue. We
hope you will tell us more about the emissary from North Yemen. Five,
we intend to reinforce Pakistan. Something which six months ago
would have been incredible has transpired. We will talk to the Paki-
stanis about their defense needs, send a military team to strengthen the
northwest frontier, and take other steps to make it difficult for the So-
viets to use Afghanistan as a military base. Six, we would like to work

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
with Iran once the hostage issue is behind us. The natural reaction in
the United States after the hostages are released would be to punish
Iran for mistreating the hostages.
Prince Saud wondered what we meant by mistreatment.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that they had been isolated and bound. The US
public will feel fiercely when they are finally released.
Mr. Christopher noted that the real issue was mental scarring from
their treatment. He noted that Schmidt had remarked on the effects of
only three days of being a hostage in Somalia; whereas, these people
have been held for over ninety days.
Dr. Brzezinski said in any event we will resist the inclination to
punish Iran for this. Iran and Pakistan together provide the forward
line and depth against Soviet incursion so we are going to pursue a six
part strategy: on the Arab-Israel question; relations between Saudi
Arabia and Egypt; to build up our own military strength; to cooperate
with Saudi Arabia on Yemen; to reinforce Pakistan; and to leave the
door open for cooperation with Iran. This is different from our strategy
in Europe but if we pursue it we think there is a good chance of stabi-
lizing the area. We would also like to open a dialogue with other Arab
states. Dr. Brzezinski had spent several days in Algeria recently and
now we have a relationship with them that we didn’t have before. We
would like the same thing with Libya and also with Iraq if that does not
threaten Saudi interests.
Prince Saud said that on the Israeli problem the United States asks
us to look at it dispassionately; we also ask you to look dispassionately
from Camp David. How will we meet the real threats. The real hope in
dealing with this issue is not to govern our actions with respect to the
psychology of the Israelis. This will not make them willing to accept
compromises and it will alienate the Arab side which is also needed in
this process. The Saudis need national backing just the same as the
United States does. It is incomprehensible here why the United States is
not providing Pakistan with military support of the same level and na-
ture that it does to Israel. With regard to Egypt and the speed of the
progress on the Palestinian core issue we have long had relations with
Egypt and we know the swings of activity, which are not new. They
have existed since Nasser’s6 time. Prince Fahd has said that if we are
frustrated it is because Sadat is not succeeding, not because we want
him to fail. Sadat has taken the lead in this process. He took the lead on
242 and all the rest of the Arab nations followed. He went to Camp
David and took another channel in the peace process and the rest of the
Arab world is not fast enough to follow him in that direction. If damage
is done to Egypt, the pendulum can swing just as fast. We have night-
mares about this. We hope that Egypt will remain an open society and
maintain its political direction away from the Soviets. We are far more
interested in this than the Americans are, so we are very careful. As far
as timing goes there is a need for Sadat to fulfill the expectations that he
has raised. As far as the exchange of Ambassadors is concerned, why
should it all be on one side. Why should the gestures always be some-
thing that Israel wants and not something that would satisfy Arab
public opinion. We certainly hope the Ambassador will not go to Jeru-
salem. If time is given to one aspect of the question, then time should be
given to all aspects of the question. The speeding up of this process
must not be at the expense of the trust of others. If so, it will react badly
on Egypt. Not all Egyptians are President Sadats. We hope that he will
regain the leadership of the Arab world. If we feel frustration, it is not
because we do not want cooperation with the United States but because
we see the dangers involved. The Israeli problem will be solved over
time that is certain but we see dangers of letting it go on for a very long
period of time with no progress. Right now the Syrians are preparing
for a war of attrition. Why is that? They see the acceleration of delivery
of F–16s to Israel. It is important that the United States pay a little atten-
tion to the psychology of the Arab world who will be your allies against
the Soviet Union. Israel is not a bulwark against the Soviets. They are
rather the way the Soviets enter the region. If Israel is interested in
maintaining a noncommunist Middle East, then they must cooperate.
They cannot provide military hegemony in the region as a way of
keeping the Soviets out. If I express my emotions, I can only say that
you listen to Sadat when he is emotional. (Dr. Brzezinski noted that
when Prince Saud was emotional he sounded like President Sadat
when he was calm.)
Dr. Brzezinski said the President feels very much as you do. You are
speaking to the converted. However, if we compare today as opposed
to two years ago there has been staggering progress made. The Israelis
have now given up the notion of retaining Sinai. They said that they
would never give up the settlements. In a walk with Begin he said that
his hand would fall off, his eyes would fall out, before giving up a
single Israeli settlement. Yet, he signed the paper giving up Israeli set-
tlements. This is not fast enough for you or for us. The problem is how
to keep the United States people, the Congress and the Israeli people on
our side. There has been a breakthrough in defining self-rule for the
Palestinians. No longer is the issue how to incorporate Judea and
Sumeria [Samaria] into Israel. This process is accelerated. Israeli public
opinion shows a genuine shift in recognizing the need to hand over the
West Bank for a true security settlement.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prince Saud said yes, you do affect public opinion in Israel. On set-
tlements the biggest change in Israeli public opinion came when the
President said that settlements were illegal and stopped some deliv-
eries of some economic and military equipment. In the same way you
could influence the Palestinian question. If the Israelis feel that re-
gardless of their policy they could count on unhindered aid from the
United States, they will not change their policy. Who will argue with
Begin if he succeeds.
Dr. Brzezinski said that he was uncomfortable in dealing with this
since Ambassador Linowitz had been here only recently and he was
better informed about the nature of the overall process. The question of
course is how to choose the right moment and what issue to press. Both
sides are forming their own view of home rule. At some point a positive
intervention may move the situation forward. We do not intend to
maintain a status quo. We know it is not tolerable. It is not even just.
Prince Saud said that the status quo would be a stumbling block.
Mr. Christopher recalled that Prince Fahd had said that Arafat was
here and that it would be a service to his reputation if he was able to
help with the hostage situation. He recalled that a year ago we had a
close call in getting the PLO to accept Resolution 242. We came within
an eyelash of getting that acceptance. Now that has slipped away. Is
there a way to return to that?
Prince Saud said this is a representation problem. Keeping the PLO
away from the negotiations does not result in security. Rather it is an
unnecessary complication which the Israelis wanted to add to the talks.
The Saudis had tried to get recognition of the 242 by the Palestinians at
the time of Geneva, when there was a general Arab position to nego-
tiate. They hoped to get the Palestinians into that negotiating team.
Since that time many things have changed; the PLO is interested in US
recognition and would be of benefit to the negotiations. How that
would happen, I don’t know. Ambassador Linowitz asked the same
question. If the US in some way takes the position of solving the Pales-
tinian question on the basis of self-determination, it could make them
take the plunge. This issue is very important to them since it is one of
the key negotiating cards which they would bring to the negotiating
table.
Mr. Christopher noted that acceptance of Resolution 242 was not
frivolous or pure formality since it involved the acceptance of the fu-
ture viability of Israel. This would be a major contribution.
Prince Saud said yes, for US public opinion; but for the Palestinians
resolution 242 involves the recognition of Israel without dealing with

the Palestinian problem. It is a unilateral step without any guarantees
from Israel. They see this as the end of the negotiations not the
beginning.
Mr. Christopher said there are various forms which were suggested
in the past which would make it more balanced. That has continued rel-
evance and vitality. We hope it has not been dropped by your side.
Prince Saud said that the Palestinians would probably be willing to
accept 242 if the United States could give some indication of its deter-
mination to resolve the problem on the basis of self-determination.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that we use the formula that the Palestinians
should participate in the determination of their own future rather than
using the word self-determination. This is a result of Israeli security
concerns which have not been inconsiderable in the past. The au-
tonomy talks are not intended to create a regime which will last for-
ever, but it is necessary that the Palestinians become engaged in the
process.
Prince Saud said that what prevents them from becoming engaged
is the unwillingness to recognize the PLO. When Israel says it does not
want to talk to the PLO, they are really saying that they want to avoid
dealing with the Palestinian problem.
Dr. Brzezinski said we recognize that but we also seek movement.
There is a debate in progress about the West Bank, that is a break-
through. More and more Israelis say that they should talk to the Pales-
tinians—Dayan, Weizman, Evron—but it is not easy to force this
process. It takes time.
Prince Saud said at the present time this is a festering sore that will
remain that way unless the United States makes an incision.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we prefer healing to surgery. Begin used to
say that the PLO was a gang of murderers. Now the PLO has begun to
talk more intelligently. Both sides are changing.
Prince Saud said that we trust the motives of the United States to
get a resolution of the problem based on justice, equity, and a stable so-
lution. We do not question the US motives but on the timing we know
that the Soviets want to implement their objectives now, not in the next
decade. Whatever we can do to speed that process we must do it. One
thing you could do would be to accept the PLO.
Dr. Brzezinski said the fact that you keep pressing us is helpful. It
not only makes us keep this issue in the forefront but also to recognize
the need to consider the views of Arabs, just as we take consideration of
the Israeli views. The Europeans are ahead of us on this issue. That also
helps. We appreciate how deeply you feel on this subject.
Prince Saud said he would take advantage of this open door policy
on the Palestinians and keep pressing.

337.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, February 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Expedited Deliveries of Equipment to Egypt (S)
Attached is the memo you requested from Harold Brown (Tab A)
following Vice President Mubarak’s visit. It seeks to set forth possible
options to speed up delivery of arms requested by the Egyptians within
definite limits on funds and financing arrangements. Once you ap-
prove these limits, we would propose to present the relevant options to
the Egyptians and have them make the necessary trade-offs. OMB and
State comments are at Tabs B and C respectively.
The package is sufficiently complex that it might be helpful to ex-
plain how the options were put together and the key issues that emerge
for your decision. The principal considerations are:
—Timing: to be responsive, we want some options that will begin
deliveries in 1980.
—Composition: the options should include both advanced aircraft
which are important for overall political effect and tanks which are es-
sential to strengthen Sadat’s position with the Army—the main Egyp-
tian military force.
—Production constraints: unless the Egyptians acquire more than
feasible. The second set of issues is key to determining which options
should be presented to the Egyptians:
—Are we prepared to increase FMS financing in FY 81 by $200
million?
—Are we prepared to increase the limit on cash flow financing
The options are set forth in Tables I and II at Tab A. I suggest you
take them out for reference as you consider the analysis which follows.
The two tables represent different FY 81 FMS levels but mix up the
issue of the limit on cash flow. For this reason, I have reordered the op-
tions in the following analysis of the impact of different financial ar-
rangements on the options and the implication of the various options
themselves.
1. No change in funding or financing arrangements will enable us to
offer Options 1 and 3 from Table I.
Option 1
First Delivery Date
Dec 81

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The problem with Option 1 (from Table I) is that there would be no
aircraft delivery for almost two years. Option 3 (Table I) would solve
that, but the tank buy (40) is too small to keep open the production line
for M–60s. For this reason, Defense suggests increasing the level of cash
flow financing.
2. An increase in cash flow financing permits us to offer Options 2 and
4 from Table I.
Option 2
First Delivery Date
Dec 82

These options lay out a comprehensive and long-term program of
modernization, but they have the defect of no advanced aircraft deliv-
eries for several years.
OMB concedes that if you are to choose, they would prefer raising
FY 81 FMS $200 million rather than lift the ceiling on cash flow pay-
ments significantly. Jim McIntyre also raises other issues which must
be put in perspective:
—Diverting F–16s and M–60s from U.S. forces; this is essential for
any acceleration of deliveries and DOD believes the relatively small
quantities involved are manageable.
—The program increases proposed by Harold are not supported
by any threat analysis, and are unnecessary given the peace treaty with
Israel; the external threat comes from Libya, which has powerful and
modern forces, but this misses the point that Egypt is the major military
power in the Middle East that we must count on for all our security in-
terests. It is the key to implementation of both the Camp David Accords
and the Carter Doctrine for the Perisan Gulf. Far more than the facilities
in Kenya, Somalia or Oman, we will be dependent on Egypt for facil-
ities (the air base at Wadi Kena, prepositioned stocks for RDF, etc.). We
need a stable Egypt with strong links to the U.S. and that means en-
gaging in a long-term military supply relationship. This, in turn, means
we must be prepared over time to replace the Soviet equipment that is
wearing out.
—We should hold up on aircraft delivery acceleration because the
F–16 has engine problems, and the F–X might be a better long-term so-
lution; the quantities of F–16s to be delivered soon are small enough
that DOD believes the present engine shortage will not be significant.
Waiting for the F–X means no advanced aircraft for at least five years
since that plane is barely on paper.
—Any increased funding or improved financing arrangements
will lead to greater pressure for Israeli increases; I believe it will give
the Israelis another talking point, but I doubt it will change any votes.
More important would be the impact on the Pakistanis.
Finally, there is the issue of the F–15. After reviewing the options, I
strongly doubt the Egyptians will want them because they would have
to wait four years to get them. But by merely offering them, we might
assuage a growing symbolic discrepancy that is adversely affecting our
relationship with Egypt. However, the situation is complicated by the
fact that Mubarak was misled by the diffident response of Javits and
Church, both of whom now firmly oppose offering the F–15. I suggest
we inform the Egyptians that we are prepared to consider supplying
the F–15s provided we and they can work together to develop suffi-
cient political support in the Congress. In this connection, we would
also make clear the long delay in F–15 delivery. The option we would

338.
Editorial Note
On February 10, 1980, the Israeli Cabinet released a communique´
stating that the Israeli Government has “no objections” to Jews living in
the West Bank city of Hebron, “as in any other part of the land of Is-
rael.” The Cabinet decision came ten days after the fatal shooting of a
23-year old Jewish student in the Hebron market, responsibility for
which was claimed by a faction of the Palestine Liberation Organiza-
tion. (David K. Shipler, “Israel Moves to Allow Jews to Resettle in Arab
inet’s move, reported by the Embassy in Tel Aviv, was not an entirely
new statement of policy as the Likud government “has always sup-
ported the right of Jews to live anywhere in Eretz Yisrael; it has in prac-
tice, however, barred settlement of Jews within wholly Arab towns on
the West Bank. The specific reference to Hebron in the context of the
reaffirmation of this right possibly foreshadows a change in the appli-
cation of that policy.” However, no timetable for the implementation of
the terms of the communique´ was set. (Telegram 2739 from Tel Aviv,
February 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800074–0170) The complete Cabinet communique´ was forwarded to
Washington in telegram 2669 from Tel Aviv, February 11. (National Ar-

339.
Summary of Conclusions of a Senior Level Meeting
Subject
Egyptian-Israeli Negotiations (U)
Participants
Vice President Walter Mondale
Vice President’s Office
A. Denis Clift, Assistant to the Vice President for National Security Affairs
State
Cyrus Vance (Chairman) Secretary
Harold Saunders Assistant Secretary for Near East and South Asian Affairs
OSD
Harold Brown Secretary
Personal Representative of the President
Ambassador Sol Linowitz
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
NSC
Robert Hunter
Both Secretary Vance and Dr. Brzezinski indicated the importance
of the May target date for concluding the autonomy talks on the West
Bank and Gaza. While there is some flexibility in that date if real negoti-
ations are clearly seen to be going on, it is important in terms of con-
vincing the Arabs that the process has a real chance of success. Secre-
tary Vance also indicated that, after the May target date, the EC–9
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
would very likely take an independent line, including a UN resolution
on Palestinian rights. Mr. Saunders sketched two basic courses of ac-
tion: pursuing the talks vigorously in hopes that success will isolate the
PLO; or having some lines out to the Palestinians—and implicitly to the
PLO—as a way of supporting the process politically beyond the target
date and encouraging the West Bankers and Gazans to participate at
the right moment. The Vice President and Ambassador Linowitz
stressed the political factors of any involvement with the PLO, particu-
larly the importance of not upsetting the Israelis in a way that would
distract them from the Autonomy negotiations. It was agreed: that
there should be no second Camp David, without complete assurances
of success; that Ambassador Linowitz should continue to try gaining as
much agreement as possible by the May target date—although a full
agreement is most unlikely by then; that there should be repeated em-
phasis on conveying an impression of progress4 to the Arab world; that
Ambassador Linowitz (and others) should step up their visible contacts
with non-PLO Palestinians; and that there should be continued efforts
with other Arabs to gain Palestinian openmindedness5 towards the
Camp David process. We should consider what else will be needed if
agreement is not reached by May.
On settlements, it was agreed that State will put out a strong public
statement today, confirming our position and indicating that the Is-

340.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, February 14, 1980
SUBJECT
Autonomy Talks: The Way Forward (U)
I must say I share the President’s reservations about the course
outlined at the breakfast, yesterday—in terms of what will be required
down the road—although it was a useful discussion that should be re-
peated frequently. (S)
Two particular ingredients seemed to be underplayed:
—the “wild card” possibilities as the final weeks approach. This
includes a very high level of anxiety in Israel, fissures in Egypt as the
lower levels press Sadat for significant pressure on Israel, a likely in-
crease of PLO activity (which could include terrorism or even a major
flare-up in Lebanon—both developments now building up steam), and
some increased pressure on us by the other Arabs; and
—increased pressure for the President to become directly in-
volved: either at the low end of the scale to provide the political excuse
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
for deal-cutting, or at the high end by putting into the crucible his past
achievements in Middle East peacemaking. Unless attention is dis-
tracted elsewhere, I expect the U.S. media to make quite a thing of the
end-game, and the President’s involvement or lack thereof. (The
Egypt-Israel treaty did go beyond the deadline; but the parallel is
inexact—that one the Arab world did not want completed; this one it
does, or at least will use the occasion of a missed deadline to make a
real fuss). (S)
Thus while the “time buying” approach is fine for now—particu-
larly your suggestion about the appearance of progress—I believe the
time is fast approaching for serious consideration of what might be re-
quired to give a real “college try” at getting a basic agreement buttoned
up by the end of May. Some basic questions for consideration on a
close-hold basis:
—what should be the minimum prior agreement to justify Presi-
dential involvement at some point, and what form could this involve-
ment take? How should the risks and possible benefits be weighed?
—how should we calibrate our approach with the Egyptians as the
end game approaches?
—is there a fallback that can include a Jordanian dimension?
—what U.S. carrots should we consider? E.G. security guarantee;
no-Palestinian-State guarantee; aid sweetener; U.S. regional-security-
relationship-with-Israel sweetener.
—how should we work with the Jewish community here on
shaping approaches to Israel? (S)
In short, how do we shift from the negotiating process to the polit-
ical process—and maintain good control? (S)

341.
Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat
Washington, February 15, 1980

342.
Telegram From the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to the
Department of State
1078. Subject: (S) Fahd Threatens Retaliation for Renewed Egyp-
tian Media Attacks. Ref: Cairo 3428.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Summary: Continued Egyptian attacks on Saudi Arabia, particu-
larly royal family, have brought Saudi restraint and patience to break-
ing point. Crown Prince Fahd has warned that attacks can no longer be
ignored, and, if continued, will result in actions which can only further
widen breach between GOE and SAG. End summary.
3. We would appreciate Embassy Cairo forwarding by immediate
cable full text of February 14 attack on Saudis, cited in paragraph 6 of
reftel.
4. We are concerned that this latest attack may well provoke strong
Saudi response which would be extremely damaging to already tat-
tered GOE–SAG relationship.
5. Crown Prince Fahd telephoned Special Counselor Isa Sabbagh
afternoon of February 12 requesting that Ambassador tell President
Carter that Saudi patience and restraint were wearing out in view of
continued attacks by President Sadat and Egyptian press on members
of the royal family, specifically the King and Crown Prince. In fact, one
attack, by innuendo, retells the late King Faysal’s assassination in such
a way as to incite, in the words of Fahd, a similar crime against the
present King.
6. Article referred to in reftel therefore assumes special signifi-
cance, especially that portion charging Fahd with conspiracy to depose
King Khalid. Fahd’s conversation continued as follows: “His Majesty
King Khalid several times every day asks me why don’t we respond in
kind. Are we afraid of anything or anybody? Can’t we frankly go ahead
and destroy him (Sadat) morally and informationally?” Fahd added
that SAG had refrained for two reasons: first, “our own good manners,
and, secondly, our friend President Carter’s constant urging and advice
not to retaliate.”
7. Fahd then said he was having difficulty restraining answers
which would not necessarily be given by members of the royal family.
He also stated that the responses may well include attacks of an ex-
tremely personal and scandalous nature on President and Mrs. Sadat.
He concluded by requesting that Ambassador inform President Carter
that unless these attacks ceased, especially those involving personal at-
tacks on the royal family, he could no longer keep “the friends of Saudi
Arabia” from responding in kind, although he personally did not want
members of the royal family to “come down to the gutter of recrimina-
tion.” He concluded with the Arabic phrase, translated, that (for the
U.S.) “forewarned is forearmed.”
8. Ambassador’s comment: I was out of the Kingdom at the time
Fahd passed this message, but I am not surprised at the continuing
pressure on Fahd to allow some answer to be made to the Egyptian at-
tacks. King Khalid has expressed, on at least one occasion, his strong
personal feelings about the Egyptians. Accusations that Fahd and Ab-
dallah have been plotting to overthrow him are bound to be disturbing
to him in his present state of mind.
9. The answers which would probably appear in the Saudi press
and otherwise would probably include revelations that Mrs. Sadat was
involved with the Arab arms industry. (It was rumored that she held a
ten percent interest therein.) Fahd, in his conversation with Sabbagh,
referred to information furnished by Ashraf Marwan, the now deposed
head of Arab arms. Saudi principal in this venture was Kamal Adham,
now out of favor here. We are afraid to estimate the amount and extent
of rumors which may well be published growing out of the Marwan-
Adham departures from their respective governments under less than
favorable circumstances, all reflecting unfavorably on Sadat.

343.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Meeting between David E. McGiffert, Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs, and Kamal Hassan Ali, Egyptian Minister of
Defense
PARTICIPANTS
US Side
Assistant Secretary of Defense David E. McGiffert
American Ambassador Alfred L. Atherton, Jr.
Lt General Ernest Graves, Director, DSAA
Vice Admiral Thor Hanson, Director, Joint Staff
Memcons/Reporting Cables. Secret. The meeting took place in the Ministry of Defense.
Drafted by Colonel Edward C. Redican, USAF (OASD/ISA (NESA)) and approved by
McGiffert.

Mr. Samuel R. Peale, State/NEA
Lt Colonel Edward C. Redican, OASD/ISA (NESA)
Egyptian Side
General Kamal Hassan Ali, Minister of Defense
Lt General Ahmed Badawi, Chief of Staff, Armed Forces
Maj General Gamal al Sayese, Assistant Minister of Defense
Maj General Mahmoud Kamal, Assistant Minister of Defense
Maj General Habib Shorab, DMI
Maj General Mohamed Harudi, COS Land Forces
Maj General Mohamed Abu Ghazala, Defense Attache, Washington
Meeting opened with Mr. McGiffert passing President Carter’s
greetings and the Secretary of Defense’s greetings to Minister of De-
fense Ali. He then described his mission to Cairo as being one of the
messenger to deliver President Carter’s final decisions on the current
phase of the US security assistance program for Egypt. He pointed out
to MOD Ali that President Sadat’s intercession with President Carter
had had a profound affect on President Carter’s thinking, thereby
causing him to revise his original decisions; but, given financial con-
straints faced by the United States, both domestically and worldwide,
President Carter feels that he has done all he can at this time. Mr.
McGiffert then explained in a summary way the decisions the President
had made, passing a written summary (Aide Memoire) of these deci-
sions to Minister Ali. Mr. McGiffert continued by outlining the objec-
tives of his current mission to Cairo; namely, that the Egyptian MOD
fully understand the decisions that they were receiving as well as the
opportunities and constraints offered by these decisions. A short expla-
nation then followed of the implications of cash flow financing with
emphasis on the fact that this is a highly unusual decision for the
United States to undertake in security assistance. Ambassador Ath-
erton then commented that he was very pleasantly surprised by the de-
cisions, feeling that they represented much more than he thought
would be possible at this time. He further stated that there was little
doubt that President Sadat and Vice President Mubarak had had an im-
pact on this program. Minister Ali then thanked Mr. McGiffert for

344.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, February 28, 1980
SUBJECT
UN Settlements Resolution: VBB (U)
Following a Vance-McHenry meeting this morning, the issue of
our vote on the UN settlements resolution3 has now come immediately
to the fore. (C)
The text in play has some objectional provisions that USUN be-
lieves it can get out. The one element that it judges cannot be got out is
the continuation of the Settlements Commission. Reportedly, it is Cy’s
judgment that we have in effect committed ourselves to the Israelis not
to vote “yes” on a resolution that contains such a provision (“We would
do what we could do . . . to get rid of the Settlements Commission”—
State canvassed the possibility of a delay in the vote from Friday
until Monday, in order to see what decision the Israeli Cabinet takes
on Sunday about Hebron settlements. McHenry said a postponement
is not possible; working levels at State think an effort should be made
Vance is reportedly going to raise the issue with the President
today, noting his own view that we should abstain (with the Commis-
sion language in), and McHenry’s view that we should vote yes. (State
working level believes the best outcome would be to try getting a post-
ponement, then either abstain or vote yes depending on what the Is-
raeli Cabinet does on Sunday. However, they judge that there is little
demned Israel’s refusal to cooperate with the Security Council Commission, requested
that the Commission continue its work, and called upon it to “dismantle the settlements
in the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and to cease the estab-
lishment and planning of new ones.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, pp. 409 and
telegram related a February 21 conversation between Lewis and Evron in which the
former outlined the U.S. position on the Security Council’s consideration of the settle-
ments issue. In response to Evron’s statement that he had raised the issue of the U.S. posi-
tion “at least five different times” without response, a situation which made Begin “sus-
picious” of U.S. intentions, Lewis pointed out that McHenry had consistently “made
clear our opposition to continuing the settlements commission.” In spite of McHenry’s
pessimism that “even with our opposition it would be possible to preclude continuation
of the commission’s life,” given Israel’s announced intention to allow Jewish settlement
in the city of Hebron, Lewis stated, the United States “would do what we could to achieve
what Israel has consistently asked us to do: i.e., get rid of the settlements commission as
part of whatever outcome is produced by the Council meeting” on March 1. (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 55, Israel:

345.
Editorial Note
On March 1, 1980, the United Nations Security Council passed
settlements in the territories occupied in the June 1967 Arab-Israeli war,
including Jerusalem, by a unanimous 15–0 vote. Although the partici-
pants in the February 28 meeting among Secretary of State Cyrus
Vance, Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, and Assistant to the Presi-
dent for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski had decided the
United States would abstain in the vote (see footnote 9, Document 344),
which was originally scheduled for the afternoon of February 29, it was
decided at President Jimmy Carter’s foreign policy breakfast meeting
on February 29 that the United States would vote for the resolution if
certain “objectionable wording,” especially references to Jerusalem,
were removed from the resolution text. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle,
page 441) The February 29 meeting was attended by Vance, Brown,
White House Senior Advisor Hedley W. Donovan, White House
Counsel Lloyd N. Cutler, White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan,
and Brzezinski and took place in the White House Cabinet Room from
Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation of the meeting has been
found.

The U.S. Mission to the United Nations transmitted the text of the
draft resolution, as tabled late on February 28, to the Department of
Foreign Policy File, D800106–0545) That afternoon, following “tele-
phonic instructions” from the Department of State, the Representative
to the United Nations, Donald F. McHenry, met with Tunisian Ambas-
sador to the United Nations M’hamed Essafi and Jordanian Ambas-
sador to the United Nations Hazem Nuseibeh. At the meeting, USUN
reported in telegram 800, March 1, “we had successfully obtained dele-
tion of operative para[graph] 7 of the resolution when we stated that
this would enable us to vote for the resolution.” (National Archives, RG
upon Israel to “abide by the pertinent Security Council Resolutions
concerning Jerusalem, in particular Resolution 252 (1968) and to respect
and guarantee religious freedoms and practices in Jerusalem and other
holy places in the occupied Arab territories as well as the integrity of
places of religious worship.” In his account of this episode in his
memoirs, Brzezinski wrote that “later” on February 29, Vance had
“phoned me to say that the wording of the resolution had been modi-
fied satisfactorily and that he therefore felt free to instruct McHenry to
support it.” Brzezinski told Vance that “he should transmit the revised
text to the President or at least speak to him personally just to be sure.”
(Brzezinski, Power and Principle, page 441) No official record of this ex-
change or of Vance’s exchange with Carter has been found. Shortly be-
fore the vote, McHenry was informed that the “text of the resolution
that the Secretary had discussed with the President did not include the
wording in oper[ative] para[graph] 6 calling for Israel ‘to dismantle the
existing settlements.’” McHenry “considered it essential, therefore, to
check back,” with the Department of State and successfully obtained a
delay of the vote to noon of the following day, March 1. (Telegram 800
from USUN, March 1; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800106–0545)
Upon receiving “telephonic instructions” from the Department of
State on the morning of March 1, McHenry telephoned Essafi to inform
him he had been “asked by the Secretary to urge strongly [the] deletion
of the wording in operative para[graph] 6 of the resolution calling for
Israel ‘to dismantle the existing settlements.’” After meeting with the
other delegations, Essafi informed McHenry that the proposed excision
on paragraph 6 would not be accepted and suggested revisions to the
wording instead. McHenry informed Essafi that “these formulations
would create even more problems. He was instructed only to seek dele-
tion. Under the circumstances McHenry thought it was best to leave the
wording as it stood and go ahead with the vote. He said he would vote
for the resolution but would include in his statement [accompanying
his vote] a comment on this provision.” Following his meeting with Es-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
safi, McHenry also informed the Israeli Deputy Permanent Representa-
tive to the United Nations of his intention to vote for the resolution.
Foreign Policy File, D800106–0938) The text of the resolution as unani-
mously passed was conveyed to Washington in telegram 801 from
USUN, March 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800107–1249) For the text of McHenry’s statement to the Security
Council, see telegram 802 from USUN, March 1. (National Archives,
The U.S. vote, however, drew sharp criticism from Israel and
Jewish groups in the United States. When informed of this by White
House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan and Vice President Walter Mon-
dale, Carter recorded in his diary, the President “told them that the Je-
rusalem references had been deleted. They showed me a copy of the
resolution as it was passed, with ‘Jerusalem’ being mentioned six times.
I couldn’t believe it. I called Cy in Chicago. He said he thought ‘Jeru-
salem’ had been deleted.” Carter continued, “My understanding with
[Israeli Prime Minister Menachem] Begin was that we would let the
issue of Jerusalem and the issue of dismantling existing settlements be
resolved in the peace negotiations. That’s why the error was serious.”
(Carter, White House Diary, page 406)
On March 3, Carter issued a public statement clarifying the U.S.
vote, stating that it “does not represent a change in our position re-
garding the Israeli settlements in the occupied areas nor regarding the
status of Jerusalem.” Carter explained: “While our opposition to the es-
tablishment of the Israeli settlements is longstanding and well-known,
we made strenuous efforts to eliminate the language with reference to
the dismantling of settlements in the resolution. This call for disman-
tling was neither proper nor practical. We believe that the future dis-
position of existing settlements must be determined during the current
Autonomy Negotiations.
“As to Jerusalem, we strongly believe that Jerusalem should be un-
divided, with free access to the holy places for all faiths, and that its
status should be determined in the negotiations for a comprehensive
peace settlement.
“The United States vote in the United Nations was approved with
the understanding that all references to Jerusalem would be deleted.
The failure to communicate this clearly resulted in a vote in favor of the
resolution rather than abstention.
“I want to reiterate in the most unequivocal terms that in the Au-
tonomy Negotiations and in other fora, the United States will neither
support nor accept any position that might jeopardize Israel’s vital se-
curity interests. Our commitment to Israel’s security and well-being re-
mains unqualified and unshakable.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81,

Book I, page 427) The same day, Carter sent a personal letter to Begin,
in which he enclosed the text of his statement, adding “I trust that you
will inform your Cabinet members about this inadequate communica-
tion between me and our U.N. delegation which caused a vote contrary
to my understanding of the final text of the resolution.” The letter was
conveyed to Begin in telegram 57573 to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, March
4. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Presi-
dent’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Israel: Prime
on March 10, stating that “my colleagues and I accept without reserva-
tion and with full respect the facts of which you were kind enough to
inform me.” The Egyptians had a different response to Carter’s state-
ment. In a March 16 letter to Vance, sent in telegram 6045 from Cairo,
March 17, Egyptian Prime Minister Mustapha Khalil characterized the
U.S. vote on Resolution 465 (1980) as “certainly a positive step in the
right direction.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Mate-
rial, Middle East, Subject File, Box 90, UN: Security Council Resolution
as part of a status report on the peace process to the Senate Foreign Re-
lations Committee. The text of Vance’s statement is printed in the De-
ance, Carter sent a handwritten note to Vance on March 20. Carter
wrote, “Had I studied the UN resolution carefully, my concerns would
not have been confined merely to Jerusalem references and to
‘dismantling.’
“a) Implications of ‘sanctions’ against Israel under Chapter 7
should be refuted.
“b) Prejudging permanent status of the West Bank by words ‘Pal-
estinian and other Arab territories’ should be explained, although I re-
alize this language had been used before.
“c) My preference is that the Commission on Settlements not be
continued, and that this issue be decided in C[amp] David follow-up
talks as specified re Israeli pressure in military enclaves.
“An emphasis on UN 242 & CDA and on our commitment to the
ongoing negotiations can be substituted for answers to deliberately em-
barrassing questions concerning the above points or answers to hypo-
thetical questions in the future. Good luck, J.C.” (Carter Library, Plains

346.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State and the White House
4921. Subject: Personal Letter From President Sadat to President
Carter.
1. Secret-entire text.
2. Vice President Mubarak asked me to call on him this morning to
hand me a sealed envelope containing a personal letter2 from President
Sadat to President Carter which Mubarak asked be delivered urgently.
We are sending letter with special courier, RSO May, who will arrive at
Dulles on TWA 803 via New York at 1909 Washington time, Wed-
nesday, March 5. Unless instructed otherwise, May will deliver letter to
S/S in an envelope addressed to Peter Tarnoff for transmittal to the
President.
3. Mubarak said that the letter had been handwritten and sealed by
President Sadat and he did not know the details of its content. He be-
lieved, however, that it deals with the general subject of the autonomy
negotiations. The President, according to Mubarak, has spent the past
several days thinking about this subject and has developed some ideas
which he wants to share personally with President Carter. Mubarak
noted in this connection that Sadat has been briefed on the recent
meeting in The Hague among Prime Minister Khalil, Minister Burg and
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis.
workable plan for the transitional period. For all these reasons combined, I am thinking
of asking Vice President Moubarak to see you and convey to you directly my thoughts,”
before the next round of negotiations scheduled for March 25. Upon his copy of the letter,
Carter wrote: “Zbig—You, Cy, & Sol read. Then see me.” Next to this note, he also wrote:
“No copies.” (Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 1,

347.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, March 7, 1980
SUBJECT
Israel
Several items:
—Aid. Strauss called, and asked that I pass along to you his hope
that you will strongly oppose any cuts for Israel in the budget
—Aid II. In trying to protect against cuts in security assistance, it
has occurred to me that we “can’t beat something with nothing”—i.e.
ask the President to make no cuts in this area when most of the rest of
the budget is being cut. You will recall my earlier idea that we try get-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ting Congress (e.g. Sam Nunn) to consider security assistance (espe-
cially for the new Gulf strategy) against the extra 2% in the budget for
DoD. This might be the way to “square the circle,” by matching poten-
tial cuts in security assistance against actual reductions in increases in
the military budget—thus giving us the best mix of increased security
without seeming to weaken in our resolve to strengthen defense and
U.S. security. Since this could be couched in terms of not cutting funds
for Egypt, and especially for Israel, it could get strong reasonance on
the Hill provided careful consultations are carried out. I talked to Ni-
metz about it, who likes the idea. If you do, you might inject it into the
discussions with the President. (C)
—Oil. Energy Minister Modai has asked to come here next week to
see Vance and Duncan, to 1) activate the U.S. oil supply commitment
and 2) ask for money to build underground oil storage facilities, as
promised by Kissinger but never followed up. The consensus is that
this is a poor time for the activation of the agreement (the need is
simply not there; and diverting U.S. oil would play very badly here).
This could become a major issue with the Israelis if not played right. I have
alerted Ed Fried, and Hinton is holding a meeting this afternoon. The
object is to turn off the visit, without letting the Israelis claim that we
are not standing behind the oil agreement. Strauss is speaking to Eppy
about it. I will come back to you for clearance of any cable coming out
of today’s meeting. (S)
—SFM. State has promised a draft cable3 to Lewis this afternoon
for our clearance (I will run it by you). I have asked Saunders to throw
the ball back into the Israeli/Egyptian court—i.e. we are prepared to in-
begin inspecting as soon as possible. If that is not possible because of objections by one
side or the other, then U.S. intentions should be made clear and responsibility for delay
firmly placed on the local parties. We should seek to begin SFM inspections on the basis
of the articles already agreed while continuing to press for resolution of the remaining
protocol establishing the multinational peacekeeping force in the Sinai would not be
signed by Egypt and Israel until August 3, 1981.

spect anytime, but it is up to them to tell us when, since they are the
ones who have held up completion of the basic Sinai agreement. (S)
—NAAA. The National Association of Arab Americans wants to
see the President to hear his story on the resolution. I am telling the
schedulers not to consider it. Strauss and Clift both say that receiving
this group is not the way to turn the issue off. (C)
—Rabbi Goren. Bentsur passed a message to me from Eppy (origi-
nating with Begin), asking for the President to receive Israeli Chief
Rabbi Goren, who is in this country. Yet I was told informally they
don’t really mean it: the last time Goren saw the President, he had un-
helpful things to say afterwards, but Goren leaned on Begin to make
the request. Better, Bentsur said, that he see the Vice President in a low-
key matter (and I will check to see whether there is any interest). As I
pointed out to Bentsur, this is a hell of a box for them to try putting us
in: if the meeting takes place, we gain little or nothing in terms of im-
proving relations; if we turn it down, someone will squawk. OK to
handle this through the VP, if he’s willing?4 (S)
—Jerusalem/Strauss. Strauss called with another idea, which he has
discussed with Solarz5 and will discuss with Vance. He would like
someone (perhaps even the President) to be in a position to say for New
York:
“While the ultimate status of Jerusalem remains to be resolved in
negotiations between Israel and its Arab neighbors, we believe that, in
the context of a final settlement, Jerusalem should and will remain un-
divided, and should and will be (remain) the capital of Israel.”
Clearly, only the last clause raises a question—and Strauss says
that maybe the words “should” could be dropped. I have not reached
Saunders yet on this and will let you know his reaction. Strauss will
welcome yours—and would like to have this decided as soon as pos-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
348.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily
Washington, March 17, 1980
SPECIAL ANALYSIS
SYRIA: Assad’s Prospects
President Assad has committed his minority Alawite government to a
risky course with his reported decision to use the military more freely to crush
civil unrest in Syrian cities. This may intimidate his domestic opponents in the
short run, but unless Assad is able to reestablish order quickly, it will also fur-
ther erode his domestic support and could eventually bring about his ouster.
By committing the military, Assad is playing his last major card to keep his re-
gime in power. Army discipline may well collapse in the face of widespread
riots. This could lead to a bloody war between Sunni Muslim and Alawite
units. The Alawites, however, may choose to topple Assad before such tur-
moil develops in order to keep their position secure. [handling restriction not
declassified]
The latest round of antigovernment activity began late last month
in Hamah, a conservative Sunni stronghold and a center of Muslim
Brotherhood dissidence. Demonstrations soon spread to Aleppo,
Syria’s second largest city, and to several other important towns in
northern Syria. Damascus remains relatively quiet despite terrorist
bombings of some government stores and calls by the extremists for
sympathy strikes. [handling restriction not declassified]
In Aleppo, the Army’s elite Special Forces failed to force shop-
keepers to reopen in the face of intimidation by armed extremists. Vio-
lent street rioting resulted. The commandos reportedly suffered sub-
stantial casualties, prompting Assad to order armor and infantry into
the city. [handling restriction not declassified]
[less than 1 line not declassified] religious leaders and government of-
ficials in Aleppo arranged a cease-fire last weekend to give the Assad
regime time to consider the dissidents’ demands for greater political
freedom and release of prisoners. The religious leaders gave the gov-
ernment until today to meet their demands, but threatened to renew
their calls for antiregime activity at noon prayer meetings if the gov-
ernment did not respond. Assad clearly has no intention of meeting the
religious leaders’ demands. [handling restriction not declassified]
Extent of Opposition
Government officials are said to be particularly worried by the ex-
tent of community support for the demonstrations. Although most
demonstrators apparently are the traditionally volatile students, many
laborers and small shopkeepers, already angry over the government’s
wage and price policies, joined the strikes voluntarily. [handling restric-
tion not declassified]
Prayer leaders in the mosques also supported the strikes. One
mullah in Hamah evidently called for the creation of an Islamic state,
reflecting conservative Sunni views that reject Alawites as true Mus-
lims and oppose the regime’s Baathist secular and socialist policies.
[handling restriction not declassified]
The recent demonstrations point to a growing Sunni alliance, in-
cluding religious oppositionists objecting to Alawite domination as
well as merchants, professionals, and laborers protesting the regime’s
economic and social policies. Assad so far shows no sign of making the
major policy changes that would break this alliance. He has not made a
sufficient effort to give Sunnis a greater substantive role in the gov-
ernment, has failed to follow through on promises to stamp out corrup-
tion, and has taken only limited steps to respond to the grievances of
merchants and the wage demands of laborers. [handling restriction not
declassified]
Repression Begins
[1½ lines not declassified] departing their home base north of Da-
mascus yesterday—probably heading for Aleppo. Assad probably has
decided to intimidate the opposition throughout Syria by making an
example of Aleppo, which historically has resisted political control by
Damascus. Its distance from the capital also makes Aleppo a less sensi-
tive area to begin a crackdown. [handling restriction not declassified]
Assad’s use of the regular Army in Aleppo and elsewhere, how-
ever, risks splitting the military along sectarian lines. Like the antigov-
ernment activists, most Army recruits are Sunnis. Although the Army
units in general probably would remain loyal, as they did during dis-
turbances in Latakia last September, some Sunni troops probably
would be reluctant to fire on their coreligionists. [handling restriction not
declassified]
If significant numbers of Sunnis were killed on both sides, sec-
tarian animosities almost certainly would spread in the military, un-
dermining the effectiveness and loyalty of all but the elite and heavily
Alawite Defense Companies and Special Forces. Extensive use of reg-
ular military units to quell Sunni-led civil disturbances could result in
refusals to follow orders, widespread desertions, and clashes between
Sunni and Alawite units. [handling restriction not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Outlook
Although Assad appears in no immediate danger of being ousted,
his dilemma is growing. He cannot allow civil disturbances to go un-
checked, but repression risks increased popular resentment of his re-
gime. He may be able to intimidate the general population and deter
demonstrations for a time, but Sunni extremist attacks on Alawite gov-
ernment and military officials—violence that predates the recent dem-
onstrations—almost certainly will continue. [handling restriction not
declassified]
Assad apparently has decided to launch a major campaign to give
the appearance of mass public support for the government’s effort to
neutralize its domestic opponents. The regime probably hopes that dis-
plays of public backing would counter what probably is a growing per-
ception in the cities that mass demonstrations are exclusively the prov-
ince of the extremists. [handling restriction not declassified]
As part of its campaign, the government probably will step up its
efforts to “prove” that the extremists are being manipulated by out-
siders such as the Egyptians, Israelis, or the US—a theme Assad has al-
ready used in a series of speeches this week. Assad is not likely to
follow through with his threat to arm peasants and trade unionists to
“liquidate reactionary gangs,” although additional militia units may be
established. [handling restriction not declassified]
The most dangerous near-term threat to Assad comes from his
fellow Alawites, who are in the best position to mount a coup and want
to preserve their dominance even at the expense of the present leader-
ship. Some Alawite officers are said to be criticizing Assad’s failure to
allow Sunnis a greater role in decisionmaking and his inability to come
to grips with the deteriorating domestic situation; further missteps
could quickly cause opposition to jell in the military. The appearance of
serious disciplinary problems in Army units assigned to quell civil dis-
turbances could persuade these officers to make their move. [handling
restriction not declassified]
Assad may be able to hold onto power for some time, but the
chances are increasing that the Alawite elite will conclude that he and
his unpopular brother Rifaat must go. The Alawites have no obvious
alternative to Assad, although men such as military intelligence head
Ali Duba and Special Forces commander Ali Haydar are likely to play a
key role in any succession struggle. The Defense Companies and the
Special Forces are considered the most loyal troops in Syria, but their
support could crumble if the President and his brother were confronted
by an Alawite consensus favoring a change of leadership. [handling re-
striction not declassified]

349.
Editorial Note
On the morning of March 18, 1980, President Jimmy Carter placed
telephone calls to Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat and Israeli Prime
Minister Menachem Begin to invite them to separate bilateral meetings
dential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memoranda of conversa-
tion for these telephone calls have been found. In his personal diary,
Carter noted on March 18 that during the respective conversations
Sadat “responded enthusiastically” to his invitation and that Begin also
agreed to come to Washington. (Carter, White House Diary, page 410)
The invitations were announced by White House Press Secretary Jody
Powell on March 19. (Terence Smith, “Carter Bids Sadat and Begin Visit
350.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to
Secretary of State Vance and the President’s Special
Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations
(Linowitz)
Washington, March 19, 1980
SUBJECT
Strategies for Managing the Peace Process Through 1980
In response to Sol’s request for personal thoughts on the autonomy
negotiations, this memo looks more broadly at how we manage the
whole peace process in its larger aspects through the remainder of the
year because the autonomy negotiations must be dealt with in that
context.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Four Premises
First: I am writing from the premise that Sol with the President’s
full support will be pursuing his negotiations with every effort to con-
clude them as early as possible. A lot of good work is being done on
possible solutions to the issues. I am leaving the issues and the tactics of
the negotiations aside for a moment, although decisions on strategy
could affect how Sol begins to talk with Sadat next week.
Second: The main issue to be kept before us is how hard we can
press to conclude the negotiations in May or June and how much atten-
tion we should give to the option of suspending negotiations. Whether
or not we might choose that option, we have to address the issue soon
because the Egyptians are already locking us into a May 25 final dead-
line and closing off options for keeping the negotiations alive beyond
June or beyond 1980. Sadat may well be planning another dramatic ini-
tiative. If we are going to suspend negotiations this summer, we need
to do so on the right issue.
Third: An immediate operational issue in the management of the
larger peace process is how to deal with a number of issues outside the
negotiations themselves. They will affect our ability to conclude them
and to win Palestinian and Arab acceptance for them or to keep the
door open for further peace initiatives if we cannot. I am thinking par-
ticularly of probable moves by the Arabs or the Europeans to bring the
Palestinian rights issue back to the UN Security Council next month or
after May 25. If we are going to shape those efforts we will need to
make our views known soon.
Fourth: How we manage the peace process this spring will affect
the cooperation we can expect on building our security framework in
Southwestern Asia as well as Saudi cooperation in keeping oil produc-
tion up and prices down.
My own view is that we should press the negotiations as long as
substantive work is being done to define the issues and solutions to
them. An active negotiating process is better than a void if it is serious.
How big a milestone May 25 is will depend on how much we make of
it—whether we and Sadat choose to make it a cut-off point or whether
we continue and try to convince others that serious work is still going
on.
However, there is a very real alternative of suspending negotia-
tions over the right issues.

Given the elections here and the shaky political situation in Israel,
we may very well not be able to achieve an agreement this spring on
terms that will meet our larger interests or Sadat’s. Because that likeli-
hood is so great, I believe we must carefully examine a strategy of de-
ciding before May how the negotiations might be put into neutral or
low gear through November while making fairly firm—if not precise—
commitments on what we will do in early 1981 assuming the President
is re-elected.
Some General Propositions
Even though all of us understand the larger context in which our
decision on overall strategy will be made, it is worth having the larger
considerations in front of us:
1. The autonomy negotiations have a wider purpose. The effort to
achieve full autonomy for the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza is
our response to the plea from most of the people of the Middle East to
promise the Palestinians a state of their own. Since we are offering far
less than that—even if we achieve the full goals of Camp David—we
must achieve everything we envisioned at Camp David or we will have
little hope that an agreement on autonomy will achieve our larger pur-
poses in the Middle East. A lesser achievement will further isolate
Sadat and assure that the Egyptian-Israeli peace cannot become the nu-
cleus of a moderate coalition in the Middle East; achieving our goal is
necessary to vindicate Sadat’s policies—and ours. Vindicating Camp
David and the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty should be as important to Is-
rael’s interests as to ours because—whatever might be wished—the
Egyptian-Israeli Treaty and normalization of relations was never in-
tended to stand on its own without progress for the Palestinians.
2. A larger U.S. purpose in the Middle East is to demonstrate Amer-
ican diplomatic power and continued Soviet inability to solve one of
the area’s main problems in a just and secure way. This has been true
for a long time, but the point has been underscored by the Soviet inva-
sion of Afghanistan. It is unrealistic to think that we will be able to re-
alize our plans for building our security position in Southwestern Asia
if we cannot demonstrate our power by dealing effectively and fairly
with this problem. The Soviets in the period from 1954 through 1973
sought to strengthen their position in the Arab world by demonstrating
that their military and economic assistance provided the answers to the
Arab-Israeli problem and to the area’s (particularly Egypt’s) economic
development needs. Three wars in that period demonstrated that So-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
viet arms were not the answer and Soviet economic aid showed little
understanding of the development process. In 1973 Sadat went to war
not to win a military victory but to get the United States involved diplo-
matically. American diplomatic power is not—as the Arabs see it—our
ability to force Israel to make concessions but rather our ability to bring
about a viable solution for all parties. It will serve Israel’s interests far
better to have a strong U.S. as the predominant extra-regional influence
than to have Soviet-supported radical movements with no moderate
counter.
3. The Palestinian issue is a security issue for the Saudis and Gulf Arabs.
The Saudis and Gulf Arabs are increasingly blunt in telling us that their
ability to stand with us on security issues in Southwestern Asia will de-
pend on our ability to deal honorably with the Palestinian issue. The
same point will be increasingly heard about oil production and prices.
The Arab point is not simple blackmail for an ideological political pur-
pose. Some parts of the Palestinian movement have roots in radical po-
litical philosophies and movements dedicated to the overthrow of tra-
ditional regimes. The Palestinians in the traditional societies of the
Peninsula and Gulf are one of their principal security problems. The re-
gimes there feel unable to identify with us on security issues when we
do not appear to their sources of political support to be dealing with
one of their main security issues.
4. A significant part of persuading those Arabs will be persuading them
that we take the Palestinians seriously. That brings us to one of the
toughest propositions of all—the question of how to deal with the PLO.
I am not one of those who argues that a direct dialogue with the PLO
would by itself resolve our problems. My long-term strategy towards
the PLO would be to try to win their support for the autonomy in the
transitional period and then to use that period to bring forward mod-
erate leadership in the West Bank and Gaza so that the moderates in the
Palestinian movement would ultimately have the capacity to isolate the
radical elements. The PLO will probably split in that process, and that
could be all to the good. But there has to be a subtly designed strategy
for giving the PLO a sense—one way or another—that we regard them
as part of the picture. Recognizing the Israeli side of this problem and
the fact that a serious dialogue with the PLO is not on in 1980, I believe
there are ways of doing just enough this year without the big splash of
open meetings with Arafat’s lieutenants. But doing something on this
front will be almost essential at some point when we have decided on
our strategy.
5. We do not have to give the Arabs everything they want. Although the
Arabs will continue to insist publicly on an independent Palestinian

state and restoration of the pre-1967 Arab role in Jerusalem, I believe
we can convince them of progress with less. Most moderate Arabs will
tell you that they are prepared to go along with us in a transition to a
Palestinian solution once they believe that our objectives are in the
right ballpark and once they see again a U.S. ability to deliver. Al-
though the Baghdad group will still not accept full autonomy, I believe
in the end that the key Palestinians, the Jordanians, the Saudis, and the
Egyptians will recognize that Palestinian autonomy and a lifting of the
Israeli civil/military occupation could be an important step forward—
if they are genuine.
6. Israel can be approached by recalling to Begin his oft-repeated promise
to fulfill everything agreed at Camp David and by negotiating in detail. We
cannot ask Sadat to accept less, but we have to ask him to cooperate with us in
detailed negotiation as long as we pursue the negotiations. Begin himself, as I
remember, was the author of the phrase “full autonomy”—which must
have differed even in his mind from “self-rule,” which was his own ear-
lier formulation. This coupled with the Israeli negotiating team’s state-
ment that their proposals are negotiable provides a basis for insisting
on achieving the fullest autonomy envisioned at Camp David. We must
always keep in mind—and explain to the Egyptians—that the only way
to move the Israelis to decision is by presenting detailed textual pro-
posals. Neither the Israeli mind nor the Cabinet can make decisions on
broad principles. Understandable Israeli fears can only be met, to the
extent that is possible, by pinning down agreements in detail. Only if
we can provide the detailed proposals needed for the Israeli decision-
making process and convince Begin that the proposed agreement is
within the limits agreed at Camp David do we have a shot at Israeli
agreement. Despite predictions to the contrary since last fall, we cannot
assume that Begin is dead politically even though the old spark may be
gone and even though the government faces serious political and eco-
nomic difficulty this spring. In any case, we must present our position
as fully within the Camp David Framework.
The Situation Ahead: The Central Issue
The big issue through May 25 is how much to invest in pressing
the autonomy talks to agreement by that date. While a maximum effort
is desirable, I believe we would make a big mistake to lock ourselves
into a May 25 cut-off point. For one thing, I doubt it is physically pos-
sible to put together a signable agreement by that time. For another, we
can manage in the Middle East as long as serious work is going on. The
important issues are whether the process can be serious enough to keep
Sadat with us, to focus Israeli decision-making on the issues, and to
sustain our involvement, including possible disagreements with Israel,
here at home. In dealing with the May 25 date, we all should remember
the three-month “deadline” in the Camp David Framework for the con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
clusion of the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty. Because serious work was in
progress when that deadline came, it was possible to keep going and
conclude the negotiations three months later. It seems to me that the
issue is not whether we can conclude the negotiations by May 25 but
whether we can say with conviction that serious work is still going on
with a prospect of achieving a reasonable agreement. But we need an
early understanding with Sadat and Khalil on our longer term strategy
so that we may maintain flexibility about the target date.
We can probably assume that Sadat is pressing the May 25 dead-
line and hinting at suspending the negotiation in order to get us more
fully engaged. The choice we will need to discuss with him is whether
he will play ball with us in conducting the negotiations our way or
whether we should agree on suspension until 1981 with promise of a
big push then. Proceeding with the negotiation will require more coop-
eration from Sadat and Khalil than we have at the moment. Khalil has
never understood why we have to negotiate in detail, yet not to do so is
to prevent our making a serious effort to get to the tough issues in ways
that would enable the Israelis to deal with them. Sadat seems to be on
the brink of calling the negotiations at an end without letting us get to
the end. So the immediate need is an agreement with both Sadat and
Khalil that wins their cooperation on negotiating strategy without
making them look as if they have made unacceptable concessions on
Palestinian interests. To have that exchange with Sadat, we must de-
cide on our own long-term strategy.
On the Israeli side, as I suggested above, the approach has to be on
the basis of fulfilling the Camp David commitments. We can show un-
derstanding of Begin’s political (including economic) problems and
concentrate on asking him to tell us how he can conclude the talks on a
fair basis. In this context, we need to know how we would suspend the
talks if that happens because the greatest pressure on Begin will not be
anything we say but rather his assessment of the situation he will face
in the light of how the issues will be positioned if and when the talks
are suspended.
As we move toward decisions on how to deal with Begin and
Sadat looking toward May 25, a central issue will be how to state our
objectives so as to avoid politically unsustainable confrontations and to
describe an achievable outcome. We will also want to give careful at-
tention to sharpening the issues in such a way as to allow them to be the
main sources of continuing pressure if negotiations are suspended.
The Situation Ahead: Managing Other Initiatives
In addition to the imperative exchanges with Begin and Sadat
through a variety of channels, we will have to deal in the next three
months with the following initiatives from other quarters:

1. We believe the Arabs (possibly stimulated by the PLO) will re-
quest a Security Council meeting4 on Palestinian rights at the end of
March or the beginning of April. Very simply, the issue for us is:
—We could write a good resolution that would be intellectually re-
sponsible in taking into account both sides of the issue, but it seems un-
likely that we want to take that issue on now, given our experience
on this subject last August, the recent reaction to the latest Security
Council resolution, and the other larger efforts in which we will be en-
gaged. We do not need charges on top of the recent ones that we are
now trying to “change 242.”
—If we do not introduce a resolution of our own, one will be pro-
duced which will face us with another difficult choice.
—I am already recommending separately that we try to get such a
Security Council meeting postponed but to do so we may have to have
some indication that we are prepared to handle this issue in some alter-
native way at a later time. Our credibility in seeking such postpone-
ments is worn.
2. The “European initiative” is gaining momentum. Key Europeans
believe they have a signal from us that, after May 25, some noise from
them might be useful.
—At worst the Europeans will seek to curry Arab favor by sup-
porting objectives that we cannot support without any prospect of im-
proving the situation on the ground. The Europeans may marginally
help themselves while putting us on the spot without helping us to
move any negotiation forward.
—At best, a party like the British might try to use the exercise to
gain PLO acceptance of Resolutions 242 and 338 and Israel’s right to
exist in order to fulfill our Sinai II commitment. At some other times
this might be helpful, but it seems unlikely to me that we really want to
open a dialogue with the PLO in 1980.
—One approach worth considering is whether we might propose
to the British that they try to engage the Palestinians in a serious dia-
logue about how they could see themselves being woven gradually
into the negotiating process. If the Palestinians knew we were behind
the British initiative, they would view this as a significant step.
3. We have received and will probably receive further suggestions
on strategy from Arab leaders that they will accept a hiatus in the peace
process in the latter half of 1980 if we can tell them what we will do in
1981. We will have to deal with this question first with Begin and Sadat,
but we should keep high on our agenda consultations with the other
the issue of Palestinian rights. For a summary of those meetings, see the Yearbook of the
Palestinian rights to the Security Council. For the Security Council’s consideration of that
resolution and the April 30 vote which followed, see Document 365.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
key Arabs lest the negative post Camp David reaction be repeated. Oil
prices and our security framework in Southwest Asia are at stake.
—Fahd has already sent such a message to the President.
—As early as last August when the Palestinian rights resolution
was in the Security Council, intelligence reports indicated that Arafat
recognized that the U.S. might well not be able to make serious moves
until early 1981.
—Sadat, in presenting May 25 as a “deadline” and in wanting ex-
changes with us on strategy toward the autonomy talks, might well be
on the verge of proposing some such strategy.
—If we are to move in this direction, we would want to talk along
these lines with King Hussein when he comes in the second half of
April
4. Throughout this period we will probably see continuing Israeli
moves to expand their settlements in the West Bank. This possibility high-
lights the need to consider further how we might take a stand for re-
straint of some kind on new settlements. The ideal way to achieve this
would be a sensible resolution of the land issue in the autonomy nego-
tiations. But if these negotiations were to be suspended, there would be
at least an argument for either positioning the talks so they will break
down over the settlements issue or, as one means to that end, seeking a
well-defined moratorium on specified actions during the period when
the negotiations are suspended. The Israelis would not agree, but the
issue would be clearly put.
The Decisions We Face
1. The basic decision that needs to be made is whether to press for
an autonomy agreement this year.
—One possible strategy is to press the autonomy talks as far as
they can go with the intent to bring substantive issues to a head when-
ever they are ready. This might require our putting forward our own
draft agreement at some point in some form, knowing this would pro-
duce another serious crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations. This would also re-

quire pressing Sadat not to lock us into the May 25 date and to coop-
erate with our strategy of negotiating in detail.
—The alternative strategy is to press the negotiations as far as they
can be pursued seriously in order to complete the foundation but con-
sciously pave the way for suspension of the negotiations in the most fa-
vorable way possible with an eye to significant action in 1981.
—These two approaches are not mutually exclusive. The issue is
exactly how to bring them together so that the second is a natural fall-
back from the first and so the issues are correctly positioned.
2. In making that choice, we need to consider carefully that a deci-
sion to try to conclude the negotiations this year will force a choice
between:
—Pressing Sadat to accept a deal that will have enough compro-
mises in it to preclude selling it to the Palestinians and other Arabs. The
temptation would be great if we set our sights on an agreement for
agreement’s sake and have to fall back to get agreement. Such an out-
come could have serious consequences for Sadat’s tenure and for our
relationship with Egypt and the other moderate states in the area.
—Pressing Israel to decisions that would put in suspense the cur-
rent government’s policy of steadily tightening its grasp on the West
Bank and Gaza. This could well provoke a government crisis in Israel
where such a crisis may already be imminent for entirely separate eco-
nomic and political reasons. Such a course would have serious reper-
cussions in the U.S.
—The unfortunate aspect of this choice is that while we would be
pressing Sadat for concessions on negotiating strategy, we would seem
mainly to be leaning on Israel to make concessions with nothing con-
crete on the Jordanian or Palestinian sides.
3. If we were going to press ahead and try to achieve agreement
this year, we will have to take some specific steps to pave the way on
the Jordanian/Palestinian/Saudi side. Parenthetically, we should note
that the need for a serious effort on this front argues for not locking our-
selves into a May 25 deadline.
—The centerpiece of a serious effort on this front would be a dia-
logue with the Palestinians. Since there are strong arguments against
taking on the burdens of a direct dialogue with the PLO this year, we
need another approach. I see four complementary possibilities: (a) Set
up a series of in-depth discussions with a group of non-PLO Pales-
tinians or Americans close to the Palestinians. (b) Ask the British to
hold in-depth talks with the PLO. (c) Ask Hussein when he is here to
put certain questions to Arafat, implicitly on our behalf. (d) Sit down
for a couple of days with one non-PLO Palestinian close to Arafat (a
professor now in the U.S.) to brief him in detail on the autonomy talks
and to ask whether there is any way the course we are on could inter-
sect at some point with a course the PLO could endorse.

351.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State
6278. Subject: Letter From President Sadat to Prime Minister Begin.
1. (S-entire text).
2. I was summoned on short notice to see Vice President Mubarak
at 1100 local today. Purpose of meeting was to provide us with the text
of a letter dated March 17 from President Sadat to Prime Minister Begin
(para 3 below) which Mubarak told me he will be giving to Israeli Am-
bassador Ben Elissar later today. Mubarak stressed that GOE has no re-
peat no intention of publicizing this letter and was providing us a copy
in confidence. In response to my question as to whether he would tell
Ben Elissar a copy had been given to us, Mubarak said he would do so
if asked. The letter deals with the negotiations, in which the U.S. is a full
partner, so there was no reason why we should not have a copy.
3. Begin text. Dear Prime Minister Begin.
—In our last meeting in Aswan, we pledged to do everything pos-
sible to ensure the success of the efforts we have been exerting along
the road to a comprehensive and lasting peace. I need not reiterate,
here, the factors which make it imperative for all of us to reach that goal
without delay. Strategic considerations, both regional and global,
render the continuation of the present situation most detrimental to the
cause of peace and stability. This makes it all the more important to
make real progress every day in the negotiations on the establishment
of the self-governing authority for the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
That is also why we agreed to step in, when the need arises, and give
the necessary directives to our delegations to the negotiations.
—It is with this in mind that I am writing to you today. I have been
following very closely the course of the negotiations with hope and
faith. I firmly believe that both our peoples are firmly committed to the
cause of peace. It is my clear conviction, also, that they are aware of the
necessity for reinforcing the historic step we took on the road to peace.
That is precisely why we have been exercizing patience and restraint
even in the face of several discouraging and alarming signs. We had
hoped that, in the course of the negotiations, a way would be found to
give the process the shot in the arm it badly needs. However, I must tell
you, in all candor, that I am deeply concerned over the present state of
affairs. Enough time has passed without making any tangible progress
on major substantive issues3 of special significance. Several months
were spent merely on defining the positions of the parties and identi-
fying the areas of agreement and disagreement. On the other hand, we
noticed that certain attempts have been made to depart from the Camp
David formula and treat it lightly. All this has been taking place despite
our positive policy of taking every conceivable action to bolster the
bridges of confidence between our peoples and eliminate any remain-
ing barriers. We have been faithful not only to the letter of the peace ac-
cords, but also to the spirit of Camp David and my mission to Jeru-
salem. With all the good will nations can command, we accepted the
early implementation of the provisions on normalization.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Nevertheless, we see no signs of any meaningful progress in the
negotiations. The twenty sixth of May is approaching in a matter of a
few weeks. If the negotiations fail to produce the necessary progress to
keep the process alive, the consequences will be very grave indeed.
Many people will question the wisdom of continuing the talks. On the
other hand, the violation of the fixed date, be it a target date or a dead-
line, might give the impression that the talks have become open-ended
since no other date is fixed. All this will expose us to charges and suspi-
cions of procrastinating or lacking the sense of urgency which is re-
quired under the circumstances. The door will be wide open before any
other efforts to seek a solution to the problem. It would be quite diffi-
cult for us to oppose such efforts or prevent any move within the
United Nations for the purpose of establishing new terms of reference.
On the other hand, this will give credence to the allegations that the
peace accords we signed constitute a separate peace arrangement. We
reject this categorically. As I told you in our first meeting6 in Camp
David, I would never accept a separate or partial agreement. I need not
emphasize this any further.
—Likewise, the success of our endeavor necessitates that you re-
frain from taking any action or making any statement that might
poison the atmosphere or exacerbate the situation. Certain actions
taken by your government lately have not been sensitive to the delicate
stage of the negotiations. Statements made by Israeli officials lately
have not been helpful, to say the least. This is not likely to generate the
kind of response we would like to see on the part of the Palestinian
people in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, whose cooperation is vital
to the success of our mission.
—In the coming few days, our representatives will be meeting to
pursue their discussion. These talks will provide an indication of the
manner in which the negotiations are developing. It is essential that
they address themselves seriously to the major issues of substance with
full awareness of the consequences of success and failure. It is also es-
sential to set up a commitee that would be entrusted with the task of
discussing the issue of security8 for it is obvious that such issue is ad-
versely interferring with many aspects of the negotiations. Hence, a
real attempt to define it and clarify it would be a good step in the right
direction. If the committee on security starts its function promptly and

352.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Ambassador Sol Linowitz
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Personal Representative of the President
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member
The President began by talking with Warren Christopher (?) on the
phone to ask how Cy made out—in one word! He listened and said that
he would get details later.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said (to the Ambassador) that Cy Vance had done
well at the hearing. The problem concerns how we could have voted
for it.
Ambassador Linowitz said that that is the key point.
The President said that Cy has been very stubborn on this. He had
Zbig call him this morning, and wrote a note. In a political campaign,
you can’t go for a week before you know that you shouldn’t answer all
questions. You can get pinned down by hypothetical questions. He is
glad to see Ambassador Linowitz, and to go over where we are. He
knows that the Ambassador was a bit reluctant on the Sadat and Begin
visits. But he needs to indicate the resolve of the Administration and its
interest in the Middle East talks. There is an impression—reflected also
in the Ambassador’s talks—that we are not supporting the talks
enough. He wants to let the world know that the talks are not dead.
Austria, Portugal, Greece, and to an extent Germany are reacting as
though the talks are dying away, and they want to fill a vacuum. He
had urgent messages from Sadat, including through Khalil and to Mrs.
Carter, that Sadat wants to see him (the President) urgently. He talked
with Cy and asked him to sleep on it, that he (the President) had to let
Sadat come. Then he also had to see Begin. When he (the Ambassador)
is in the Middle East, he should keep in the back of his mind what the
major obstacles are. On Israel, he wants to be blunt with the Ambas-
sador: he wants to come up with a position we can take, and get ac-
cepted by himself, Sadat and the majority of Israelis and its political
leaders—probably with the exception of Begin, but preferably with
him. He needs to bring the talks to a head, probably in June. He can’t let
this thing continue through the Convention5 and the election period.
He is prepared to resolve the issues. If this can’t be done, then our posi-
tion will be clear to American Jews, to the community here, to Sadat
and others. He feels there will be a repetition of past negotiations in
leading to a showdown with Begin, who wanted to do nothing, and
was willing to let the process breakdown. Yet Begin is constrained, first
by his sense of his historical and Biblical place in Israel’s history—this is

very important to him; and second by the political exigencies in Israel.
Therefore he might act, reluctantly, contrary to his beliefs, and those of
his party, because they would be acceptable to Israel and would keep
his opponents out of power.
These are notable motivations. But until we can convince him—
can lead him to understand—that both of them are true without vio-
lating his principles too much, then there will be no progress. There
was an escape hatch at Camp David for Begin, when he said he
couldn’t accept dismantling of the Sinai settlements without approval
of the Knesset. This can help put things on the back burner. If the Israeli
people see that there is a choice between seeing a breakdown and
having no settlements, voting rights for people in East Jerusalem, and
the like—and if they vote it down, then so be it. He will have done what
he could. His sense now is that the obstacle is not the Israeli people but
Begin himself. Last time, they convinced Begin to act. Labor could not
have done Camp David. Maybe Peres (with a united party) could have
done the Egypt-Israel treaty. So he will give Begin the benefit of the
doubt on this. In the upcoming process, he believes that Begin can’t do
it—though he (the President) would like to be proved wrong.
We need to keep Sadat flexible, and he would appreciate the Am-
bassador’s advice on how to do it. The President will study this closely,
and needs the Ambassador’s thinking on what our position should be.
Sadat can be resistant. He sees himself as the inheritor of the Pharaonic
crown. He sees himself as a man of destiny and of courage. He takes big
gambles, but it can be embarrassing if the gamble does not work. There
are constraints on him. If he broke relations with Israel, then Fahd and
others—whom he despises—would appear to have been right and
Sadat to have been wrong. Sadat and he have a mutual affinity. If the
Ambassador says there is an Israeli position we should go with (?), then
he can sell it to Sadat. But once Sadat says he will not do something,
then he can’t be changed. It is important to keep him on generalities.
The Ambassador and he (the President) should reach a firm U.S. posi-
tion, and try to get some progress in dealing with Begin. There would
be a chance to succeed.
Ambassador Linowitz said he would clarify the issues, and put in
some positions. He thinks that Begin knows he is weak politically (the
President agreed). Burg has told the Ambassador, in total confidence,
that he has sent emissaries to Peres on early elections and dealing with
Labor. Ehrlich is doing the same. Yadin is also playing around a bit.
The President said Dayan and Weizman, too.
Ambassador Linowitz said that this could crumble, and Begin knows
it. In his (the Ambassador’s) judgment, this has brought Begin to tough
positions, instead of wanting to be a man of flexibility, in part because
of his associates. (The President agreed). But Begin does also want to be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the peacemaker for Israel, and to insure its security for the future. In-
side this there might be a way to find a way to movement, but it will be
excruciatingly tough. His sense—shared by Sam Lewis—is that Begin
will give nothing to the Ambassador on this trip; anything he might
give he will give to the President here. Therefore it will be useful for
him (the Ambassador) to sound out Begin. But he is also having
meetings with Peres, Dayan, Weizman and others.
The President said that this is good, and that the Ambassador
should also use Hedley Donovan for this purpose.
Ambassador Linowitz said that it would be useful to have Hedley
along. He can take soundings; he will be helpful. He (the Ambassador)
hopes he can come back from this trip with a better sense of where
there is room for give with Begin. Is he beyond moving? His (the Am-
bassador’s) guess is that Begin will want to do something—for ex-
ample, the establishment of a security committee. Why? Because he
(the Ambassador) had been tough with Sharon here. Sharon liked it—
and had called to say so—and that they should meet alone in Israel.
There must be some masochism there. He had told Sharon that the
President was personally concerned about the security issue. Sharon
said that they should discuss this. The Ambassador had said that
Sharon should tell Begin, and Sharon said he would. We should let
Egypt know we are pressing on this.
The President asked what Egypt wants.
Ambassador Linowitz said that it has an understandable position. Is-
rael says that everything touches on security—health, welfare (the
President added “schools”). Therefore, with the lists of coordinated
powers, they had agreed at the Hague7 that security was not in the first
list of 18 transferred powers, and he had thought they (the Israelis?)
were off the security kick on the first list. Khalil said he had tried to
move them, and couldn’t do it. He said that we should try to get the Is-
raelis to define their security needs and tell them, and they will try to
work around it. This concerns Khalil. We may be able to get something.
He (the Ambassador) had told Begin that adding to the ring of settle-
ments around Jerusalem was an affront to the President. This shook
Begin; he does not want to be in the President’s bad graces.
The President said that Begin had kicked him when he was down on
this one. He was causing him the greatest hurt when he was vulnerable.
But he (the President) survived!

Ambassador Linowitz said that Begin was taken aback. He had had
messages from Begin that this is not what he had meant. Because
of that, Begin may want to show some flexibility, but it won’t be much
of substance. Therefore he would come back with appraisals and
suggestions.
The President asked how long the Ambassador would be in Israel.
Ambassador Linowitz said he would be three days in Israel and three
in Egypt: one and a half days for meetings and one and a half days in
the plenary. In Israel, he will have lots of meetings, and wants Begin to
know about it. He will see Peres and others. The issues are still there
but they are solvable. He had repeated to Burg that if he is worried
about security, then we are willing to be responsive (?). Sadat has said
that he would be prepared to say publicly that there will be no Pales-
tinian state.
The President said that if the Ambassador would write down items
like these, that suit Ehrlich, Dayan, Weizman, etc., then this would be
helpful.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he had tried ideas like that; he had
tried ideas like absentee ballots for East Jerusalem—which were for-
eign to the Israelis. But it could keep them from worrying about the Je-
rusalem issue. Sadat has problems, for example, the poor communica-
tions within his government.
The President said he thought that this was deliberate, except for
Mubarak, who is not very much involved in this. Sadat trusts and likes
Mubarak, unlike Khalil and Ghali. Sadat stays away from the nitty
gritty—the President envies the Ambassador sometimes.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Sadat will talk with him on partic-
ular issues. He (the Ambassador) asks him to tell his Prime Minister,
since he doesn’t accept these positions. Sadat agrees, then doesn’t do it,
and Khalil takes a different position.
The President said that he had to be cautionary on this. There are
times when Sadat says things he shouldn’t. If he goes to Al Baz, to ask
him what the Palestinians think, Al Baz will say that they disapprove.
He (the President) needs to keep Sadat flexible. Sadat doesn’t think
enough of what the other Arabs think. Sometimes he (the President)
has to protect Sadat. There are reasons to have positions acceptable to
Saudi Arabia, Morocco and the other moderates—though not Iraq and
Syria, etc. Therefore Sadat must be protected, so that he does not get too
far out in front of Al Baz. Some movement, yes, but not so far out of line
with the moderate Arabs.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Linowitz agreed. Last time, Sadat had told him that set-
tlements were not important. He said they could concentrate on Gaza
and could forget the West Bank for years. This couldn’t happen. There
is a troublesome dichotomy that is hard to get hold of. Khalil is on a
kick—how can we get him off it? He has switched his philosophies—
the Ambassador hopes this does not mean Sadat, as well. Before, Khalil
said that they could transfer some powers into the first list. Now his po-
sition is that under Camp David, all powers must be transferred, and
then have the Israelis negotiate some back. This Israel will never do.
Camp David says that the powers should be defined.
At the Hague, the most important conversation—which he was
told he could not tell Khalil or Sadat—was with Burg, and was sur-
prising. Otherwise it was a sterile session. One idea dealt with absentee
ballots for East Jerusalem residents. He (the Ambassador) does not see
Burg being independent enough to talk about something like this
without Begin’s interest in the idea.
The President said that Burg might be prepared to break with his
boss.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Burg had said frankly that he (Burg)
is dismayed by Begin’s position. Shamir in Burg’s view was worse.
Burg said that he could not meet with Linowitz alone. But he (the Am-
bassador) believed that if he can persuade Shamir, then he could sell an
idea. He is a man of integrity and speaks frankly.
The President said that the Ambassador would have to waste a lot
of time teaching Shamir the issues.
Ambassador Linowitz said he wanted to tell the President how
things appear. He does not have great expectations for this trip.
The President said that if issues can be clearly defined, this would
be good. Begin knows what happened at Camp David, and now he will
be ganged up on—not just with Sadat, but with some of his own asso-
ciates. Barak was good. He would take Begin off privately and get him
to change his mind in a way that was not embarrassing. Dayan was
close to this, though not as good. He is not sure that Shamir, Burg or
Weizman could do this. Barak is like a bookkeeper, or a personal CPA,
or a lawyer friend—that is, not a peer. Begin didn’t care if Barak knew
he had changed his mind, but he cared about the others. Sometimes he
(the President) would work out a position with Barak, who would go
off with Begin. Three hours later Barak would emerge and say what
Begin had suggested! There is a need for some way for Begin to change
his mind, without losing face. Begin might say that he had to let the
Knesset decide.
The President said he was extremely eager to get into this. It might
be unpleasant; and this is not the time (?). He thinks there will be no
cutoff of the process, for example for this to be taken to the UN. Yet

353.
Memorandum for the Files by the President’s Special
Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations
(Linowitz)
Washington, March 29, 1980
RE
Memorandum of Conversation with President Carter
On Saturday morning, March 29th, I received a phone call from
Phillip Wise, the President’s Appointments Secretary, asking whether
it would be convenient for me to come to the White House to see the
vious evening, and obviously the President wanted to have a report as
soon as possible.
I arrived at the White House and the President received me in the
Oval Office. He was wearing a sweater and a jacket and was seated at
his desk. I pulled up a chair and we talked for about 45 minutes.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President started off by telling me of his recent meeting2 with
Moshe Dayan in which Dayan had come forward with the suggestion
that it might make sense for Israel to put on the table its intention with
respect to future settlements and then to indicate what the correlative
anticipated right might be for the Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza. Dayan told the President that he thought Israel wanted about 15
or 20 more settlements; that he anticipated that all of the settlements
would in due course have about 3,000 people additional; and that the
Palestinians could be told that they could bring in about 50,000 Pales-
tinians under the autonomy arrangement. The President thought this
was a sensible idea, and I said that it was along the lines of Sharon’s
suggestion about a limited number of settlements, but that obviously
Dayan had gone beyond that to limit also the number of people at each
settlement.
I then gave the President about a 10-minute report on my meetings

pointed out to him that there had been some real advances in a number
of important areas which augured well for the future of the negotia-
tions. He had read all of the cables and was, therefore, fully familiar
with what had transpired except for the report of my last meeting with
Sadat the day previous.
The President thought that making use of the Coordinating Com-
mittee6 for dealing with certain issues such as Water might be a good
idea and at first blush felt that the addition of the United States to the
Coordinating Committee would make sense. He agreed that this tactic
might permit us to finesse the difficult problem of trying to work out
details and answer Egyptian concern about trying to negotiate details
for the Palestinians. I also told the President about the approach to
avoiding the problem of transfer of authority by specifically listing the
powers to be exercised and the notion of trying to shoot for getting
Heads of Agreement agreed to by May 26th. He indicated that the term
“Heads of Agreement” was new to him, and I explained it.
I also told him that we had made very little progress on the
problem of the Arabs in East Jerusalem although Begin had seemed to
be attracted by my reference to the absentee ballot to be exercised out-
side of East Jerusalem by the Palestinians who are now in East Jeru-
salem and who, as Jordanian citizens, apparently have the right to vote
in Jordanian elections. As to settlements, I told the President that I had
been unable to get the freeze until May 26 which I had tried to extract
from Begin, but I thought it not impossible he would be willing to do
something about it when he came to Washington. On the Security
Committee I was confident that Begin is ready to agree to that and
probably when he is in Washington. I also told him of Sadat’s sugges-
tion of a Gaza First approach, and the President said he thought Sadat
had long been too optimistic about his ability to get the Gaza Pales-
tinians to cooperate.
I tried to explain to the President why Begin seemed to be so in-
transigent and that his primary concern is the possibility of an inde-
pendent Palestinian State. I pointed out that Begin needs reassurance
on that score and needs to be told that Israel’s security will be pre-
served. I also told the President that Begin feels that the President
thinks that Begin went back on his promise to him about a settlements
freeze following the Camp David talks. I pointed out that there was ob-
rity Committee, was conveyed to Carter and Vance in telegram 8 from USDEL AMVIP
Linowitz Aircraft, March 28. In addition, it was agreed at Alexandria that Egypt would
drop its demand that the SGA receive all of the powers currently accorded to the military
government, and that “certain unassigned areas—such as water,” and “residual powers”
be placed under the aegis of the Continuing Committee. (Carter Library, National Secu-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
viously some disagreement, and the President agreed that upon reflec-
tion and after the emotions had subsided there was probably misun-
derstanding between them as to just how long the freeze was to run. He
said he would make clear to Begin that he understood the basis for the
misunderstanding. I told him that I thought this would be helpful.
We then talked about how to move the relationship along and the
fact that Sadat will be concerned with large issues while Begin will be
cautious about details.
I then went through a number of other areas which Sadat had dis-
cussed with me. With respect to military aid and the F–15’s, I told him
of Egypt’s concern that the price to Israel was so much cheaper than
that to Egypt and also that Sadat wanted 4 destroyers on a lend-lease
basis.
I also told the President that Sadat had told me the Shah was very
bitter about the United States and felt he had been betrayed; that 14
months ago Sadat had suggested that he remove his planes from Iran
and bring them to Egypt and the Shah had said that even if he wanted
to do so they would not come unless the United States directed them to.
Sadat said he was trying to temper the Shah’s feeling.
Sadat also asked me to convey to the President that he thought that
there was now civil war in Syria and that Assad would be out by the
end of the year. He thought that Iraq was working against Assad and
cautioned the United States to be careful about Iraq.
With reference to Saudia Arabia, I told him that Sadat had said that
the United States can control it whenever it wants to and that the Royal
Family exists wholly because of the help of the United States. He said
that Saudi Arabia could get Hussein to join the negotiations by a phone
call, since Hussein and his family are on the Saudi payroll. Sadat did
think, however, that this might be the time to improve Saudi-Egypt re-
lations, and that the United States could undertake to do it.
The President then said that he was not surprised at the suggestion
about Hussein; [2 lines not declassified] He also indicated that the Shah
was a trouble-maker and was misstating facts to Sadat.
Quite clearly the President is eager to get back into the negotia-
tions and said as much. He said that he had enjoyed the Camp David
negotiations immensely despite their difficulties because except for his
submarine duty it was the only time perhaps ever that he had devoted
himself for an extended period to a single subject—entirely apart, as he
put it, from the Congressmen on his neck, etc. He seemed to be im-
mensely interested in every aspect of the negotiations and the attitude
of the people involved. He is obviously not only knowledgeable but
keeping current on every tactic.
The President then spoke again about Moshe Dayan’s suggestion
which he said was the best idea he had heard for weeks about the situa-

354.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Second Meeting with Egyptian President Anwar
al-Sadat
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President
Ambassador Roy Atherton, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (notetaker)
His Excellency Muhammad Anwar al-Sadat, President of the Arab Republic of
Egypt
General Kamal Hasan Ali, Minister of Defense and War Production
Dr. Butros Butros Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States
Mr. Osama el-Baz, First Under Secretary and Director of the Office of the Vice
President
The President began by suggesting that this afternoon2 they talk
about the procedural approach to be followed until the end of May. He
believes it useful to get a sense of the key differences there are between
Egypt and Israel. He would like to do what they did at Camp David
and during his Middle East trip: to reach agreement with President
Sadat, with flexibility, and then deal with Begin on that basis. Not ev-
erything can be agreed by May 26. We should proceed, as Ambassador
Linowitz and Prime Minister Khalil had worked out, to hold contin-
uing negotiations, preferably here. President Sadat can designate
whom he wants—Burg would be here for the Israelis—because he un-
derstands that Prime Minister Khalil might not be able to be here all the
time. That would give us only a month to iron out as many difficulties
as possible. Ambassador Linowitz had suggested working out “heads
of agreement,” and Khalil and Burg had agreed. This would be agree-
ment on principles, and on specifics. Some of the details could be left
until later. (President Sadat said fine.) It would not be possible to get Is-
raeli and Egyptian agreement on all points by then, and since the Pales-
tinians are not in the talks, and on some issues they are needed for
agreement, this could be done with their elected representatives or
with the mayors. We can negotiate for a month, and then the heads of
agreement can incorporate what is agreed by May 26. Second, there
should be definition of the specific responsibilities and authority of the
SGA. We do not know how large it would be. Egypt prefers having it
fairly sizable; Begin wants about a dozen members. One possibility
would be to have the mayors on an interim SGA. For the Palestinians,
this would give them a voice—either personally or chosen. We have
not discussed this possibility with Begin, and do not know his view.
The SGA should have the right to issue proclamations, and to
modify existing statutes, but not change the terms of the heads of agree-
ment. It would have no right to change agreements reached between
him, President Sadat, and Prime Minister Begin. The Continuing Com-
mittee would include representatives of the SGA, Egypt, the U.S. (if

Begin agrees), Israel, and Jordan (if and when it will join—he doesn’t
know when). We also need to specify that the SGA can act in ways to
promote harmony with others. Its relations with us are secondary:
what Egypt and the SGA agree to is all right with us. We need, Presi-
dent Sadat and him, to reach an understanding on external defense and
foreign affairs. He sees no reason that the SGA should have any. There
is no need to specify that any one has control of foreign affairs. The
SGA is not a nation, and has no foreign policy to define. Israel prefers to
have control over foreign affairs. He prefers just to say that the SGA
does not have it.
Once this group is inaugurated—which he believes is the term
from Camp David—then the Israeli military authority would be with-
drawn, the civilian government would be disbanded, and Israeli forces
would go to specified locations. We have discussed that this should be
on the periphery of the West Bank. We can presume that this would
take care of external defense. He does not want the SGA to have tanks,
howitzers, or heavy weapons. Israel would continue to have these for
the West Bank.
Difficult issues remain—e.g. public lands, water development, and
the number and kind of refugees who could go back to the territories.
This is a very important issue (the refugees), and could be decided by
the Continuing Committee. Some were specified in the Camp David
Accords, and in a number of 1967 refugees’ going back. This committee
could turn over an agreement—say in August—to the SGA, as with
water rights, and it would then in turn be the responsibility of the SGA
to administer the agreement. On another point, the security committee:
He prefers that it be headed by General Ali and Minister Weizman. So
far, when various issues come up, Israel says that they are security
issues. It uses this argument to delay decisions that are not related to se-
curity. There is a difficult line to be drawn here. There are genuine de-
fense needs and the control of terrorism. Israel requires some role in
anti-terrorism. As to where to draw the line, we need negotiations.
Camp David calls for strong police forces—the word “strong” was put
in particularly—and they need to deal with Egypt, Israel, and Jordan.
He would like to see, over time, the role of the police increase. As it
proved itself to be effective against terrorist acts, it would play a useful
role.
He has written down, for President Sadat’s study overnight, these
various points. They reflect his best judgment. Sol Linowitz under-
stands that these points are what he and Khalil worked out. He (the
President) modified them to take into account some points made by the
Egyptians this morning.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(At that point, copies were passed—see attachment—and the
The President said that one Iranian diplomat, scheduled to be de-
ported, has had a nervous breakdown, and wants to stay in the hospital
for 24 hours.
The Vice President said that he was fired last night by the Iranians,
and fears for his life.
The President said he doesn’t doubt it, but he can go to a third
country.
Assistant Secretary Saunders said that the diplomat had been our bet
as the best man to handle the transition.
The President said he would not go to the American people and
make excuses about a diplomat’s not leaving. He can stay in the hos-
pital for 24 hours, under custody.
President Sadat said that he would be pleased to offer this man
asylum in Egypt. Any Iranian could come, openly before the whole
world. They have recently taken two Iranian military officers.
The President said that 9000 Iranians have entered the country since
the hostages were taken; and we have a total of about 70,000 Iranian
students here. He asked Osama el-Baz whether the points in the paper
suited him.
Mr. el-Baz joked that anything the President presents is acceptable!
President Sadat said that he and his team would chat together this
evening.
The President said that on another issue, we may have problems
with Begin on anything agreed here. (President Sadat said right). First,
on the U.S.’ being a member of the Continuing Committee, he doesn’t
know why, but often Begin would hold out on something like this as a
bargaining point. That’s his privilege.
Mr. el-Baz said that this can be seen in the context of the United
States’s being a full partner under Camp David. Therefore it can join
any committee.
Ambassador Linowitz asked whether this means that, if Israel ob-
jects, the U.S. could still be a “full partner” on the Continuing
Committee.
Mr. el-Baz said that this is not the point: “full partner” means that
the U.S. can join all committee.
Ambassador Linowitz asked whether we can make the Camp David
distinction as a “full partner”, but not as a “party.”
President Sadat said yes.
The President asked what the difference was.

Assistant Secretary Saunders said that it would affect the principle of
unanimity on the Continuing Committee.
The President said he sees. As he understands it, Egypt has no ob-
jection to U.S. membership. If Begin objects to there being a U.S. role
with a veto, then it is up to us and the Israelis to agree.
Ambassador Linowitz said that if we can agree on “full partner” with
Egypt, then the U.S. has flexibility.
President Sadat said that Egypt insists that the U.S. continue to be a
full partner.
The President said that at Camp David, the U.S. was not included in
the Continuing Committee. There was an argument at Camp David on
refugees that related to this point, and it was decided that Israel and the
SGA had to agree on refugees. A separate part of Camp David lists the
major role the Palestinians can play. The Continuing Committee is
powerful. It can continue what we are doing now, with the Palestinians
and Jordanians involved.
President Sadat said right.
The President said it would be new if we were in the Continuing
Committee, since that hadn’t been agreed at Camp David.
President Sadat said yes. If there is no U.S. presence as a full partner,
he would do nothing.
The President joked that he would turn over the whole problem to
President Sadat (laughter).
President Sadat said he had said at Camp David that 90% of the
cards are in the U.S.’ hands.
The President joked that he would turn it over to President Sadat
and King Hussein. (laughter)
President Sadat said he wants Hussein to take over responsibility
for the West Bank (the President agreed). If we succeed here, then Hus-
sein will come in.
The President said that the Continuing Committee should have
some full powers—e.g. on deciding when to start the negotiations on
the final status of the West Bank and Gaza. They have to start by the
third year, but can start earlier. If there are differences between Israel
and the SGA, or between Israel and Egypt, the Continuing Committee
would be the forum, sort of like a supreme court. It can also coordinate,
and keep things moving forward.
President Sadat said that Israel tries to exclude the U.S.—as it tried
to do with the treaty negotiating.
The President said they tried it at Camp David, as well!
President Sadat said that he believes Begin will not insist on this
now. The U.S. has proved itself as an arbiter between the two sides. It is
very vital that the U.S. be in.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said we are willing.
President Sadat said that the Israelis should not want the Soviet
Union to be happy, in saying that the U.S. was excluded!
Ambassador Linowitz asked if he understood correctly: if we con-
tinue as a full partner on the Continuing Committee, and under the
Camp David Accords, is this agreeable to Egypt?
President Sadat said full partner. . . . There had been two turning
points. With the first Disengagement Agreement, after the October
war, there were hot feelings and emotions. It was a deadlock. The first
Disengagement Agreement was a U.S. paper submitted after the dead-
lock. Also at Camp David, without President Carter and the U.S., Begin
would not have signed. We will face this in the future. The fact is that
the U.S. is a full partner.
The President said he wants to know what President Sadat envi-
sions if we go for Gaza-first. How can we negotiate on one part of the
territories only? He can’t see it. Does President Sadat see implementing
Gaza first?
President Sadat said he had talked candidly with Begin about this at
Aswan. Begin was silent. He (President Sadat) had said, let us agree
about Gaza and the West Bank first; but he (President Sadat) would
have nothing to do with the West Bank, let us start with Gaza first. He
said to Begin: “Do you hear?” And Begin replied: “I hear with three
ears,” which meant he felt it in his heart, as well. He (Begin) had asked
the same question—do you mean agreeing on Gaza only? Does this
mean postponing the West Bank? He (President Sadat) had said no. He
(Begin) said in Cairo, that we could start with Gaza after agreeing on
the West Bank and Gaza together. He (Begin) declared himself. He
(President Sadat) proposed to help him (Begin) with problems of the
West Bank. Also, why should they keep Hussein as an outsider?
The President commented that Hussein is throwing rocks.
President Sadat said that when he first proposed this idea to Begin,
Begin refused immediately. Then after six months, all the Israelis—in-
cluding Begin—said that this was a happy solution. There is no threat
to Israel from Gaza. On the West Bank, even Israeli editors said that
they had misunderstood him (President Sadat). Now they see this as a
most happy solution—all the factions in Israel do. At Aswan, he had
tried to ease matters for Begin, who heard with three ears, to go to the
Cabinet. There was no answer. We need to get his (Begin’s) answer.

The President asked, if the Palestinians on the West Bank and Gaza
want to go together on implementation, is this President Sadat’s first
choice?
President Sadat said he would not advise it. There are difficulties on
the West Bank: the PLO, Jordan, and the Israelis all maneuver against
one another on the West Bank. He does not want to let King Hussein as
an outsider upset our work. We should reach agreement, and say we
will start implementing it in Gaza. Then the three of us can ask Hussein
to resume his responsibilities for the West Bank as Egypt would be
doing in Gaza. We could leave it for one or two years, to buy time, then
the West Bank would come along.
General Ali said that he last met with the Israelis a month ago, with
military authorities, with Palestinian leaders. He asked whether Egypt
and the Gazans should apply the SGA in Gaza first. They are ready to
start. They are ready.
The President said he has no evidence to contradict this view, but is
less sure that the Gazans would be willing, without agreement by the
PLO, Arafat, and Hussein.
President Sadat said that he agrees; he does not trust any of them.
But if we have a model, he will impose it. Let us get a model in Gaza
(and the West Bank?)—for there is no alternative—and Egypt will
apply it to Gaza; he will find local mayors to do so.
The President asked if this is not acceptable to them, how will Presi-
dent Sadat impose it.
President Sadat said that Begin should simply have given full au-
tonomy after the Camp David Accords were signed, then said to the
Palestinians, when you are ready to sit with us, you can govern your-
selves. If they are ready, they can discuss all that is in Camp David.
Anyway, we will win, even if they refuse. Time is on our side.
The President asked whether Begin had taken the Gaza-first idea to
the Cabinet.
Ambassador Linowitz said Begin is worried that Gaza-first would be
a precedent for the West Bank. He thinks that maybe President Sadat
means by “impose” that Israel will transfer authority, and let the
Gazans pick it up or not. There is a question in Begin’s mind: since there
are more difficulties on the West Bank, if there is full agreement on
Gaza, and some progress on the West Bank, will we move forward with
Gaza-first before finishing on the West Bank?
President Sadat said that he will think of it. This is a breakthrough.
It is a subtle idea. Maybe we will be forced to it. He would prefer agree-
ment about both sides, then implementing Gaza first. The West Bank is
a quagmire for Hussein, the PLO, and the Israelis.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said there is no water rights problem in Gaza. What
may happen is that we will set up the SGA in Gaza, and the Camp
David Accords say the Israelis withdraw. Therefore Begin does not
want to go forward in Gaza, so that he will not have to go forward with
the process on the military side. Did this come up in Cabinet, or get
discussed?
Ambassador Linowitz said no.
Secretary Vance said that there was some discussion at the end of
the Egypt-Israel treaty negotiations. It went to the Cabinet, which voted
no, so it was not put in the (joint) letter.
The President said the first he had heard the idea was on the phone
after Camp David with President Sadat.
President Sadat said that he heard from Weizman—who is agree-
able. Also the Israeli editors saw it as a happy solution.
The President said that we should pursue it as an alternative option.
It sounds good, to avoid a breakdown. It may be acceptable to Israeli
public opinion.
President Sadat agreed.
The President said that he hears that some Israeli military com-
manders have turned over some responsibilities, with no publicity.
General Ali said that some Cairo officials were there too, dealing
with pupils, students, and passports.
Minister Butros Ghali said that this was not implemented.
President Sadat said the Gazans are against it.
General Ali said it was in his last report.
Minister Butros Ghali (disputing that report) said that the Gazans
were still delaying.
President Sadat said they were resisting it.
The President said that some Israeli military commanders, without
publicity, were turning over some powers: e.g. some police functions
and schools.
Secretary Vance said Moshe (Dayan) had told us.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Mayor Shawaa confirmed this, and
also discussed Gaza first.
President Sadat asked what the answer was.
Ambassador Linowitz said at first there was no interest. Then
Shawaa indicated that this might be possible if we had not finished the
West Bank. He said that this would have to mean there were not much
time lapsing, however.
President Sadat said he had no confidence in Mayor Shawaa any-
more. Shawaa had sent many messages; but at the last moment the
Gazans were intimidated by the PLO. And it would not be a short-time
lapse: we must bring in Hussein.
The President asked Mr. el-Baz whether Arafat would permit a
quiet takeover of responsibilities by the Palestinians under Gaza-first.
Mr. el-Baz said yes, some jurisdictions could be given to the Pales-
tinians, but not as a long-term solution. For the transition period itself,
the PLO would require it to be for the West Bank and Gaza.
The President asked what if it were done one community at a time,
on a selective basis. Perhaps Hebron would say yes, and Bethlehem
would say no. Would this approach be supported? They could be re-
sponsible for maybe 15–20 things, like schools, roads, police.
Mr. el-Baz said the mayors have no courage.
The President asked about Arafat’s position.
Mr. el-Baz said he thought the answer would be no.
President Sadat said that Shawaa said in messages that Arafat had
given the green light; then he denied it. We need to do this boldly, as
Camp David and the peace treaty were done. Look at the problems of
normalization and exchange of ambassadors. Now there is an Israeli
flag flying in Cairo, and an Israeli Ambassador—who has not been boy-
cotted. But he is unfit, doesn’t know Arabic or the Arab mentality. He is
Polish.
The Vice President asked if the Ambassador came from Poland.
President Sadat joked that he was, along with Dr. Brzezinski and
Begin.
The President joked that he knows the trouble he has with all of
them (laughter).
President Sadat said the Pope, too!
The President said he is asking about the Palestinians: will they ac-
cept responsibility? Will they accept anything?
Mr. el-Baz said that, in general, if there were a genuine transfer of
authority, it would be all right, on a de facto but not de jure basis. Let the
mayors do it. They will give the green light, while still cursing it and
the U.S.
Secretary Vance asked whether the Palestinians would accept the
SGA, or the mayors take the responsibility.
Mr. el-Baz said that they would accept the SGA.
The President asked whether they would prefer the SGA or the
mayors.
Mr. el-Baz said that they would prefer an SGA leading to an entity.
Doing it through the mayors implies fractionating and no entity.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said that if we can agree on 40 representatives for the
West Bank, a date for elections, and voting for residents of East Jeru-
salem, would the PLO encourage Palestinians to participate in the
election?
Mr. el-Baz said that de facto, yes.
The President asked whether the word would get out.
Mr. el-Baz said yes. Hikmat el-Mazri saw Arafat, and got this point.
President Sadat said that Hikmat el-Mazri had at one time been
speaker of the Jordanian parliament.
The President said that there is a problem with Begin in East Jeru-
salem on voting. Ambassador Linowitz told him (Begin) that they had
the right to vote in Jordanian elections. Begin was surprised, and
checked to see whether it was accurate. It is illogical for them to be able
to vote in Jordan and not in the West Bank. This is a difficult issue.
Ambassador Linowitz said they had only touched on settlements.
Begin agonizes about this—even two months of a moratorium is a lot,
and he (Begin) rejected his (the Ambassador’s) appeal.
The President asked whether there was more to discuss on Begin.
President Sadat said no.
The President joked that Osama (el-Baz) has really mellowed!
Mr. el-Baz joked that he (the President) should wait until the
drafting!
Minister Butros Ghali joked that it is age!
The President joked that he (el-Baz) always agreed with him in gen-
eral but not in the drafting! He continued that Camp David was a mir-
acle. He talked with Mrs. Carter at noon—and said look at what has
been done; it is a miracle. He asked whether President Sadat is running
water under the Suez Canal for the Sinai.
President Sadat said it would be done this month, but only opened
in October.
The President asked if this tunnel is for traffic.
President Sadat said yes, and room for a pipeline. He had a feasi-
bility plan to send water from the Nile done by Bechtel. The water will
be for Ma’adi in the Eastern Desert, and for Suez. The tunnel is near
Suez. A man from Bechtel visited him recently, and is doing a feasi-
bility study, for free.
The President asked whether they needed water on the Cairo side.
President Sadat said yes, that they have lots of land in Sinai—and
need water for agriculture and drinking, and for use inside.
The President asked whether there were any difficulties in turning
over Sinai on time. Did they get good cooperation?

President Sadat said yes, the treaty was implemented very scrupu-
lously. Obligations were honored. Mt. Sinai was turned over early.
General Ali joked that everything had been painted.
President Sadat said that the Israelis used to plow before turning
over. Now all was in good condition.
The President asked whether the settlers were still in Sinai.
President Sadat said that they were. The land had not yet been
turned over.
The President asked whether they would stay until the end.
President Sadat said the fear of the Israeli government is that public
opinion will be shocked the day they turn over Amit, the largest settle-
ment, on the sea. But we have to face it.
The President said it was agreed.
General Ali said that the Israelis were doing two new settlements
nearby in Israel. The reason that Weizman did not want to advance the
withdrawal is that he was worried that the U.S. would not finish the air
bases on time, and that the Amit people would wait until the end.
These are problems.
President Sadat said that in the settlements near Arish, they burned
everything.
The President asked whether the Egyptians had oceanographers
working near Sharm-el-Sheikh.
President Sadat said they had them at Ras Mohammed. They are
able scientists; but they had not had an opportunity to act.
The President asked whether President Sadat had instructed the
oceanographers to maintain the environment.
President Sadat said he had given strict orders.
The President suggested that General Ali could check. Some scien-
tists are concerned that there is damage.
President Sadat said he has asked a lady U.S. doctor to come to join
him in April in Ras Mohammed. (He instructed General Ali to contact
the governor).
The President said this would not happen by itself; hotels, for ex-
ample, dump into the water. President Sadat may not know about it
until too late.
Ambassador Linowitz asked President Sadat, as a philosopher, why
Begin had been helpful on the peace treaty, but was harder now on full
autonomy.
The President said he didn’t remember Begin’s being helpful before!

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
President Sadat said that before Camp David, he felt they would
reach nothing. There was a heavy campaign by each side against the
other. He had an inner confidence that was tactical, not strategic. Now
Begin gives nothing, because of what he has lived for the last 40 years:
the West Bank. A mutual friend of theirs heard that Begin wants the
West Bank. This raises difficulties. In history, Begin wants to go down
as the man who made peace with Egypt, which has been important
since Moses. Until Begin visits here, and the President hears him, then
he (President Sadat) can’t give his idea about the whole thing. He
knows that Begin doesn’t want to act in the West Bank as he did in
Sinai, for ideological reasons. He (President Sadat) sent Begin a letter,7
saying that if Begin stayed in the middle of the road, then the person
after him would take the whole credit: for both the comprehensive
peace and the treaty with Egypt. He (President Sadat) will not make up
his mind until Begin meets here with the President.
The President said that the hardest for Begin of all was dismantling
the settlements in the Sinai. He (the President) does not believe Begin
will give East Jerusalem to the Arabs, so it will need to stay unified. Ex-
cept for Jerusalem, Sinai was the worst problem; it was torture for
Begin on the settlements.
Dr. Brzezinski said that at Camp David he had referred to the settle-
ments as colonial. Begin had asked him to go for a private walk, and
had upbraided him for using that word. Begin said that his right eye
would fall out, and his right arm would fall off, before he would agree
to give up the Sinai settlements. But 10 days later he did.
President Sadat said Begin told him the Sinai settlements would go
with him (Begin) to the grave.
The President said that Begin had had a good reception at those
settlements.
Assistant Secretary Saunders said that the problem of the West Bank
settlements was worse.
President Sadat said that if he could solve the Jerusalem problem, he
insists. . . . There should be public opinion here and in the whole world;
why should Israel put the U.S. in such a position with 800 million
Moslems? He tells Israelis, how many of you are there, 16 million? Why
not take U.S. interests into account in the Muslim world? When Begin
agrees on Jerusalem, then he (President Sadat) will give water.

The President said that they negotiated a paragraph at Camp David
on Jerusalem. It is the most likely basis for agreement. No one will like
it; but people will live with it. The next difficulty is getting Begin to
carry out Camp David (not new proposals). There are many diffi-
culties. The day Begin gives the order to the military authorities to
withdraw will be tough for him (Begin).
President Sadat said he knows. January 25, the last withdrawal, was
a funeral in Israel. 90% of the people are for peace, as he saw in Haifa.
But Israel says: “what did we receive.” Compare what Israel gives up: it
is tangible, a lot. But if Camp David fails, Israel loses, and its future
would be in danger. If it carries it out in good faith, then Israel can turn
to the world for approval, with the West Europeans, the Canadians, the
Japanese, the Australians, and get a lot of approval. Maybe in 100 years
the Palestinians will still be demanding a separate state. But most Arab
leaders would accept what is being done, de facto, while still insisting.
Secretary Vance asked, if there were agreement on the West Bank
and Gaza, what will Assad do?
President Sadat said that Assad continues to raise dust. We are
waiting for civil war. Assad is in grave danger. Assad is of no signifi-
cance, now, following his Lebanon fiasco and the civil war. See him and
Iraq. Assad provides arms. Therefore, he is of no significance.
The President said that, except for South Yemen, Syria is most sub-
servient to the Soviet Union.
President Sadat said that it is also most despised in the Arab world.
We have the upper hand despite Soviet actions, in Libya, Afghanistan,
etc., because of the Soviet agents—South Yemen is despised in the Arab
world; Assad will have a civil war by next summer, with the fall of
Assad and the Alawites or a quagmire in Syria; and Qadhafi the Soviet
Union knows is moody. We have the upper hand, therefore should not
lose the moment. With any Soviet move, we must check it. We (Egyp-
tians) must do it, or help the U.S.
The President concluded by saying it is good to have President
Sadat as a partner.
(The meeting concluded at 4: p.m.)

355.
Memorandum of Conversation
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
President Sadat
Prince Bandar
Zbigniew Brzezinski
President Carter: I read the message to President Sadat from Prince
Fahd. I am concerned that there be an improvement in relations. Presi-
dent Sadat wrote a good letter to Prince Fahd which was conveyed
through Ambassador Eilts. There was no response to it from your side,
which was a mistake.
Prince Bandar: I was just with Crown Prince Fahd and Prince
Sultan. They have asked me to convey their highest esteem for Presi-
dent Sadat and for the Egyptian people. They strongly believe that the
Arabs are successful whenever Egypt and Saudi Arabia work together.
We have never disagreed with the strategic objectives of President
Sadat. We are not convinced that the tactics are right. We do not think
the Israelis will deliver. We would be happy to be wrong. If things
don’t go right, we will throw our weight into the balance, but we want
to keep the Arabs together. We want to support both Presidents Carter
and Sadat. The area cannot afford a failure.
President Sadat should not believe anything that is said to him
about the views of Crown Prince Fahd or Prince Sultan. (Bandar adds
that President Sadat’s late brother was his flying student.) If things fail,
we will use our “single bullet.”
Dr. Brzezinski: How would you use it?
Prince Bandar: The time will come to support the American posi-
tion. We will do whatever it takes to support it. We would be prepared
to recognize Israel’s right to exist within approximately the borders of
1967.
President Carter: What President Sadat has done to move things
forward other Arab nations, including Saudi Arabia, failed to support.
This increases Israeli doubts that Saudi Arabia would eventually accept
Israel. When Begin found a willing negotiating partner in President
Sadat, there was no positive response from Jordan, Saudi Arabia, or the
Palestinians.
President Sadat: There has been a misunderstanding. What we
have reached is not the end of the road. We have to start somewhere.
Camp David is not an end but only a beginning. You are right in saying
that I have done some things against my own convictions, but after
1977, when Geneva looked like a failure, I got a letter from President
Carter. I was disappointed that the Palestinians welched out on their
promise on 242. Also, when I met with Arafat he proposed an Amer-
ican professor to represent the PLO at Geneva and then reneged on
that. The Syrians, Soviets and Palestinians maneuvered against us. By
October 1977 we had reached a stalemate. President Carter was vehe-
mently attacked here after the U.S.-Soviet statement, which he in-
tended to be a source of pressure on Israel. President Carter was the
first to speak of a homeland for the Palestinians; the first to demand im-
mediate Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon, and that is what the United
States should also have done after the 1967 war. Under Carter, the U.S.
has a solid position on the settlements. I took the initiative because
Carter was under attack from the Jewish lobby and also in the Arab
world. But again he emphasized that this is not the end of the road. I
initially also thought that the Israelis would not withdraw, but they
did. I have recovered 80% of the Sinai, all the oil, etc. We have started
on a road, but we cannot insist that Begin promise everything at once.
To ask for everything is to give him the golden opportunity to do
nothing.
Yet he evacuated the settlements, then abandoned the airports
there. It was President Carter and I who brought him to do this. We
have thus created precedents for the West Bank and the Golan Heights.
Sitting in our capitals and waiting for Begin to act is going to get us no-
where. I made the breakthrough not to recover the Sinai alone but be-
cause it is the only way. We now have U.S. and world public opinion on
our side. Let us exploit it.
I am not optimistic for the first time about achieving full autonomy
on schedule, but I will continue to work for it. Whenever Egypt and
Saudi Arabia work together, the Arab world comes along.
What I ask is this: Why not wait till I could clarify my position to
you after I signed Camp David? I have nothing against Prince Fahd or
Prince Sultan. I have always been on good terms of brotherhood with
ment 142.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
them. But I am bewildered by Fahd. He is encouraging Iraq and the Pal-
estinian dreams. The severing of relations with Egypt—I shall never
forget it because I don’t want the Egyptian people hurt. I don’t ask for
economic or diplomatic relations, but everything can be solved when
relations between Egypt and Saudi Arabia are normal. Moreover,
somebody has to be able to sit down and argue with Begin.
President Carter: The most important thing is for Hussein and the
West Bank mayors to join the negotiations. Saudi Arabia could help
there. Also there must be a rapprochement between Saudi Arabia and
Egypt. It will take some courage for Saudi Arabia to withdraw from its
close relationship with Iraq and the rejectionists.
Prince Bandar: The relationship with Iraq and Syria is not as close
as it seems. We will support a peace process with all our weight.
President Carter: Your non-participation plays into the hands of
those who oppose progress.
Prince Bandar: One final request: Please, no more speeches or
press attacks on us. (Speaks briefly in Arabic.)
President Sadat: You have my word. A moratorium. As of now, no
more.
President Carter: (to Prince Bandar) And that means both ways.
Prince Bandar: Yes.
(The meeting ended with warm greetings exchanged between
President Sadat and Prince Bandar and personal best wishes to Princes
Fahd and Sultan.)

356.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Third Meeting with Egyptian President Anwar
al-Sadat
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President
Ambassador Roy Atherton, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (notetaker)
His Excellency Muhammad Anwar al-Sadat, President of the Arab Republic of
Egypt
General Kamal Hasan Ali, Minister of Defense and War Production
Dr. Butros Butros Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
Ambassador Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States
Mr. Osama el-Baz, First Under Secretary and Director of the Office of the Vice
President
(From 10: a.m., the two Presidents met separately in the Oval Of-
fice. The others—except for the Vice President and Dr. Brzezinski—
Presidents joined them. The Vice President joined them at 10:57; and
Dr. Brzezinski at 11:05).
Ambassador Linowitz began the meeting in the Cabinet Room by re-
ferring to the draft Egyptian paper on points of agreement (see attach-
ment). First, he wanted to note that we hope that Israel can also agree
to whatever is worked out here; therefore we should look at these
issues with that factor in mind. Point one4 is ok. Point two5 is ok, but the
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
word “tackled” should be changed to something else. On point three,6
there is a problem: there is a difference between listing powers and re-
sponsibilities to be transferred, and providing for transfer of authority.
He thought we could skirt this by simply outlining the powers trans-
ferred. On point four, Israel objects to “legislative” authority. Begin
says that the SGA can do what has to be done. He said to Begin that you
can call what it does a regulation, a rule, a law, or whatever: but the
SGA needs authority. Begin did not deny this point; but he is troubled
by the idea of legislative authority that could lead to a Palestinian state.
Begin wants to avoid that.
Mr. el-Baz said that Egypt had avoided the word in this point of the
draft, but not the concept. They need something like this point for
afterwards.
Secretary Vance asked Mr. el-Baz to clarify the word “afterwards.”
Mr. el-Baz said that this would be during the negotiations, but it
formed a concept in a manner to give the SGA legislative authority. If a
different term is used, that is all right; but the concept must be clear.
Egypt will not abandon the concept. We can decide to take the Israeli
argument into consideration, and defer the question of “legislative au-
thority” now, but then talk about certain forms.
Ambassador Linowitz said that [he] was troubled by the question of
“afterwards.” When would this be?
Mr. el-Baz said after the 27th of April.
Secretary Vance asked whether Mr. el-Baz were saying that on the
27th, in the intensive negotiations, the question should be faced re-
garding words about laws, legislation, etc.
Mr. el-Baz said: yes.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we are kidding ourselves if we think
that we could get that from the Israelis.
Mr. el-Baz said that they will try.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he had tried to find words (in the
U.S. draft8 yesterday) that would not create problems for Begin. This is
a prickly subject, and will provoke a strong reaction. Without a cate-
gorical change in Begin, it will get a violent reaction on “law” or “legis-

lative.” This approach is ill-advised. The Egyptians can get the au-
thority (for the SGA) without the words.
Mr. el-Baz said that therefore on the 27th of April it can be dis-
cussed, accommodating on words. But he does not like many words to
be ambiguous, since that would lead to further controversy. If they try
accommodating, it is still necessary to know what is important. Can the
SGA do these things or not. First there would be the principles (?);
second is the right to amend existing statutes; and third, the details can
come later.
Minister Butros Ghali said that if one accepted the U.S. paragraph
four, in four weeks Israel will say that it won’t negotiate, that the
words don’t require it. If the Egyptian fourth paragraph is accepted,
then there can be talks.
Ambassador Linowitz said he did not object to the fourth Egyptian
paragraph as such. At the negotiations, Egypt can put it forward and
get Israel’s reaction. We are trying to tell the Egyptians what the Pavlo-
vian reaction will be. If the words do not raise problems, then all right.
(At 10:54, the two Presidents joined the larger meeting in the Cab-
inet Room).
The President joked that he understands that all the technical work
was being done in the Cabinet Room, and that the group was trying to
undo his and President Sadat’s agreements! He thinks they should go
over the paper we had presented and get the Egyptian response.
(The Vice President entered at this point).
President Sadat said that they had submitted another paper.
Secretary Vance said that Ambassador Linowitz sees no problem
with the first paragraph. Paragraph two is ok, with a change in the
word “tackled.” With paragraph three, there is a fundamental problem,
which he will describe later. Paragraph four’s words are all right, but
they hide a problem that will come up when the parties meet on the
27th. There is no reference to laws or legislative authority, but, when
the parties meet on the 27th, the issue will be raised. Therefore there is a
problem.
The President asked if this was a substitute paper.
Secretary Vance suggested that Ambassador Linowitz discuss that
paper.
Ambassador Linowitz said that there are differences between us:
whether all powers should be transferred, or the document should try

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
to get around that point by listing the powers of the SGA. We are back
to “transfer of authority.” We need not get into that issue, if the Heads
of Agreement just list powers. It will not advance the discussion to go
back to “transfer of authority.” On paragraph four, again: Israel will
react to “legislative authority” and “laws,” if described as such under
powers and responsibilities, as leading to authority for an independent
Palestinian state. Therefore we framed our language to get around this
problem. The Egyptian redraft is all right, but we must recognize that it
does not remove the problem. It is all right now. On the rest of the
paragraph. . . .
The President asked: paragraph 4?
Ambassador Linowitz said: the second part. We are trying to reflect
the Israeli position. They are trying to keep defense and foreign affairs
for themselves. There is no question that Israel will agree to the SGA’s
having diplomatic or consular relations or armed forces. Maybe this
formulation (in the Egyptian draft) is all right, but Israel will assert that
defense is with them. What does “defense” mean: it is just of Israel or of
the West Bank, too? Israel insists on the latter. Second, on foreign affairs
and relations with other countries, these would not be exercised by the
SGA. Israel demands the right to handle communications and other
types of international relations matters. We have no quarrel with the
Egyptian language, but there is a problem of ambiguity. Paragraph
five10 is fine, but why did the Egyptians change our language? The
Egyptian language is all right. On the language on “coordinating,” the
powers will not be unilateral if they are coordinated. Implicit in the
Egyptian language is a practical change that will not be acceptable. Is-
rael will say that both have to agree. The next paragraph11 focuses on
what would happen if there is no agreement. Therefore, we said that
existing arrangements would apply. Why has this been changed? The
Egyptian draft does not deal with an important aspect of the problem.
Also, this paragraph deals with coordination; not dispute settlement or
whether the Continuing Committee has some agreed full powers. Most
troubling, from our point of view, is that there is no alternative pro-
vided if there is no unanimity. There is a need for a way to go if there is
no resolution of disagreements. We thought our proposal was good.
Khalil understood it; Burg and Shamir accepted it tentatively, as pro-

viding for the continuation of the status quo. Our language12 was even
more precise. On the security committee, why change “agree to estab-
lish?” There is no security committee yet; or is this saying that that is
implicit? “To examine security aspects” is all right. And we kept out
references to 242, since it is clear in the Camp David Accords that they
are under 242.
The President asked if we have an objection to including the refer-
ence to 242. Would it hurt?
Ambassador Linowitz said no.
Assistant Secretary Saunders said it would, since it gets into the
question of Israeli withdrawal, and Israel may object.
The President said the inclusion of a reference to 242 caused him no
problem.
Ambassador Linowitz said that the Egyptian paragraph 814 is irrele-
vant. It may be good to urge this on Israel, but it has nothing to do with
areas of agreement.
The President said that we could take the rest of the day to negotiate
a draft. (To Secretary Vance: Cy will you sit down in the afternoon,
with whomever President Sadat decides, and work this out, with
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
brackets? I will try to do the best I can with the Israelis to get agreement
on it). He does not want differences here, between President Sadat and
himself, and to try guessing what the Israelis will accept. Let’s do this,
and he will then be in touch with President Sadat (after seeing Begin)
and seek a common approach.
Mr. el-Baz said that we will not need brackets.
The President said he agreed. With Osama redrafting, though, you
never know! When he (the President) was in the Georgia legislature, he
had been a slow learner, and found out that in a conference committee,
it is better to be the secretary than the chairman. In a meeting of 20
people, he would rather be the secretary. Whoever does the first draft
has the advantage. We will try to get agreement and, if not, there can be
brackets. President Sadat and he will decide. Did Ambassador Lino-
witz have anything else?
Ambassador Linowitz mentioned East Jerusalem.
The President said that there are two basic proposals and it may be
necessary to discuss them. First, some form of absentee ballotting; or
second, delaying a decision by letting the Gaza and West Bank mayors,
who are elected, select or appoint the SGA. He strongly prefers the first
alternative. If we remove direct elections, this would modify a part of
the Camp David Accords, and that might open the door for both sides
to modify other parts. He expects that Begin will refuse (to move) on
East Jerusalem. This is an untenable position. We will stand firmly and
publicly on this. It is an important issue, and it needs to be addressed.
Would Ambassador Linowitz like to comment?
Ambassador Linowitz replied: no.
The President said he feels that if Begin is intrasigent on voting
rights for the residents of East Jerusalem, he (the President) will push
hard and publicly. Instead of letting the SGA breakdown, we could es-
tablish it from the mayors. His opinion is that Israel would prefer not to
have the SGA set up, since that means the automatic requirement to
withdraw the Israeli military government and the civilian administra-
tion. A profound change is required, with no delay, to withdraw armed
forces, and to assign the rest to specified security locations. Among our-
selves, we should be more flexible on what the SGA is, in order to get it
set up. When it is established, even without some things, this will be a
major development, leading to a step by step increase in the authority
and stature of the SGA.
(Dr. Brzezinski entered at 11:05).
Would Ambassador Linowitz like to comment?
Ambassador Linowitz said he wanted to add a footnote. There are
two things this skeleton agreement would let happen, in signalling to
the Palestinians—as the Egyptians say is their view: first, the military

government would be withdrawn, with great consequences. The SGA
makes this possible. Second, the Palestinians, as of right, would be at
the table, at the Continuing Committee where they can vote on issues
they must negotiate. This should be of great significance to the Pales-
tinians in terms of unresolved issues like water, economic relations,
and maybe land. If the SGA gets set up, there would be the withdrawal
of the military government. This can be viewed by Israel as some de-
parture. If so, they (?) should be ready for it.
Minister Butros Ghali said that unless the SGA has the minimum
authority needed, the Palestinians will not come in. Therefore, we
should try to show them they will be given a maximum number of
powers. If they do not see flexibility, he knows they will not take part,
and there would be no Palestinian participation.
The President said we will work for maximum authority. What
steps will induce representatives of the West Bank and Gaza, plus Hus-
sein, to join the negotiations?
Minister Butros Ghali said that they (the Egyptians) had sent a note
on confidence-building measures.
The President said that was before; what process can be done now
to induce their involvement—without involving Begin or the Israelis in
the effort?
Minister Butros Ghali said that that was a big qualification.
The President said he knows. He guesses that Begin does not want
them to join.
Mr. el-Baz said that the Palestinians want a settlements freeze and a
U.S. commitment to what is at the end of the tunnel, nearing self-
determination, and the liquidation of Israeli occupation. First, it should
be cut down; later it should be liquidated. There must be some real
movement on the ground, or a U.S. presence or forces in the area.
The President asked what the last idea meant.
Mr. el-Baz said that Hikmat el-Mazri said that maybe the U.S. could
substitute for Israel in the transition period.
The President said he sees.
Mr. el-Baz said that this would be difficult. If we emphasize
confidence-building measures, and if we do not get Begin to agree on a
settlements freeze or an attractive definition of powers and responsibil-
ities for the SGA, he would like something like the President’s speech
of last night (at the White House dinner). If this were repeated, it would
be useful. The Palestinians attach importance to the U.S. position; they

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
rely only on the U.S. and on Egypt. Others, like the Arab states, are
unreliable.
The President said he would make the same speech to Begin, and
underline the principles from Camp David. He needs to repeat his toast
almost verbatim, for the benefit of U.S. supporters of Israel, and others.
Second, Camp David could be carried out quickly, if the West Bank
mayors, others, and Hussein would join the discussions. Absent some
action by Begin and the Israelis, what can we do to get Hussein and the
Palestinians to join? Should someone contact the Saudis, Arafat, or
Hussein? They are playing into the hands of the enemies of Camp
David. The whole world would rally to an Israeli withdrawal, and Pal-
estinian rights would have a good chance to succeed if the Palestinians
and Jordan were in. He understands why they are not. But where is the
key to get them in?
Mr. el-Baz said that the Jordanian and Palestinian positions are
different. Jordan and Hussein have their eyes on the West Bank,
and would like to move to negotiations with Israel on the lines of the
Allon plan. There could be some Israeli-Jordanian talks, perhaps non-
governmental, or with Peres or others.
The President said that this is required to be done by Camp David in
the second step, which could take place after a few months, and must
begin no later than three years. If the Saudis were convinced that
Jordan should be in, could the Saudis induce it to do so?
President Sadat said 100%. If only to guarantee their economic
assistance, Jordan would immediately come in.
The President asked whether Saudi Arabia could convince Arafat
and the West Bank Palestinians.
President Sadat said no, the Saudis are intimidated by them. But
they (the Saudis) could bring in Hussein.
The President asked how we could bring in the Palestinians.
President Sadat said that if Hussein joins, then for sure there would
be repercussions on the PLO position. They may say that Hussein has
joined the Zionist plot, but in their hearts they would try to do their
best. They know Hussein; they would not want him to take all the land
himself.
The President asked whether Hussein, on balance, was more afraid
of Syria and Iraq, or interested in pleasing the Saudis.
President Sadat said both. If Saudi Arabia backs him, he will come
in, whatever the threats are from Syria and Iraq—and we should see
what is happening in Syria. Saudi Arabia for sure can bring him in.

Therefore, this would affect the Palestinian position, since they fear that
Hussein wants a united kingdom.
The President asked if that included part of the West Bank.
President Sadat said yes.
The President said that Hussein wants others to do the negotiating.
Mr. el-Baz said that Hussein would not be blamed for anything; he
believes it will fall into his lap, sooner or later. He would take the credit,
but not the blame.
Ambassador Linowitz said that the Palestinians should join the
process. They have no alternative for a better life; and they will get
more at the table than absent from it. First, he can see them holding off,
expecting a magic formula or a better turn of events after May 26. We
should discourage the notion that they would get a better deal later.
Second, if they stay away, someone else will speak for them. Israel will
say that no matter what Egypt says, when the Palestinians get in they
will press for more. Therefore, Israel will hold back: why give anything
now, they will say, if they will be pressed for more later. The Pales-
tinians can get the best deal now.
Mr. el-Baz questioned whether the fact of sitting down at the table
were an important element. Is it an inducement? Egyptian contacts say
this is not so, that it is not a big advance. The first liability is in the Pal-
estinians’ talking with the Israelis without equilibrium, since Israel is in
control. Therefore, there is no equilibrium. This could work if the Is-
raelis had said that they would withdraw completely. Without that—
either a commitment that Israel would withdraw completely or under
some other shield for their fears—i.e. of Israeli de facto control—then the
outcome to the negotiations would either be the status quo or occupa-
tion. Without a commitment to withdraw there should be the shield of
the U.S. position, to show that the Palestinians are not left to the mercy
of the Israelis at the table.
Ambassador Linowitz said the Palestinians should welcome the
Continuing Committee.
Mr. el-Baz said that they need to know the joint Egyptian-American
concept of foreign affairs, with limited exceptions. First, they want a
U.S. commitment to self-determination.
Ambassador Linowitz said he had told Crown Prince Fahd that the
Palestinians have three courses open to them: to stay as they are now; to
resort to force; or to pursue the path of the autonomy negotiations.
What else is there?
Mr. el-Baz said that they see two other approaches.
Ambassador Linowitz asked what they were.
Mr. el-Baz said that could combine a UN resolution and some form
of international conference, with people like Kreisky and others. The

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
fact is that that would be a multilateral approach, not just with two or
three countries. They think others should be involved, including the
West Europeans, and self-determination should be included. These de-
velopments the Palestinians believe should be done now. Such alterna-
tives seem more promising to them.
Ambassador Linowitz asked how. Would they try to seize the West
Bank and Gaza?
Mr. el-Baz said that if there were negotiations under a different um-
brella . . . Israel is there, but there could be another 242, and add a reso-
lution on self-determination. They could try to get the Soviet Union and
the socialists in. The Palestinians believe objective factors would lead to
a different outcome.
Ambassador Linowitz asked whether Mr. el-Baz believed it in that
approach.
Mr. el-Baz said he believed it was wrong, or Egypt would be pur-
suing it. They honestly tell the Palestinians their view. The Palestinians
feel there are other options. Second, if the Israeli government doesn’t
give anything—and the Palestinians hear this from former Cabinet
members and Kreisky and others, they believe there is a disincentive to
join Camp David. They wait until Israel changes; they wait for another
government.
Secretary Vance asked if the “they” was the predominate Pales-
tinian element, or just some of them.
Mr. el-Baz said that this is hard to measure. But it is the prevailing
view among many PLO members and on the West Bank and Gaza.
They see the best alternative as waiting, and maybe to get a better deal.
The President said that the Palestinians would get a pretty good
deal in Camp David.
Mr. el-Baz said he believes therefore that we should try to
strengthen it. This would be the key work to attract the Palestinians.
Assistant Secretary Saunders said we don’t know what the Israeli
Labor Party would say about a better deal or a territorial deal. There-
fore the issue is confused in Palestinian minds.
Dr. Brzezinski said that when the Palestinians see the map, it will
not be a better deal.
Assistant Secretary Saunders agreed: since it is not concrete, the Pal-
estinians don’t see this.
Ambassador Linowitz said that this approach was a disservice.
Mr. el-Baz agreed.
Ambassador Linowitz asked Mr. el-Baz to say more.
Mr. el-Baz said that if we could get a good agreement, this would
reassure the Palestinians about their fears of the Israelis. The Pales-

tinians are very pragmatic. It is in their self-interest to cooperate in
gaining a better life. Therefore, they need something attractive that we
can defend. This is our best argument. Lots of Europeans have been in
contact with the Palestinians. With Begin’s intransigence, these factors
lead to a negative attitude of wait and see.
The President said that there is another aspect which might prevail,
though he hopes not. This is that the Israelis, with the support and co-
operation of Egypt and the U.S., might believe they can stay where they
are, and blame the entire failure of Camp David on the failure of the
Palestinians to take part. We need to do two things: to move forward
with Israel, and to get points more clearly defined. Second, we should
do all that is possible—with President Sadat’s, Sol’s, and his influence,
and to try to get Jordan—at least—and some Palestinians in the talks. Is
this hopeless? We should pursue it more. And we should get a clearer
picture of what is acceptable to the Palestinians. This is not a final solu-
tion, but they should join the discussions. This would put Israel on the
defensive. Everyone is concerned—Israel, Jews everywhere, the United
States—that Western Europe is severing itself from Israel. This is a
major concern to Israeli leaders, except for Begin. If it were obvious that
Jordan and the Palestinians and the U.S. and Egypt were all trying to
work out an agreement on Palestinian aspirations, and gaining them a
voice in their future, this would be very helpful. He thinks we have to
go forward. Would President Sadat designate someone to work on the
draft?
President Sadat named Minister Butros Ghali and Mr. el-Baz.
The President asked whether they had agreed on a communique.
Secretary Vance said yes, but it had been referred for Israeli agree-
ment. The Israelis had not yet responded. We had gone this morning to
ask if it is all right to put it out.
The President said that if the Israelis don’t agree, then delete the ref-
erence to the continuing negotiations. He asked if they would be
meeting with the press when they left.
Mr. Hunter said yes.
The President asked whether the communique could be released
later.
Minister Butros Ghali agreed.

357.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s First Meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Menachem
Begin
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President
Ambassador Samuel Lewis, United States Ambassador to Israel
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Ambassador James Leonard, Deputy Negotiator for the Middle East Autonomy
Negotiations
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Prime Minister Menachem Begin
Yitzhak Shamir, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Dr. Yosef Burg, Minister of Interior
Ambassador Ephraim Evron, Ambassador of Israel to the United States
Chaim Kubersky, Director General, Ministry of Interior
Jacob Nehushtan, Minister, Embassy of Israel
Yehiel Kadishai, Director, Prime Minister’s Bureau
Brigadier General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Dan Pattir, Public Affairs Adviser to the Prime Minister
Elyakim Rubinstein, Assistant Director General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Professor Ruth Lapidot, Legal Adviser to Foreign Ministry
Gilad Stern, Assistant to the Minister of Interior
(Prime Minister Begin began by presenting the President with a
book).
Prime Minister Begin said that this book shows how great is peace.
It quotes ancient sources. It is dedicated to “President Jimmy Carter,
the architect of the peace treaty, in gratitude and admiration.”
The President said that Prime Minister Begin was too generous.
Prime Minister Begin said that the book contains their greatest
sayings.
The President said that he is grateful, and will keep the book the rest
of his life. (The President presented a book on a section of Georgia
called Jerico). He said that, since he had read about Jerico in the papers,
he wanted to give Prime Minister Begin this book! (laughter) It is about
the Southland, where the President lives.
Prime Minister Begin said that he understands the President has the
right to live there! (laughter)
The President said that Jerico has a special meaning in the South.
The book was written by James Dickey, who is a Georgian. It is beau-
tiful. He wants to say that we are grateful and honored to have Prime
Minister Begin here and his group. He (the President) is grateful that
Prime Minister Begin has brought his new foreign minister to meet
with us. He is also thankful that Minister Burg is here. The President
has had reports that Minister Burg has been doing constructive work.
He will say in public the comments he made to Prime Minister Begin in
private. They covered the crucial elements of our relations. Our secu-
rity is intimately tied together, in the Middle East and also in other
parts of the world. Our purposes are the same; and enhancing the secu-
rity of Israel also enhances the security of the United States. He would
repeat: the U.S. is committed to the security of Israel. We have prom-
ised that we will not negotiate with, or recognize, the PLO until and
unless it recognizes Israel’s right to exist and endorses Resolution 242,
which is the basis for peace. We are adamently opposed to the estab-
lishment of a Palestinian state on the West Bank. This is felt strongly by
Sadat, as well, and Sadat said it here last week. He (the President) had
outlined to Prime Minister Begin Sadat’s views. Sadat is eager to finish
all of Camp David soon. Sadat wants continuous negotiations, for 40
days until the 26 May target date. Sadat is aware of Israel’s special con-
cerns with security. And Sadat deplores, with him (the President) the
constant threat to Israel of terrorist acts. We have common purposes,
both in the immediate security of Israel, and also of the Middle East and
Persian Gulf region. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has changed
adversely the alignment of forces there—which contains 90% of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
world’s exportable oil. U.S. positions are well known, vis-a`-vis the So-
viet Union. We are taking strong steps to induce Soviet withdrawal. We
do not see them getting out soon, if ever. Its forces are not going down,
but up. Several units have been increased during the past week. The So-
viets are killing thousands of Afghans a month, destroying entire vil-
lages, and directly and brutally violating the rights of the brave people
of Afghanistan. The Soviet Union underestimates the Afghans’ bravery
and commitment to fight. It underestimates the revulsion in the world
at the invasion; and it underestimates the condemnation of the Arab
world.
We have a specific interest in the peace process—in addition to our
friends Sadat and Prime Minister Begin. We have a direct interest in its
success. Sadat is for it. He (the President) will add his own voice: we
should carry out the Camp David Accords meticulously, at the earliest
possible time. He is concerned about the Europeans—the Austrians,
French, Germans, and to an extent the British—over their tendency to
turn away from their historic support of Israel, and to accept increasing
relations with the PLO and the militant groups. But to avoid this trend,
we must carry out the Camp David Accords: including refugees, the
Palestinian problem in all its aspects, and also the security of Israel. The
Camp David Accords are complex, and difficult issues remain. Prime
Minister Begin said that some minor issues have been solved. The
major ones are left for intense negotiations. The American public is
deeply committed to the peace process. If there is a failure to succeed,
the American people will condemn all of us who are involved: him (the
President), and also Israeli and Egyptian leaders, for sure, if we do not
carry out all of the Camp David Accords.
We have a serious problem with the hostage crisis, and this is his
(the President’s) constant preoccupation. He gets advice, varying be-
tween taking strong action and exercising patience. He accepts the need
for patience. He has called on the Allies to exert more pressure on Iran.
After stronger economic efforts later, then we will need to decide on
military moves. This option is open under international law. He will
take it if he needs to.
We have a mutual interest in the security and peace of Israel; and
also in the peace and security of Egypt. This is a three-way partnership:
all are valuable. Sadat has shown both determination and patience.
There is a difference of interpretation concerning the Camp David Ac-
cords. If there had been no flexibility in the language, then we would
not have got agreement at Camp David. The Accords went far in spe-
cifics. We need to honor both the letter and the spirit of the Camp
David Accords, and recognize the need for accommodation in re-
solving differences. What we get will be the measure of our success.
There is some concern here that Sadat and Egypt are isolated in the

Arab world. Sadat is extraordinarily courageous, strong, and tenacious.
He resists these pressures successfully. He (the President) is also full of
admiration for Prime Minister Begin and Israel for their courage in car-
rying out difficult aspects of the peace treaty, often early. But we cannot
rest on our laurels. There is an equal need for sensitivity, determina-
tion, and courage now. We need to get to determine the status of cit-
izens on the West Bank and Gaza, and the terms under which the Israeli
military government will get out, with adequate security for Israel, and
with its troops in specified security locations. None of these issues are
easy. There were some other points that Prime Minister Begin made—
or would he (Prime Minister Begin) prefer to make them? He (Prime
Minister Begin) is welcome. We are eager for progress in these two
days, and to get continuing negotiations for 40 days. Ambassador Li-
nowitz has proposed Washington; Prime Minister Begin prefers hold-
ing them in the Middle East. We would be happy to host them. Prime
Minister Begin says that there are a number of cabinet members—such
as Khalil—who have other duties. Therefore, Prime Minister Begin says
that we should split the talks with 20 days each in Israel and Egypt.
Prime Minister Begin said that he is deeply grateful for the Presi-
dent’s invitation to come here, for these crucial talks—crucial for the
Middle East, Israel, Egypt, the U.S., and maybe half the world. The
President is preoccupied in all senses with the international situation.
The Iranian situation causes them (Israelis) great pain, as it does the
American families connected with the hostages, with the crisis going
into its sixth month now. Customs that had been sacrosanct for cen-
turies, not just during times of peace but also in wartime, are being
trampled underfoot. Israelis, more than other nations, feel with the
United States in their hearts. Israel has had experience with hostages,
who are killed if it does not submit. Only 10 days before Prime Minister
Begin came here, five children were taken hostage in the middle of the
night. Four were saved, but were wounded, and one soldier was killed
and 11 wounded, seven of them seriously. Israel paid with blood to try
saving the four children. Therefore the Israelis feel this situation
deeply. Given his time in Russia—which he did not love!—he should
know them. What would have happened if their embassy had been
seized? Russia would have marched to Tehran, with no concern for its
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
people held hostage. The American people cannot acquiesce in their
people’s being killed. Therefore, the President has been patient for 160
days and more. The world has been astonished by this patience. Even
Sadat—at Aswan—said that the U.S. had lost 50,000 lives in Vietnam.
Prime Minister Begin had had to tell Sadat that in the U.S. life is sacred.
He (Prime Minister Begin) did not think that direct action would help:
though Khomeini’s army is weak, and would be crushed, the hostages
would be dead. This patience honors America and the President. Is-
raelis have the same pain, and the choices are difficult. Prime Minister
Begin knows that it is a sacrifice for the President to see him (Prime
Minister Begin). Therefore he is grateful for the President’s taking time
to see Sadat and now the Israelis.
Second, there are the Soviets in Afghanistan. This is one of the
most serious events since World War II. Some people compare this in-
vasion with Czechoslovakia in 1968. There was a tragedy at the end of
its “spring,” when the Czechoslovak people had begun to breathe.
Warsaw Pact forces crushed them, and then there came the Brezhnev
Doctrine. Yugoslavia and Romania and others denied it. But anyway,
Afghanistan is not in the Soviet orbit. It could go through Baluchistan
to the Indian Ocean in a few days, and change the balance of forces in
the world. There is no force to stop them. Therefore this is one of the
greatest events, and it is difficult to handle. Declarations by the Presi-
dent, Secretary Vance, Dr. Brzezinski—they still found time to talk to
us (Prime Minister Begin and Sadat). Therefore he is grateful. And
therefore he will do his best to bring about practical results, and has
come here with concrete proposals to discuss. Israel agrees on intensi-
fied talks. He suggests holding them in the Middle East for 40 days.
This is not a deadline, it is not a target date, as was suggested at Camp
David and Israel did not accept. It had said we need to be careful, and
therefore accepted, on his amendment, that the two countries pledged
with good faith to go for the goal of finishing in one year. Then elec-
tions can be held for the Self-Governing Authority as expeditiously as
in candor, maybe we will have to continue after May 26. It will be no
tragedy. But he and the other Israelis would like to meet the goal. Let’s
have intensive talks. As at Camp David, we can work every day and
even day and night. There are 40 days, and they should be divided 20
the Warsaw Pact’s invasion of Czechoslovakia the previous August, as a necessary move
to prevent capitalist encroachment on the socialist camp. This principle, by extension de-
signed to apply to any similar military interventions in the future, was informally known
as the Brezhnev Doctrine.
and 20 between Alexandria and Tel Aviv. This will place the talks near
the governments, and there is a need for consultations. Thank you for
inviting us to Washington. But communications are difficult. The So-
viet Union listens to all international calls, and cables are sometimes
slow. Minister Burg and Shamir—and the negotiating team—will need
to consult with the Israeli Cabinet, and with Prime Minister Begin, too.
We will need to do this quickly, and can send emissaries in 45 minutes,
to take decisions. This is his suggestion. He accepts the objective of
holding intensive talks. If questions are asked of the President, Sadat,
and himself, then they can talk by phone. We can see perhaps whether
we can reach the goal of 26 May. Israel wants to carry out autonomy, as
faithfully as the peace treaty—as Sadat said: “faithfully and with
honor.” For nine months, all the burden has fallen on the Israelis’
shoulders—land, the removal of the flag. They don’t regret it. They
gave back the Alma oil field, and now pay $650 million a year to Egypt
for oil; and next year it will be $800 million, as the price goes up. This is
equal to all of American aid. Israel spends 30% of its gross national
product on defense: there is no precedent for this. This (the oil) is a
burden on the Israeli economy, and is difficult. But they do it without
complaint; they did it for the sake of peace. The treaty has been carried
out scrupulously, and they will with the first (sic) part of Camp
David—autonomy. If we carry the negotiations forward, he hopes we
can succeed. As at Camp David, three months were provided to com-
plete the treaty, but they kept at it for three months more. It was a pity,
but what tragedy was there? In March 1979, at the treaty signing here,
all were happy, those were great happy days. He hopes that more will
come with effort.
Thank you for inviting us. We shall do our best and try to meet the
goal. There will be intense daily negotiations in Alexandria and Tel
Aviv. Let us try—we may succeed.
Ambassador Linowitz asked whether Prime Minister Begin under-
stood that we had proposed holding the talks here for one week, and
then going to the Middle East. The U.S. feels the need for 8–10 hours of
negotiations every day. We can’t do it there. It will be tough if Khalil is
in Egypt—he could give one or two hours at most at a time because of
his other responsibilities, as is also true of Ministers Burg and Shamir.
He (Ambassador Linowitz) thought that only 2 or 3 people from each
side would come here.
Prime Minister Begin said that his answer is “no.” He understands
the idea of meeting in Washington. Ambassador Linowitz’s remarks do
not matter. If Khalil were here, he would have to go home after a day or
two. It would not be serious if we have to extend the negotiations a day
or two. Let’s decide to start the day after tomorrow, or next week, in Al-
exandria and Tel Aviv. There are lots of people in the Israeli delega-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tion—ten or twelve—like Egypt. Let’s do it a simple way: with the
teams there, and only 45 minutes to be on the spot.
The President said that he had no objection. But Sadat favors having
the first week in the United States. We can ask Sadat (about Prime Min-
ister Begin’s suggestion), or Prime Minister Begin can do so through the
Israeli Embassy in Cairo. We can find this out today.
Prime Minister Begin agreed.
The President asked Secretary Vance to ask Sadat if Prime Minister
Begin’s proposal is all right.
Secretary Vance agreed.
The President said that there are some key issues, which Prime Min-
ister Begin had described to him. They are controversial in some in-
stances. Prime Minister Begin is talking from an Israeli paper. Israel is
inclined to see the Self-Governing Authority as an administrative
council—and no more—as a cabinet, with one person for each function
to be performed. Sadat sees a much broader approach, with several
hundred members: 200, he (the President) thinks. His response to both
leaders is that the delineation of authority and responsibilities is more
important than how they are identified. Ambassador Linowitz has lan-
guage, so the group will not have allocated to it legislative authority.
The idea of legislative, executive, and judicial would make (the SGA)
like a nation. We agree with Israel that there should be no nation, or in
effect an independent government. It will be difficult how to ascribe to
the group some powers and responsibilities. Egypt wants it to have
more members. The number is arbitrary. We suggest 40, elected in a
free process. Obviously there are difficulties: e.g. settlements on the
West Bank and Gaza and the Israelis living there. The U.S. under-
standing, under the Camp David Accords, is that when the Self-
Governing Authority is formed, then the Israeli military government
will withdraw and the Self-Governing Authority will have broad re-
sponsibilities. Israeli security is a special subject; the Camp David Ac-
cords guarantee Israel’s security. A difference of opinion was inevitable
in defining that security relationship. We have interpreted this, in the
past, as covered in the “designated security locations,” with strong po-
lice forces under the aegis of the Self-Governing Authority. Prime Min-
ister Begin goes to subversion and violence, which can again lead to ter-
rorist acts. This is a broader scope than Egypt has in mind. There is a
dispute on who, how, and in what circumstances Israelis can live in the
West Bank and Gaza. The right to settle; the official nature of the settle-
ments; and Israeli government financial support—all these will be well
discussed in the future. The U.S. positions are well known. He is trying
to get this right. Would Prime Minister Begin like to comment?

Prime Minister Begin said that he will read his proposals. (See at-
tachment). Some of them are open-ended. It is not correct that they are
agreed, for the heads of agreement, but they are proposals. The first is
about the Self-Governing Authority and its essence of government.
First is what was at Camp David, and a number of proposals which he
will read: “1) The self-governing authority of the Arab inhabitants in
Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district, will be an Administrative Council
freely elected by the aforementioned inhabitants.” This makes clear
that it is an administrative council. What it is based upon is at page 22
of the State Department book on Camp David, at point A/1/(c). Thus
the only establishment is of an Administrative Council. If it were not
so, the words “administrative council” would not be in parentheses.
Therefore, how should it be interpreted where the words “self-
governing authority” appear elsewhere? It was clear, when the Presi-
dent talked at Camp David with Barak and el-Baz—who are good
lawyers. The suggestion was made by Barak in the President’s pres-
ence. Barak says that everywhere the reference is to an administrative
council. This is in the minutes, to which we can refer. Therefore, now at
the moment of considering the most basic issues, there is a need to state
what the self-governing authority is. Israel says it is an administrative
council, freely elected. Then there is the number. In an Egyptian docu-
utive of 11 members. Therefore, that clearly is legislative, and with a ju-
diciary. According to Montesquieu, this would be a Palestinian state in
all but name. It is a division of power (which exists here in the U.S., but
not in Britain: Montesquieu was wrong about that).
Minister Kubersky said 1762.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel does not want a Palestinian
state, nor does the President or Sadat. But it would be that in fact. Am-
bassador Linowitz says that Egypt does not stand by its document. He
(Prime Minister Begin) has not heard from them that they have with-
drawn it, and would like to hear it. It is unacceptable, and contrary to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Camp David. Camp David provided for no legislative council and no
judiciary. The President will bear him out. Secretary Vance will bear
out that there is to be “a” withdrawal of forces. The President accepted
it. “A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will take place and there will
be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into specified security
locations.” We weighed all the words at Camp David. If it (the SGA)
had legislative, executive, and judicial functions, that is a sovereign
state. Israel doesn’t want that. Therefore, it must not be that in fact or in
name. On numbers, Egypt wants 80–100. Ambassador Linowitz says
40, and Ambassador Lewis, too. These are arbitrary numbers. It is cas-
from reality. How can it be done? Therefore Israel suggests that the
number equal practical functions of the proposed Israeli model, with
powers and responsibilities. He will not take time on this now, or Min-
ister Kubersky can make a presentation.
The President asked if this model describes the powers and respon-
sibilities of the central government.
Prime Minister Begin said that it says there are 11 functions. If there
are 30, that is all right. If there are 15, that is all right. The number of
members depends on the number needed to administer, not to be a de-
bating society which one day will take us by surprise and declare itself
independent. There is no wisdom for Israel in using force to oppose
such a step. This would lead to world pressure on Israel. Israel does not
want that. If in the self-governing authority, the members only admin-
ister, then Israel will not interfere. He hopes it will not be double the
number of the U.S. cabinet, or of Israel’s 17. Does the U.S. have about 11
or 12?
Dr. Brzezinski asked if he could ask a question?
Prime Minister Begin said that he has one or two sentences more.
Therefore, Israel will not stand on the number, that is not important.
But the number of members must result, in the Administrative Council,
in corresponding to the number of functions. If that is 15, all right. If it is
an administrative council, that is proper, but not if it is a quasi-
parliament. If all it does is carry out its duties, then Israel will not
interfere.
Dr. Brzezinski referred to Prime Minister Begin’s reasoning. Is the
question that he (Prime Minister Begin) is concerned that the number of
members correspond to the number of functions, because he fears a
precedent in a larger number?
Prime Minister Begin agreed.
Dr. Brzezinski suggested that maybe it would be better to have a
larger number, since this would provide more political support and
therefore make the agreement more acceptable—which is in Israel’s in-
terest. Why does one function have to equal one person? Why not have

one person and two deputies? This would still be administrative, but it
gets a larger number. Israel gets the principle: 13 functions could lead
to 39 people.
Prime Minister Begin said: Professor Brzezinski, he (Prime Minister
Begin) appointed a deputy, and was told by parliament that this was a
waste of money. Minister Burg will answer in detail.
Minister Burg said that here the quantitative begins to be qualita-
tive. A large body has to be seen as a parliament. On this rationale, we
tity. And an individual would like to say who is his deputy. For ex-
ample, Secretary Vance would like to name his deputy. In the elections,
would there be 13 districts or 39 in Dr. Brzezinski’s model? Where
would they take place: 13? 39? Dr. Brzezinski says that there would be
deputies, but if they do not respond to the temperament of the prin-
ciples, that would not be good. If the 13 want deputies, they can ap-
point them.
Dr. Brzezinski suggested that there be 13 three-man districts.
Prime Minister Begin said that if there were 15, there would be 45.
What would be the result?
Dr. Brzezinski said that this would get Israel the principle, and they
(the Egyptians) would get what they want in the number.
Prime Minister Begin said that Ministers Burg and Shamir have no
deputies. There is one non-military deputy in the Defense Ministry,
and there was objection in the country, which saw it as a waste of
money. This way results in a quasi-parliament. Then there is the need
members. It would depend on the number of functions, to be decided
in negotiations, not in an arbitrary way.
Ambassador Linowitz said he would speak with candor. We believe
that if numbers are being used as a target, then Israel won’t get its ob-
jective. Israel wants no parliament with legislative powers. Israel is
worried that it would declare a Palestinian state. We will say—in any
form Israel wants—there can be no Palestinian state in this period. He
doesn’t care for calling the group an administrative council; and is not
happy in Prime Minister Begin’s definition of the Self-Governing Au-
thority as an administrative council.
Prime Minister Begin said that this is Camp David, not him.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we agree on the need to convey cer-
tain powers to the Self-Governing Authority. Is this consistent with
Prime Minister Begin’s definition?
Prime Minister Begin agreed.
Ambassador Linowitz said next, what powers should go to the
Self-Governing Authority? We will meet your concerns, and also do so
within Camp David. The Egyptian model is not worked on; it is out.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin said he had never heard this from Egypt.
Minister Burg said that Ambassador Linowitz is partly right. They
had talked about 1) transferred powers; 2) shared (like water) or coor-
dinated powers; and 3) residual powers (like internal and external se-
curity) for Israel. Israel agreed on this. But Khalil got cold feet, and said
that he can’t agree on residual powers for Israel. His need is to see them
all transferred. Israel says that what is security is Israel’s.
The President said that he is not sure about the definition of internal
security, but the rest is all right.
Minister Burg said that three categories . . .
The President said that with Ambassador Linowitz, Minister Burg
had used the term “reserved.”
Minister Burg agreed.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we are not very far apart. We pro-
posed that there be a list of transferred powers; and some for Israel, like
security and foreign affairs (if anybody has the latter). This we agree
on. And there should be a Continuing Committee to deal with a middle
group—like water, internal security, maybe land. Why is there a
problem? He thinks there is a misconception, from talks with Minister
Burg, about the Continuing Committee. The idea is that there should be
an agreed list of powers to go to the Self-Governing Authority. The
Self-Governing Authority would then be chosen by the residents of the
West Bank and Gaza. It would be understood that some powers—e.g.
Israel’s security—would go to Israel. The Continuing Committee
would be set up—and Egypt says that the U.S. should be in—and it
would take issues like water, economic arrangements, and maybe land.
It would reach decisions on a unanimous basis, and if there were no
agreement, then existing arrangements would continue.
Prime Minister Begin said he would come to the concept of the Con-
tinuing Committee—in the seven points9 (the U.S. had shared with Is-
rael)—later. The issue of greatest important is security. First, the
Self-Governing Authority is an administrative council—not within the
spirit but within the letter of Camp David. They had weighed every
word for 13 days and nights. Second, the number of members (of the
SGA) should be equal to the number of functions. The U.S. and Egypt
should think this over. Israel stands by it. It is in accord with the Camp
David Accords. On the seven points, he wants to quote one: “It is
agreed that Israel will have sole authority to exercise the power of ex-
ternal defense and foreign affairs.” This says “defense” instead of “se-
curity”—why? It is narrower. “Defense” refers to attack; and then Is-
rael will defend itself. “Security” is another problem. There are Israel’s

eastern and northern frontiers. There are 5000 tanks in Syria, including
T–72s. In Jordan, there are 400 Chieftains, among the best on earth.
Saudi Arabia has the F–16, etc. What is its army worth? But the ad-
vanced weapons are there. Iraq has 1000 tank carriers it got from West
Germany. It could move four armored divisions in 48 hours, whereas
before it took them a week, and they were wounded when they got
there (to the Syrian front). Israel is not frightened by all this. This comes
under “defense.” But there is also infiltration—as at Misgav’am. This is
“security.” Camp David always used “security.” “Defense” is not
there. Therefore, we must not change Camp David. Foreign affairs is
not a matter for this document. Of course there will be no foreign min-
ister or ambassadors. This is only a transitional period. After five years,
everyone can claim rights. This is five years long, and we should let it
work. Therefore, we should leave foreign affairs out.
There is his other point (in his 4-point proposal): internal and ex-
ternal security are linked, including anti-terrorism. This is Israel’s. It is
in accord with Camp David. At page 24 (of the booklet), point two says:
“All necessary measures will be taken and provisions made to assure
the security of Israel and its neighbors . . .” That includes “neighbors,”
too—why? With regard to Jordan, the PLO can do things to them, as it
did before Black September. He would not want Palestinians to go
from Israel to Jordan, to kill the King. This is the reasoning behind his
proposal. If “External and internal security, including the fight against
terrorism, conspiracy to commit acts of violence and subversion, will
be the responsibility of the Israeli authorities” is not the case, then in Is-
rael there will be permanent bloodshed. Lebanon will be a playground
in comparison. Last year, Israel captured thousands of detonators, and
hundreds of kilograms of explosives, including 1000 half-kilogram
bricks of delay-explosives. Therefore, Israel prevented their use. But it
might not always do so. If Israel does not have responsibilities, and the
police have it, they would not do it. Israel has had experience with po-
lice—as in Hebron where a student was left to bleed to death by the po-
lice until the IDF arrived. Therefore, Israel can’t rely on police. Then we
can assure peace for all time. There is no need for foreign affairs; “de-
fense” should not be substituted for “security”; and internal and ex-
ternal security should be combined.
The President said that he is deeply concerned. At Camp David,
they talked of “specified security locations,” and talked about between
three and twelve locations. If security is seen as anything that could
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
lead to a threat to peace, then Israel could say that it has to be on every
block in Jerico and Nablus. Thus he is concerned.
Prime Minister Begin said that with all respects, he did not refer to
the Army with any of this—as it is written. The President will know
how many there will be in Judea and Samaria and the Gaza District. He
will give numbers and numbers on a map. The rest will be redeployed
to specified security locations. (The President said: yes). He will give the
President a map. Secretary Vance knows that they changed “agreed” to
“specified.” This is a matter of Israelis’ lives. Therefore, it is not written
down, but Israel will show it on the map. When the Self-Governing Au-
thority is inaugurated—or even earlier—Israel will take some forces
out. A number will stay, and be redeployed to specified security loca-
tions as on the map. This is a question of the Army. The question of in-
cursions is wider. It is a daily problem. And there will not always be the
Army there to deal with it.
Secretary Vance said that in the call to the Camp David Accords, it
says: “A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will take place and there
will be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into specified se-
curity locations. The agreement will also include arrangements for as-
suring internal and external security and public order.” Therefore, this
is to be worked out between Israel, Egypt and Jordan—if it is in; it is not
specified how it is to be worked out.
Prime Minister Begin said that is a separate sentence—but he ac-
cepts Secretary Vance’s reading. Therefore, Israel will make proposals
(on external and internal security and public order), and agreement
will come. But not on the specified security locations.
The President and Secretary Vance agreed.
Prime Minister Begin said that arrangements on the rest will be
agreed. Now on the Continuing Committee: it is in Camp David. He
saw the U.S. words—in the seven points. In the Camp David Accords,
the Continuing Committee is only given one task—“to decide by agree-
ment on the modalities of admission of persons displaced from the
West Bank and Gaza in 1967 . . .”
The President asked Prime Minister Begin to read the rest.
Prime Minister Begin said: yes. “. . . together with necessary meas-
ures to prevent disruption and disorder.” Judea and Samaria are not
in it.
The President asked if that is all. Please read it.
Prime Minister Begin read: “Other matters of common concern may
also be dealt with by this committee.”

The President said that this is a broad charge.
Prime Minister Begin said that means during the transitional pe-
riod. That is the time to start it, when the Self-Governing Authority is
established and inaugurated. First, elections will be held. Second, there
will be the withdrawal of the military government. Third, then the Con-
tinuing Committee will be set up “during the transitional period.” It
could be after four years, but that would be a distortion. It should be in
the next few months. The question should be: what do we do about the
Continuing Committee now?
Ambassador Linowitz said that we want agreement on what will be
submitted for approval (of the Palestinians). Therefore, it can be set up
after inauguration of the Self-Governing Authority. Is this agreed?
Prime Minister Begin said certainly: it is written. He says this in the
President’s presence. Israel will not deviate from the Camp David Ac-
cords—they feel, however that it (the Continuing Committee) should
be at the proper time.
Ambassador Linowitz said that the agreement among the parties
calls for a Self-Governing Authority. It must be approved by the Pales-
tinian people. Through the agreement—therefore as part of it—once
the Self-Governing Authority is in being, there shall be a Continuing
Committee, and to it will be referred water, economic relations, maybe
land, for unanimous agreement.
Prime Minister Begin said that this is in “other matters.” It is agreed.
(There was then discussion among the Israeli delegation). We agree.
But we will not do it today (i.e. start the Continuing Committee). When
it is agreed.
Minister Burg clarified: when the Self-Governing Authority starts
functioning.
There are two things to try to keep up the momentum. First, here
there was a misunderstanding of the Continuing Committee’s func-
tions. It has been solved. Israel will abide by the agreement. Second is
the question when it should start working; that is only after the Self-
Governing Authority is set up.
The President said but we should delineate what it will do, and de-
cide that now.
Prime Minister Begin said it may. We should have wide discussions.
Minister Burg said we can get our people—maybe 3 or 4 of them—
today to work it out.
Prime Minister Begin said that his third point is that “Israeli citizens,
inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district will be under the ju-
risdiction of Israel.” It is clear that autonomy is for the Arabs.
The President asked if this included the settlements?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Linowitz suggested something like our Status of Forces
agreements.
Minister Burg said he had not heard of this idea.
Prime Minister Begin said that Minister Burg speaks Rococo style.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Status of Forces agreements apply to
our military people abroad, and mean that they are subject to our laws.
Minister Burg said that Israel’s settlers are citizens, not soldiers.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he knows that Israel wants the law to
apply to citizens, not property.
Prime Minister Begin said they will think it over. The Vice President
had said, and the President had said on European TV, that Israelis
have the right to live on the West Bank, though they differ on the ques-
tion of settlements. On an individual basis, they can’t send their people
to Jericho, though they have the right to live there (as Arabs live in Is-
rael). When Sadat came to Haifa, Sadat said that he saw Jews and
Arabs living together. If a man goes to Jericho and buys a house, he will
be killed by the PLO. Therefore, historically, Israelis have lived in
groups, with a fence. But at Misgav’am the Palestinians broke through.
This was a technical failure. Therefore, the settlements should be under
Israeli jurisdiction.
The President asked if this meant that, wherever an Israeli lives, Is-
rael has jurisdiction.
Prime Minister Begin said that this is true in Judea, Samaria, and the
Gaza district, not everywhere.
Minister Burg asked whether the President meant individuals or
settlements.
The President said both.
Prime Minister Begin said that this does not apply in the U.S.—a
person can become a citizen here after 5 years.
The President said he meant this.

Prime Minister Begin said that Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district
are different from the U.S. They have left the question of sovereignty
open for five years. Therefore, Israel has to carry out its obligations.
The President said that there is a difference between individuals’
living in Jericho, and their being financed by the government.
Minister Burg said that if someone went to an Arab village, and
buys a house, he does so as an individual. Many of his friends were
killed in 1948—including only 20 kilometers south of Jerusalem. There
are settlements there now. Surely these are under Israeli jurisdiction
and not under the Self-Governing Authority. Since they are there as a
group, surely this applies to Israeli settlements. There is a basic differ-
ence—Israel says that settlements are legal; he will not say what the
U.S. thinks! (laughter)
The President asked whether they intend, during the transition pe-
riod, to have military occupation and Israeli rule over the Palestinians
there.
Prime Minister Begin said that “military occupation” does not apply
to Judea and Samaria, although there is a military government. In prac-
tice, they have promised to withdraw the military government.
The President said: right.
Prime Minister Begin said that therefore there will not be a military
government. The Self-Governing Authority (Administrative Council)
will decide daily affairs.
The President said he did not want to talk semantics. He asked
whether the area of the West Bank and Gaza would be demilitarized.
Will Israel relinquish government control over them?
Prime Minister Begin said that one can’t say “demilitarized,” as at
Camp David, with the specified security locations.
The President asked: only those?
Prime Minister Begin said: yes. Israel must have them for security.
The President said that the government now for the West Bank is
the Israeli military government and civilian administration.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel will withdraw them.
The President asked whether it would be left to the Self-Governing
Authority.
Prime Minister Begin said: yes.
The President asked whether it would have authority and responsi-
bility adequate to replace the military government.
Prime Minister Begin said yes. What will be transferred should be a
solid completion (of the discussions). Other powers will be shared; and
others will be kept by Israel.
The President said therefore the issue is defining full “authority.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin said that that word (“authority”) is not in the
Camp David Accords.
The President said that if Israelis and settlements—which have gone
up rapidly under Prime Minister Begin’s government—are under the
jurisdiction of Israel, the percentage of land—10 to 20—is under Israeli
jurisdiction, therefore this is a subversion of the Camp David Accords.
This is a matter of how much land and water. Any settlement, under Is-
rael’s jurisdiction, is a subversion.
Minister Burg said that 20 per cent is too high.
The President asked if 15 per cent is better.
Minister Burg said it is much lower, primo, and secondo . . .
The President said he understands (what Minister Burg is saying).
Prime Minister Begin said that the President reads the Bible in
Spanish!
Minister Burg said that secondly, Jews and Israelis in the West Bank
and Gaza are about 2 per cent of the Arab population. Therefore, this is
not as important as the President’s understanding.
The President said: yes.
Minister Burg said that there is a difference between individuals
and settlements, because all governments since 1967 . . . and he has
been in almost all of them . . .
Prime Minister Begin said: 31 years in the government!
Minister Burg said . . . all say that these are in Israel’s jurisdiction,
not any other. Therefore, there are two points: first, the percentage of
inhabitants, and second, individuals vs. settlements.
The President said he understands. Will they apply Israeli jurisdic-
tion to all Jewish settlements and citizens?
Minister Burg said that if a citizen goes to Ramallah, there is no Is-
raeli jurisdiction there.
Ambassador Lewis said that there are no individuals on the West
Bank; only settlers.
Prime Minister Begin said that autonomy is for the Arab inhabi-
tants. Israelis do not need it: they are citizens of Israel.
The President said that he is concerned. Israelis have the right to live
anywhere—Arabs, too. If Israel says that, wherever Israelis live, Israel
has jurisdiction, therefore this will subvert (the agreement) on Israel’s
withdrawal. Therefore if there is Israeli authority wherever they live,
all of the West Bank is involved.
Prime Minister Begin said that he had told the President why they
can’t settle individuals: for security, there must be groups. They will be
in a limited number of places, and not be subject to the Self-Governing
Authority’s jurisdiction over them.

358.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Second Meeting with Israeli Prime Minister
Menachem Begin
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President
Ambassador Samuel Lewis, United States Ambassador to Israel
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Ambassador James Leonard, Deputy Negotiator for the Middle East Autonomy
Negotiations
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Prime Minister Menachem Begin
Yitzhak Shamir, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Dr. Yosef Burg, Minister of Interior
Ambassador Ephraim Evron, Ambassador of Israel to the United States
Chaim Kubersky, Director General, Ministry of Interior
Jacob Nehushtan, Minister, Embassy of Israel
Yehiel Kadishai, Director, Prime Minister’s Bureau
Brigadier General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Dan Pattir, Public Affairs Adviser to the Prime Minister
Elyakim Rubinstein, Assistant Director General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Professor Ruth Lapidot, Legal Adviser to Foreign Ministry
Gilad Stern, Assistant to the Minister of Interior
privately on the Rose Garden Terrace and in the Oval Office. They
then joined the others in the Cabinet Room).
The Vice President said that Prime Minister Begin looks handsome.
Prime Minister Begin said: “handsome I was not born!” (laughter)
The President said that he understands that the two delegations had
a discussion before the meeting on the Continuing Committee. He
asked Ambassador Linowitz if that were correct.
Ambassador Linowitz said: yes sir.
The President asked Minister Burg if he would care to comment on
the meeting.
Minister Burg said he had not been there.
The President called on Ambassador Linowitz.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we had framed this paragraph (see
attachment) to codify the sense of the group on the Continuing Com-
mittee. We should read it, and then think about it. (He then read the at-
tached statement).
Minister Kubersky said that this statement raised several questions.
Maybe we should write it in general terms, and give examples. Good
examples are water and economic cooperation; and Ambassador Li-
nowitz agrees. His question is mainly on the last sentence: what will
happen until there is agreement? When the Self-Governing Authority
is elected and established in office, some spheres may not be defined—
according to the original draft: “Pending agreement, existing condi-
tions will continue.” What does “existing conditions” mean? It needs
definition.
The President asked: where?
Minister Kubersky said it was now out (of the draft, where it had
been the final sentence of the original U.S. draft).
Prime Minister Begin asked whether two deletions had been agreed
upon.
Minister Kubersky said yes. But the problem of the (missing) last
sentence is still a problem, along with “source of authority” and re-
sidual powers. Ambassador Linowitz had written: “Pending agree-
ment, existing conditions will continue.” And the Continuing Com-
mittee may change its character. According to Camp David, the
Continuing Committee is for discussions, not operations.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we have not described that it would
“have certain authority.” If there is understanding on the source of au-
thority and residual powers, maybe it would be easier.
The President said that to have a concept, in general terms, is all
right now. He can’t speak for Egypt. The powers to be transferred to the
Self-Governing Authority and retained for Israel are not in (this paper);

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
maybe other issues can be in the Continuing Committee. It could in a
few months determine water rights. It will give flexibility for progress
during the next 40 days, to determine the division of powers.
Minister Burg said that Prime Minister Begin had not seen this
paper.
Prime Minister Begin said that he will study it.
Minister Burg asked if the understanding is that the question here
has to be talked over with the Egyptians.
The President said that he guesses it will be all right. He has not
seen the language.
Minister Burg asked if they could talk more about it.
The President agreed.
Minister Burg said “primo” and then “excuse me.”
Prime Minister Begin said Minister Burg should skip that and just
say “second.”
Minister Burg said that residual categories are not mentioned (in
the paper)! Where are they? There are three categories: those to be
transferred—in principle; those to be shared and coordinated—here it
says shared; and residual—where are they? He asked to be allowed to
get this out of his system. What about the residual categories? He per-
sonally likes not to postpone deciding on economic cooperation. It is a
legal question, and should be discussed now—not delayed. This is a
small country, and we should do this before (the agreement). The idea
of a veto is no good. Eighteenth-century Polish governments fell be-
cause of the veto, under Prime Minister Bishinsky (?).
Prime Minister Begin said that one man disagreed, and the whole
parliament went home. Professor Brzezinski remembers!
Dr. Brzezinski said that is why the Prime Minister and he are both
here! (laughter)
Minister Burg said that there were three partitions of Poland.
Therefore, what if there is too much of a veto?
The President asked: a what?
Minister Burg said: a veto. It needs to be clarified. In between, what
happens if the military goes out before the civilians are ready. It should
be there on the same date, if a vacuum is to be avoided. If the veto is
added, there will be a stronger problem.
Minister Kubersky said that because of practical problems of daily
life, water and other services must be supplied. When the military gov-
ernment is withdrawn, the civilian administration would continue to
operate until there is agreement. When there is agreement, there will be
a transfer. Would there be a vacuum? A veto on political problems is
bad enough; but where it applies to the supply of services, the veto can
cause paralysis.
Ambassador Linowitz said that, first, residual categories are not here
(in the paper) and were not intended to be here. What the Continuing
Committee would do is deal with issues not resolved before the overall
agreement is finished. It would not deal with residual powers. Second,
with regard to economic cooperation and similar issues, there would be
three steps: try to get full agreement; if not, agree on principles and
work in as much detail as possible; and if we can’t gain even principles,
then use the Continuing Committee. Third, Camp David says that the
military government and the civilian administration go out at the same
time. Israel’s proposal is not in Camp David, and there could be a
problem with Egypt.
Minister Burg said that if we cannot get to our target—but try to do
so—then the Continuing Committee would become an incentive not to
solve problems.
Ambassador Linowitz said that it would help to introduce this para-
graph to indicate a joint commitment—to the heads of agreement, to
May 26, and to accelerate the talks to get as much as possible.
Prime Minister Begin asked if he could have the floor.
The President said: “you have it.”
Prime Minister Begin said that he has read the paper two or three
times, and understands it. Therefore he will make some remarks, and
think aloud. They will need to take the paper home to study it for to-
morrow. In the meantime: first, today and tomorrow we need to agree
on certain principles submitted by Israel this morning. He would like to
know if they are agreed, to be suggested to Egypt for its consideration.
He proposes that we not just agree on just this (U.S. paper), and leave
out the most basic problems—such as the question of the Administra-
tive Council and the Self-Governing Authority. If we can agree that
the Self-Governing Authority is an administrative council, then we
can come to the Continuing Committee. We should not just announce
the Continuing Committee and accelerated negotiations: that will not
suffice.
The President agreed that there should not be just this (i.e. the Con-
tinuing Committee).
Prime Minister Begin said that we need agreement on a set of points.
The President agreed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin said that second, the average reader will think
we have agreed to abolish the Continuing Committee.
The President asked why.
Prime Minister Begin said that since Camp David originally says
that it will deal with the 1967 displaced persons.
President Carter said he believes that the last sentence includes that.
This is not a departure from Camp David.
Prime Minister Begin asked if it were clear.
The President said yes.
Prime Minister Begin said that at Camp David, Israel said they
would accept a reasonable number of persons.
The President said 100,000!
Prime Minister Begin said several tens of thousands. On zeros, he
never exaggerates. (laughter)
The President said: Okay, several tens of thousands.
Prime Minister Begin said that he will think it over. There are ab-
sorption problems; but he will think it over. It is a human problem. He
would like to do it (expand the Continuing Committee?), but not make
it look as though we are abolishing the Continuing Committee’s main
task of dealing with the displaced people of 1967. On the Continuing
Committee, there are two possibilities: to be very specific or put it in
general terms. He prefers the latter, since it is not in existence yet. Oth-
erwise, it would be putting the cart before the horse: “economic”; “de-
tailed negotiations”; “water.” It would be better to agree on: “matters of
common concern and cooperation”—that’s enough—“are referred to
the Continuing Committee.” Maybe we can put further details in abey-
ance for a while. A partial detailing, with others left out, would leave
the impression that our work is not finished. “Matters of common con-
cern” is good. “Coordination will be required, etc.” First of all, we have
to reside on basic principles, not on this paper. The United States would
be in the Continuing Committee (according to the U.S. paper): is this a
change of Camp David?
The President said no.
Prime Minister Begin said: really?
The President said: well, go ahead and talk.
Prime Minister Begin said that he does not see it in the Camp David
agreement. If it is agreed, then all right. The question is, why is the U.S.
needed in this Continuing Committee? The U.S. is not in all com-
mittees, is it?
Minister Kubersky said that in the negotiations, the U.S. is in all
committees. It is a full partner.
Prime Minister Begin asked: in all committees?

The President said: all.
Prime Minister Begin said that that is a serious answer. Then we
don’t need the line (in the paper referring to U.S. membership). We do
not need to single it out. We should just agree that the U.S. will take
part, as on all committees. Otherwise, it will seem as though we are
changing Camp David. It (the reference) is not needed. Therefore, we
should not write it down, but agree that the U.S. representative or dele-
gate will be in when the Continuing Committee is set up. He would like
to consult on the U.S. paper, and reply definitely tomorrow. (The Israeli
delegates conferred among themselves).
Minister Burg said he would like to strengthen the last point. In his
Weltanshauung, he has no ideological homeland but the West—that is
the United States—ideologically or philosophically. The Prime Min-
ister has said two things: Here it is written Egypt, Jordan, and the Self-
Governing Authority. To add that the U.S. would be in would mean
changing a paragraph of Camp David. Sometimes that is a little bit bad.
Other changes would be possible. People would say: why were you not
against this change? It is a matter of formulation. Second, the U.S., as a
full partner, would also here become involved in administration in a
certain sense. If the U.S. is interested in this, Israel would love and like
it to do it. But does the U.S. need this? (laughter) These are two strong
points: first, the change in formulation; and second, the U.S. will take a
role leading to its being a full partner. If the U.S. were involved in the
practicalities, therefore administratively there would be a “superau-
thority” on the Self-Governing Authority. Please think this over, as Is-
rael will do.
Professor Lapidot said that Article 3 of Camp David says: “. . . repre-
sentatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and the self-governing authority will
constitute a continuing committee . . .” This expresses who should be-
long. To add the United States, we would need to amend Camp David.
The President asked Ambassador Linowitz to describe the Egyptian
position. The U.S. is not asking gratuitously to inject the United States
into the Continuing Committee. This means added problems. Ac-
cording to the Associated Principles, paragraph 5, the United States is
in: “The United States shall be invited to participate in the talks on
matters related to the modalities of the implementation of the agree-
ments and working out the timetable for the carrying out of the obliga-
tions of the parties.”
Prime Minister Begin asked where this is found.
The President said in point C–5.
Secretary Vance said: on page 26.
The President said that if Egypt agrees that the U.S. will not serve,
this is fine with us.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin said that they can do without it (i.e. a formal
reference), and agree on it . . . in general terms, we need guidelines.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we want to deal with difficult
problems. We are at a critical time, and near agreement. But the big
issues have not been dealt with effectively. We can agree that there will
be no agreement. The point now is that we have a formula with which
Egypt can agree. The U.S. urges Israel to think seriously on what we
can try to do with the Continuing Committee. If we can’t agree on prin-
ciples or details, they can go to the Continuing Committee. Israel’s
rights would be preserved in the interim; Israel should have no concern
for it. Egypt proposed that the United States be in the Continuing Com-
mittee. This provides an added dimension to its discussions. It would
be useful to Israel and to Egypt that the U.S. would be closely involved.
The U.S. is not pressing; but Egypt wants the U.S. in badly. If Israel
does not want that, it should tell Egypt.
The President said that this is the role the U.S. would play. Where
issues are not resolved, the Continuing Committee could function for a
while, and maybe resolve issues with experience. Exclusion of the U.S.
is what Egypt is trying to avoid. If Israel feels that on unresolved
issues—economic relations, water—if Israel and Egypt and the Pales-
tinians want to do this without the U.S., then Israel should decide.
Egypt wants to get us past May 26th, before there is an impression of
failure. The Continuing Committee, with the U.S., goes ahead and
works as the Self-Governing Authority is set up.
Minister Burg said that the U.S. is a full partner. This Continuing
Committee is set up after the elections and the setting up of the Self-
Governing Authority. This is not the answer for May 27th.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Egypt proposed that the U.S. be a
member of the Continuing Committee.
The President said that this is so that the Continuing Committee can
go on working on issues that are not resolved.
Minister Burg said that the Continuing Committee is for after the
inauguration and the elections. Is something further needed for after
May 26th?
The President said he thinks so.
Prime Minister Begin said: maybe yes or no.
The President said that if all issues are resolved, then the Self-
Governing Authority can deal with water, etc. Security for Israel, there-
fore, is not concerned here, except for definitions. All he wants is that
there be no failure on the 26th. The negotiating group can continue
under Camp David.
Minister Kubersky said that it (the Continuing Committee) cannot
be established on May 27th.

The President said that yes, it can.
Minister Kubersky said that there is an interval after May 27th.
The President disagreed. It can start at the same time as the inaugu-
ration of the Self-Governing Authority.
Minister Kubersky said this could take many months. We (i.e. the
autonomy talks) can continue to exist.
The President agreed. He cannot speak for Sadat, but he guesses
that, in 40 days, if there is obvious progress and good faith, then prob-
ably—he doesn’t know, but he hopes so—Sadat will let us continue as
we are now. When the Self-Governing Authority is set up, then issues
can go to the Continuing Committee and be resolved.
Prime Minister Begin said that the problem of international commu-
nications is a serious problem. There are problems of taxation and
customs. Israel wants an economic entity, with a free movement of
goods—and there are other problems, they can make a list. Therefore,
this (reference) should be expressed in general terms: “Matters of
common concerned shall be . . .” They would like to consult tomorrow,
and submit proposals. The word “augmented” creates certain impres-
sions. It is a change. They don’t want Egypt to say it is a change, and
therefore why not others? In practice, this may be a dangerous prece-
dent. We need to keep to the Agreement. For two weeks at Camp
David, it was hard to get an agreement.
The President said that he hopes before Wednesday6 afternoon,
Minister Burg and others can talk about powers and responsibilities.
Minister Burg said there is too much.
The President asked if it was 20 areas? . . . And Israel should say
which it would give, which it wishes to retain, and others—on which
we would either say we failed or put into the Continuing Committee.
Therefore, this list will undoubtedly be different from what Egypt de-
cides. This is for the 40 days of negotiations.
Prime Minister Begin said that, on the categories, Ambassador Li-
nowitz had suggested them, and so they were approved: those for com-
plete transfer; those that are shared; and those that are reserved. This
should be accepted. Does Ambassador Linowitz have comments on the
Israeli paper?
Ambassador Linowitz said that the negotiators had agreed on 18
powers and responsibilities. This paragraph will not be put in the
agreement for 30 or 40 days. The Palestinians will want to ask questions
about land, water, economic relations—so it will help to have them in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
this document. He has two questions. First, if we use these as illustra-
tions—“for example”—will this be all right?
Prime Minister Begin said he would think it over, and doesn’t reject
the idea on the spot.
Ambassador Linowitz said that, speaking as one lawyer to another,
he is making progress. Second, if Israel would feel better, regarding the
U.S. role, instead a Continuing Committee would be set up with the
U.S. named to it.
Prime Minister Begin said no, this is not from the Camp David Ac-
cords: “During the transitional period, representatives of Egypt, Israel,
Jordan, and the self-governing authority will constitute a continuing
committee . . .” Very good; so it is written. There is the inauguration,
then the Self-Governing Authority starts. Then there is the Continuing
Committee.
The President said that Camp David doesn’t say that. It says in the
transitional period: “. . . will constitute a continuing committee . . .” It
doesn’t say wait five days—that is in the entire period: as soon as the
Self-Governing Authority is set up.
Prime Minister Begin said that it says: “during.”
The President said that it does not say: “will be established.”
Prime Minister Begin said: during the transitional period—after the
Self-Governing Authority is inaugurated.
The President said that he reads English! It doesn’t need to be set
up.
Prime Minister Begin said: not the very day the Self-Governing Au-
thority, the very day it is inaugurated. It says “During the transitional
The President said that in Hebrew he doesn’t know, but in English
. . . If it says “will be constituted,” yes. But it says “will constitute.”
Minister Burg said: but not before.
The President and Secretary Vance agreed.
Minister Burg quoted: “The United States shall be invited to partici-
pate in the talks on matters related to the modalities of the implementa-
tion of the agreements and working out the timetable for the carrying
out of the obligations of the parties.”
Prime Minister Begin said that they would think it over.
The President asked Ambassador Linowitz when he would see a list
of authorities.
Prime Minister Begin asked whether Minister Kubersky could
speak.
The President said: please.

Minister Kubersky said that on January 16th, at Mena House, Israel
presented its model. In it, Israel delineated powers and responsibil-
ities, chairmen, divisions. It gave details on each of the divisions and
the details of sections. The Israeli model has three categories. First, they
described in the model all powers and responsibilities to be given to the
Administrative Council—in Israel’s opinion, all the elements needed
for full autonomy. They did a comparative study with the military gov-
ernment and the civilian administration. They took the powers in cate-
gory number 1, which cover more than 80% of those of the military and
civilian government—there is a difference between military gov-
ernment and autonomy, under the Administrative Council. The second
category includes powers and responsibilities of shared powers.
Prime Minister Begin asked what are the 18 powers?
Minister Kubersky said that they are 80%. He will tell what they are
later.
Prime Minister Begin said that the list is important.
Minister Kubersky said that in the third category are the residual
powers retained by Israel. This draft, this proposed model, is under
Camp David. He asked Egypt to tell if Israel had forgotten something.
Now for the details: the Administrative Council would have 11
members, including a chairman and 10 members. Each would be the
head of a division. Therefore, they suggest general powers. They
should have the power to issue regulations, set up a budget, issue con-
tracts, sue and be sued, and to employ staff. The Administrative
Council can delegate to heads of divisions. The divisions can function
within the framework of the Council. (He then listed some of the
powers of the following divisions: agriculture, health, relations (?),
labor and welfare, finance, transport, education and culture, adminis-
tration of justice, local affairs). Each division would be managed by a
director general, with special assistants and helpers. The chairman will
coordinate, and have non-elected functionaries, in statistics, civil ser-
vice, publicity, and archives. There would also be legal officers, an om-
budsman, and others. There would also be two zonal representatives,
who would work with Israeli authorities on an ongoing basis. This rep-
resents responsibilities for coordination.
This is the Israeli model, which was rejected totally by Egypt. Am-
bassador Leonard said that he welcomed the Israeli model, and said
that it seemed to mark the beginning of a new phase of the negotiations.
The U.S. warmly welcomed it. No details were discussed after this, and
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the Egyptian model was submitted. Ambassador Linowitz was there at
the Accadia (Hotel), where Israel stated the categories and prepared a
listing. Israel worked and Egypt rejected it. There was no agreement on
details, but on one point—with U.S. help—in technical planning. This is
a meaningful agreement. This understanding could be the umbrella for
many subjects. Israel said shared; Egypt said coordinated. They need to
agree on two levels: planning and implementation. They have not
agreed yet, even on the agreed list. The Israeli approach consists of
three categories . . . there is understanding on many functions, a re-
markable number. Ambassador Linowitz remembers. It was done ad
referendum.
Prime Minister Begin said: thank you.
The President asked Ambassador Linowitz to explain the difference
between the Israeli and Egyptian positions.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Egypt did not like the Israeli presen-
tation. It told the Self-Governing Authority how to run itself. There was
a number of asterisks on the transferred powers, which Egypt said took
away too much. This was the heart of the Egyptian intemperate rejec-
tion. The Egyptian proposal rests on an assumption: there should be
three areas—legislative, executive, and judicial. This went beyond
Camp David. Israel—showing admirable restraint—did not reject the
Egyptian model, but merely said that it was “totally unacceptable!”
Minister Burg asked to speak one sentence. Israel said that the areas
to be transferred were quite a lot: more than for municipalities.
The President agreed.
Minister Burg said it was the majority of powers.
Minister Kubersky said that when Israel made its presentation, they
said that it did not have to be taken per se. They took into account the
care needed when negotiating. Therefore, there are many asterisks.
Ambassador Leonard said 45.
Professor Lapidot said: 48!
Minister Kubersky said that the asterisks are not part of the Bible.
Many are for negotiations, and were put in automatically.
The President said they had done so! In addition to “security,” they
had not defined what else they would retain.
Ambassador Linowitz said that there are three additional areas: in-
ternational commerce, security, foreign affairs, and settlements.
(A pause in the conversation followed).
Prime Minister Begin said that his impression is that the U.S. would
like Israel’s answer to tell the Egyptians. They (the Israeli delegation)
would like the U.S. reply to their paper. Or they could remain in Wash-

ington. They were planning to go directly from Washington to home at
noon on Thursday.
Minister Kubersky said it is in the afternoon.
Prime Minister Begin said that if the President wants a 24-hour
postponement . . .
The President said that the U.S. would respond tomorrow, or later if
need be. He has some questions for tomorrow.
Prime Minister Begin said: yes sir.
The President said that one concerns Sadat’s being for Gaza-first, if
we need an alternative to a Self-Governing Authority for all the terri-
tories. Sadat wants it for Gaza and the West Bank, but Gaza-first as a
fall back.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel’s position has been misunder-
stood. At Aswan, Sadat mentioned Gaza-first. In their third talk he
(Prime Minister Begin) had asked Sadat whether he meant first dealing
with and implementing an agreement there first. Sadat had replied: no,
that he wanted agreement on both the West Bank and Gaza and then to
apply it in Gaza-first. So there was no such proposal as Gaza-first. He
had asked Sadat. Sadat said that first there must be a genuine agree-
ment. Thus there is no Gaza-first in this sense.
The President suggested that they go on, since there are difficult
issues to face, and he would like to have alternatives under consider-
ation. He prefers—and Prime Minister Begin and Sadat do, too—that
the Self-Governing Authority be freely elected on the West Bank and
Gaza simultaneously. If not, then we should keep open our options on
Gaza-first. There is a problem, important to Prime Minister Begin, of
Jordanian citizens in East Jerusalem, regarding the vote. This is crucial
for Egypt. How can they vote in Jordan and not on the West Bank? If
there is no agreement on this issue, then it could be left open with im-
plementation in Gaza-first. They don’t need to vote, since Gazans are
not Jordanian citizens.
Prime Minister Begin said that no, we should not leave this question
open. He told Sadat at Aswan about a traditional story from the Middle
Ages. A learned man served a prince. The prince asked the learned man
to convert to Christianity, and he would make the man very great. The
man refused. The prince pressed him. Finally, he said that he would
give the man three days to think about it. The man went home and
thought: what did I say? I need time to think? I have denied my faith in
God. And he cursed himself. The prince cut off his legs. This is fact, not
legend. Before he died, the man wrote the most famous prayer for Yom
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Kippur—because of those three days. He (Prime Minister Begin) has
said this to Sadat and to the President, too. He will not wait. He will an-
swer now. Sadat said that his was not a proposal, it was just something
to think about. Ambassador Linowitz said to think about a flag (over Je-
rusalem Holy places). To Sadat he (Prime Minister Begin) had said:
does this mean sovereignty? And Sadat had said: yes and no. He had
said to Sadat: Arab sovereignty and an undivided Jerusalem is a contra-
diction in terms. Never do Jordanian citizens cast votes in Jordan.
The President asked if this were right. Don’t they?
Professor Lapidot said there hadn’t been any elections in 13 years.
Prime Minister Begin said that there is a difference on Jerusalem. Is-
rael put its law on Jerusalem in toto—but not on Judea, Samaria, and the
Gaza district. Israel is sovereign in toto. Therefore, it can’t be said that
they vote for the Jordanian government. Elections were postponed.
The President asked: does that therefore mean no elections?
Prime Minister Begin answered: yes, there would be elections; but
the President had asked about Jerusalem. In Jerusalem there are Judean
citizens. Some opted for Israeli citizenship. They have 80–90,000 Jews in
Israel who are not citizens, and they do not vote for the Knesset. To
have a vote in Jerusalem for the Arab residents: this is out of the ques-
tion. It is absolutely impossible. It means repartition.
The President asked about absentee voting.
Prime Minister Begin said that Ambassador Linowitz had brought
that idea up. But what change does that make? Israel says that if the in-
habitants in Jerusalem vote for the Administrative Council, then this is
repartition, since there would be two jurisdictions, since the Arabs
would be under the Administrative Council and the Jews would be
under Israel. So he had said at Camp David. He never misled anyone.
The President said he knows.
Prime Minister Begin said that he and Sadat had written separate
letters about it. There should be no illusions; there can be no repartition
and no vote. The city cannot be divided.
The President said he sees how firmly Prime Minister Begin feels
about it. If an American lives in either West or East Jerusalem, he can
vote in the United States. This does not encroach on sovereignty. His
judgment is that the entire prospect of elections on the West Bank
would be destroyed. There can be no elections if we take away the fran-
chise from these people who happen to live there.
Minister Burg said he would respond not in sentiment, although Je-
rusalem is in the Bible more than 660 times, and is in the Koran not
once. He will speak as a statesman. The logic is this: a U.S. citizen in Je-
rusalem can vote for the President of the United States, because he
wants to be ruled by the President here. A citizen in Jerusalem can vote

in municipal elections, which, in Israel, is independent from citizen-
ship—one just has to live there. But a citizen, to vote for an authority
with no authority over him (is different). The Self-Governing Authority
has no say in East Jerusalem. So they can’t vote for it.
The President said that he can understand what Minister Burg is
saying, but does not see the logic. Can Israeli settlers on the West Bank
vote for the Knesset? There is an exact parallel here. Minister Burg says
that Israelis have the right to live there, and Arabs to live . . .
Minister Burg said that the Self-Governing Authority gives no
citizenship.
The President said that they can vote in Jordan.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel had never said so.
Minister Burg said that that had never been excluded.
Prime Minister Begin said: thank you! If they have the right to vote
for the Jordanian parliament, why not the Administrative Council?
Minister Burg said he disagreed.
Prime Minister Begin said: all right, but Minister Burg had quoted a
thesis, and he (Prime Minister Begin) is a lawyer. (He continued): Mr.
President, there is a great principle here. If Jerusalem residents do not
vote, he (the President) is saying that this would destroy the elections.
The President said it was accurate.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel is being blamed. Why blame
this on them? No one in Israel would agree to such an event. Only the
Communists—6 out of 120 Knesset members—would agree. There is
complete agreement. Therefore, how can it be changed. Israelis speak
of this city. The Government of National Unity said that Israeli law
should be applied to Judea and Samaria. It did not accept it. But it did—
and the opposition led on this—apply Israeli law to Jerusalem. It is a
city; it became one. When Jordan was there, Israelis could not pray at
the Western Wall. Now it must be undivided.
The President agreed.
Prime Minister Begin said that, therefore, people there can’t vote.
The President said that he hopes that Ambassador Linowitz and he
haven’t taken the vote away in Jordan away from people of East Jeru-
salem! He thinks it would be a waste of time to hold elections; then
there must be an alternative means to set up the Self-Governing Au-
thority—some other procedure. He has some ideas. One he had sug-
gested in private to Prime Minister Begin, who said he didn’t like it.
Prime Minister Begin said he is speaking sincerely, and for all his
colleagues and all but 6 members of the Knesset: Jerusalem is the capi-
tal of Israel, and it is sovereign there, on the basis of the 1967 law.
Ambassador Linowitz said that they had talked at length about this
several times. If Prime Minister Begin is concerned about any sugges-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
tion for dividing Jerusalem, we should be able to draft something to
take care of that. But Prime Minister Begin seems to feel viscerally that
the right to vote leads to a divided Jerusalem.
Prime Minister Begin said: yes.
Ambassador Linowitz said he was sorry: he would like to assure
Prime Minister Begin.
Prime Minister Begin said that it is not a matter of assurances. What
could Israel want? What does it need? This is not religion or sentiment.
It is a fact. Jerusalem is sacred to the three monotheistic religions. Israel
does not interfere with the religions. The Copts and the Abyssinians
ask Israel for help. Egypt can now get in and help if it wants—though it
has problems with its own Copts.
Minister Burg said that the Egyptians would like Israel’s Copts!
Prime Minister Begin asked what the Christians have to complain
about?
The President said that this is not at issue.
Prime Minister Begin asked why the Muslims should complain. El
Aqsa is there—despite the fact that it is on the Temple Mount, where
there are two mosques. Jerusalem is sacred to Jews, Christians, and
Moslems. But that is history: in our time, what is Jerusalem? It is the
heart of the Israeli nation for 3000 years. The Moslems conquered it.
King Abdullah10 did so, again. He desecrated the Mount of Olives cem-
etery. He destroyed the Hadassah Hospital and the Hebrew University.
Israel rebuilt one city. Should it suggest that Copts in Cairo vote for
other governments? It is incomprehensible. It is one city. Teddy Kollek
could be reelected for 3 elections more. It will still become a divided
city if Israel permits voting for the Administrative Council.
Minister Burg said he would add a footnote. The President had
mentioned absentee voting. They live in Jerusalem. It is their capital—
though the U.S. does not recognize it. Does the U.S. want to give Israel a
mortgage? It is too difficult.
Ambassador Linowitz said that no one here wants to divide Jeru-
salem. He would try an idea. Suppose that there were elections in the
West Bank and Gaza, and the elected officials then selected from Jeru-
salem 8 or 10 people to serve with them as members.
Prime Minister Begin said that he doesn’t think this would be pos-
sible. It is difficult. He speaks about the heart of the Israeli nation. Why
play around? It has been the central issue of their lives for 3 millenia.
The Eastern part is the real Jerusalem—West Jerusalem is an addition.
He is now told that they should vote in the Judea and Samaria Admin-

istrative Council—which was Israel’s idea—and destroy Israel’s con-
nection with Jerusalem. How could this be done? For more than 3000
years, it has been a part of their life. It is not dead, it is alive. Their
prayers, every day—Dr. Burg prays for return, after 1900 years.
The President said that he is not trying to take the Jews out of East
Jerusalem. Under Prime Minister Begin’s definition, people and not
land are under jurisdiction. Therefore, we are not talking about a terri-
torial jurisdiction.
Prime Minister Begin said that at Camp David, they talked about
Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza district. And in the letters!
The President asked if an Arab in Tel Aviv or Nazareth could vote.
Minister Burg said that there is no absentee vote under Israeli law.
Minister Kubersky said that even Ambassador Evron can’t vote.
Prime Minister Begin said that this was a problem of the constitu-
tion—one day it would be amended!
The President said we need to find an alternative to the election
process.
Prime Minister Begin said that the President had asked that they
think about it; therefore maybe it can be raised again tomorrow. The
U.S. should not blame the Israelis’ attitude on Jerusalem.
The President said he was not blaming them for anything. But he
doesn’t see any way to proceed with elections.
Prime Minister Begin said that Sadat said there are 700 million
Moslems who do not agree. But for Israel, Jerusalem is sacred; it is their
life.
The President said he did not want to change that.
Prime Minister Begin said: thank you.
The President said perhaps they could adjourn on a pleasant note!
(laughter)
Prime Minister Begin asked when they meet tomorrow.
Ambassador Evron said 10 o’clock.
The President said there is another question. Sadat wants there to be
a security committee, to work out the delineation of what is internal se-
curity, and what is for the police.
Prime Minister Begin said could he please ask permission. At 5:00
he is to meet with some Senators. The President and he have to speak at
7:30. He will reply tomorrow. Thank you.
The President said: thank you.
(The meeting concluded at 5: p.m.).

359.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Third Meeting with Israeli Prime Minister
Menachem Begin
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President
Ambassador Samuel Lewis, United States Ambassador to Israel
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Ambassador James Leonard, Deputy Negotiator for the Middle East Autonomy
Negotiations
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Prime Minister Menachem Begin
Yitzhak Shamir, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Dr. Yosef Burg, Minister of Interior
Ambassador Ephraim Evron, Ambassador of Israel to the United States
Chaim Kubersky, Director General, Ministry of Interior
Jacob Nehushtan, Minister, Embassy of Israel
Yehiel Kadishai, Director, Prime Minister’s Bureau
Brigadier General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Dan Pattir, Public Affairs Adviser to the Prime Minister
Elyakim Rubinstein, Assistant Director General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Professor Ruth Lapidot, Legal Adviser to Foreign Ministry
Gilad Stern, Assistant to the Minister of Interior
(The Vice President and David Aaron entered during the plenary
meeting.)
The President began by saying that so far the meetings had been
constructive. We had an enjoyable evening at the White House last
night, and he hopes that our Israeli guests enjoyed themselves. There
are several important issues to be resolved. Egypt has replied4 to our
message that it is all right if the intensive negotiations be in Egypt and
Israel. However, Egypt very much wants the establishment of a secu-
rity committee, as an integral part of the Camp David Accords. They
told us that General Ali will represent Egypt if and when the committee
is set up to carry out this provision of Camp David. We had alleviated
the problem of the Continuing Committee in a way gratifying to Egypt.
It is important under the Camp David Accords for it to function. For the
U.S., we need to discuss alternatives if the Israeli position on East Jeru-
salem Arabs is that they can not vote in any elections that are carried
out. If so, then we need Israeli suggestions for Egypt on alternatives to
elections. We see only two such alternatives: to establish a procedure
involving the mayors; or (less acceptable) to implement an agreement
in Gaza first. As Prime Minister Begin has pointed out, Sadat is likely to
insist on gaining agreement on both the West Bank and Gaza before im-
plementing it in Gaza first. These are his (the President’s) items for dis-
cussion in this group. He will also have a couple of items to discuss
with Prime Minister Begin privately.
Prime Minister Begin said he wanted to be clear in his mind. Did
Egypt agree on the venue for the intensive talks?
The President said yes. Khalil said he would devote full time to
them; but he made strongly the point on the need for the security com-
mittee. Also, he (Khalil) would like to keep the option open, near the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
end of the 40 days, to have a brief session here to confirm what has been
done. This is an option the Egyptians would like to have.
Prime Minister Begin said that this could be considered at the
proper time. With regard to the draft on the Continuing Committee, in
accordance with the Camp David Accords, in the transitional period
the Continuing Committee could deal with other matters of common
concern, with the U.S. invited to take part, and decisions to be taken on
the basis of unanimity. First, he did not like to change Camp David,
and this could be written into a protocol, that this is not a precedent.
Second, we don’t need all the words of Ambassador Linowitz (from
yesterday’s U.S. proposal), if they say “in accordance with the Camp
David Accords.” We should also put in the word “also,” to show that
we are leaving in the original text (on the uses of the Continuing Com-
mittee). It will “also” deal with other matters. He has accepted the U.S.
idea on citing some examples (of the work the Continuing Committee
might do). It should also cite the development of sources of water, for the
benefit of all. In accordance with paragraph five (of the Camp David
Accords Associated Principles), the United States would be invited to
join. He had a problem with the word “operate” (in the U.S. draft).
Rather we should say that “decisions will be taken.”
The President asked the Prime Minister to reread his draft.
Prime Minister Begin said that it was his handwriting. Nobody else
could read it; and even he could only read it with difficulty! (laughter)
The President said he wanted to hear whether Prime Minister Begin
could read it the same way a second time! (laughter)
(The Prime Minister reread his draft.)
The President said he preferred actually listing the three nations to
be involved, as stated in Camp David that they “will constitute” the
Continuing Committee.
Prime Minister Begin asked if the President wanted to list all the
names.
The President said that if we were going to change the words of
Camp David, then he would like to add the word “immediately,” since
the Accords just say the Continuing Committee should function soon.
Prime Minister Begin asked if the words “as soon as possible”
would be all right.
The President said that Camp David did not contemplate any delay.

Prime Minister Begin said that Camp David actually says “during
the transitional period,” but . . .
Minister Burg suggested saying: “As the Camp David Accords
say.”
Secretary Vance said the words are “will constitute.”
Mr. Nehushtan said that Ambassador Linowitz’ draft had said “will
be established.”
Prime Minister Begin suggested “in accordance with Camp David.”
President Carter suggested “immediately.”
Prime Minister Begin said that then they would have to repeat the
names of the members. This would complicate matters. Perhaps we
should just say “as soon as possible.” Or how about “without delay?”
The President said he preferred to repeat Camp David exactly.
Prime Minister Begin asked if this was with all the names.
The President said he preferred this.
Prime Minister Begin said he had no objection, and read: “During
the transitional period, representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and the
self-Governing authority will constitute a continuing committee.
The President and Secretary Vance concurred.
Prime Minister Begin said that then we should have a semi-colon,
followed by the rest.
Secretary Vance concurred.
Prime Minister Begin said that, with agreement, we can print it.
The President said fine.
(At this point, Ruth Lapidot and Robert Hunter left the room to
work out the precise wording of the statement. They reentered at
10:36, in the midst of a discussion on a possible security committee).
The President said that, in summary: if the Israelis accept his pro-
posal, that would be fine. Security will be discussed soon at the ple-
nary. Then advisors or some other sub-group will be established on
issues of security. This committee will make recommendations back to
the plenary and ultimately to the heads of state. He would like to be
able to tell Sadat that, at an early plenary meeting, the issues of security

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
will be assigned to an advisory group, and this committee will make
recommendations to the plenary and the heads of state.
Prime Minister Begin suggested that we go by stages—he is not pre-
judging the issues. The President may tell Sadat that we discussed this
subject. He (Prime Minister Begin) wishes the President would accept
his proposal: Issues of security will be discussed after Israel puts to-
gether its maps for the Egyptians. Then the main negotiating terms can
take up the issues, as the Camp David Accords provide, with military
experts taking part. Then what the plenary decides, he will accept.
Today he can’t accept the words “security committee.”
The President said that this causes a problem. Sadat did not make
this a proviso in regard to having continuous discussions, but Prime
Minister Begin should not underestimate Sadat’s concerns on this
issue. Prime Minister Begin should be flexible—which is natural for
him (the Prime Minister) and help him (the President). If the plenary
just states that the advisors will discuss these issues, then there will be
ten days to get the maps, and then report back—this will delay the en-
tire process for 10 days, which is bad.
Prime Minister Begin said that the President had said he (Prime
Minister Begin) is flexible: he is used to hearing different compliments!
The negotiating teams will consider this approach.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Israel had said publicly that a secu-
rity committee could be set up.
Prime Minister Begin asked who said it.
Ambassador Linowitz said Minister Burg.
Minister Burg said yes, provided he was quoted exactly!
Prime Minister Begin said he could always say that they had made a
mistake in saying that. It had happened before, on Khalil’s part, as well.
It happened at Camp David and elsewhere. Minister Burg shouldn’t be
put on the spot!
Minister Burg said he liked to be quoted.
Ambassador Linowitz said: “primo.”
Minister Burg said he had said that at some stage there would need
to be talk about security issues. He had not excluded that there could be
a security committee at some point.
Secretary Vance said that Minister Burg had said . . .
The President said that he hoped the Israelis would think it over.
This is crucial to Sadat; and he has said so to his own people, in the As-
sembly, and to the Palestinians. Sadat and he (the President) see this as
part of the Camp David process. What it is called is of secondary im-
portance. If we continue the plenary without discussing security, there
will be serious and unnecessary problems. We need cooperation to
avoid problems.

Secretary Vance said that to accelerate progress in the talks, we need
to deal with security problems promptly. This is important from the
standpoint of general expedition.
Prime Minister Begin said that they would start on the maps now. It
would take 10 days to two weeks to complete them.
Minister Burg said that there are no Egyptians here to speak for
themselves. Why is this the crux of the matter? First there can be
meetings (Note: accent on the plural), with security taken up, then the
advisory committees can be set up.
The President said that this was fair enough.
Prime Minister Begin asked whether Minister Burg is suggesting
this. Then it is his (Minister Burg’s) suggestion!
Minister Burg said that Begin is the Prime Minister!
Prime Minister Begin said that, after Ambassador Linowitz’s com-
ment, he (Prime Minister Begin) had no option but to accept!
Ambassador Linowitz said he was glad he had found the right
formula!
Minister Burg said: “advisory teams.”
(Prime Minister Begin then read the redrafted statement on the Con-
tinuing Committee). He said that Professor Ruth wants the word
“may” instead of “will” (on issues to be dealt with by the committee). Is
this in Camp David?
Professor Lapidot said that it is, if we stick with Camp David.
Minister Burg said as with the 26th of “May.”
The President accepted the word “may.”
Prime Minister Begin agreed. (See Attachment II)
The President said that if this flexibility continues, there will be no
other matters!
Prime Minister Begin said that this is very good.
The President agreed it was very good (i.e. the agreement on the
Continuing Committee). Next is the problem of alternatives to the elec-
toral process.
Prime Minister Begin said he had told his friends of the President’s
two proposals. (He then conferred with his colleagues, who nodded
agreement). This is a very serious issue.
The President agreed.
Prime Minister Begin said that the soul of the Camp David Accords
on the Administrative Council is elections. There should be no misun-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
derstanding. The negotiating teams on security . . . all depends on the
principles he presented yesterday. They expect an answer today or to-
morrow. They could have said (at Camp David) that they would just
appoint the Administrative Council. But people would say that this is a
masquerade, and an indirect aid to Israel. So Israel proposed free elec-
tions—though they may be difficult to do. Sadat is mistaken in saying
that he could impose autonomy on Gaza. Sadat can’t do it; no one can.
Can we drag people to the polls? In Belgium, there is a fine for not
voting. But it doesn’t help; people just pay the fine, of about 50 francs.
So you can’t drag people to the polls. Israel stands by the elections. It is
objectively difficult if the Palestinian Arabs will not take part. First, the
Mayors could appoint the Council—but this can’t be done. It would be
like having PLO-types. Israel would prefer known PLO people if it
came to that. That is, if the mayors would agree anyway, which is
doubtful. So what if we postpone the elections—as with the mayors—
and they appoint the members? The same difficulty would arise. If
there are free elections, the President says, PLO sympathizers could be
elected anyway. Israel would say, so?—this happened through free
elections. It would ask the elected individuals not to be with the PLO,
but what can Israel do once there have been free elections? Therefore,
there should be no proposal to say that anyone acquiesces in
non-elections. His proposal is, let us work to get done in 40 days. Then
after 30 days or so, we can assemble, and the President can empower
Secretary Vance to come together with them, and to reason together.
Now there is no other proposal that seems reasonable. We should stand
by the democratic process of free elections. (At this point, Robert
Hunter left the room for about two minutes).
Minister Burg said that surely, before May 26, talking about not
having elections would be psychologically bad.
The President said that this was a wise statement.
Minister Burg said that since it came from a sage, it was appro-
priate. (laughter) He would add that if we leave the idea of free elec-
tions, it would be a grave deviation from Camp David. We do not wish
that now, at least until May 26.
The President raised the other option—Gaza-first. Minister Burg
has assessed it well: to say today that we would abandon free elections
would be bad. But the Camp David Accords would not come into being
if the elections are not carried out. When we reach the final stages of the
negotiations, it all becomes a failure if there is no means to get the
Self-Governing Authority in place, then it will fail, and other provi-
sions will be lost. Maybe we need to keep our option open to have a
brief transitional period—maybe a committee—in Gaza or of mayors—
to negotiate on a limited number of issues . . . We don’t need to cross
that bridge now. We will work now, and with Israel and Egypt, on free

elections—as in the Camp David Accords. We won’t put this issue
aside, but keep it on the top of the agenda.
Secretary Vance asked: in 40 days?
The President said yes. If we get near the end, then we can look at
this again.
Prime Minister Begin said there is a problem of control in the Sinai.
In the peace treaty, a UN force is provided for. There is the problem of
Sharm-el-Sheikh, in particular. But the Soviets vetoed this approach.
And there is the U.S. letter11 about efforts to be made to find acceptable
alternatives—i.e. a multinational force. Maybe the United States had
talks with the Soviet Union, and it said that it would use the veto.
Therefore, it was necessary to try an alternative.
The President said that we had been talking primarily with Secre-
tary General Waldheim.
Secretary Vance said we talked with the Soviets at the end.
Prime Minister Begin said that UNTSO was not for the time of the
peace treaty; it was for the armistice period. The U.S., Israel, and Egypt
joined in agreeing that members of the UN group should carry out the
functions. This was not signed.
Then there was a promise that, a year before the ultimate with-
drawal from the Sinai, we would meet again. The former foreign Min-
ister (Moshe Dayan) said, and he (Prime Minister Begin) subscribed to
his view, that if there is no UN force, and no multinational force—the
former foreign minister would like it (multinational force) now. So they
accepted the agreement, but stated that if neither of the forces is estab-
lished, then Israel can’t withdraw from its positions in the Sinai. They
want the commitment to be fulfilled. Also, the U.S. commitment is one
of the most vital parts of the peace treaty—bearing in mind problems
like Sharm-el-Sheikh. Nobody knows what will happen. We could
have a situation one day with the Straits (of Tiran) closed. That would
be, in the European concept, a casus belli, but Israel does not want that.
He suggests accelerating the talks on the tripartite agreement, where
now there is no agreement. What should be done if there is no UN or
multinational force? This should be decided bilaterally between Israel
and the United States. Otherwise, a vital part of the peace treaty would
be out. Therefore, he suggests that we accelerate the tripartite agree-
ment and sign a bilateral agreement. The U.S. has noted Israel’s an-
nouncement. There is a vacuum: let’s fill it up.
The President called on Secretary Vance.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Vance said that he would describe the negotiations. We
want a tripartite agreement: let’s work on it.
The President said he recalled that Israel had suggestions on Ar-
ticles 4 and 6.
Secretary Vance said he had discussed them at breakfast, but can’t
remember the details now.
The President called on Ambassador Evron.
Ambassador Evron said that the problem is that Egypt now takes ex-
ception to the whole paragraph.
Professor Lapidot called on Mr. Rubinstein.
The President said he had not been in this issue.
Mr. Rubinstein said that Egypt did not see Israel’s declaration, that
if there is no agreement reached (on the follow-on force), then Israel
will not withdraw in 1982. There is more than a hint of that in the docu-
ment, in section (sic!—paragraph) six to that effect. Egypt says that it is
not acceptable, any hint that Israel might not withdraw. The Israelis
think that the Egyptians know the Israeli position.
Prime Minister Begin said that, therefore, let’s have a trilateral and a
bilateral . . .
The President said he sees.
Secretary Vance said we have . . .
Prime Minister Begin said: . . . and an exchange of letters. They
should become an integral part of the treaty.
The President asked: who?
Secretary Vance said that this didn’t need to be crossed to the year
before withdrawal.
The President said that he could see that Sadat would be reluctant to
sign a document saying that Israel might not withdraw. We need to re-
serve the prospects on that. It is not in the (agreement?). He sees a
problem.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel would not require that of
Sadat: the United States gave the commitment.
The President agreed.
Prime Minister Begin said that this was central to it (the treaty?).
Mr. Rubinstein said that Egypt would object to a U.S.-Israeli agree-
ment saying this.
The President said he knows.
Mr. Rubinstein said that this is a crucial thing, which Israel cannot
accept.
The President said that it was not necessary to get agreement with
Sadat, but we could see, and try to remove it (the problem?).

Ambassador Evron said that we did reach agreement on a text12 here
(in Washington last September), and he thought that took care of the
Egyptian problem.
The President said that that was not the case.
Secretary Vance said that it was not yet the case.
Prime Minister Begin asked whether they (Israel) would be notified.
Secretary Vance agreed.
Prime Minister Begin asked for a reply on their 4-point document.
The President said he wanted to save some time to meet privately
with Prime Minister Begin.
Prime Minister Begin asked whether the President wanted to see
him.
The President said yes.
Prime Minister Begin said thank you, sir, it would be a pleasure.
Ambassador Linowitz said (in reference to the second document, at-
tached), that he thinks Prime Minister Begin would agree that it is im-
portant not to change Camp David. The problem is not what the au-
thority is called but what it does. This is what the negotiations are
trying to do. This formula will not help in the negotiations. We should
work now on what the authority should do, not on what it should be
called.
Prime Minister Begin asked him to clarify.
Ambassador Linowitz said that the import of point one is that the
Self-Governing Authority is an administrative council.
Prime Minister Begin said that it is in the book (the Camp David
Accords).
Ambassador Linowitz said that therefore we should say it like it is in
the book. Why give it a different name?
Prime Minister Begin said that there is a simple reason: for the last
ten months, there have been proposals that there be 40 members. This is
an assembly. We need to make clear what it is. What does it mean? We
should not turn in circles. He contends, and Barak—whom the Presi-
dent likes, and who sends the President his regards—in an exchange
with el-Baz in the President’s presence, said that when the words
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“Administrative Council” appeared once, then it applied every time.
This was agreed. In the year and a half since Camp David, attempts
have been made to change the document, without the words “Admin-
istrative Council.” He has to return to the document. He showed
Dayan, in a paper at the peace treaty signing, seven deviations from it
(on not including the words “Administrative Council”). We are now at
a stage, in the last year, where we see proposals to change the content
and meaning. Israel wants it clear: if “Administrative Council” is not
there, then Egypt will say it is an assembly. He wants to make clear that
Egypt can’t say this, since it is an administrative council. He does not
want a closet state, or a corridor leading to an independent Palestinian
state. This is crucial. It is another idea, a proposal. He wants to remind
the President that in the joint letter, Egypt and Israel repeated the
words “Administrative Council.” Egypt did not want it, but we re-
peated it. In communiques (of the autonomy talks) it is always there.
Therefore “Administrative Council” means something. It is a most es-
sential point. The basic issue is, what is the self-governing authority?
Everybody has interpreted it—so what is it?
The President said that he does not favor substituting the words
“Administrative Council” for “Self-Governing Authority.” This is fruit-
less semantics. It is better to look at the powers and responsibilities it
will have, not at the name. We put in “Administrative Council” once,
reluctantly. We cannot accept giving up “Self-Governing Authority” in
all references, and use “Administrative Council” in its place.
Prime Minister Begin said that he does not want to give up “Self-
Governing Authority.” He repeats this.
The President said he understands.
Minister Burg said that “Administrative Council” means something.
The President said he knows.
Prime Minister Begin said that these words give an accent: that it is
more administrative than political. Therefore, it gives more or less, but
the words stand per se. What they are asking for all the time, and Am-
bassador Linowitz once agreed—then the Egyptians got cold feet—ei-
ther bring (?) the Israeli model or talk about the three categories. But
Egypt backed out. Therefore, there should either be an accent on “Ad-
ministrative Council,” or use of the three categories. These are two pos-
sibilities, and. . . .
The President said he would prefer to accept the latter.
Minister Burg said that Egypt had not agreed.
The President said that there are good prospects for success.
Problems of semantics are there all the time: Judea and Sumeria vs. the
West Bank; Palestinians vs. Palestinian Arabs—there is always a
problem of definition. He understands that Prime Minister Begin and

Sadat make statements about aspects of full autonomy that are justifi-
able, but letting them stand can be a problem. We need to find common
ground. The second approach is good. We do not need to decide what,
today, should be the division of powers and responsibilities among the
three categories, but this approach gives us good flexibility.
Prime Minister Begin: Now there is the question of the number of
members.
Ambassador Linowitz said that in the negotiations, Prime Minister
Begin feels that this should correspond to the number of functions.
Egypt has a different view.
Prime Minister Begin said that the U.S. has proposed a number
which is arbitrary. What we need to do is create a basis for establishing
the number of members.
The President said that this opens up additional problems: How
many fragmented parts into which to divide actual responsibilities?
Ambassador Linowitz’s paper has 22 different functions. Should edu-
cation and culture be one function or two? On administration of justice,
is there a separate function for prisons?
Minister Burg mentioned Health, Education, and Welfare.
The President asked whether that should be one function or three. If
there is one member for each function, then Egypt will work to get
many functions, while Israel will try to get a few. This is a question of
balance and imbalance. On agriculture, there can be a function for
planting, harvesting, marketing. We do not favor anything that will
lead to the creation of an independent Palestinian state. We are pre-
pared to say so in a final signed document. He thinks there is a chance
that Sadat would also sign that there is no authority ever (sic!) to de-
clare itself an independent Palestinian state. He (the President) can’t
speak for Sadat, but the Israelis should think about it. He (the Presi-
dent) wants the Self-Governing Authority to have the needed au-
thority, and no chance to declare itself an independent state.
Minister Kubersky asked whether there was agreement in principle
that the number of members should equal the number of functions, for
the negotiations?
The President said that this would make the negotiations more diffi-
cult. Then each time that Egypt proposes having more, there will be

360.
Editorial Note
Council passed Resolution 467 (1980), addressing the mounting vio-
lence in Lebanon, including Israeli military intervention and attacks
upon troops attached to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

(UNIFIL). The United States, along with the German Democratic Re-
public and the Soviet Union, abstained. The resolution “reaffirmed” the
Security Council’s “determination to implement its previous decisions
in the totality of the area of UNIFIL operations, up to the internation-
ally recognized boundaries. It condemned all actions contrary to these
decisions and, in particular strongly deplored any violation of Leba-
nese sovereignty and territorial integrity; Israel’s military intervention
in Lebanon; all acts of violence in violation of the General Armistice
Agreement between Israel and Lebanon; provision of military assist-
ance to the so-called de facto forces,” i.e., the Lebanese militia forces of
Major Saad Haddad;” “all acts of interference” with the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine (UNTSO); “all acts of hos-
tility against UNIFIL and in or through its area of operations; all ob-
structions of UNIFIL’s ability to confirm the complete withdrawal of Is-
raeli forces from Lebanon, to supervise the cessation of hostilities, to
ensure the peaceful character of the area of operation, to control move-
ment and to take measures deemed necessary to ensure the effective
restoration of Lebanon’s sovereignty; and acts that had led to loss of life
and physical injuries among UNIFIL and UNTSO personnel, their ha-
rassment and abuse, the disruption of communication, and the destruc-
tion of property and material.” Moreover, the Security Council con-
demned the shelling of UNIFIL headquarters and “called attention” to
the provisions in the UNIFIL mandate giving the force the right to self-
defense. (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, page 352) The complete
text of the resolution is printed in Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980,
pages 358–359.
The Resolution was passed in the aftermath of more than two
months of increased skirmishing along the Israel-Lebanon border and
attacks upon UNIFIL personnel. The issue was referred to the Security
Council by Lebanon on April 13 in a letter to the Council charging Is-
rael with “continuing acts of aggression against southern Lebanon and
with “direct confrontation with UNIFIL.” (Yearbook of the United Na-
tions, 1980, page 348) The same day, Secretary-General of the United
Nations Kurt Waldheim issued a statement condemning attacks on
UNIFIL forces by Haddad’s forces around the At-Tiri area of Lebanon.
A description of the situation around At-Tiri is in telegram 7147 from
Tel Aviv, April 17 (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800190–0992) A Lebanese draft resolution was circulated to the
Security Council on April 17. Following the killing of two Irish UNIFIL
peacekeepers on April 18, Assistant Secretary of State for International
Organization Affairs Michael Newlin and Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold H. Saunders pre-
sented Secretary of State Cyrus Vance with an action memorandum
outlining three options for a U.S. response: 1) “try to improve the
present resolution,” deleting the “worst of the condemnatory language

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
directed at Israel,” followed by abstention; 2) “leave the resolution as it
is,” then veto it; and 3) produce a new U.S. resolution “which focuses
on the main problems in South Lebanon and directs attention toward
possible ways of dealing with them.” Of these, Vance chose the third
option. A copy of the new draft U.S. resolution, the Lebanese draft, and
the action memorandum are in the Department of State, Office of the
Secretariat Staff, Special Handling Restrictions Memos, 1979–1983, Lot
However, the pace of events in the Security Council and the situa-
tion in Lebanon meant the U.S.-drafted resolution had little traction.
On April 20, Representative to the United Nations Donald F. McHenry
reported that if “an immediate improvement on the ground, plus some
long-term improvements in UNIFIL’s situation were possible,” the
Lebanese draft “might be avoided, but such developments are unlikely
in light of Haddad’s wish to enlarge his area of control, Israel’s support
of that objective, probable Lebanese inability to take the necessary
steps, and the time required to accomplish any long-term improve-
ments. Despite understanding among Western SC members and troop
contributors for Israel’s security concerns, they consider a strong reso-
lution, focused on Israel’s and Haddad’s misdeeds, justifiable in the
present situation.” McHenry concluded: “U.S. failure to join in support
of such a resolution will concern our Western allies and a U.S. veto, pre-
venting action, will meet with no understanding.” (Telegram 1541 from
the U.S. Mission to the United Nations, April 20; Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 58,
Lebanon: 4/80) Proposed revisions to the U.S draft were discussed
with the Lebanese on April 22. (Telegram 1588 from the U.S. Mission to
the United Nations, April 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D800201–0157) A Tunisian redrafted version of the res-
olution was presented April 23. (Telegram 1610 from the U.S. Mission
to the United Nations, April 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D800202–0801) On the redraft, Assistant to the Presi-
dent for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski related to Presi-
dent Jimmy Carter in a April 23 memorandum that “other members of
the Council” would not accept references to the Palestinian attack on
the Israeli Mishgav Am kibbutz (see footnote 2, Document 357) and
other “actions by the Palestinians,” “insisted” on “strongly deploring”
Israeli military intervention. The instructions proposed by the Depart-
ment of State, Brzezinski pointed out, were for McHenry to abstain
unless a clause including a condemnation of attacks on Israel were in-
cluded. Vice President Walter Mondale had advised dispatching a mes-
sage from Carter to Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin on moder-
ating the situation in Lebanon, though Brzezinski saw this as “partially
overtaken by events.” Brzezinski advised Carter to meet with Mondale,
Vance, and himself on the instructions to be issued to McHenry; Carter

361.
Summary of Discussion and Conclusions of a Senior Level
Meeting
Subject
Middle East Autonomy Negotiations (U)
Participants
State
Cyrus Vance (Chairman) Secretary
Warren Christopher* Deputy Secretary of State
Harold Saunders Assistant Secretary for Near East and South Asian Affairs
Michael Sterner Deputy Assistant Secretary
Personal Representative of the President
Ambassador Sol Linowitz
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski*2
NSC
Robert Hunter
*Attended only part of the meeting
Secretary Vance said that there are several areas that we should
pursue in the next 30 days: voting rights, land, security, jurisdiction
over Israelis in the territories, legislative authority, and the Continuing
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Committee. Ambassador Linowitz said that water was the most ame-
nable for solution, with security next. He expects that there will be little
or no movement on land and East Jerusalem voting rights (Secretary
Vance thought the latter issue was dead). It might be possible to get
something on private lands, since the Israelis have not so far made a
point of this issue. He would try out a new formula on East Jerusalem,
permitting Jordanian citizens, in general, to vote. He also hoped to skirt
the issue of legislative authority. The object should be to get enough
agreement to keep Sadat interested in continuing the process, and to
deflect any European efforts.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he doesn’t expect very much on
this 10-day trip, since both parties are still testing one another. Begin,
for example, was chided in Israel for giving away too much here in
Washington, and therefore is not ready to make concessions. The Am-
bassador is worried that the Israelis might not make a security presen-
tation on the first day. If so, the Egyptians might go home. But if this
issue can be resolved early, other issues could be easier. Mr. Saunders
pointed out that this would be particularly so with regard to land, be-
cause of the security implications tied up with land issues.
Dr. Brzezinski asked what we should do if the parties prove too
unyielding to get agreement before May 26. Secretary Vance said that
then we would have to consider how to cut back our expectations, in
order to get something to claim a partial victory. Ambassador Linowitz
said that he might have at some point to go to Begin and indicate the
risks of a breakdown unless Israel is forthcoming. Mr. Saunders said
that a “pause” might be possible after May 26, if there are a few tough
issues to be settled—as happened with the 1975 disengagement negoti-
ations. Secretary Vance said that conditions are different: the press has
made a lot of May 26, and the Europeans are waiting in the wings: that
might not directly affect the situation in the area, but it would affect our
interests. It is one thing to pass the date in a state of serious negotia-
tions; it is another to have a pause. We should also not jump ahead too
soon.
Ambassador Linowitz said that in his first meeting with Begin,
he would try to disabuse the Prime Minister of the notion that the
“four points” tabled here in Washington are conditions for forward
movement.
He said that he would proceed on this trip by talking through
issues for a couple of days, and then be prepared to table papers on in-

dividual subjects. First, he would like to get agreement on a list of sub-
jects for a Heads of Agreement. Second, he would try to fill in each of
the subjects. Third, he would try to sharpen up the issues within this
context. And fourth, he would try to resolve as many issues as possible.
Mr. Saunders suggested that we build an agreement cumulatively, as
in the peace treaty negotiations. It was agreed that the nature of the
issues do not lend themselves to “trade-offs” within an overall pack-
age, as opposed to a constant paring down of difficult issues. Mr.
Saunders suggested—and it was agreed—that a drafting group be set
up early, so that the delegations could be working from actual drafts
(e.g. on the Heads of Agreement) as they move along.
There was a lengthy discussion of the Gaza-first option. Secretary
Vance reported Peres’ view that the issues in Gaza are easier to resolve,
and that an agreement could attract significant support. Egypt can in-
fluence the Gazans, and this would be an achievement for Sadat. Peres
had also reported that King Hassan had spoken favorably of Gaza-first.
The Secretary also reported Ambassador Evron’s view that Begin
might be prepared in time to see the value in negotiating and imple-
menting Gaza-first, provided the precedent problem could be over-
come. Begin’s objection would be more to having an overall agreement
first, and then merely implementing Gaza-first.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we should try first to get a real
agreement for both the West Bank and Gaza. In this coming round of
talks, Egypt would not be ready to back off emphasis on a full agree-
ment, and Israel is not ready for Gaza-first. Secretary Vance suggested
overlapping the two efforts: building the list of powers to be trans-
ferred and tackling tough problems; and having the ability later to con-
vert the effort to a Gaza-first approach. Sadat could probably be deliv-
ered on Gaza-first. On the timing for talking about Gaza-first, Mr.
Saunders warned of the risks of introducing the idea too soon, because
this deflects concentration from a full agreement. At the same time, Sec-
retary Vance argued, the idea couldn’t just be dropped in at the end.
Also, with only about 16 days left after Ambassador Linowitz returns
on his second trip, there will not be much time to play with. It was
agreed that Ambassador Linowitz should use his best judgment—or
ask for guidance—on whether to introduce the Gaza-first approach be-
fore returning here at the end of this trip.
Secretary Vance said that we should think seriously of “sweet-
eners,” in terms of Israeli confidence-building measures on the West
Bank. Weizman’s credibility is already at stake on this issue. Having
these gestures—which needs to be sold to Begin—could be particularly
important with a Gaza-first solution. With regard to the U.S., the Secre-
tary said, there could be no “sweeteners” that cost money. Ambassador

362.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
108902. For Charge. Subject: South Lebanon and UNIFIL: Presi-
dent’s Message to Begin.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. Following is text of message from President Carter to Prime
Minister Begin which you should deliver as soon as possible, either di-
rectly to him or through appropriate intermediary. In delivering this
message, you should include a copy of Ambassador McHenry’s state-
ment of the U.S. position with regard to the April 24 SC Resolution on
Lebanon and UNIFIL (septel3 from USUN).
3. Also see septel4 on talking points.
4. Begin text of message:
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by the White House; cleared by Newlin, Hunter, Vance
(in substance), W. Scott Butcher (S/S–O), and Raymond G. Seitz (S/S); approved by
Saunders. Sent for information Immediate to USUN and the White House. Carter ini-
tialed his approval of a draft version of this letter on an attached April 23 covering memo-
randum from Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office,
negotiations.
While here, you expressed your concern to do whatever is possible
to deal effectively with a deteriorating situation in southern Lebanon
that would pose increased threats to Israel, as well as subjecting the in-
habitants of that region to renewed conflict and suffering. It is impera-
tive therefore, that everything possible be done to restrain the activities
of Major Haddad, just as it is imperative to do everything possible to
strengthen UNIFIL against Palestinian infiltration, while trying to in-
crease the capacity of the Lebanese Government to be in control of its
own territory.
We are working hard at the UN and elsewhere to try bringing
about conditions that will increase UNIFIL’s effectiveness and reduce
threats to Israel emanating from southern Lebanon. Whatever you and
your government can do immediately with regard to the forces of
Major Haddad would be of immense importance.
In this sensitive period, there are some who do not wish us well as
we work toward a resolution of the difficult issues in the autonomy ne-
gotiations. Therefore, we must redouble our efforts to prevent those
who want to disrupt the political climate surrounding the talks from
succeeding stabilizing the situation in southern Lebanon is an impor-
tant part of that process, and I know I can count on you to do all you
can.
With best regards,
Sincerely, Jimmy Carter
End text of message.
Vance

363.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting With Ambassador Sol Linowitz
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (notetaker)
The President said that he thought there were going to be negotia-
tions for 40 days, and several had gone by!
Ambassador Linowitz said that there have been discussions going on
at lower levels.
The President said he had been disconcerted by the report of the
SCC2 on Ambassador Linowitz’s trip. There seemed to be no clear-cut
decisions. Maybe he has a distorted view, but this is his impression. He
is concerned that there is an apparent timidity about using Ambas-
sador Linowitz’s 10 day trip to the area. The Ambassador should be
strong, clear, forceful, and aggressive.
Ambassador Linowitz said that this is what he got out of the meeting.
He doesn’t know what is in the minutes. He will not be timid. He will
see Begin first thing on arriving in Israel, and take on Begin’s four
points. Since we did not actually reject them while Begin was here,
Begin is saying in Israel, in effect, that we accepted them. Begin is using
the notion that the President is known to view them as candidates. The
Ambassador will discuss this with Begin. Begin knows that we have an
alternative view on points one and two; and the Ambassador had
talked with Burg about three and four. He will hit Begin hard on all
four points. The first is on making the SGA an administrative council;
the second is on the number of people on the SGA equaling the number
of functions; the third is on Israel’s having jurisdiction over all its cit-
izens in the West Bank and Gaza; and the fourth is the combining of ex-
ternal and internal security under Israel’s authority.
The President said that he preemptorily rejects all four points.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he will do it. On the third, he will try
out our idea on Status of Forces.

The President said let’s not skim over these. He is bothered by them.
Peres had told him that his view is that Israelis living on the West Bank
should come under the jurisdiction of the SGA. How you could have
settlers scattered all over the West Bank with it any other way bothers
him.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we should look at the Panama
Treaties, and how we worked it out with regard to the employees of the
Panama Canal Company. If someone violates both Panamanian law
and U.S. law, we can bring him back here to be tried under U.S. law. So
it would be with Israelis on the West Bank. If a crime is not under Israeli
law, then the SGA would try him.
The President said that this would be difficult for the Israelis (?).
Ambassador Linowitz said that he doesn’t know whether the juris-
diction problem can be worked out. He thought he would explore it
with Begin, and talked about it with Shamir when they were here. They
haven’t rejected the idea totally. So let’s try this approach.
The last of Begin’s points concerns security. We could try it on the
basis of internal and external security as it affects Israel’s security. And
that includes having the assistance of the police, etc. But there must be
arrangements to ensure cooperation and coordination.
He doesn’t know what course Begin will be on now. Begin is
having a difficult time politically now. Begin did not go back to Israel a
hero.
The President said that they had said he had given too much. What
was the basis for those allegations?
Ambassador Linowitz said it was the Continuing Committee. There
was unhappiness that Begin had agreed to defer any decisions. Second,
there was the Weizman caper, which will cause increasing problems.
There is also talk among various groups about getting out (of the coali-
tion) if Weizman leaves, as may happen soon. Third, there was Peres.
He (the Ambassador) had talked with Peres, who is not being helpful

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
in talking about alternative ways to proceed—e.g. the Allon Plan; this
is no help with the Palestinians. Begin is upset. We should try to help
with Begin, but handle him differently from Israel, itself (in terms of the
way we present the issues), so that the country will not see us as anti-
Israel.
The President said that that is crucial. What about the ultimate ques-
tion? Should we try to bring all this to a head next month, or be a partic-
ipant in a willingness to find ways so that the talks can just go on?
Ambassador Linowitz said no (to the latter point), we should do this:
Once we have made our position clear on Begin’s four points, we
should first insist on an Israeli security presentation early in the talks,
so that the advisory groups can be set up. Weizman is going back to Is-
rael7 early so that he can join the talks and meet with General Ali.
Maybe we can make some headway on this. Second, there is water.
There is a need to get some agreement on principles, so that it can then
be put into the Continuing Committee.
The President asked when Weizman would be getting into the talks.
Mr. Hunter said that Weizman was leaving from here early, on
Tuesday8 night.
The President asked when he was seeing Weizman.
The President asked whether Weizman’s participation was Begin’s
decision or something that Weizman was doing on his own.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Weizman was all along a member
of the negotiating team. Ali will be there, and Weizman will show
up. This might be part of the internal struggle within the Israeli
Government.
On the first two issues, we will surface papers, and therefore leave
the land issue. He doesn’t know yet when we should surface our ideas.
We will not hold back on our ideas.
The President asked what Ambassador Linowitz would surface on
the first two issues.
if the papers were all right.
Mr. Hunter replied that they are very good.
Ambassador Linowitz said he thought the President had seen them.
This is a real course that we are on. He thinks that now there should be
more U.S. initiative. Egypt will welcome it.
The President said that he would, too. There will be a debacle on
May 26 if the negotiations have not produced a document. Sadat will
accommodate him without any real effort. But the Europeans will be-
come active if Sadat and he do not get somewhere. The Egyptians will
even try to get the Saudis involved, at the UN or otherwise. Also, if
Burg, maybe Ehrlich, and Peres and Weizman—and Dayan would give
his vote—are prepared to see matters brought to a head, and if we are
seen as playing in Begin’s camp, this will give our concurrence to delay.
That will be seen in Israel, too. He feels strongly that we should bring
the negotiations to a head. He doesn’t know how accurate Peres is on
politics. He (Peres) is almost as unpopular as Begin as a leader.
Weizman is the most popular in Israel, and would work with Peres—
though the question would be who is on top; Peres would want to be.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Weizman said that he would serve as
defense minister under Peres.
The President said that Peres had told him that Burg had been plan-
ning to decide in May whether to stay with Begin and go down, or to
try to stay alive.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Burg had told him this.
The President said that therefore Peres was accurate. He (the Presi-
dent) would be better off politically if the negotiations are brought to a
by Linowitz on the “most important issues we will face over the next few weeks:” East
Jerusalem voting rights, land, water, security, jurisdiction over Israeli nationals, the size
of the SGA, and the Continuing Committee. Each paper sets forth objectives and pro-
posed draft language for the Heads of Agreement. The papers, forwarded to Brzezinski
under an April 24 covering memorandum from Hunter, along with two Department of
State papers on overall negotiating strategy and strategy for engaging the Palestinians,
are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
head. Begin sees that he will either move or fall (?). He (the President)
doesn’t want to make Begin fall, but if Begin sees that he can only keep
Weizman and Dayan (?) by moving, this is a strong incentive. He (the
President) would like to get as much of an agreement as possible—a
reasonable agreement, even if no one loves it. If he goes to Sadat, then
Sadat will accept it. He wants to put forward what Sadat will accept—
and not attempt to assuage Khalil.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he had talked with Sadat, and told
him the substance of his recommendations. He had told Sadat how he
planned to handle water . . .
The President said that Sadat didn’t care about details.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he had told Sadat that there could be
agreement on principles, with the Continuing Committee taking ac-
count of the rest, such as the technical matters. Until there was agree-
ment, then things like the rate of water sharing would continue. Sadat
said that was all right; and he (the Ambassador) thinks this will be all
right with the Israelis.
The President said good.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he had talked about other issues with
Sadat—such as security. Butros and Osama and others find this ap-
proach wrong. On public lands, they will try a formulation, even
though neither Egypt or Israel will like it: it is that, after autonomy is set
up, there can be no settlements by either side without agreement by the
Continuing Committee. Therefore, there would be a freeze.
The President asked on which lands.
Ambassador Linowitz said on public lands. Private lands anyone
could have.
The President said that Begin would not buy this.
Ambassador Linowitz said he wanted to try it out with the President.
If the idea were to leak, we would be pleased.
The President said that it would please him. It is, however, more
generous than our position, since it doesn’t call for dismantling.
Ambassador Linowitz said that it would give Israel a veto over Pales-
tinians settlements, and Egypt wouldn’t like that. It would be good if it
leaked.
The President said good.
Dr. Brzezinski asked what would happen if Begin rejects it.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he would take the issues one at a
time—e.g. water, security, and legislative authority. He can’t see Begin
rejecting all the ideas. Begin would reject land and East Jerusalem
voting rights. If there is enough progress on other issues, then we can
look at what to do with the Continuing Committee with regard to

them. We would not say that we are putting things off, and if we can
produce for the Palestinians an SGA and the withdrawal of the military
government and the civilian administration, with some other issues left
over, then there will be a respectable package.
The President said he thinks that we should keep the Gaza-first idea
alive. In private discussions, we should say that we think it should be
kept alive. But it is also clear that early public revelation would lead to
the conclusion that we are abandoning free elections, as we discussed
when Begin was here.
Ambassador Linowitz asked when he should surface the idea.
The President said before the end of the 10-day trip.
Ambassador Linowitz said he was afraid the others would grab at it,
and not negotiate seriously on the rest.
The President said that it should be surfaced at the end of the 10
days, before Ambassador Linowitz leaves to come home. There is no
secret that the idea has been discussed.
Ambassador Linowitz said that, however, we have not said how we
feel about the idea. It is Sadat’s position, and is attractive. Weizman,
Peres, and Sharon (?) like it.
The President said that Dayan does, too.
The Ambassador agreed. He thought he would go there for 10 days,
then come home and report, and then go out again.
The President said he wanted to leave a thought in Ambassador
Linowitz’s mind. If it would not work out completely on the West
Bank—and the President was sure this was the case—therefore we
could start now on the circumstances under which we should go to
Gaza-first. If we delay that to the second round of negotiations, it
would not be possible for the governments to consider it seriously in
the time remaining.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we will discuss it, and he will do it.
The President said that, on the authority for the SGA, he under-
stands that the only difference is on the definition of security.
Ambassador Linowitz said no.
The President said he wasn’t talking about a constitution, or the
number of people to be on the SGA. He means that the only issue of sig-
nificance is security. Is it deciding on the role of the police, anti-
terrorism, and the army? Or is it just internal defense? Or is it internal
defense and anti-terrorism?
Ambassador Linowitz said that also there is the question of what is
wholly within the SGA’s authority. First, there are questions like inter-
national communication and financial issues; there are four or five
issues to be resolved, to get from 18 to 22 or so. Second, on the question

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
of “legislative authority,” he would try to skirt the issue, and not use
the words, but try to ensure that the SGA has the powers that it needs.
There are no other specific issues. The rest of the problems are like the
one on what to do with water. If we can use . . . that is the beauty of the
Continuing Committee, if we use it to make unnecessary agreement
now on all details.
The President agreed.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Begin should like this—since it
means that everything doesn’t have to be decided now.
The President said that even if Begin wants it, he won’t agree on it.
He likes to run down a string of tedious points, to see what they can be
traded for. Finally he gets to the point of making major concessions.
Ambassador Linowitz asked if he could introduce a sensitive point:
when—and he would like to keep this open—he should break off and
come home early, if he hits a roadblock. This would show that we are
serious.
The President said that when Ambassador Linowitz asks him, he
will say yes. In fact, Ambassador Linowitz will be more reluctant than
he will be to have the Ambassador come home.
Ambassador Linowitz said he just wants authority to do it.
The President said he guesses that Egypt would pull out first.
Ambassador Linowitz said that if Israel is not forthcoming on secu-
rity, then Egypt might pull out then. He will tell this to Begin.
The President said that maybe he should send a message to Sadat,
and even do so early, so it will arrive by the time that the Ambassador
gets there. He will ask that Sadat permit a few days for security to be
discussed. Or he would ask that Sadat not pull his people out over se-
curity—this is better.
Ambassador Linowitz said that this is good; it will keep the talks
going.
The President said he would tell Sadat that we have plans for
making progress on schedule, not just for discussions. Before Sadat de-
cides to withdraw, even under difficult circumstances, Sadat should
consult with him (the President) first.
Ambassador Linowitz said that this is a great idea.
The President said that, where possible, the Ambassador should (in
his approach) quote Camp David directly. Even if it is a matter of three
words, this would be better.
Ambassador Linowitz said he knows. Begin is almost Biblical about
it!
The President said almost.

Ambassador Linowitz asked whether the President had anything he
wanted conveyed to Begin.
The President said that the Ambassador should stress how ex-
tremely important it is that we succeed. He has confidence in Begin as a
dedicated and generous leader, to get success. He (the President) had
joked with Begin here about Begin’s flexibility, and had said this to ease
the tensions.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Begin was talking about his interna-
tional reputation for flexibility! (laughter)
The President said he thought Begin might do that!
Ambassador Linowitz said he knows what to convey.
Deputy Secretary Christopher said he had nothing to add, and would
prepare a cable to Sadat.
The President asked Dr. Brzezinski and Mr. Hunter whether they
had anything to add and they said they didn’t.
(The meeting ended at 12: p.m.)

364.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
111991. Subject: Letter to the President From Prime Minister Begin.
1. Secret Entire text.
2. Following FYI is text of letter to the President from Prime Min-
ister Begin delivered by Israeli Embassy April 28.
3. Begin text.
Dear Mr. President,
Thank you for your letter2 of April 24 which was brought to me on
Friday, April 25, by the U.S. Charge d’Affaires, Mr. Brown.
In accordance with your request I acted at once by asking the
Deputy Defence Minister to instruct our military commanders to use
whatever influence possible with Major Haddad to ensure that the UN-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Korn; cleared by Edward J. Hull (NEA), Hunter, and
Bremer and in S/S–O; approved by Korn. Sent for information Immediate to Jerusalem,

365.
Editorial Note
On April 30, 1980, in a vote taken by the United Nations Security
Council, the Tunisian-sponsored draft resolution S/13911 on Pales-
tinian rights, proposed on April 28, was vetoed by the United States.
Under the proposed draft resolution, introduction of which restarted
the round of Security Council consideration of the issue of Palestinian
rights that had occurred from March 31 to April 9, the Security Council
would affirm “that the Palestinian people should be enabled to exercise
the inalienable right to self-determination, including the right to estab-
lish an independent state in Palestine; the right of Palestinian refugees
to return to their homes and live in peace with their neighbors; and the
right of those choosing not to return to receive equitable compensation
for their property.” Moreover, the draft resolution reaffirmed the prin-
ciple that Israel “should withdraw from all Arab territories occupied
since June 1967, including Jerusalem; decide that appropriate arrange-
ments should be established to guarantee the sovereignty, territorial in-
tegrity and political independence of all States in the area, including the
sovereign independent State of Palestine, and the right to live within
secure and recognized boundaries; decide that these provisions should
be taken fully into account in all international efforts and conferences
organized within the United Nations framework for the establishment
of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East; and re-
quest the Secretary-General to take all the necessary steps, as soon as
possible, for the implementation of the resolution and to report on the
progress achieved.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, page 380) For
the full text of the draft resolution, see telegram 1672, from the U.S. Mis-
sion to the United Nations, April 29. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800262–0961)
With the introduction of the Tunisian resolution impending, the
U.S. preference was to “avoid” a veto of the proposed text, as the per-
ceived “decision” of the Palestine Liberation Organization to “force a
vote” on the resolution “could provide a pretext for calling an emer-
gency special session of the General Assembly.” “To do so” the Depart-
ment of State observed, “it will be necessary to prevent the resolution
from obtaining nine yes votes.” The United States could count on four
abstentions, but some delegations previously thought to be abstaining,
such as the Philippines and Mexico were “wavering” after revisions
proposed by the resolution’s sponsors. The text, from the U.S. perspec-
tive was also problematic as it did not “specifically reaffirm Resolution
242,” though a paragraph critical of Camp David had previously been
deleted. (Telegram 112025 to multiple posts, April 28; National Ar-
ment to the Security Council issued in connection with the U.S. veto,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Representative to the United Nations Donald F. McHenry argued that
given the search for a “comprehensive peace” in which the United
States had taken an active role, “we should not be distracted by ap-
proaches that offer no prospect for making practical progress.” Further,
the United States “should not adopt an approach that does not endorse
UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, the agreed basis for all
peace efforts in the Middle East—an approach which, indeed, seeks to
change Resolution 242. We should not allow the United Nations to be
used in this way. The clash of opposites and the sharpening of contra-
dictions has no place here, in this body dedicated to the maintenance of
peace and the resolution of disputes through peaceful means.” For the
full text of McHenry’s statement, see telegram 1714 from the U.S. Mis-
sion to the United Nations, May 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800216–0283)

366.
Summary of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting on Oil Supply Agreement with Israel
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Acting Secretary of State Warren Christopher
Secretary of Energy Charles Duncan
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Henry Owen
Richard Cooper, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (notetaker)
The President indicated that we should develop a reasonable ap-
proach on implementing the oil agreement with Israel that would be
definitive enough to meet Israel’s needs, but that would not become a
price-subsidy device. If Israel were being gouged on price, or couldn’t
get oil, then it should be able to get oil through us, at cost price. But the
triggering mechanism should not become an incentive to activate in
terms of price. If Israel could get oil elsewhere, it should do so. He had
no objection to a triggering device that cited either the top 10% or top
20% of the average cost of U.S. imports. (There was a general consensus
at the meeting on 10%). He wished to avoid triggering now, and does
not want to sell Alaskan oil to Israel. It was agreed that we should come
up with a standard for automatic triggering of the agreement, in order
to give the Israelis a sense of certainty, and to indicate that we stand by
the oil agreement.
Further recommendations on the formula would be made to the
President later in the day.

367.
Editorial Note
On May 8, 1980, the United Nations Security Council adopted Res-
olution 468 (1980), which expressed the Council’s “deep concern” over
the May 2–3 Israeli expulsion of the Mayors of the West Bank cities of
Hebron and Halhul and the Sharia Judge of Hebron and called upon Is-
rael to rescind these measures. The final vote was 14–0, with the United
States abstaining. (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, page 411) The
text of the resolution as passed is printed in the Yearbook of the United
The Israeli deportation of the Palestinian notables on the night of
May 2–3, came in the wake of a period of heightened tension in
the West Bank, culminating in a terrorist attack on Jewish settlers in
Hebron, killing six Israelis and wounding 16, on May 2. For details of
the attack, as well as the atmosphere leading up to the incident and its
and the political aftermath in the West Bank is discussed in telegram
The Security Council meeting on May 8 was convened at the re-
quest of Tunisia on May 6 and a draft resolution was submitted by the
Tunisian delegation on May 7. Assistant to the President for National

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski submitted this draft, which made
no reference to the killings in Hebron, to President Jimmy Carter for ac-
tion under a May 8 covering memorandum. In the covering memo-
randum, Brzezinski informed the President that the Department of
State would like to instruct Representative to the United Nations
Donald F. McHenry to tell the Tunisian representative that the United
States would be forced to veto a resolution which did not make refer-
ence to the Hebron incident; at the same time, the Department of State
wished to instruct McHenry to “use his discretion” about “floating” a
U.S. draft resolution for which the United States could give a “yes”
vote. Carter did not take action on this memorandum. In a separate
May 8 memorandum, sent for action to Carter, Brzezinski informed the
President that the Security Council had “softened” the resolution, de-
leting references to Security Council Resolution 465 (1980) and to the
“deploring of Israeli action.” Brzezinski recommended to Carter that he
instruct McHenry to abstain on the resolution while issuing a “strong
statement;” Carter initialed his approval of this recommendation,
adding a handwritten note: “Check with me on final text. J.” Under a
third memorandum, dated May 8, Brzezinski forwarded to Carter the
draft text of the statement to be delivered by McHenry. After making
textual changes, Carter initialed his approval of the statement, adding
the handwritten note: “Tell McHenry to use the text as I’ve approved it.
J.” All of these documents are in the Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 79,
to the Security Council with the U.S. abstention is in telegram 1823
from the U.S. Mission to the United Nations, May 8; National Archives,
The Security Council passed two further resolutions on the issue of
the expelled Palestinian notables. On May 20, the Security Council
passed Resolution 469 (1980), condemning Israel for failing to act on
again abstained, stating its position in the matter had not changed.
(Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, page 413) The complete text of the
resolution is printed in the Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, page
428.

368.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Representative
for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz) to
President Carter
Washington, May 10, 1980.
Dear Mr. President:
Having just returned from the Autonomy Negotiations in the
Middle East, I want to give you my impressions about where we stand
and where we ought to go from here:
1. As you know, President Sadat has instituted a postponement in
the Autonomy discussions3 on the ground that he wants to reflect on
the developments during our recent negotiations at Herzliya and to
consult with his advisors. Originally he had agreed that the working
groups could continue meeting despite the suspension of negotiations
at the Ministerial level, but later, at the urging of Boutros Ghali, he de-
cided to suspend the working group discussions too. In my conversa-
tion with Sadat at Ismailia Thursday afternoon, Sadat indicated that
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the postponement would be a relatively brief one, probably not more
than a week or so. One of the key factors in his decision to postpone is
the forthcoming major address he will be making on Wednesday, May
14, in which he will announce some significant Cabinet and policy
changes. The Israelis were at first puzzled but then philosophical about
Sadat’s proposal to postpone the discussions, and they are anticipating
that the postponement will not be an extended one. They can be ex-
pected to assert publicly that they had been perfectly willing to proceed
with the negotiations and that Sadat’s action makes it less likely than
ever that there can be an agreement by May 26. For his part, Sadat now
is clearly miffed at Begin’s failure to move forward in the negotiations
and tends to discount the possibility of making any real progress with
Begin in the months ahead.
2. During the nine days we spent at Herzliya trying to find agree-
ment, we accomplished little substantively on the major issues. For
several days the Security issue was the major hang-up. Prime Minister
Khalil and the Egyptian Delegation refused to discuss any other issues
unless and until the Israelis agreed to move forward with discussions
of Security by an appropriate group. Begin had asserted at the outset of
this round of negotiations that Israel would not discuss Security on any
continuing basis unless it were first agreed that Israel would have re-
sponsibility for both external and internal security. Predictably, the
Egyptians refused to agree, there was almost a breakdown in the talks,
and ultimately the Israelis dropped the condition and agreed to a dis-
cussion. The Egyptians then put forward their own security proposals
which were dismaying to the Israelis and, in important respects, out of
line with our own thinking. At that point the negotiations almost broke
down for the second time. After some fast footwork and semantics, we
were able to get things back on track again. (Reflecting the tone of the
discussions and the hypersensitivity of the parties is the fact that I was
able to get Egypt and Israel to agree on a formulation for security dis-
cussion by proposing that this be done by a “negotiating team” rather
than by a “negotiating committee” or “negotiating group”.) The heart
of the matter is that the two sides are actually not so far apart in imple-
mentation of Security measures as they are in the jargon and rhetoric.
Accordingly, I did my best to try to get Ali and Weizman in center
tied fashion. Each point went through several steps: First, a position by
Burg; second, an endless discussion and ultimate endorsement by the
full Delegation of Ministers (including that great apostle of moderation
General Sharon); and third, the telephone call to Jerusalem for the scru-
pulous scrutiny and ultimate grudging approval of Begin. (It is note-
worthy that a couple of times Begin initially refused to approve a par-
ticular point but was later prevailed upon by Shamir and Burg to go
along.)
5. For their part, the Egyptians were acting strangely. Khalil was
impatient, hard-nosed, and uncharacteristically rough. Burg sensed
this and seemed to be making a real effort to meet Khalil’s concerns. A
couple of times I thought that Khalil had made up his mind to search
for a reason to suspend the negotiations, but then when he finally ac-
ceded I concluded that he was adopting his position in order to try to
eke out some concession from the Israelis.
6. We played a central position in the negotiations, shuffling from
one party to the other and helping them overcome differences. We also
surfaced several position papers as agreed, including draft of Heads of
Agreement; Water paper; Land paper; and Security paper. I gave
copies of the Water and Land Papers directly to Begin and also dis-
cussed with him the draft of the Heads of Agreement point by point. At
Sadat’s suggestion I turned over to General Ali papers on Water and
Land. It is perhaps significant that both the Israelis and the Egyptians
focused on our Heads of Agreement paper and each presented written
comments, suggestions and amendments. We are going to try to use
these to put together a revised paper which may perhaps bring us
closer to agreement. For the moment, however, the differences are
wide. We have not yet had any significant reaction to the papers on
Water and Land, although the Israelis have indicated that they find our
water ideas very interesting.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
7. In a one-to-one discussion8 with Begin I tried out with him the
Gaza First idea after I had already done so with Khalil and the other
members of the Egyptian Delegation. Interestingly enough, Begin said
that the only Gaza First proposal he knew about was one which would
call for an overall agreement with respect to the West Bank and Gaza
and implementation first in Gaza. I then asked him point blank
whether he would approve an agreement which dealt only with a plan
for Gaza for early implementation while further discussions continued
with respect to the West Bank. He did not answer me directly but
merely said that if such a position were presented “we will think about
it”. The Egyptians, however, did not respond favorably when I put the
same question, and Khalil said that Sadat had never intended that there
be a Gaza First option which would not include agreement on an
overall plan to be implemented first in Gaza. When I met with Sadat in
Ismailia, the conversation was such that it simply was not possible to
bring up the Gaza First option with him, therefore, I did not do so.
8. Begin’s political position is stronger than it was a couple of
months ago. The recent Hebron killings9 and his visit to Washington
apparently helped him in the polls since he now emerges as a tough
fighter on behalf of Israel’s security. When I met with Shimon Peres
he told me that there was no more than a fifty-fifty chance that there
might be an election this year and asserted that he thinks Begin is
stronger than he was earlier this year. Begin obviously feels this be-
cause he told me several times that he thought that his position on secu-
rity had a national consensus behind it and the full support of the
people. When I asked Peres and Rabin11 about their own estimate, they
said that the nation would, indeed, be deeply concerned about its secu-
rity but they thought that this did not necessarily mean support for
Begin’s position. Both are confident Labor would handily win any elec-
tion now.
9. As to Sadat, he is about to unveil a new governmental plan
which he thinks will make a dramatic difference in the governing of
help to Egypt economically as well as politically. He regards his May 14
speech as a landmark.
10. At this juncture the prospects for significant achievement by
May 26 are obviously not good. Assuming that the heads of delegation
and Ministers reconvene around May 21 or 22 (as we had earlier
agreed) then we will have about four or five days to come up with an
acceptable agreement or at least significant and encouraging progress.
Unless there is a complete breakdown, however, Sadat does not indi-
cate any desire to terminate the negotiations, believing that ultimate
agreement will have to await new elections both in Israel and the
United States.
11. On this next trip, in about ten days, I would seek to accomplish
the following:
A. Try to get agreement on Heads of Agreement or Points of
Agreement which might be publicized as indicating acceptable
progress. For reasons indicated, this is clearly problematical at this
juncture.
B. Try to get agreement on paper on Water and, if possible, on
Land.
C. Try to get agreement on one or more of the major legal is-
sues now before us—Source of Authority, Residual Powers, and
Jurisdiction.
D. Try to see what progress can be made with the Gaza First idea if
it is clear that we cannot make any sufficient headway on the broader
points.
12. If by May 26 there has been no progress worth talking about,
then Sadat will, I believe, come down quite hard on Begin and will
probably call for a suspension of the talks though he would refrain
from terminating them. His attitude with reference to the European Ini-
tiative12 is still uncertain, but I tried to make clear that his and our in-
volvement in such moves at the United Nations would prejudice fur-
ther negotiations under Camp David. Quite clearly Sadat presently
intends that the Autonomy Negotiations go forward during the
months ahead but he does not anticipate any real agreement before the
end of the year.
Sincerely,
Sol M. Linowitz
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

369.
Summary of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Egyptian President Sadat
Washington, May 13, 1980
The President called President Sadat at 0605 EST this morning and
asked about Sadat’s speech to Parliament. The Egyptian president indi-
cated he had just finished speaking and that “everything will be okay.”
Sadat confirmed the President’s statement that Ali2 would now be
doing most of the negotiating. When asked about resumption of the
talks, Sadat said he would tell Parliament tomorrow3 that because of
the President’s “interference” they will resume next week. (C)
The President informed Sadat that his daughter-in-law was doing
fine and Sadat expressed his and his son’s great appreciation for what
the President is doing in that regard. The conversation terminated at

370.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs
Washington, May 13, 1980
SUBJECT
Autonomy Talks (U)
We may be doing enough to get ourselves past the May 26
“goal”—but I am not entirely convinced. At the very least we should
follow through on the steps decided:2
—message to Sadat (done) and Begin (tonight);4
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—Secretary Muskie’s talks in Europe;5
—Sol Linowitz’ talks in Europe;6
—a speech on autonomy7 (where Muskie is preferable);
—low-keying the importance of May 26 in our public presenta-
In addition, we need some form of presentation for the moderate
Arab states, and especially Saudi Arabia. Perhaps Sol should go to Ri-
yadh—or a message could be sent to the Crown Prince. (S)
I also believe that both Linowitz—and the speech—should get at
the security question, by reassuring the bulk of Israelis and reducing
the capacity of Begin to wrap himself in the flag on issue after issue be-
cause of their “security” implications. (S)
I remain convinced that we need to intensify the talks in some way.
Holding a Blair House or Rhodes-type9 set of talks may be impractical
at this point. But I do believe that Sol should spend longer at a time in
Sol’s current status, at some point soon he will exhaust his remaining 50
days or so of his 120-day appointment, and some other status could be
required. (S)
Intensifying the talks in this way—while being careful not to raise
expectations unduly—could hasten the time (if at all) when enough
work would be done to merit reconsideration of the option of bringing
the talks to a head (perhaps through a summit). (S)
Under other circumstances, Muskie’s going to the area next month
could give an added fillip of senior authority. For the near term, how-
ever, his becoming that deeply involved would probably not be a good
ordering of his priorities. (C)
We also need to be alive to the risks that there will be a continuing
rise in violence on the West Bank. This may be, as Sam Lewis argues,
something Fatah has decided upon for internal political reasons within
the PLO, basically unrelated to the course of the talks. I am less con-
vinced (since tactics on Camp David is the issue on which much of PLO
politics turn). And it may be that violence—and Israeli counterac-
tions—will go down now that the pressure of May 26 is off. But I sus-
pect we will still face a recurring cycle of violence and counteraction,
including UN resolutions. (S)
One approach would be to make greater efforts to explain what we
are about to the Palestinians on the West Bank and Gaza (and working
on the Israelis to “cool it” with regard to such steps as further deporta-
tions of mayors). (S)
There is another—more sensitive—line that bears thinking about
(though I am not recommending it). I met this morning with Mustapha
Zein, an American-educated Palestinian (who [less than 1 line not declas-
sified] is close to the PLO). He argued that the PLO leadership, as well
as Palestinians on the West Bank, are uncertain about the directions we
are going, although he acknowledged that we have explained the
process over and over in public. He suggested better flow of informa-
tion (he did not, however, suggest any variation on our proscription on
dealing with the PLO—since he argued there is nothing for us to talk
with the PLO about!). (S)
Of course, he also took the argument a step further, in saying that
an effort to isolate the PLO from the West Bank and Gaza is doomed to
failure, and would only intensify Fatah’s efforts to assert control
there—and also to be active. (This was at least in part self-serving
Nonetheless, there might be some merit in exploring ways to seek a
reduction in the tolerance among West Bankers for disruptive violence,

371.
Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of
State
1. (C-entire text).
2. The bill referred to in reftel was not “passed” by the Knesset, but
was merely given a preliminary reading and referred to committee,
where it is virtually certain to languish indefinitely. Any responses to
press inquiries should reflect this fact.
3. The bill, which was introduced by Tehiya MK Geula Cohen to
coincide with Jerusalem unification day, was primarily a publicity
stunt by the theatrical right-wing MK. It contains three clauses: Jeru-
salem is the capital of Israel; the integrity and the unity of greater Jeru-
Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Amman, Cairo, and
Jerusalem.
questions related to the Knesset bill on Jerusalem. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800239–0289)

372.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State and the White House
11060. Subject: Letter From President Sadat to President Carter on
Suspension of Negotiations. Ref: Cairo 11043.
1. Secret-entire text.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. Under Secretary Osama El-Baz called me to the Foreign Ministry
Friday at 1630 local to hand me the text of the following letter from
President Sadat to President Carter. El-Baz said this was intended to
supplement the oral message conveyed last night in reftel.
3. Begin text:
Dear Jimmy:
I was very pleased to talk to you on the phone3 and have another
stimulating conversation with you. As you well know, I highly value
the bonds of friendship and solidarity that bind us together and con-
sider them among the main pillars of our policy. It is my deep convic-
tion that coordinating our stands and agreeing on a common strategy
should remain as an overriding factor in shaping our moves and ac-
tions. I view this as an important contribution to world peace and sta-
bility in the Middle East.
It is in this spirit that I am writing to you this letter to share with
you some thoughts on how best to deal with the present situation. You
will certainly recall that I told you, in our telephone conversation, that I
was quite willing to agree to the resumption of the autonomy talks de-
spite the discouraging signs which emerged from the Hertzliya Round.
In that session, the Israeli Government took an unyielding hard line po-
sition on such sensitive issues as the settlements and the planned ex-
pansion of Jerusalem. To be sure, we are never deterred by such posi-
tions, however unreasonable, for they can be said to be merely
negotiating positions. But the situation becomes different and those po-
sitions acquire new dimensions when they are accompanied or fol-
lowed by certain steps which are designed to consecrate them and con-
front both Egypt and the United States with a fait accompli every now
and then. Unfortunately, experience reveals that the Israeli Govern-
ment is liable to interpret our willingness to continue negotiating de-
spite its uncooperative actions and statements as a proof of our ac-
ceptance, or at least acquiescence, to its policy.
This has often resulted in encouraging the said government to take
more untenable positions rather than moderating its views, a fact
which has been recognized and regretted by many Israelis. It is for
these reasons combined that my colleagues and I found it imperative to
take a firm stand in response to a new Israeli move which could under-
mine our efforts if it goes unchecked. The move was initiated in the
Knesset to turn the annexation of Arab Jerusalem into a basic law, an
act which amounts to a constitutional amendment under the Israeli
system. Such an act would be extremely difficult to reverse. Undoubt-
edly, it was intended to intimidate future Israeli governments and cur-
tail seriously their freedom of action. It has been suggested that such a
move was undertaken by a Knesset member and not by the Israeli Gov-
ernment. However, it is evident that the government acted in parallel
with the member’s move and associated itself with it. Both Premier
Begin and his chief negotiator found it opportune to endorse the move
and state that it was nothing new. Furthermore, the Israeli Government
submitted an additional draft of its own to formalize the annexation of
East Jerusalem and render it irrevocable. One of the arguments Prime
Minister Begin used was that he confronted us both with that at Camp
David. On the other hand, Israeli officials have been making provoca-
tive statements about their settlement policy and their determination to
build 14 new settlements [garble] The content as well as the timing of
such actions came as a negative development to which we could not re-
main passive. It would not be in the interest of the negotiations and, in
fact, the entire peace process to hold the talks in this atmosphere of
rising tension and unilateral actions which run contrary to the spirit of
reconciliation. As you know, the issue of Jerusalem is a sensitive one
that invokes the interest and sentiments of eight hundred million
Muslims. We recognized quite willingly the religious and cultural
rights of sixteen million Jews in the city. By the same token, the rights of
eight hundred million Muslims must be respected and observed.
Thus, it was inevitable for us to move to check such Israeli defiant
attitude which is criticized by many moderate Israelis. We called for a
pause, not a breaking-off of the negotiations. Such pause is intended to
serve Israel notice that its policy of imposing preconditions and cre-
ating fait accompli is counter-productive. It is also meant as a signal to
the Israeli public that their government is undermining the peace
process with these rash and uncalled for actions. In the final analysis,
the pause could, if utilized skillfully, help the peace efforts and boost
the chances for reaching agreement. The Israeli Government must be
brought to understand that it is under an obligation to exercise self-
restraint and refrain from any precipitate action which is likely to affect
adversely the peace process or render the negotiations meaningless.
Afterwards, we will be ready to resume the talks in a more conducive
atmosphere.
May I also suggest that we utilize this interval to discuss and coor-
dinate our views of the major issues of substance which were raised in
the course of the last round of talks. Our aides have started such thor-
ough examination of substantive issues following the Hertzliya talks
and I think that it would be fruitful to pursue this joint study prior to
the resumption of the talks. Of course, you are at liberty to hold consul-
tations with the other side as well. My confidence in you and your
judgment has no limits. As usual, I will be delighted to receive your
thoughts and observations.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
With best wishes and regards.
Sincerely,
Mohammed Anwar El Sadat
End text.
4. As I did with Boutros Ghali last night, I told El-Baz that, ac-
cording to our information, their interpretation of the Knesset action on
the Jerusalem bill was erroneous; it had been introduced by an opposi-
tion member of the Knesset and the government had moved to bury it
in committee. El-Baz refused to buy this explanation, saying that the
government could have taken the position that submission of this bill
was untimely and opposed its introduction at this time. Instead, the
government had permitted the bill to be introduced and referred to
committee.
5. I then asked El-Baz what the GOE considered should happen be-
fore negotiations resume. He said their position was as stated in last
night’s oral message—namely, that there should be assurances that the
Jerusalem bill will not be voted into law while negotiations are going
on. In addition, Israel should stop provocative announcements of plans
for new settlements such as that in the recent Dobbles’ report; it was
one thing for Israel to state its position in negotiations that it had a right
to settlements but quite another thing to announce specific plans to es-
tablish new settlements.
6. Noting that President Sadat’s letter called for coordination and a
common strategy between us, I reiterated the point I had made last
night to Boutros Ghali that the GOE announcement which caught us by
surprise was hardly an example of coordination and consultation and
could not help but make a bad impression in the United States, after
President Sadat’s statement to President Carter and in his People’s As-
sembly address that Egypt was prepared to resume negotiations. This
would inevitably be seen as a reversal of the Egyptian position. I
thought it useful to make this point again since Mansour Hassan, Min-
ister of State in the presidency, with responsibility for information and
cultural affairs, was in El-Baz’s office during our conversation. Hassan
was apparently there to discuss a press briefing which El-Baz was
going to give immediately after our meeting to further clarify the Egyp-
tian position on the autonomy talks. I believe the Egyptians are gen-
uinely worried about the effect on President Sadat’s credibility which
their announcement has created and are seeking to minimize the
damage, particularly with the American press.
7. Department may wish to repeat this message to Tel Aviv.
Atherton

373.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of

374.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Jordan
131696. For Ambassador Veliotes. Subject: King Hussein Visit to
U.S. Ref: Amman 3237.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1. (S) Entire text.
2. Please deliver2 following message from President Carter to King
Hussein: Begin text:

375.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts
131748. Athens and Muscat for Ambassador Habib. Subject: May
26 and Beyond in the Autonomy Talks.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. Consultations here in which Ambassadors Atherton and Lewis
participated, following Ambassador Linowitz’s most recent round of
negotiations in Herzlia, have led to a number of conclusions about the
situation we face and the manner in which we should proceed through
May 26 and beyond. In essence we believe that the negotiations are be-
ginning to cut into the tough issues and while clearly there is little hope
of concluding an agreement by May 26, we have concluded the negoti-
ations should be pursued as intensively as possible until an agreement
is reached. We recognize this may take some time and that in the mean-
time we will face a problem in maintaining credibility on the part of the
Arabs and Europeans in the efficacy of our approach. With respect to
the latter, the Secretary in his trip to Europe4 has begun to set forth the
rationale for our approach and to make it clear that we consider it es-
sential that the Europeans take no action that would make these negoti-
ations more difficult. In one forum or another we will also begin to put
out a public line that affirms our determination to pursue these negoti-
ations until an autonomy agreement is reached and expresses confi-
dence in the Camp David process as the only practical way to proceed
toward a peace settlement.
3. With respect to the Arabs, we recognize there is little that we can
do to influence the radical Arabs in any event. But we do want to keep
in close touch with the moderate Arabs, and in particular to convey a
signal to the Saudis and Jordanians at an early stage as to how we in-
tend to proceed. In using the points below we want to give you max-
imum flexibility to adapt your presentation to your various interloc-
utors; the important thing is to get our message across as effectively as
possible to the key officials in your host governments over the days
ahead. We want to avoid appearing to be defensive. We do not think
the Arabs (or Europeans) are going to have an easy time putting to-
gether an alternative strategy and we believe it will help to keep mo-
mentum from building in this direction if we project confidence in our
own game plan.
4. Begin talking points:
—After a thorough review of the results of the recent Herzlia
Round of negotiations and the overall status of the talks, we are con-
vinced that, while agreement obviously cannot be reached by May 26,
the negotiations should continue at as intense a pace as possible in the
weeks ahead.
—It would of course have been ideal if the date set as a goal by the
two parties could have been met. However, these are unprecedented
negotiations in terms of their complexity and their objective, and it is
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
hardly surprising that it has not been possible to conclude them in 12
months. We have had targets before that have been exceeded, but it is
the ultimate success of the outcome and not meeting the target date that
is important.
—What is important today is that serious negotiations are un-
derway, and that we believe they are getting somewhere. The experi-
ence at Herzlia of engaging both Ministers and working groups simul-
taneously permitted the parties to begin grappling with some of the
central issues for the first time.
—Ambassador Linowitz had to handle a tough confrontation over
the security issue at Herzlia. But at the same time much valuable work
was accomplished. We have now put forward our suggestions on most
of the issues and these are being considered carefully by the two sides.
There is a much closer common concept of what kind of document we
should aim for as the outcome of negotiations than there was even a
month ago. We are moving steadily toward getting both sides to accept
a single text as the basis for negotiations.
—It is our intention to pursue these negotiations as vigorously as
possible until an agreement is reached. We will play our role as “full
partner” and will both put forward our own suggestions as we con-
sider appropriate and intervene to break deadlocks to move the process
forward. We are not interested in achieving an incomplete or inade-
quate agreement within some arbitrary time limit. We are determined
to get a meaningful agreement on autonomy and will extend the nego-
tiations if necessary to achieve it.
—There is already agreement on a significant list of functions to be
transferred fully to the Palestinian self-governing authority. The two
sides are now grappling with the remaining core issues: arrangements
for control over land; the principles to govern an equitable allocation of
water; designing arrangements that will fully assure Israel’s security
while giving the Palestinian authority an appropriate role in security
functions; arrangements in the economic sphere; voting rights for the
East Jerusalem Arabs. These will be tough issues to resolve but we be-
lieve it can be done with patience and determination.
—The President remains convinced that Resolution 242 and the
Camp David Framework offer the only practical way of building
toward a comprehensive peace. He is determined to see this process
through to success.
—The President has asked Secretary Muskie and Ambassador
Linowitz to outline to key European leaders the progress made to date
in these talks and to stress the complexities of the issues which can only
be ultimately resolved by tenacious attention to the negotiating process
itself in the months ahead. We will make clear to the Europeans that we

see no virtue in any alternate negotiating forum so long as serious ne-
gotiations are underway and both sides want them to continue.
—With respect to the present “postponement” in the negotiations
that Sadat has brought about, the Egyptians are clearly upset by certain
actions the Israelis have taken, but they assure us that they have no in-
tention of breaking off the negotiations. We are in touch with both sides
and are urging a resumption of the negotiations at an early date. We
can understand the frustrations which each side periodically feels but
past experience has shown that a tenacious application to the negotiat-
ing process is the best way ultimately to resolve the issues.
5. In making these points, we would like you to find the occasion to
place them in the context of the President’s desire to maintain strong
and close relations with your respective host countries. We want to
continue our dialogue on the peace process, and we hope both gov-
ernments will agree with our view that it is of utmost importance to do
this in a manner which preserves our overall cooperation for the vital
strategic objectives we share.
Muskie

376.
Letter From the Israeli Ambassador to the United States
(Evron) to President Carter
Washington, May 20, 1980
My dear Mr. President,
I have been asked by Prime Minister Begin to transmit to you the
following message:
“Dear Mr. President,
I thank you for your letter of May 15 which Ambassador Lewis de-
livered to me on his return to Israel.

377.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt
140586. Subject: Mobarak Visit—Autonomy Talks.
1. (S-entire text.)
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Sterner and Walker; cleared by Hunter and Jane E.
Taylor (S/S–O); approved by Draper. Sent for information Immediate to Tel Aviv and the
White House.

378.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to
President Carter
Washington, May 23, 1980
SUBJECT
Oil Supply Agreement to Israel
At your request, the Israelis were told on May 2 that we wanted to
defer talks scheduled for May 4–6 on the U.S.-Israeli Memorandum of
Agreement on oil supply so that you and I could have a chance to
discuss this problem. I have now reviewed the issue and have exam-
ined the memorandum of May 1 sent to you by Charles Duncan and
Warren Christopher. I think we should move quickly to resume dis-
cussion of this issue with the Israelis. As Ambassador Lewis explained
in your meeting on May 1, further delay on our part in discussing the
terms for activation of the Agreement is likely to introduce an unneces-
sary irritant into our relationship with the Israelis. If you agree, I would
like to send a negotiating team to Israel sometime in June. Before we
approach the Israelis to propose specific dates, we need your approval
for our position.
The two basic principles which our negotiators will convey to the
Israelis are: (1) that the MOA is a supply unavailability agreement, and
cret; Nodis Attachment. Carter wrote “Ed. C.” in the upper right-hand corner of the
memorandum. Brzezinski returned the approved memorandum to Muskie under a May
27 covering memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
we are working from that; and (2) the price charged for any oil supplied
to Israel must be full replacement cost; it cannot contain any hidden
subsidy.
My Recommendation:
We stay with the basic position contained in the May 1 memo-
randum (attached) with one change: increasing the requirement for
short-term, indirect purchases from two-thirds to three-quarters. Our
negotiators would have to seek additional instructions before changing
this position. The position has the following main provisions:
When there is no physical shortage of oil available to Israel, the
Agreement could be activated, subject to the concurrence of each of the
governments at the time, if Israel:
(1) is paying for all its imported oil an average price higher than
the average cost of the most expensive 10% of crude oil imported into
the United States ($38. per barrel in March) and;
(2) has to buy at least three-quarters of its oil through short-term,
indirect purchases.
As to the matter of the price of oil that we would provide if the
Agreement were activated:
(1) if the U.S. provides foreign oil to Israel, we would charge our
acquisition cost plus any handling charges; and
(2) if the U.S. provides domestic oil to Israel, the price charged
would be acquisition cost or the replacement cost whichever is higher.
Replacement cost means the actual cost to U.S. refiners of replacing oil
sold to Israel; if this cannot be precisely determined, replacement cost
will be considered to be equivalent to the average cost to U.S. refiners of
the most expensive 10% of crude oil imported into the United States.
This is a sound, tough negotiating position. We may have to autho-
rize adjustments in the future, but I recommend that we not do so in
advance.
I recommend, and Charles Duncan concurs, that we send a team to
Israel in June, to proceed on the basis described above.

379.
Memorandum From Edward S. Walker in the Office of the
President’s Special Representative, Department of State, to
the President’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace
Negotiations (Linowitz)
Washington, June 3, 1980
SUBJECT
THE CURRENT SITUATION
The situation in the West Bank and Gaza, in the Arab world gener-
ally and in terms of the negotiations is deteriorating.
Begin’s first act as Defense Minister2 was to suspend publication of
two out of three West Bank Arab newspapers. (His action was, strictly
speaking, justified since the newspapers had evaded the censor by
placing editorial comment in news stories.) The Israeli authorities also
apparently suspended Arab women’s organizations after an attempted
sit-in organized by one such group in three homes which were sealed
by Israeli authorities in Nablus (the comparison of Government action
in this case to its lack of action against Israeli women sitting-in at the
Hadassah building is vivid in West Banker’s thoughts and in those of
many Israelis, some of whom reportedly had come to Nablus in a show
of solidarity with the Palestinian women). Attempts by shopkeepers
to close their businesses in reaction to the bombings3 of West Bank
mayors were forceably broken up by the IDF and two or three Arab
youths were wounded by IDF fire during a scuffle at one Arab town.
Several more schools have been closed just as students were preparing
for critical examinations and, as Mayor Freij told Brandon Grove, since
Weizman left there is no address in the Military Government to which
the Arabs can turn. As you know, Mayor Shawa of Gaza has resigned
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and the few remaining West Bank mayors, including Freij, are consid-
ering similar action. The quality of life has plummeted in the territo-
ries and many, including Sam Lewis, expect a cycle of violence and re-
pression which could turn the clock back ten years. This ultimately
could lead to repugnance in Israel and even greater pressure for new
elections.
Begin is no closer to solving his ministerial problem. He and
Sharon engaged in a vitriolic exchange at Sunday’s5 Cabinet meeting
which will make it all but impossible for Sharon to support Shamir’s
appointment as Defense Minister and equally impossible for Begin to
withdraw it. If Sharon votes against the government he is required by
Knesset procedures to resign and Begin is apparently backgrounding
the press that this would be no great loss. Sharon’s defection would not
bring down the government but would make Begin’s majority and sur-
vivability very tenuous.
Begin, in an almost irrational Knesset speech, compared the
German government to the Nazis and the French to the Vichy. He reit-
erated Israeli policy on Jerusalem and used the line that the gov-
ernment does not intend to “intervene” in the Knesset handling of the
Cohen Bill. While the intent may have been to be helpful, the message
was couched in a way which will be interpreted by the Egyptians and
other Arabs as anything but helpful.
Burg talked to Sam and said he was anxious to come to Wash-
ington to see you and is ready to travel on 36-hour notice. Burg once
again tried out Begin’s formula of the Government not “intervening” in
the matter of the Cohen Bill but asked Sam for any other suggestions.
Burg would like to get a formula worked out before coming to Wash-
ington. Sam is skeptical that any formula Begin could agree to would
satisfy the Egyptians and suggests we not spend much political capital
in pursuing this track. He also points out that the government is begin-
ning to press its own version of a basic law on Jerusalem which could
come out of committee or at least be considered in committee in a
matter of weeks or no more than months. Thus, even if we get a reas-
surance on the Cohen Bill we must be careful not to mislead the Egyp-
tians and set the stage for a future walk-out which causes even more
damage. Sam suggested getting Burg and Ali together (Ali is currently
indisposed due to a recurrence of his rheumatic arthritis), back-to-back
Burg and Ali visits or a shuttle by you in the area. However, Sam is
afat and al-Fatah have done the same at a Damascus gathering by
re-establishing the goal “to liberate Palestine completely and to liqui-
date the Zionist entity politically, economically, militarily, culturally
and ideologically.” The conference went on to say that the only way to
achieve this goal is through armed struggle. While the tougher formu-
lation of Fatah’s goals is a product of frustration, and probably also a
move by Arafat to out maneuver his extremists, it has given Begin a
handle to rally support behind him.
The Jordanians are telling us that the US is being blamed for the at-
tacks on the West Bank mayors and it seems to be a consensus in our
Embassies and the Consulate General in Jerusalem that our stock has
hit a new low. The Jordanian Prime Minister, a cool head, has urged us
to take a strong public posture against Israeli action in the West Bank. A
UN Security Council debate is likely in the next few days to discuss Is-
raeli activities in the territories at which we will be pressed to come
down hard on Israeli practices. This debate apparently has taken prece-
dence over the proposed debate on Jerusalem.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

380.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Representative
for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz) to
President Carter
Washington, June 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Status of Egypt-Israel Autonomy Negotiations
I thought you might want to have this very brief report on where
things stand now with reference to the effort to get the autonomy talks
started again and how we have been going about it.
Ever since the visit of Mubarak, I have been working with the Is-
raelis and the Egyptians endeavoring to evolve a satisfactory formula
which might cover the concern expressed by the Egyptians with refer-
ence to the Jerusalem Bill3 in the Knesset. I tried out several alternate
approaches with the Israelis after first checking with Roy Atherton to
get some assurance that the Egyptians would be agreeable to them.

381.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Israel and Egypt
150415. For Ambassador for Urgent Delivery June 7. Subject: Letter
for President Sadat.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Please deliver the following message from President Carter to
President Sadat as soon as possible.
3. Begin text:

382.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts
150838. Subject: U.S. Position on European Middle East Initiative.
1. (C) Entire text.
2. As addressees know, Europeans are concerned about Middle
East peace process and have conferred among themselves about an ini-
tiative they might take. There is much divided counsel, however, about
what specific form an initiative should take, with some preferring the
idea of a Security Council resolution while others believe this would be
a mistake and that instead the Europeans should confine themselves to
an EC statement. The Egyptians are apparently now weighing in with
the Europeans against a Security Council resolution at this time: Vice
President Mubarak reportedly took this line in his recent visits to
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent Immediate to Luxembourg, London, Paris, Bonn,
Copenhagen, Brussels, and Dublin. Sent for information Immediate to all Near Eastern
and South Asian posts and Khartoum. The telegram was repeated Immediate to Rome
and The Hague and repeated for information Immediate to Brussels (for USEEC),
USNATO, and Berlin on June 9.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
London and Bonn, and Minister of State Boutros Ghali appears to be
making same argument in Rome. The state of play as we understand it
is that various options will be examined at meeting of political directors
June 4, who will prepare final recommendations to their leaders in time
for summit June 12–13.
3. In our judgment the Europeans have already made up their
minds that they will have to issue some kind of statement and it will
therefore probably not be possible to talk them into holding off entirely
on an initiative. We believe instead our efforts should be directed
toward channeling any statement by the Europeans in directions that
are as constructive as possible and that will be less damaging to our
own Middle East strategy. We can best do this, we believe, by defining
our own concerns and requirements as precisely as possible.
4. As the EC governments formulate their final positions over the
next few days, you should seek appropriate opportunities to get our
views across as outlined below at the level you deem will be most effec-
tive. In your remarks you should stress three principal points: (1) We
will view any statement they make or any action by the contribution it
makes to a negotiated settlement; (2) anything that appears to offer the
Arabs the false hope of an easy alternative would conflict with our pur-
poses since it would take the heat off the Arabs to engage eventually in
the autonomy negotiations; (3) we wish to be consulted about any ini-
tiative the Europeans propose to launch well in advance.
5. Begin talking points:
—The achievement of peace in the Middle East is, as we all agree,
of vital importance to the West. In our view that cannot be achieved by
actions which are designed primarily to satisfy one side. It can only be
achieved by negotiations, as difficult as these can be, of the kind which
flow out of the Camp David Framework. As the Secretary has already
stressed, the President has determined that we will pursue these nego-
tiations in the absence of any other alternatives which have a chance of
achieving peace.
—We are now attempting to cope with Sadat’s suspension of the
talks2 over the proposed Jerusalem legislation. Amb. Linowitz is at
work attempting to get the talks back on the tracks because we believe
both sides basically want to see the process through. In the meantime
the Israeli Cabinet crisis4 and the increased violence in the West Bank
have complicated matters. But we continue to hold the view that the
autonomy negotiations are viable and that they ultimately offer the
best hope for progress. The negotiations are tough, but they are slowly
getting somewhere.
—Our concept is that we need further work by the negotiating
teams before the key issues are delineated in such a way that we can
begin to plan for a major push to get trade-offs on these issues. We are
working to get the parties back to the table as soon as possible so that
we can work intensively toward this.
—We understand European concerns at the slowness of the talks
but we would ask them to analyze carefully the pressures they believe
are building on them. Are the Arabs really going to rush to actions that
would be as self-defeating for them in the final analysis as they would
be damaging to the West? Is the security of the moderate Arab states se-
riously threatened by the present negotiations? Our own judgment is
that while the key moderates have reservations about the autonomy
negotiations they have no alternative plan and do not plan to join any
radical bandwagon to produce a confrontation with us on the peace
issue. They are concerned but not seriously threatened. We believe we
have the time to see this process through but also want to stress that it is
our intention to help complete it as soon as possible.
—We and the Europeans have a shared interest in the fundamental
importance of a comprehensive Middle East peace. Actions which the
Europeans can take to further this objective would be welcomed by the
United States. Our own specific reaction to any European proposal will
be determined by whether an initiative will be supportive of a negoti-
ated solution.
—Our reaction to any consideration in the UN of the peace process
will be based on the fact that Resolution 242 is the agreed basis for a
peace settlement and it is the foundation of the Camp David process
and the current autonomy negotiations. Any effort to alter the ground
rules of the negotiations would be fundamentally counterproductive.
Resolutions which seek to establish or define “rights of the Pales-
tinians” or “self-determination for the Palestinians” are likely to be con-
strued in Israel as changing 242 and cause a similar adverse impact on
the peace negotiations.
—We have another concern that bears on any initiative the Euro-
peans might take. We should not offer the Arabs the false hope of an
easier alternative that will save them from joining the negotiations or
giving serious consideration to the eventual negotiated outcome of the
autonomy talks in the cold light of available alternatives. You should
stress that no other means has been suggested that offers the Pales-
tinians the hope of as many real gains in the near future as the Camp
David process.

383.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State and the White House
13017. Subject: Egyptian-Israeli Talks: Response From President
C. Cairo 12987.
1. Secret-entire text.
2. I was summoned to meet Wednesday morning, June 11, with
Foreign Ministry Under Secretary Osama El-Baz, who handed me the
cret; Immediate; Nodis.
text of the oral message from President Sadat in para 3 below, re-
sponding to President Carter’s letter (reftel B) which I delivered to Mu-
barak for Sadat on June 8. El-Baz commented that President Sadat’s
reply contains nothing new but includes several points which GOE
considers it important to have on the record. El-Baz said he thought the
way was now clear for us to issue our announcement5 today about re-
suming the negotiations but that I should confirm this with Foreign
Minister Ali in view of his comments to me the previous evening about
reconsidering the timing of our announcement (reftel C). I have not yet
been able to reach Ali this morning but will keep trying.
3. Begin text:
June 9, 1980
Dear President Carter:
Thank you very much for your message of June 8. As I told you in
the message Vice President Mubarak conveyed to you last month, I am
willing to do whatever you deem helpful despite our assessment of the
current attitude of the Israeli Government. In this assessment, we are
not resorting to passing any judgment on Israeli intentions. Rather, we
are basing it on a careful analysis of their actions and official state-
ments. There is every indication that they are determined not only to
obstruct the process of reaching agreement, but even the creation of the
atmosphere which is necessary for the continuation of the negotiations.
However, on the basis of your appeal, we decided to accept your
invitation to the Washington meeting for the purpose of removing the
existing obstacles and verifying the presence of the essential requisites
for pursuing the talks. I think that it is important to make this point
clear in any statement or announcement regarding the meeting in
Washington.
On the other hand, I think that the timing of this meeting is equally
important. As you certainly have noticed, I hastened to announce our
acceptance of your proposal in order to strengthen your hand. You will
always find us helpful and cooperative and we will do everything we
can to make matters easier for you.
With best wishes and regards,
Mohammed Anwar El-Sadat
End text.
Briefing Room that Egypt and Israel had accepted the invitation of the United States to
send Burg and Ali to meet with Linowitz in Washington to prepare for the resumption of
formal negotiations. The text of the announcement is printed in Public Papers: Carter,

384.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s First Meeting with King Hussein of Jordan
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Edmund Muskie
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Nicholas Veliotes, U.S. Ambassador to Jordan
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Personal Representative of the President for Middle
East Peace Negotiations
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Robert Hunter, National Security Council Staff Member (notetaker)
His Majesty Hussein I, King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
His Excellency Sharif Abdul Hamid Sharaf, Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
His Excellency Ahmad Lawzi, Chief of Royal Court
Lt. General (Ret.) Amer Khammash, Minister of Court
Lt. General Sharif Zaid Bin Shaker, Commander in Chief of the Jordan Armed
Forces
His Excellency Fawaz Sharaf, Ambassador of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
to the United States
(The President and His Majesty met briefly in the Oval Office,2
then joined the others in the Cabinet Room at 10: a.m. Throughout,
King Hussein addressed the President as “Sir.”).
The President began by recalling his last meeting with King Hussein
The Prime Minister noted that His Majesty had just been talking
about that last meeting in Iran.
The President said that he was pleased and honored to have His
Majesty come here again. He (the President) had said in his welcoming
remarks4 that relations with Jordan are extremely important to us. They
are founded on shared commitments and ideals, which have not and
will not change. He was sorry that there had been this series of delays
in his (the King’s) coming here. But he looks eagerly to having this
chance to talk. He welcomes Queen Noor; we are proud of her. Con-
gratulations to His Majesty on his marriage and on the birth of his
child. Second, in the brief time available to them, he hopes to explore
as many common problems and opportunities as possible. We will
present our analysis of what we face. He is eager to get his (the King’s)
advice and counsel on our policy for the future. There is a large meas-
ure of identity in their common agreement. There is a minimum of dif-
ferences within a common approach. His Majesty is welcome. Their
meeting will be fruitful.
His Majesty thanked the President. He welcomes this opportunity
to be in a country he respects, admires, and loves. He is one of the few
leaders in his part of the world who feels an identity with the founda-
tions of the United States, with its ideals and principles, which they
hold dear in Jordan, as well. U.S. and Jordanian aims and objectives
must always be the same; their objectives are very much one and the
same—objectives of peace with dignity, and of stability. He is in a posi-
tion to see and observe the Islamic world, which is now the focus of at-
tention, brought about by its location, its sources of energy, and its po-
tential for instability. This area must now be part of the free world;
there is no other way to go. If there are divisions, or weaknesses, or
cracks in cohesion, that should be overcome. Unfortunately, all of this
is related to the Palestinian problem, and the fact that it is not yet totally
resolved in a way that future generations can live with. He remembers
his meetings with the President, through their meeting in Tehran. He
knows that the President has given him more time than any other presi-
dent. In their discussions on the Middle East, he can see that the Presi-
dent has greater sincerity on this problem and on resolving it than he
has ever experienced before. Unfortunately, their hearts had moved
away (from one another)—but not from the objective of peace. We (Jor-
August 1978, Document 182.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
danians) are always committed to it; it is dear to us; and we will try to
contribute to it—to see it realized in any way we can. He remembers
discussing with the President approaches to a comprehensive settle-
ment—pre-Geneva, joint delegations, Palestinian involvement, etc. But
events took a different course! Unfortunately, there was a lack of com-
munication between him and the President; and both were “surprised”
by events. There were gaps of time, understanding, cooperation—
which he had always valued. He is very grateful to see the President, to
talk, and to hear the President’s opinions on all matters. He will speak
honestly and frankly on all of them. The area is one of danger. Condi-
tions have changed since they met in Tehran—Iran, Afghanistan, and
the changing attitudes of people in the area. He once thought that
Jordan was on the front line, with dangers to Arab identity and the fu-
ture. Others now face this as well. There is a history of struggle, going
back hundreds, even thousands of years. Their future is in jeopardy. He
will see what they can do in the area, to bring the countries closer to-
gether to face the challenge. The President looks clearly into the future,
about our joint action to meet the threat, to our joint cause, and to our
common future. He (King Hussein) is also concerned about the Euro-
peans. It is true that Jordan is small—in its people and location. For
many years past, they have struggled and made achievements. This is
not a matter of survival, but of wanting something better than survival
for his people. They want something: the future, defense, in the identity
of people. There are limits there, too. It is a great problem they all face;
they are at the receiving end of threats, developments, and events. They
need to be with friends, dealing with contingencies, and need to play
the role they can, defending their future. In the area of the Arab world,
it is interesting to discuss that—the different attitudes, the problems
they face. It is obvious that the Palestinian problem needs to be moved
toward a solution. In particular, there needs to be a major role for the
U.S., without which nothing will happen. What seems to be a step for-
ward (note: Camp David) may be so in reality. But what is next? What
about the real problems—Palestine, the difficult problems that need
help and attention to be overcome. In all fields, our future cooperation
is needed, in many fields. What can we do? Thank you very much for
the opportunity to deal with you (the President). He (King Hussein) is
ready to discuss with friends the President’s interests.
The President expressed his admiration for King Hussein, and for
what he has done and tried to do in gaining a comprehensive peace.
Also there is the history of His Majesty’s family—including his father

and grandfather6—in their courageous efforts to bring about the resolu-
tion of difficult issues. The President also complimented the courage of
His Majesty and of his people, in preserving Jordan’s independence, in-
tegrity, and supporting human rights. He admires Jordan’s economic
development, under His Majesty’s wise administration. We have a con-
glomeration of challenges in the region, beginning with the Soviet inva-
sion of Afghanistan, with close to 100,000 troops there. The Soviets are
trying to subjugate a courageous and free people. This is of deep con-
cern to us. We are resolutely against the invasion. We are encouraging
our Allies to take a position of clear, tangible, and permanent opposi-
tion to this occupation. We are more resolute than some others. Some of
the Europeans are timid, vulnerable, and dependent on foreign trade.
We are trying to get them to stand with us, and with the Moslem world,
to convince the Soviets that they have nothing to gain and lots to lose
through the continued occupation of Afghanistan. He has seen and ad-
mired the combined efforts of the Moslem leaders, which sent a signal
to the Soviets. We will not abandon our effort to get the Soviets out, to
enable the Afghan people to choose their own government, and to keep
the country non-aligned.
The changes in Iran caused us great concern. Some elements of the
revolution only want the right to choose their own government; but the
irresponsibility of seizing the hostages shocked the United States, and
is his greatest problem. We want Iran to be united, independent, and
secure. We will not interfere—and this is a deep commitment. The Shah
had been a friend of the U.S. and we had tried to work with him. But we
have no animosity to the new leaders. We hope that Iran eventually
will see the wisdom in releasing the hostages, so that we can have
normal relations. Iran’s greatest threat is from the North. He appre-
ciates His Majesty’s advice and help with the hostage situation. He
hopes that the world will not forget the plight of the hostages. This was
an act of international terrorism, the first time that a government had
endorsed and supported such an action. It is abhorrent. The UN and
the ICJ have acted, as well.
On the U.S. presence in the region—with its energy, the potentially
explosive role of religious belief, social change, and struggles for influ-
ence—we see the region as vital to the whole world, perhaps more than
any other. It is not a secret that we have some military presence there.
We are not basing troops, but will be using facilities—in Somalia,
Kenya, and Oman. This will be transient; and they are not bases. Some
and King from 1946 until 1951.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
of the states welcome this. We have a large naval presence in the Indian
Ocean, to stabilize it; then we will reduce the force.
Under difficult circumstances, we departed from His Majesty’s
ideas on resolving the Israeli-Arab conflict, by taking advantage of the
opportunity to resolve the Sinai problem. We laid the groundwork for
the Palestinian people to participate in determining their own future.
This is not perfect. But we have made progress. As for the future, it is
difficult to predict. There are major problems—there is no responsible
person to negotiate for the Palestinians living in the West Bank and
Gaza. We hoped at Camp David that this would happen, but it has not
materialized. This has crippled the prospects for complete success. The
issue was to induce Israel to withdraw from the Sinai, and to withdraw
from the West Bank—keeping some outposts—as a way of helping to
resolve the problems and to permit the Palestinian people to participate
in determining their own future. Some people would be able to return
to the West Bank. It is not easy to negotiate under Prime Minister Begin;
but there has been progress. He (the President) is determined to con-
tinue. This is not incompatible with His Majesty’s ultimate goals for the
West Bank. It is an interim solution. After the Self-Governing Authority
is set up, then discussions will take place on the permanent status of the
West Bank and Gaza. We support Resolution 242. There should be a
withdrawal by Israel from the occupied territories and guarantees for
Israel’s security. He would like His Majesty’s advice on how to go
about finding a way to get the Palestinian people to be represented.
There is an obstacle: Israel will not talk with the PLO as long as it says it
wants to destroy Israel and will not accept 242 and Israel’s right to exist.
If the PLO will do this, however, we will talk with it. Maybe there is
something possible in the interim—perhaps some mayors: this would
get us over a difficult time. If Israel and Egypt go on with the talks, and
make progress, then we will continue, and resist efforts to subvert the
process. We welcome efforts that would add to the peace process, and
would not oppose the Europeans on that basis, or a Jordanian initiative,
to build on the process. However, we would resist any modification
that would cancel 242 or threaten Israel, or that tried to undo the
Egyptian-Israeli achievement. He sees and appreciates His Majesty’s
efforts to reach the same goals: the right of self-determination; a with-
drawal of Israeli West Bank forces; and the control of terrorism (where
His Majesty has done an admirable job).
He sees changes taking place in Iraq—he sees it to be more respon-
sible and moderate than before. Syria is going the other way; and it is
more allied with the Soviet Union than any other state in the area. He
would like to hear how His Majesty would approach the future—this
would be helpful to him (the President). Maybe they have a different
view of Sadat. He sees that it took an act of courage to resolve the con-

flict with Israel. He can’t comment on Sadat’s consultations with His
Majesty and the Saudis: maybe this was inadequate. We saw—and
were surprised—on how fast the situation moved after Sadat’s visit to
Jerusalem, and we tried to take advantage of it. He believes that the
peace treaty will be implemented in its entirety. If it can be extended—
on Jordanian or U.S. ideas—to allow the Palestinian people to partici-
pate in determining their own future, then ultimately there will be
hope of success. In the last two years that has been a major step for-
ward. The future is hard to predict; it is not easy to deal with the Is-
raelis; it is not easy for His Majesty to deal with the Syrians, Iraqis, and
Palestinians. His Majesty can help him (the President) with ideas and
how to provide more stability in the Arabian Peninsula, with relations
with the two Yemens and Saudi Arabia. Jordan’s beneficial role in the
Persian Gulf region is important to Jordan and to us.
Tomorrow, he will tell His Majesty about our concerns at the forth-
coming Venice summit, and will discuss other issues. He has tried to
present with candor our concept of the problems, commitments and
concerns—about Iran, Afghanistan, the Soviet Union, and the peace
process. He doesn’t believe that U.S. and Jordanian ultimate views are
different. He is not sure, however, of His Majesty’s view of self-
determination: an independent state between Jordan and Israel would
be a mistake; but His Majesty will have to judge this for himself.
[Omitted here is discussion of the situation in Afghanistan, Iran,
Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and the Venice G–7 Economic Summit.]
[Hussein:] On the Palestinian problem, Jordan was working on it,
then there were surprises! (laughter) It is not a matter of consultations,
and not a question of Sadat’s courage, as in his going to Jerusalem, etc.
But it is a feeling he (His Majesty) developed over the years, that if there
were a chance for peace, then they (the Arabs) should move together,
and preserve cohesion between them to get Palestinian rights. Egypt
has had a leading role in the area over the years; therefore Egypt has a
moral responsibility to the rest of the Arabs. In 1967, Jordan went to
war in support of Egypt, knowing what the result would be. This was
done in response to an Arab league agreement. Jordan honored it—as
did Syria. Since 1967, he (His Majesty) tried his best. He took a position
on negotiating with Israel that was not against it. He tried to get his
ideas and aims in all ways. He worked on Resolution 242 and helped to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
get Egypt’s support for it. He accepted Resolution 338. Jordan could
not bargain over Palestinian rights. Was Israel willing to return the
lands, either directly or under international auspices—with self-
determination? If there is self-determination, he is sure the Palestinians
will choose what we can live with. Most Palestinians are in Jordan.
Most Palestinians carry Jordanian passports. The radicals do well only
when hope appears closed. After many years—they only want to know
the end of the process. The President was honest to say that he couldn’t
say what that is. Jordan had to rely on his (the President’s) good will.
But after so many promises and assurances, they couldn’t go into the
unknown without knowing where the process was going.
He does not want to divide Jerusalem. They say that there should
be Arab sovereignty—sovereignty for the Christians and the Moslems
in the Arab part of it. Let Jerusalem be a real city of peace. There should
be self-determination for the rest (i.e. West Bank and Gaza). There
should be an end to settlements. Jordan has prepared a slide show on
the settlements, which he would be happy to show the President. This
shows that all has changed; there are new obstacles. Maybe even stop-
ping settlements now would not be enough. Water resources, the
ecology—all have been changed. In Israel’s opinion, Jerusalem is Is-
raeli; the West Bank is Israeli. There are rights for some, but they are
under Israeli occupation. He has had a vivid impression that Israel
wants the West Bank to be forgotten. Israel had the impression that it
could remove Egypt from the scene. And this has happened. With the
support and help they get, he doubts that they will change. But the Pal-
estinians must be involved. Without Palestinian participation, there
cannot be a real solution. If there is agreement otherwise, it will sow
seeds of distrust, and then the radicals will get the opportunity to de-
stroy the agreement. He is willing to do all he can for a real process,
with an end in view—on the future of the Palestinians, and of Jordan,
and of the region.
He is in touch with the PLO—that is a title: leaders change. Re-
cently he has tried a little opening—he is not totally encircled. After
Egypt moved (i.e. 1977), they faced a state where the area seemed to be
disintegrating between left and right. An idea was floated and a
meeting was held (i.e. in Baghdad); but friends (note: the United States)
did not see what this meant. For the first time, all the rest of the Arab
world spoke of 242 as the basis of a solution—including some ex-
tremists and the PLO. This held the Arabs together, and avoided disin-
tegration which would have helped the enemies of the Arabs. This situ-
ation has changed recently. Syria is closer to the Soviet Union, and
there are pressures in that country. Syria’s attitude tends to be negative
on any solution—and this is more so, now. But they are part of a

group—including Libya and Syria. Algeria has a decent president,9
who is honest and courageous, who will have an impact on his
country—though he is not yet totally in control. For a time, Algeria will
be part of this group. He hopes it will change.
He sees pressure on the PLO to encourage the radical elements and
extremist attitudes. He has tried to open the door to the PLO, and show
that they can come towards us; that they do not face only this pressure.
The PLO approached Jordan to talk with Jordan’s friends to see what
can be agreed on—for example, the future of Jordan and the Pales-
tinians together, as in the early 1970s, while preserving their separate
identities. He gets this from Arafat: the possibility is still there. And
Sadat broke relations with Jordan when he (His Majesty) proposed this
idea in 1972 (laughter)! So, something can be done there. Arafat said
that he wanted to remove U.S. fears and Israeli excuses against moving
to a just and durable peace. Arafat came to Jordan recently to see the
Mayor of Nablus, and again spoke of his difficulties and pressures. His
Majesty told Arafat of his coming here. The PLO is anxious to keep the
dialogue going with Jordan. It tends to be closer to Jordan. He (His Maj-
esty) promised to give what help he can in the interests of the Pales-
tinians. The PLO has sent an envoy to the UN in New York now, if he
(His Majesty) wants to convey anything.
Israel’s recognition of Palestinian rights, and Palestinians recogni-
tion of Israel’s right to exist have to come. But which should come first?
It should be simultaneous.
Jordan admires the Afghan people’s resistance. It is similar with
the Palestinians. If there is a lack of progress toward a solution, there
will be a movement towards violence. On the question of finding
someone to speak for the Palestinians, he was ready—if Israel would go
out of the territories and solve the Jerusalem question. If he can now get
support for doing so, he will go back and say that this is what Wash-
ington sees as an end result. If they do not know the end results, it will
be impossible to do anything, since it would serve no purpose. The
mayors were elected under occupation. They are deeply concerned
about the beginning of attempts to intimidate them into leaving. What
will happen? He does not know. The President sees this even without
Jordan’s daily contacts. The President is sincere; he has put in lots of
time on the problem. But Jordan lives with it every day. If this were
1967, maybe the experience would be different. He has tried every
door, without results.
The situation in Syria . . . Lebanon is a problem. It is unfortunate.
He does not even know the issues any more. Israel and Syria are there

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(i.e. in Lebanon), but it is not a clear-cut issue. There are three groups of
Christians; Sunni and Shia Moslems; the Syrians; the Palestinians. The
nightmare continues, with suffering and danger. He does not know the
result. But Lebanon is a time bomb. This does not serve Lebanese or
others’ interests.
In Jordan, they are making progress. They are affected by oil price
increases. Maybe the oil producers see their benefits going up; and the
industrial nations suffer less than Jordan does. The majority of coun-
tries try to make progress and to catch up—they are suffering most
from this instability (i.e. in oil markets). This is another area of danger.
There is a danger of eruption of more radical regimes’ taking over in
the world as such.
Jordan is in touch with its European friends. It senses their concern
for the future. What will happen next? He believes that we are not
[now?] at a critical juncture, where misunderstandings are the order of
the day, and lack of communication. Are we (i.e. Jordan and the U.S.)
partners in seeking a better future? Will we share the making of the fu-
ture? How can we ensure that we work together? The Europeans are re-
luctant to move. Jordan does not want something that is an alternative
to what has happened (i.e. Egypt-Israel peace treaty) or to block it. But
what can we do about Jerusalem, the West Bank, Palestinian rights, and
how can we relate to other parties? The Europeans are anxious to avoid
a U.S. veto. This leads to the idea of differences in the Alliance at a diffi-
cult time.
We can wait to see what happens. He hopes to go home knowing
the President’s ideas. But when that ends in disappointment, then he
fears that hope will be lost, and only the extremists will benefit. In
Jordan, they have problems. Jordan is close to the United States. Jordan
is grateful for U.S. economic help—which has diminished—and he is
not asking now. But the United States knows where Jordan stands. He
wants to know: how did things go wrong (i.e. between Jordan and the
U.S.)? How did it reach this point? Beyond that—if we are still
partners—how can we reach common objectives?
The President said that this was extremely helpful. First, there is our
friendship. The U.S. commitment to Jordan’s security and prosperity is
solid and unchanging. He was disappointed by the lack of Jordanian
support for Camp David. He has a great deal of investment in it, and
saw it as the only viable way to get goals that both he and His Majesty
share. It has one defect, which can be corrected: the need to have a firm,
recognizable voice of the Palestinians, making their demands on water,
total withdrawal, land, a share in security, an end to settlement, and
resolution of Jerusalem. No one does this now—with world attention
and approval—negotiating with Israel, the U.S., and Egypt to get His
Majesty’s goals. Therefore it is very difficult for us when others say that

this avenue should not be pursued and that there is a better one—such
as the U.N., or Geneva, where both the PLO and Israel would be repre-
sented. We went down that road. But the Arab nations could not agree
on how to negotiate, or on the role of the PLO and the Palestinians. We
tried it, with determination, and even got a U.S.-Soviet agreement.
But we couldn’t get Syrian or PLO agreement. The alternative was a
surprise, but he was grateful for it: Sadat broke the log-jam.
If there is a desire to resolve the issues, and to capture world atten-
tion, to get support and to prevail over Israeli obstructionism, isn’t the
best way to get someone among the Palestinian Arabs to join the nego-
tiations, with the tacit support of the PLO and Jordan? His Majesty says
he cannot negotiate for the Palestinians, but will he support others—for
example, some mayors—if they adhere to their principles—such as
total withdrawal and Jerusalem? Now there is a vacuum; it is difficult
for Egypt to speak for the Palestinians.
He (the President) is convinced that most Israelis want peace, and
will go a long way towards self-determination and withdrawal—ex-
cept from Jerusalem. At Camp David, they had a paragraph on Jeru-
salem that was satisfactory to Israel and to Egyptians who were even
closer to the Palestinians than Sadat. Israel found it difficult to with-
draw from the Sinai, to give up the oil, and abandon its strategic posi-
tion at Sharm-el-Sheikh. It was torture for Begin to have settlers come
out of the Sinai. This was very difficult, but he did it. The reason was
that the Israeli people want a permanent peace that would make them
secure. Israelis still have that feeling. Begin is not popular. He repre-
sents the majority on some issues—for example, the Israelis are terri-
fied about a divided Jerusalem, under which they could not go to the
Western Wall, as when Jordan occupied Jerusalem. Therefore we do
not see the advisability of abandoning Camp David. Another process
would be neither rapid or lead to a peaceful settlement. Jordan and the
PLO are not in the talks. If you would get Palestinians to join, then Is-
rael would be under difficult negotiating circumstances and it would
arouse in the world a belief that there is a desire of Jordan and the Pal-
estinians to resolve the issues. He (the President) has no desire to sup-
port Israeli positions against the Arab world. Sadat will tell His Majesty
that. There is a U.S. and Egyptian position together. He (the President)
would be happy to see Israel out of the West Bank and Gaza, with full
autonomy and preparations for its final status. He would be pleased to
see a total West Bank confederation with Jordan and see the Pales-
tinians support it. This is what he wants. Many Israelis want it, as well,
except for “total” withdrawal—they want some minor modifications.
There is a stalemate now, though we are trying to make progress. His

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Majesty should see our determination. There is terrorism on both sides;
and we deplore both.
In summary, to underline His Majesty’s commitment, is there
some way to pursue the process of Camp David, without Jordan or the
PLO in? This brings him to the conclusion that if Palestinian repre-
sentatives were in for the next few months, and we see nothing happen,
then we will explore something different—though always within 242.
Perhaps it was a mistake to go so far with Camp David without
Jordan. We understand that Sadat after Camp David was to go to Mo-
rocco to see you (His Majesty). Later, we got your list of questions11 and
responded12 to them. If we made a mistake, it was not deliberate. He
(the President) believes that without some other process, this (i.e. Camp
David) is the best. It is not perfect, but it is the best alternative.
One last thing, concerning the PLO: when he has met with Assad,
His Majesty, and the Saudis—including Fahd—and Sadat, he has
always asked that they induce Arafat to endorse 242 and Israel’s right
to exist. Following that—or concurrently—we would deal with the
PLO to look for a solution. This has not proved possible through pri-
vate encouragement—Arafat talks about this as his bargaining chip—
and is an element of the problem we have not been able to solve. Our
commitment to Israel’s security is complete. Israel does not ask for U.S.
forces; we provide its security needs. Maybe there is an incompatibility
in our hopes to resolve the problem. Does His Majesty see what is pos-
sible to do?
King Hussein said that they can see when they are at home, with the
PLO, what can be done.
The President said that he expects that getting Palestinians into the
talks would be hard. But negotiations and communications are impor-
tant. He had been surprised how far Israel had moved on the Egyptian
front, and on its commitment to principles on withdrawal, etc. He
cannot predict success, but he has seen movement before.
King Hussein said that it is precisely 242. Perhaps we can look at it
later. That was adopted after the 1967 war and only talked about coun-
tries. The Palestinians objected: 242 did not talk about their rights.
The President said that 242 just mentioned refugees.
King Hussein said that it was the missing ingredient.
The President said that with the Saudis, we drafted a statement the
PLO could issue, putting forward its reservations on full Palestinian
rights. He presumes that Arafat saw it, but it didn’t work.
King Hussein said that at that point Begin arrived (laughter)!
The President said that Begin went further on Sinai than the Labor
Government. But he is more extreme about the West Bank.
The Prime Minister agreed.
The President said that Labor, whether under Meir or Rabin, had
not been prepared to withdraw from Sinai or give up Sharm-el-Sheikh,
etc. Begin has done some difficult things, and went against his political
allies.
King Hussein agreed.
The Prime Minister said that it was hard now with the West Bank.
The President said he understood.
King Hussein said that he understood the President’s disappoint-
ment on Camp David concerning Jordan’s not supporting it. He had
sent the President a letter then; and sent an identical letter to Sadat.
The Prime Minister said that Sadat wrote to His Majesty from Camp
David.
The President said that Sadat had told him so.
King Hussein said that Sadat wrote that he was adhering to the
same line and to all the points he (Sadat) had made in the Knesset.
Jordan had agreed about them.
The Prime Minister said that did not include separating the process
into two parts. It was a shock, therefore, when Sadat did so at Camp
David and backed off on self-determination.
The President said that from Sadat’s and his perspective, he (Sadat)
did not abandon this in a separate agreement. He (Sadat) did not give
up self-determination or the return of Jerusalem. He (Sadat) did not
abandon it. Rather they went round it, and said that the agreement
would be an interim one, to provide later negotiations on the final
status, including Palestinian rights. This is the difference between His
Majesty on the one hand and Sadat and himself on the other.
The Prime Minister said that His Majesty is under the impression
that the Israeli strategy has been to isolate Egypt, and they practically
said to His Majesty that they wanted to solve the Egyptian problem and
then Israel would absorb the West Bank.
The President said he doesn’t doubt that goal. Israel prefers to keep
the West Bank, Gaza, and Sinai, but at the root wants peace. Many Is-
raelis see that, if they insist on keeping the West Bank, they will not
have a permanent peace. At Camp David, it was agreed that Pales-
tinians could join the talks in the Jordanian delegation, and others
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
could be brought in as mutually agreed. People from the West Bank
and Gaza could come in as part of the Jordanian and Egyptian delega-
tions. This still has promise. If Jordan is not in the talks—and he wished
they would be—there should be another way.
The Prime Minister said that they had dealt with the Israelis for a
long time.
The President said that he had read about it in the newspapers
(laughter)!
King Hussein said that that had been a violation of the only agree-
ment between Jordan and Israel (laughter)!
The Prime Minister said that Israeli actions are to absorb the West
Bank—on the ground. Without a commitment that the result of the
process is self-determination, Jordan couldn’t join the talks. Jordan
would be used as an umbrella while Israel absorbed the West Bank
through settlements—in the Arab view. This was the dilemma after
Camp David. This was the fear they tried to convey before Camp
David, that Jordan would look like the obstruction, whereas Jordan is
trying to provide the basis for a viable settlement.
King Hussein said that there is a basis for future misunderstanding.
There are two schools of thought in the Arab world. Some say that
there should be concentration on the remaining problems. Others like
to undermine Camp David and return to the past. This camp is more
aligned with the extremists. Security should be for all; Jordan wants as-
surances for itself, too. All right, they will think about it (i.e. what the
President had said on Palestinian involvement).
The President said he hopes His Majesty will think about it. He
sees differences between the Jordanian position and ours; they are
important.
The Prime Minister said that they were not fundamental.
The President agreed. The most difficult issue is Jerusalem. As
Begin says, its ultimate status should be resolved in negotiations.
Second, there is the end of Israeli occupation and military government,
which Dayan and Weizman support. The definition of full autonomy
needs to be hammered out. How much Israel should get out is to be
negotiated. The Labor Party is for partition. Begin says that the Pales-
tinians should be left to manage their own affairs. He (the President) is
for full autonomy. Begin is for full autonomy. Some difference!
(laughter)! We need to find a means for the Palestinians in the West
Bank and Gaza, with PLO support, to get in the talks—as long as we
make progress. They can make strong demands, and Egypt will sup-
port them. If the process still breaks down, then all of us will look for
alternatives. We will do our best now. He fears that otherwise the situa-
tion will get worse. There will be deterioration.

385.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Second Meeting with King Hussein of Jordan
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Edmund Muskie
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
6/80). Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Nicholas Veliotes, U.S. Ambassador to Jordan
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Personal Representative of the President for Middle
East Peace Negotiations
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Robert Hunter, National Security Council Staff Member (notetaker)
His Majesty Hussein I, King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
His Excellency Sharif Abdul Hamid Sharaf, Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
His Excellency Ahmad Lawzi, Chief of Royal Court
Lt. General (Ret.) Amer Khammash, Minister of Court
Lt. General Sharif Zaid Bin Shaker, Commander in Chief of the Jordan Armed
Forces
His Excellency Fawaz Sharaf, Ambassador of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
to the United States
Secretary Muskie began by asking His Majesty if he had enjoyed his
visit to the Air and Space Museum.
King Hussein said yes; it had been his first visit.
The President said that His Majesty had had a good guide. Senator
Glenn2 had taken King Hussein and Queen Noor to the Space Museum
after last night’s dinner.
King Hussein said that it was extremely interesting.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the capsule was interesting.
The President said that now we are working on the space shuttle. It
will carry a large payload, and is very flexible. Space on it will be leased
to private corporations and governments. It will help with repairs to
machinery in space and satellites.
King Hussein said that it meant a new era.
The President agreed. It is complicated to build one that can go out
and back repeatedly. There is the problem of heat damage. He would
be glad for His Majesty to go up in it sometime. We would try it out
well, first (laughter)!
The Prime Minister said that next they should go to a naval mu-
seum; he had a preference for it.
The President said that this morning’s meeting could be brief, here,
and then they could talk in the Oval Office while the others continued
their talk here. He apologized for keeping His Majesty so long yes-
terday—he only realized how long when he read about it in the news-
paper! It was so fruitful, and he had been enjoying it so much. So he
apologized for keeping His Majesty. He presumed His Majesty would
be discussing with Harold Brown on defense matters, which are impor-

tant to us, to Jordan, and to others. He had talked with Brown before
His Majesty arrived. We are grateful for His Majesty’s role. He (the
President) will be going to Venice, and for two days before that he
would stop in Rome, and would see the Pope. Venice is primarily about
economics—e.g. the stability of the monetary system and dealing with
energy. (At this point, Dr. Brzezinski brought a plastic model of the
space shuttle into the room).
The President said that this is a model of the space shuttle, which
His Majesty can take with him.
King Hussein said thank you.
The President (pointing to the model) said that it would be
launched from here, and then separate.
Dr. Brzezinski pointed out the rockets and the solar panels.
The President said that this is a good-sized model; and is an inter-
esting thing.
King Hussein said thank you.
The President said that at Venice they would talk about economic
matters, such as inflation and unemployment—and particularly about
energy. We have cut down our imports of oil. We have had a success
since the Tokyo Summit. We promised to reduce imports by 5% and
did so; we were the only country to meet its commitment. This year, in
the first five months, we reduced oil consumption by 12%, which is
about 1 million barrels per day. At Venice, they would discuss how to
continue, and make a recommitment to reduce imports between 1980
and 1985. Also they would talk about how to produce more energy,
from coal, nuclear, shale, the sun, crops—including trees. We got
through the Congress an amount over 10 years equal to $227 billion in
taxes for these purposes, and were setting up corporations to en-
courage synthetic fuels—technology we would share with our Euro-
pean Allies; we are eager to cooperate with Jordan on any projects it
has. We are planning the biggest photo-voltaic project in history, jointly
with the Italians. With other countries we will cooperate, and as tech-
nology evolves, we will be eager to share it with Jordan. We can learn
both ways.
On other items at Venice, they will talk about how to deal with the
Soviet presence in Afghanistan; about Iran; and dealing with the LDCs,
regarding the devastating impact of oil prices on their economies.
Countries like Turkey and Brazil are importing about as much oil as
their total exports. As a result, debt is a serious problem; inflation is
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
high. How to accommodate to these problems and to share responsi-
bility with OPEC—which is making the profits—will be discussed
jointly. Then he will be going to Yugoslavia, Spain, and Portugal. After
his visit, the world will see the communique—we don’t have any secret
agreements—to analyze it, and to see whether we answer Jordan’s
questions.
We have discussed the Middle East. His Majesty has seen the Euro-
pean resolution. We do not see it as incompatible with the Camp David
process. There was a resolute attack by the Israeli Cabinet and the PLO
on the European resolution. Therefore, it must be fair and well bal-
anced (laughter)! He doesn’t know what can be done on the Maqarin
Dam. Habib had been to see His Majesty and others. Would His Maj-
esty like to comment? We do not want to interfere. We are trying to
eliminate some obstacles that exist. He has studied the problem, in-
cluding water rights for the West Bank and Syrian cooperation. We
have gone as far as we can, without some agreement between Jordan,
Syria, and Israel on what to do. Does the project have a life?
King Hussein said very much so. They have agreed to address
themselves to the question of the West Bank, and prepare an answer for
Phil (Habib) soon. He hopes the U.S. will continue. Would we please
clarify the rules and the guidelines on shares so that they can tackle the
problem of getting Syrian cooperation.
The President asked about the possibility of direct Jordanian
dealings with the Israelis.
King Hussein said that they do this in the Israel-Jordan Mixed Ar-
mistic Commission (IJMAC), concerning the waters of the Yarmuk
River and the Jordan Valley. There are direct and indirect contacts.
The Prime Minister said that they had had a meeting yesterday.
Ambassador Veliotes said that they had solved a technical problem,
and they met under the auspices of IJMAC.
The President said good.
Ambassador Veliotes said that these were technical issues.
The Prime Minister said that there is now no problem. He assumes
that issues with Israel can be managed. Habib raised issues on which
there was agreement. There was only one, raised by Israel, on water for
the West Bank. Jordan is not ready to go into details. This must await a
his four day mission to help resolve riparian issues arising from the Maqarin Dam/Yar-
mouk river project. Habib had earlier met with Begin and senior Israeli officials May
12–13. A full summary of Habib’s mission and his meetings with both the Israelis and Jor-
Foreign Policy File, D800241-0698)

broader settlement. How Jordan talks with Israel about West Bank
water is for the future. The project has several stages. They are now
working on the second stage, and water that exceeds the second stage
should go to the West Bank. They can agree if the Israelis do not have a
problem.
King Hussein said that Jordan is worried about becoming involved
in greater discussions. Then there is a danger.
The President said he had no objection to such discussions
(laughter)!
Ambassador Linowitz said that the issue is discussed under Camp
David, concerning water and the West Bank. We feel it is desirable, in
determining allocation, that Jordan be represented, along with Egypt,
the Self-Governing Authority, and Israel, to get agreement. Is this
possible?
King Hussein said not now, there is a problem, but maybe later, in
the context of movement toward self-determination.
Ambassador Linowitz said that suppose there is already a Self-
Governing Authority . . .
The Prime Minister spoke briefly about Jordan’s use of water. Now,
he said, non-allocated water, that Jordan did not use from the dam,
would go to the West Bank in the future.
King Hussein said that it is an old story, the idea that some water
would go to the West Bank from the Jordan River. He is a little worried
about the possibility that Israel wants to discuss the future of the West
Bank, and then Jordan will have to talk about their taking water from
the Jordan River for the West Bank. Therefore this is difficult. Jordan
needs to limit the talks now to Israel’s and Jordan’s share of the water,
without prejudicing the future water supply to the West Bank.
The President said that as more water is taken from the Jordan
River, the Dead Sea is drying up. Israel is assessing the possibility of
bringing water from the Mediterranean. It is possible that this issue
would affect Jordan.
King Hussein said that it would require . . .
The President said that there would need to be an assessment of the
environmental impact. There would be some power generation. This
would stabilize the level of the Dead Sea at a proper point. This is not
happening now. It is being analyzed; and it involves Jordan.
King Hussein asked whether the water would come from the Medi-
terranean or the Red Sea?
The President said the New York Times said the Mediterranean.
Ambassador Veliotes said it was possible it would come from the
Gulf of Aqaba. We are exchanging technical information with Jordan
on a quiet basis.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President said good.
Ambassador Veliotes said he hoped it would not show up in the Is-
raeli press!
King Hussein said that this project could be done in the context of
peace.
Secretary Muskie asked whether there were any problems with the
authorization bill for the Maqarin Dam; Congress asks about it each
year.
Ambassador Veliotes said that this is a problem.
The President said he knew.
Ambassador Veliotes said that there is $50 million this year and pre-
vious appropriations. If agreement is not reached in this fiscal year,
then we will have to tell the Congress we can’t swing it. Hal Saunders
and he will discuss this with the Prime Minister. The last issue with Is-
rael is that Israel is asking a specific figure, concerning water Jordan
would take from the Yarmuk to the West Bank. This is hung up.
The President said that if U.S. funds are available, we will need
something for Congress to keep them.
The Prime Minister said that several issues have been resolved: the
Yarmuk triangle, the weir, and others. Only one remains, which Israel
raised recently: water for the West Bank. The major political issue is can
Israel speak for the West Bank? We can find a formula.
King Hussein said that there are other issues with Syria.
The President said he knew. These are his items. Perhaps they could
talk privately about self-determination. He wants to understand. He
has listened carefully, but does not see how His Majesty sees this in a
broader context. Perhaps they should talk privately?
King Hussein said: as you wish.
The President suggested that they stay here.
King Hussein said that they had talked about all subjects that had
been raised; they should try to work them out together. Jordan’s feeling
now: as far as what else happens, they accept developments and
progress in some areas to establish a comprehensive peace (i.e. the
Egypt-Israel peace treaty). Now is the point to think again about what
to do. In the Arab world, there is a division. Some—either in their
thinking or from external suggestions—want to undermine all that has
been done recently. Jordan’s feeling is that what has happened has hap-
pened, and they would like to see how to go forward. Their object is a
comprehensive peace settlement and security, to transfer the area to
greater stability and hope.
Some points were raised yesterday on the Palestinians: can anyone
speak for them? This is a dilemma. The natural answer is the PLO. Then

there is the second point, that the PLO would have to recognize Israel’s
right to exist before it could speak. The PLO counters that Israel should
recognize the rights of the Palestinian people. Jordan’s impression is
that the President’s suggestion is to see if there is a Palestinian body
which can come out with the Palestinian position. (By this idea) Jordan
would be in touch with the PLO and others to encourage them to make
a Palestinian contribution, at least at the initial stage. After yesterday’s
meeting, the Ambassador told them that this would need to be in the
context of Camp David—with Palestinians in the Jordanian or Egyp-
tian delegation. This would be very, very difficult to convince anyone
to do now. If this could be clarified, it would be very important. He is
very anxious that there be no misunderstanding. Should we go back to
talk?
The Prime Minister said that it should be free from a specific
mandate.
The President said that his thoughts could be difficult. First, we will
continue with the Camp David process as long as it can succeed—and
he can see that the Jordanians see it as inadequate. Second, he presumes
that Jordan is not willing to join the talks—formally or informally, now.
He would like it to be different, but will not try to change their minds.
Third, the provision in the Camp David Accords is that Palestinians
could be in the Jordanian and Egyptian delegations, plus others as mu-
tually agreed. This is covered in Camp David. To get past the problem,
he hopes there could be a responsible group of residents from the West
Bank and Gaza who would meet with us, Egypt, or Israel, and present
to us and to the world the Palestinian positions: the need to hold elec-
tions, to choose their own leaders, how to take over responsibility when
Israel is out—for police, schools, highways, etc. Until now, the Pales-
tinians are either too timid or intimidated. The mayors won’t do it. He
hopes that His Majesty and other leaders of the Palestinians—even the
PLO—in Jordan will encourage the mayors, three, five, seven of them—
he doesn’t care, it is their initiative—to say that they will speak with us,
Egypt, or Israel and Jordan later—if Jordan agrees—to be sure that Pal-
estinian views are adequately considered. Now there is no effective
consultation. If the mayor of Gaza City, who knows His Majesty and
Arafat, says he will consult with Ambassador Linowitz, Secretary
Muskie, himself, Foreign Minister Ali, or the foreign or prime minister
of Israel, then we would not inadvertently not take account of the posi-
tions, desires, and interests of the residents of the West Bank and Gaza.
Also this could expedite the withdrawal of the Israeli Military Govern-
ment, turning it over step by step, giving responsibility to the Pales-
tinians. Some of this has been tried in Gaza. Dayan says he is eager to
get the Israeli Military Government out. Weizman feels the same way.
When they tried to deal with the mayor—saying you take over the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
schools, police, etc.—they found reticence. The mayor was fearful of
being seen as betraying the Palestinian cause.
Maybe this (i.e. consultations) is a fruitless effort. He understands
the difficulties of having a formal group. Perhaps 5 or 6 mayors would
be willing, collectively, if they know they had the tacit approval of the
PLO and of Jordan. They could speak for the residents, and demand
that the Israeli Military Government be removed. They could demand
responsibility to run their lives, to have elections, and for the Self-
Governing Authority to have full responsibility. So far, we are playing
into Israel’s hands, by not being able to carry out the Camp David Ac-
cords. If Begin wants to slow down the process, he can blame it on the
Palestinians, and say that he wants to do something, but can’t get the
Palestinians to take responsibility. This (i.e. the consultations) would be
a public relations achievement, at least in the U.S., if the West Bank and
Gaza mayors were trying to take their own rights under the Camp
David process. Now it is felt here, in the press, that the Palestinians are
not willing to negotiate, but rather are terrorists.
He is eager for progress. It is hard for us to meet with West Bank
mayors. They are reluctant to talk with us. (Speaking to the Pales-
tinians?): How can we help Jordan take over the West Bank, and get the
Israeli Military Government out? One mayor is coming here.
King Hussein said Khalaf.
The Prime Minister said he has a relative here.
The President said that his (Mayor Khalaf’s) brother is here. We will
treat him, and hope it will succeed. We will try to break the stalemate
(i.e. in the talks).
King Hussein said that there are many members of the PLO and
other Palestinians who would be ready, if it worked out, to speak di-
rectly to the United States. The issue is how can they join the Egyptian
delegation—there is no Jordanian delegation.
The President said that they do not need to be in a delegation.
King Hussein said it might be easy to discuss with them.
The President said that the problem is that if they are designated as
representatives of the PLO, it will not work. If they come as indi-
viduals, we will not try to analyze whom they represent. Some mayors
may be PLO members: we don’t know. If they say they will negotiate,
but represent the PLO, it would be impossible for us. We can’t talk with
the PLO.
The Prime Minister said that there is a practical difficulty for West
Bankers to come in a context that would prejudge the result—i.e. the

autonomy talks. This is virtually impossible. They can come to speak
on the right of self-determination, freedom, and independence. This
they can do; they can talk to others, in a peaceful channel. But within
agreements whose end result is not clear, or is limited, what can they
do? This is a block.
The President said that they do not have to acknowledge they are
not getting all they want. They can demand that Israel get out, and that
they take over their rights; that they want to take over their rights on
land, etc. We will not say that they have to give up ultimate rights.
The Prime Minister asked whether Israel would permit a Congress
in the West Bank? Jordan could arrange that. They could meet, and
draw up a peaceful platform. Is this idea tolerable? Then Jordan would
talk to other Arabs and the PLO. This is a peaceful channel. But it has to
be outside of a presupposed course of action. If the Palestinians are
asked just to take over providing services on the West Bank, we are not
likely to get cooperation. They would say that this only relieves Israel
of the burden, when Israel is going about annexing the West Bank.
Therefore, this would only help Begin. Settlements would go on; ab-
sorption would go on. It is not likely that West Bankers would agree.
Also there was the violence against the elected leaders.
King Hussein mentioned the expulsions, as well.
The Prime Minister agreed (and listed several of the expulsions).
They were not engaged in violent acts; they would see Dayan and
Weizman; they are not violent people. They could have been a rival
force. The problem is that Israel is suppressive. If the Palestinians could
assemble peacefully, have a Congress, write a platform, ask what they
want, then they can talk with others, outside the Camp David context.
The President said that this is not prohibited under the Camp David
agreements. The U.S. takes the Jordanian position. Israel wants only 12
people on an Administrative Council. Egypt wants it to be larger, and
be a legislature or Congress. Nothing prevents the mayors or others
from saying what they want to do as they proceed to get to ultimate
goals: the right to vote, assemble, speak, exercise local responsibil-
ities—as an interim stage.
Ambassador Linowitz said that when he met with His Majesty in
London, he (His Majesty) had wished us well, but could not say we
would succeed and we were not responsive to Palestinian needs and
self-fulfillment. Since the Palestinians are not there, how can we re-
spond? Israel says: how can the U.S. and Egypt know what the Pales-
tinians want? Therefore there is the President’s suggestion, to help us
advance Palestinian positions, and ensure consultations—however
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
they get their views across. If not, the Palestinians will suffer most: they
will be held responsible for failure. The Israelis say they want to go for-
ward, but the Palestinians do not—Israel does not hear their demands.
King Hussein said that there is a dilemma: Camp David dealt with
two areas, Egypt-Israel in one and the Palestinians in the other. The
Egypt-Israel treaty many see as progress and as a solution to part of the
problem.
The President underlined that it was a part.
King Hussein said that the Palestinian side, unfortunately, was
done in the absence of the Palestinians and Jordan. Egypt was unable to
address this adequately, because it did not know what was involved.
The President said yes, this is what he is saying.
King Hussein said that Jordan passed maps to Egypt to help it avoid
mistakes. Is there a way to say that what happened between Egypt and
Israel exists, and take a fresh start on the rest? Camp David is telling
people to fit into a formula which does not meet their needs. It brings
into question the end results Jordan is asking about. The Palestinians
do not know what rights they will secure at the end of the day—the
future.
The President said that nothing in Camp David contradicts what
His Majesty wants in the future.
King Hussein and the Prime Minister said that they understood.
The Prime Minister said that asserting the demands of the Pales-
tinians is difficult for them to do under occupation.
The President said that we know what they want, and want to get
there. But there is no mechanism to get there, if they will not partici-
pate. For Jordan and the Palestinians, if you are not in the talks until the
goal is clear, and is 100% of what you want—then there will be no
progress. Sadat knew what he wanted; he (Sadat) said so to Begin:
withdrawal. Begin didn’t want that, and wanted to keep the settle-
ments. But world and Israeli opinion was with Sadat. Begin yielded,
and said that the Knesset should decide. He (the President) believes
that Begin is difficult. He has spent as much time with Begin as with his
(the President’s) wife—since each hour with Begin is magnified a hun-
dred fold (laughter)!
We should remember that there will be other Israeli leaders after
Begin—and he (the President) will be President. Also, the people of Is-
rael want peace. Its public opinion indicates that, if settlements were an
obstacle to peace, the overwhelming majority are opposed to them.
Now there is no way for moderate leaders or public opinion in Israel to
believe that Palestinian leaders demand rights: e.g. an independent
state, a confederation, or Israel’s getting out. Demanding these is all
right. But no one is designated to work with Dayan, Yadin, us or

Egypt—with the private backing of His Majesty and Jordan—to say
what they want. They should ask. How do they induce Israel to with-
draw, and to realize a solution? There is no entity to deal with—no
moderate responsible voice. That is all he (the President) asks. He is not
asking the Palestinians to sit down and say they accept Camp David.
He is asking Egypt, the PLO, and His Majesty to get the mayors to
speak publicly, to say that they represent the Palestinians and this is
what they want and how they will go about getting it. It will not be
easy; there will be obstacles. He hopes His Majesty will think about
this, and talk with the mayors and Arafat about it. If they see an
opening leading towards a 100% solution, they can talk about how to
proceed to realize their dreams, etc. This is what we need, and don’t
have it. Their position now is all or nothing.
King Hussein said that he can go back and carry these thoughts and
ideas. Could they succeed or not? He is not sure. Jordan had never ap-
pealed for an engagement of a group from the West Bank and Gaza.
The President said that they (the Palestinians) think there is opposi-
tion to it.
King Hussein asked whether his friends (i.e. the U.S.) could think—
if there is a lack of real progress—about a fresh start, including
everyone.
The President said that a “fresh start” is easy to say and hard to
do—it would take us back to where we were three years ago. There are
hard problems. Even the Arabs could not agree among themselves.
Should the Soviets be in? This is impossible.
The Prime Minister said that the emphasis before was on procedure,
not on substance.
The President said that that is what we got.
The Prime Minister said that if we can get an idea—of self-
determination—then the PLO and others could not resist. But to ask
them to commit themselves to a dead end—the autonomy talks—
would abridge their right to self-determination.
The President said that there is no abridgment on the final status of
territories, after five years.
The Prime Minister asked about Israel’s intentions.
The President said he didn’t know.
The Prime Minister said that for the Palestinians, it would only be
five years of legitimacy for Israel, while it absorbed the West Bank and
Gaza. Jordan knows Begin and those who went before him.
The President said he was not trying to defend them.
The Prime Minister said that the Arabs were on the receiving side.
There is a long record. Begin tries to negate U.S. pressure, and engages
in the appearance of talking, while building settlements. Look at the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
record. We need to broaden the basis for the Palestinians to assemble
and talk—only in the context of eventual self-determination.
The President said that Jordan and the PLO see self-determination
differently. The difficulty (between them) is that Jordan does not
espouse publicly an independent Palestinian state—and he believes
Jordan doesn’t want it. Assad said two years ago that this was the worst
thing that could happen, but doesn’t say so publicly, because of Rabat.
Therefore self-determination is a phrase in Israeli minds meaning an in-
dependent Palestinian state. In Jordanian minds, it means federation
with Jordan. His (the President’s) preference is Jordan’s—confedera-
tion of the West Bank with Jordan. He had told the Israelis this. He has
no group of West Bank leaders to present their case to the American
people and himself, demanding the right of free assembly, to express
their views and demand the right to vote, to choose a congress, and to
take over administering their own affairs. No one is recognized to make
these demands. He is asking the Jordanians to help it evolve.
The Prime Minister said that without Begin, Israel might let the Pal-
estinians assemble. How can it be done? His Majesty is ready to talk to
them (the Palestinians). But if they are not allowed to assemble in
peace, with an elected body, how can it be done?
Ambassador Linowitz said that this issue has not come up in that
form in the autonomy talks.
The President said (to Ambassador Linowitz) to forget Camp David
(i.e. as the context). How can we get the limits removed?
Ambassador Linowitz said that let the Palestinians announce that
they will be involved, with a mechanism to get their views, and ask for
an assembly. We can support them in that.
The Prime Minister said that the U.S. says the Palestinians should
participate in Camp David: this is a non-starter.
The President said he does not believe they have to do it that way;
we can get around it.
The Prime Minister said that if that is just a future course of action,
then all right—but it will be necessary to get Begin to allow it. They
(Jordan) will ask.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Jordan should tell Israel it is doing
this, and is taking responsibility for a peaceful assembly.

The Prime Minister said that Jordan cannot be responsible; it does
not control the Palestinians.
Ambassador Linowitz said the Israelis would see this as a basis for
insurance.
The Prime Minister said that the Israelis are in control—there would
be no real problems. The Palestinians will say that they want self-
determination, and to elect machinery to talk with the U.S. and others,
on machinery to reach self-determination. There will be no difficulty in
doing that. But this has to be an untied process not linked to autonomy.
Ambassador Veliotes asked whether the Prime Minister would ex-
clude that this group could talk with us on autonomy.
The Prime Minister said that they would seek to talk to the U.S.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we talk with some mayors, now. If a mecha-
nism were set up on the West Bank to articulate positions, however,
they would say they want an independent Palestinian state; they
would say they would talk with us about an independent Palestinian
state. That, in practice, is what they would do.
The President asked: then what?
Dr. Brzezinski said that they would then say let’s talk outside of the
Camp David framework. To be sure, we would have a fresh start, but
that would take us back to three years ago. What the Prime Minister is
doing is trying to get started a political approach which will derail the
Camp David Accords.
The Prime Minister said that one has seen this situation so many
times, as with Zimbabwe and Mugabe, who now seems a peaceful
man: myths get exploded. He (the Prime Minister) is arguing that the
majority living on the West Bank know that if they talk about an inde-
pendent Palestinian state, the U.S. would say no; but if the discussion
were about self-determination, that permits everything. It keeps op-
tions open. But the five-year transition means that the end is closed: the
Palestinians would get only rights like the post office and sanitation.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we have a process that is for Arab aspira-
tions. The other party—Israel—wants to incorporate the West Bank.
This can’t happen, but we need to see Israel’s legitimate security needs.
The outlook in Israel on the Palestinians in the last 3 or 4 years has
undergone tremendous change. Lots of Israelis now see the reality of
the Palestinians—e.g. General Harkabi. Camp David is a mechanism to
get Israel to make concessions in practice. It can translate demands into
reality. But if the demands are articulated in their totality, it will derail
the process and set it back.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The Prime Minister asked what changes there had been in Begin
and Shamir.
Dr. Brzezinski recounted his discussion with Begin at Camp David,
when Begin had told him that his (Begin’s) arm would fall off and his
eye would fall out before he would give up the Sinai settlements. But 10
days later, Begin agreed that a number of them should be dismantled.
He (Begin) accepted autonomy for the West Bank; now we are trying to
make that a reality. In five years more, it will be possible to translate an
intolerable reality towards accommodation. But to start a new process
would mean going back three years.
The Prime Minister said that the problem is that this view as-
sumes the process of Camp David occurs in a vacuum. Begin sabo-
tages it. They need something explicit on the end result—i.e. self-
determination. With the vacuum, one party is in control, and tries to
sabotage. There is a need for a mechanism guaranteeing fulfillment in
the right directions—either self-determination at the end, or allowing
an assembly in the West Bank and Gaza, with a platform shaped by two
guidelines: self-determination and security for Israel.
The President said they had discussed this subject enough. He
would summarize: first, some Israeli positions are not acceptable to
Jordan. These can be negotiated, though some would not change—e.g.
Jerusalem. Palestinian mayors can say that self-determination is their
position, and they will not change, but are willing to negotiate to
achieve that goal. This doesn’t have to be under Camp David; they can
say what they need. Only 1% of the American people know that the
Palestinians cannot assemble and talk. But if there were a group of rep-
resentatives of the Palestinians who could say they insist on an alterna-
tive—self-determination—we want them there as soon as possible.
First is the need for them to peaceably assemble. If Jordan says, all
right, it does not accept the Camp David Accords, but will help create a
peaceful assembly, this kind of rhetoric would help us make progress.
Without it, Israel is firm on the West Bank; Egypt tries, poorly, to speak
for the Palestinians; and we try to get Israel out of the West Bank, etc.—
without any way to deal with the Palestinians.
Secretary Muskie said the first phase of Camp David—the Egypt-
Israel treaty—the Jordanians say is a fact and will continue. The second
phase—Palestinian rights negotiations—are stalled because there is an
absent party. We can make it a fresh start by following the President’s
idea. How else can we get to talk? Jordan says to give up on the talks for
another approach. Negotiations are needed. Two parties are already
talking; but the third is not there. Which is more likely to work: an on-
going process or a new one which is not conceived? This is the choice. It
is difficult to do the talks bilaterally with Egypt, so the talks are stalled;
the Palestinians are not there or represented there. That can be a fresh

start. The President has shown that the process of evolution can work.
We will persist in trying to bring the parties in, to get a new perception.
Israel is concerned with security; the Palestinians are concerned with
self-determination. Fundamental rights must be kept separate; it can’t
be done in a grand effort; only dealing with the nitty gritty can work.
The powers and responsibilities of the Self-Governing Authority are
largely resolved—though the tough ones are left. We need to work out
answers to five issues, or the talks will fail. If they do, will a fresh start
be possible?
The Prime Minister answered yes. The talks don’t have to fail. He
doesn’t say they are finished. But one should allow a parallel course,
for the Palestinians to articulate their demands outside a formula
which closes the road to the future. The Israeli occupiers must relax
their repressive policies for this. Without it, who can articulate a rea-
sonable platform? If an alternative road is open—if the idea of self-
determination is allowed—then the Israelis will get used to it.
King Hussein said he knows the President was disappointed on
Camp David about the lack of participation. He (the President) knows
that Jordan was out of the picture until the Camp David results were
announced. Jordan sent its questions11 to help in dealing with the other
Arabs. If Jordan had gotten in, without knowing the end results, then
the very danger Israel sees of a radical state would not be more real on
the West Bank; but a similar threat would emerge on the East Bank—as
a wedge threatening the entire area. Instead, Jordan kept in touch. The
promises in the past were not fulfilled. Jordan knows the President’s
sincerity and his desire to see a solution. Jordan managed to keep the
Arabs together, but there are almost two camps. There are other
problems on Jordan: Afghanistan, etc. Regarding the PLO, Jordan has
bridges. With Iraq, Jordan has dramatically improved relations. Re-
garding Saudi Arabia and the Gulf, Jordan talks with all of them now. It
hopes to play a constructive role; it wants peace and stability. The Jor-
danians will go back and talk to the PLO. They have covered it time and
again: Jordan wants something to help move forward beyond this
point. The Egypt-Israel treaty is something that has been achieved. But
the Palestinian problem is still there—in Jerusalem, Gaza, and the West
Bank. Soon, there will be the next Arab summit in Jordan.
The President asked when.
King Hussein said: November. Soon, on the economic level of the
Arab world, they will need to talk to the oil producers, regarding the
future, and to see if there is a way of changing them. He sees they have
not charted a course, but an erratic one. The next phase is the summit:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
trying to regroup in the area. They will talk, but retain their identity;
will others say that Jordan goes too far?
He will talk to the PLO, maybe in New York before he leaves. The
Europeans are worried; he hopes they will be involved. The Soviet
Union is not important; it only needs to know where we are going.
Jordan can prevail on the reasonable elements among the Palestinians.
He will not promise that he can deliver, with things as vague as they
are. With Egypt and Israel in Camp David, everything was clear. On
the Palestinian side, it was not clear. Therefore Jordan posed its ques-
tions. He wants the U.S. to understand totally where Jordan stands.
Our objectives are one and the same. But how can we move? He wants
to move as fast as possible.
The President said that what he would like for His Majesty to say—
after consulting with the PLO, the Palestinian people, and the other
Arabs—is to acknowledge that the U.S. will not abandon Camp David.
His Majesty can deplore this if it [he] wants—he hopes he (His Majesty)
will not condemn it; and His Majesty can say that the ultimate goal of
Camp David is too limited. But second, please say that the Palestinians
must have a voice in our affairs: a free assembly, the vote, the right to
take over administration of the occupied territories, a congress to speak
for the Palestinians, and that the ultimate goal—which is different from
others’—will be pursued and not abandoned. This would be a step for-
ward. He hopes that the code words could be avoided.
King Hussein said that there is one difficulty: Israel wants sover-
eignty over the West Bank, Gaza, and Jerusalem.
The President said no, they prefer West Bank sovereignty, but this is
for negotiating. Some Palestinians are for an independent Palestinian
state; and some are for a confederation with Jordan. No one has to relin-
quish demands for a final solution. He wants His Majesty to say that
the Palestinians must have a voice, a free assembly, the vote, the right
to choose a body to represent them, and to state their ultimate goals
and say they will work for them. He (the President) hopes that His Maj-
esty will not condemn the Camp David process, but say that he (His
Majesty) will not speak in favor of it or join it, but the Palestinians in the
area must have a way to express themselves. This would add a new di-
mension, although it might not succeed. Palestinian leaders do not
need to acknowledge acceptance of Camp David; but Egypt, Israel and
he, himself will not abandon Camp David.
We can work in harmony. If His Majesty says this, that would be
good. Please consult with us; and have the Jordanian foreign minister
and prime minister come back and talk with Muskie, Linowitz, and
with him. Perhaps Jordan will say that it didn’t work, or that the PLO
said to say that, but please report and we will see how we can proceed.
He wants to explore how to break the deadlock.
(The meeting ended at 12: p.m.)

386.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, June 28, 1980
SUBJECT
UN Resolution on Jerusalem (S)
At Tab A2 is a memorandum from Warren Christopher, setting
forth the arguments either for an abstention or a veto or non-
participation in the vote on the UNSC Jerusalem Resolution—now
scheduled for Monday afternoon. The memorandum does a good job
in setting out the various arguments. (S)
Because of the gravity of this issue—and the risks in any vote—I
believe it would be useful for you to meet on Monday morning with the
Vice President, Ed Muskie, and me to discuss our vote and related
statement. Given Don McHenry’s deep involvement and concern, I be-
lieve it would also be useful for him to be present (his telegram to you is
at Tab B—note, however, that the operative text of the resolution is that
contained in Chris’ memorandum). (S)

387.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Egyptian Foreign Minister Kamal
Hassan Ali and Israeli Interior Minister Joseph Burg
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Edmund Muskie
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Personal Representative of the President for the West
Bank, Gaza and the Autonomy Negotiations
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Robert Hunter, National Security Council Staff Member (notetaker)
Egyptian Foreign Minister Kamal Hassan Ali
Israeli Interior Minister Joseph Burg
(The President met briefly with Minister Ali and Dr. Brzezinski in
The President began by noting that West German Foreign Minister
Genscher had just been here, following Chancellor Schmidt’s talks in
Moscow. Genscher is going back to Bonn tonight, for a cabinet meeting
tomorrow. This is a difficult travel schedule, and Genscher is not well.
Deputy Secretary Christopher said that Genscher has a heart
problem.
Minister Burg said that Genscher has had to cut down on his food
and his weight.
The President said that Genscher had spent three months recuper-
ating last year.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Minister Burg said that his color looked better.
The President said that Genscher has cut his weight back.
Deputy Secretary Christopher said that Genscher’s colleagues had
urged him not to go to Japan (for the Ohira funeral).
The President joked that maybe he should have said “see you in
Japan!” His (the President’s) hope is that without further delay we can
restart the autonomy negotiations. He asked Minister Ali to relate this
to President Sadat. They should start without preconditions, with a
firm commitment of both parties to negotiate under the Camp David
Accords. It is his belief that any act by either side to disturb the talks
would be. . . . (Secretary Muskie entered at this point).
Secretary Muskie said that Minister Burg has the world’s best collec-
tion of stories.
Minister Burg said that it is one of his minor prides!
The President continued that his hope is that there will be no pre-
conditions in restarting the negotiations. What concerns there are about
future interruptions in the talks would be lessened by the fact of the
talks itself. If Israel and Egypt are in talks, they would be less likely to
take particular acts, and there would be more confidence. His hope is
that the talks will restart with no further delay. If in the next few weeks,
or perhaps in September, there are developments that cause one side or
the other to withdraw, that problem can be faced then. He believes we
can make progress. The history has been surprisingly good through the
peace treaty. Both nations have concerns, but the talks can be suc-
cessful. He has asked Minister Ali to convey this to President Sadat.
Ambassador Linowitz said that they had had a very fruitful three
hours today, mostly clearing the air. The talks5 had been frank. Minister
Ali had raised three issues: Jerusalem and the Knesset committee ac-
tion; settlements; and confidence building measures on the West Bank,
which are a cause of agitation. Minister Burg’s concerns had included
articles in the Egyptian press making unwelcome statements about
Begin, plus Sadat’s suspending the talks without conferring. The talks
this morning were very helpful and beneficial. Afterwards, he thought
that we could get the talks resumed. Minister Ali needs to consult with
Cairo; Minister Burg is ready to start. After Minister Ali conveys his
views to Cairo, he (Ambassador Linowitz) hopes that we can meet to-
morrow morning and indicate that the talks will resume.
Minister Burg said he was prepared to say this.
Minister Ali said he was not.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Minister Ali could say what his con-
cerns are.
Minister Ali said that he had done so.
The President said that this was adequate, and he hopes that Min-
ister Ali will relay to Sadat his (the President’s) hope that the talks can
be restarted. We have all worked hard. If something should happen
that could stop the talks again, it would be better if the talks were actu-
ally going on.
Minister Burg said that he would follow the President’s line, which
is reasonable. Quoting what the President had said in Venice, it was
best to work for an ideal. Therefore, Israel is ready to restart the talks.
The President said he was gratified that Minister Burg saw it that
way, and that he (Minister Burg) had noted what he (the President) had
said in Venice!
Minister Burg quoted former Prime Minister Macmillan, saying
that a statesman is a politician when he is abroad.
Ambassador Linowitz said that, if we can—after Minister Ali talks
with Sadat—agree to restart the talks, we can get them structured, to
lay out a plan for the next several months, to proceed in a businesslike
way. The groundwork is laid, and now we wait for agreement.
The President said good. We will do all that we can to help. If either
Sadat or Begin have a problem, they should call him (the President) di-
rectly. He had had a good report from Minister Burg on how the Prime
Minister is feeling.
Minister Burg said that Prime Minister Begin is active despite his
illness—and so he is also angry about what happened in New York (i.e.
at the UN)! (laughter)
Secretary Muskie joked that we are helping to restore the Prime
Minister’s health!
Minister Burg said that this is a way of judging his (Begin’s) health!
The President said it was gratifying to know that Begin is recov-
ering. Will Yadin serve as acting Prime Minister for the next few
weeks?
Minister Burg said sure—and he (Yadin) will also be defense
minister.
The President asked if this had happened before.
Minister Burg said yes. It was part of the bargain three years ago.
Yadin was the head of a strong faction. Then this deal was worked out.
Now, it is continued out of propriety.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President asked whether Yadin had been able to see Egyptian
antiquities.
Minister Ali said yes.
The President said that Yadin had asked him (the President) to ar-
range it.
Minister Burg said that Yadin had been to Memphis, and shown a
strong interest in it.
The President said that he had asked Yadin if he (the President)
could help arrange such a trip to Egypt. Yadin had said he would like to
go. He (the President) had said that this would be the first thing he
would raise with Sadat—that Yadin should go to Egypt and see its an-
tiquities. Sadat said he would invite Yadin personally.
Minister Burg said that he was in Egypt 40 years ago, travelling
from Geneva to Palestine via Lisbon and Africa. The trip took four and
a half months.
The President said that people forget what has been done in the past
two years. He does not want us to move backwards with disagreement
or failure. If we continue to work we can succeed.
Minister Burg said that too much has been invested to permit
failure.
The President agreed.
Secretary Muskie asked whether the Egyptians had removed all the
artifacts before Aswan was flooded.
Minister Ali said yes.
Secretary Muskie asked if this was all of them.
Minister Ali said that it was all. They had teams that went
throughout the valley to see whether there were other artifacts. They
succeeded in digging out the ancient buildings.
The President said that it was a mammoth job in raising the sites
above the water.
Minister Ali said that the biggest was Abu Simbel; it was more than
20,000 tons of stone.
The President said that autonomy should be easy in comparison
(laughter).
Secretary Muskie said maybe we should build a new pyramid.
The President said he was very glad that the discussions have got so
far. Minister Ali would talk to Sadat tomorrow. Does he have to wait?
What time is it in Cairo?
Minister Ali said that sometimes Sadat goes out and comes in late.
The President asked whether Sadat goes to bed late. Minister Ali
could tell Sadat that he (the President) considered this important
enough to call him (Sadat) tonight.

Minister Ali said that by 9: a.m. here tomorrow he could report
on his call.
The President said that he would have gone to California by then.
Secretary Muskie asked why the President was going to California.
The President said he was addressing the National Education Asso-
ciation convention.
Secretary Muskie said that that was non-political!
The President said absolutely!
Minister Burg said that the reasons were great.
The President said that the political reasons were great!
Ambassador Linowitz asked Minister Ali whether he (Minister Ali)
could call Sadat now.
Minister Ali said he would try.
Ambassador Linowitz asked whether a call could be put in now.
The President said that a call could be placed from the White House.
Ambassador Linowitz asked Minister Ali if he would like to do it.
The President asked Minister Ali if he would like the call placed.
Minister Ali said all right, he would call now.
The President asked Mr. Hunter to place the call to Cairo for Min-
ister Ali.
Ambassador Linowitz said let’s do it.
(The meeting ended at 4: p.m.).

388.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Israel and Egypt
178916. Subject: Washington Autonomy Talks.
1. (S-entire text)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. Summary: Following for the record and your information is re-
port of meetings which lead to July 2 decision to resume autonomy
talks.
3. Ambassador Linowitz met alone with Burg evening of July 1
and breakfasted alone with Ali July 2. Burg was bristly about Egyptian
inconstancy and said Israeli Government and public increasingly
doubtful of Egyptian intentions. He was particularly upset about
media report he said he had heard to effect that Egyptian Parliament
had passed resolution stating that Jerusalem was to be capital of future

389.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter, Gary Sick, William
Odom, and Fritz Ermarth of the National Security Council
Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, July 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Syria (U)
We met, today, per your request, on CIA’s Alert Memorandum
(Tab I). We focussed not on the prospects for Assad’s removal from
power2—that is beyond our ability to predict—but on likely conse-
quences and steps we can take now. (S)
In our judgment, the Israeli and peace talks angles identified by
the CIA are less critical than two others: the impact on Lebanon and the
potential role of the Soviet Union. It is possible—but not likely—that a
change in government could be peaceful. Given the Alawite dominance
over the Sunni majority (and the split in the military between officers
and enlisted men along these lines), a change in government (other
than from a random assassin’s bullet) is likely to take both Assad and
his brother from the scene (e.g. through an Alawite coup to protect a
deteriorating position) or through incipient civil war involving Sunni
troops. Even with an Alawite coup, the risks of civil strife would be
high; and so would be the opportunities for Soviet exploitation of the
situation. The Soviets are not likely to remain detached from Syrian in-
ternal strife. Should Syrian internal conflict become tangled with Leba-
nese and Arab-Israeli developments, the Soviets would welcome the
chance to distract attention from Afghanistan and to assume a role
toward Syria that gave them leverage over Syria’s internal affairs while
appearing to protect against external threats. (S)
A critical scenario could involve Syrian force withdrawals from
Lebanon. The risks of a chain of events leading to renewed civil war in
Lebanon would then be high—including high incentives for Israeli mil-
itary engagement in southern Lebanon (and—in the extreme—in Syria
itself). A less likely—but still plausible—scenario could entail coinci-
dence between Assad’s collapse and Lebanon difficulties with pa-
ralysis in the autonomy talks occasioned by the (now virtually certain)
passage of the Cohen bill3 on Jerusalem and the (highly likely) move-
ment of Begin’s office to East Jerusalem. At that point, Israel would
have even less to lose through involvement in Lebanon in support of
Haddad, etc. (S)
U.S. Efforts
We concluded that there is little that the U.S. can do directly to af-
fect events in Syria. We do not have the position there now to influence
events either way; and any efforts (e.g. pumping up foreign aid) would
be unlikely to matter in the context of Assad’s problems. (S)
We also discarded efforts to deal with Iran, the UAE, and Kuwait
on this issue. We noted, however, that if there is a Saunders mission to
Iraq, that fact would be duly noted in Syria, and that could have an im-
pact with Assad—whether or not Saunders discussed Syria in Baghdad
(which would need to be considered further). (S)
Our best approach, therefore, should be threefold: 1) gain more in-
formation; 2) share our concerns with appropriate others; and 3) at
some point further increase sensitivities of interested parties to the po-
tential problems of instability in Syria:
—CIA should further refine the analysis in its alert memorandum;
begin identifying possible alternatives to Assad; and give us a good
analysis of the Soviet role now, Moscow’s interests and possible calcu-
lations (now and post-Assad); and the potential role of its direct in-
volvement in Syria;
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
—State should do a contingency paper laying out possible sce-
narios, risks, alternative regimes and their impact, and possible courses
of U.S. action (precautionary and reactive);
—we should compare notes with our key allies who have some in-
volvement in Syria, about the situation and possible course of events
(UK, France, FRG, Italy, Japan);
—we should go now to both Jordan and Saudi Arabia, along sim-
ilar lines, but seeking to draw on their particular knowledge and con-
cerns about Syria. With the Saudis, we should also stress the Soviet
angle;
—we should also have lower key discussions with the Egyptians
and Israelis on the issue—at some point stressing with the latter the
need for caution during any transition beyond Assad;
—at some point later, there might be value in discussions with the
Soviets on the seriousness of our concerns. This would be premature,
however, until we know a lot more about the situation. (S)
When we get the results of these soundings, we will be in a better
position to chart our course intelligently. This exercise would also get
other countries sensitized to the serious risks involved, and could thus
reduce the problems of ill-considered reaction to a change of regime in
Damascus. (S)
Tab I
Alert Memorandum for the National Security Council
Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, July 11, 1980.
SUBJECT
Syria
Although not imminent, Syrian President Assad’s assassination or
overthrow is significantly more likely today than it was before the 26
June assassination attempt. I believe that US policymakers need to
focus sooner rather than later on the potential adverse regional conse-
quences of Assad’s removal from the scene. The attached Alert Memo-
randum outlines briefly some of these regional implications. [handling
restriction not declassified]
Frank C. Carlucci

Attachment
Alert Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency
Washington, July 11, 1980
SYRIA
There is a growing likelihood that Syrian President Assad will be assassi-
nated or ousted by a coup. Assad’s departure could signal the return of an era
of chaotic instability and regional isolation that typified Syria’s first quarter
century of independence. Virtually any successor regime would be initially
more nationalistic and hardline, unable to propose or respond effectively to
major foreign policy initiatives, particularly negotiations with Israel, until it
felt confident of its hold on power. A new regime might also withdraw from
Lebanon, raising the prospect of renewed civil war; seek to rally domestic sup-
port through limited clashes with Israel; and seek support from the USSR to
help offset internal threats.
The recent assassination attempt against Syrian President Assad
underscores his growing vulnerability and is likely to encourage fur-
ther assassination attempts and increased terrorist attacks against
Assad’s minority Alawite regime. Although the beleaguered Syrian
President may be able to hold power for many months, his removal by
a coup or assassination—with little or no warning—is becoming in-
creasingly likely. [handling restriction not declassified]
In the event of Assad’s violent death or overthrow, Syria could
easily revert to the pattern of chaotic instability that existed before his
assumption of power in 1970. Alawites are in the best position to oust
Assad but the absence of an obvious successor could soon generate a
power struggle until a new leader consolidated his position. In any
event, a new regime—whether Alawite or Sunni—would be domi-
nated by the military. A Sunni regime might be able to strengthen its
position by attaining an accommodation with Muslim Brotherhood ex-
tremists. [handling restriction not declassified]
At the outset, virtually any successor would be more unpredict-
able, nationalistic, and probably more radical than Assad. This sit-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
uation would generate increased tension with Syria’s neighbors,
especially Israel. A weak successor might seek a limited military con-
frontation with Israel—such as air clashes over Lebanon or artillery
duels on the Golan Heights—to unite the country, but such confronta-
tions, especially on the Golan, could escalate to wider war. [handling re-
striction not declassified]
A post-Assad regime might extricate itself from Lebanon even
though a complete withdrawal would increase the risk of renewed civil
war there. An unstable leadership probably would not sustain the
steady financial drain and corrosive effect on the armed forces without
substantially greater Arab financial and military support. A new re-
gime could also fear that keeping a sizable military force outside Syria
would increase the likelihood of countercoup plotting within the mili-
tary. [handling restriction not declassified]
It is unlikely that a successor regime would moderate Syria’s ap-
proach to Middle East negotiations. There is no evidence that Assad’s
Alawite lieutenants, the officer corps, or Syrians in general support the
existing peace process. Chronic domestic instability would make it ex-
tremely difficult for Syria to moderate its stance toward Israel and to
play a constructive role in reaching a comprehensive peace settlement.
[handling restriction not declassified]
The Palestinians would welcome increased room for maneuver as
a consequence of instability in Syria. They, and the Jordanians, how-
ever, would remain unwilling to enter peace talks under the Camp
David framework and would also be unlikely to risk entering negotia-
tions under a new framework until the policies of a successor regime in
Syria had been worked out. By virtue of its central geopolitical position,
any government in Syria would possess substantial capability to foil
unilateral Palestinian or Jordanian peace initiatives. [handling restriction
not declassified]
A change of leadership would at least temporarily increase Syria’s
isolation in the region and further erode Syrian influence in inter-Arab
councils. A weak regime would invite outside meddling in Syrian af-
fairs by those who have done so in the past, notably Iraq. [handling re-
striction not declassified]
A new leader in Syria, uncertain of his power base, might seek ad-
ditional support from the USSR in an attempt to deal with the internal
threat. While most successors will want to preserve some ties to the
United States in an effort to keep a balance in Syria’s relations with the
superpowers, all will be compelled to maintain Syria’s military supply
line to Moscow. Soviet influence in Damascus is likely to increase ini-
tially, especially if Syrian-Israeli tensions increase. A new Alawite re-
gime is likely to seek increases in Soviet aid and closer military and
security ties, but, like Assad, is probably unlikely to request the sta-

tioning of Soviet ground forces in Syria. Given Sunni hostility toward
Assad’s closeness with the Soviet Union, however, a Sunni regime
might begin to distance itself from the Soviets and move closer to mod-
erate Arab states. [handling restriction not declassified]
[1 paragraph (17 lines) not declassified]
390.
Presidential Determination No. 80–231
Washington, July 16, 1980
Subject
Presidential Determination Under Section 4 of the Arms Export Control Act—
Egypt
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by Section 4 of the Arms Ex-
port Control Act, I hereby determine that the financing under the
Arms Export Control Act of the sale of F–16 and associated missiles to
Egypt is important to the national security of the United States.
You are requested on my behalf to report this determination to the
Congress, as required by law.
This determination shall be published in the Federal Register.
Jimmy Carter
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
391.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to
Secretary of State Muskie
Washington, July 22, 1980
SUBJECT
U.S. Response to Begin’s Moving his Office to East Jerusalem
The Problem
Sam Lewis reports2 that Begin is determined to go through with
moving his office to East Jerusalem, despite our representations. There
are now indications that the move may take place by early August. We
need to devise a measured but firm U.S. response which will show both
Arabs and Israelis that we stand by our position on Jerusalem. At the
same time it will be in our interest to avoid pushing matters to the point
where Begin would be given an issue he could use to bolster his failing
position at home and use against the Administration.
Background
Begin has been thinking about moving his office to East Jerusalem
for some time. Sam Lewis has had several talks with him about it, most
recently on June 25, but all attempts to dissuade Begin have been un-
availing, as have our talks here with Ambassador Evron and Interior
Minister Burg. Sam believes that there is virtually no chance that Begin
or his advisors will be swayed by a senior level appeal from the United
States. His estimate is that a message from the President would at best
meet with a polite rebuff.
Begin’s reasons for wanting to make the move appear to be:
—The move is necessary to prove to the world that Israel’s annexa-
tion of East Jerusalem is irreversible and that efforts by the world com-
munity, in particular the UN, will have no effect.
—Concern to make the move while he still has enough time as
Prime Minister to carry it through and make it permanent. (Begin
knows that the Labor Party will not make the move if it comes to office
but apparently believes that he can face it with a fait accompli which it
will be unwilling or unable to reverse.)
—Hope that the Israeli public will rally around him in the face of
expected international criticism, and that his domestic popularity and
political support will be strengthened.
Very likely a further consideration is that Begin sees the next few
weeks as a period when it will be difficult for the Administration to
react firmly.
Considerations
Begin’s moving his office to East Jerusalem will put our credibility
on the line in a way that few other actions could at this time. We are
publicly committed to the position that we do not recognize Israel’s
annexation of East Jerusalem and that we do not accept unilateral ac-
tions concerning Jerusalem by any of the parties. Our response will
have to make clear that we continue to hold firmly to that position.
Even then we can expect a very sharp response from the Arab bloc sup-
ported more broadly by non-Arab Islamic states, with demands that we
force Begin to back off. If our response is merely one of verbal disap-
proval, with no action to back it up, it will be seen by the Arabs as U.S.
acquiescence. We can expect that the Arabs will immediately call a Se-
curity Council meeting and put forward a resolution condemning Is-
rael’s action.
If we are seen to be wavering on our long established position on
Jerusalem, reactions from the Arab side could be damaging. The Saudis
would be particularly upset by a feeble U.S. response. Because of his
close association with us, Sadat could be seriously hurt were we to fail
to make clear our opposition to Begin’s move, and he might feel
obliged to take some action to put a distance between himself and us.
We expect Sadat would in any case withdraw his Ambassador from Is-
rael, but if he felt our response were feeble he might go further and
break off diplomatic relations with Israel entirely or again suspend the
autonomy negotiations.
In any event, it is important that Sadat and we ourselves not take
totally different tacks in reacting to Begin’s move. When we decide
what we intend to do, we should have Ambassador Atherton consult
with Sadat to sound out his views.
At the same time we want to avoid being carried beyond our pre-
vious positions into statements or actions which would be interpreted
by the Israelis and their supporters in this country as denying even Is-
rael’s right to be in West Jerusalem, somehow implying that we intend
to divide the city again, or threatening a cutoff of U.S. military or eco-
nomic assistance. We are faced with the probability that they will inter-
pret any opposition at all as evidence of one of these positions.
Options and Proposed Action
Within these limits there are essentially two steps we can consider:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
1. A statement4 making clear that we consider the move detri-
mental to the peace negotiations, reiterating our position on Jerusalem,
and calling on the Government not to implement the decision.
2. A determination that neither our Ambassador nor visiting Ad-
ministration officials will call at Begin’s East Jerusalem office.
In evaluating these steps, we need to consider carefully our basic
alternatives in handling this situation.
—It may be difficult over the long run to sustain a position that
U.S. officials will not call on the Prime Minister in East Jerusalem. Cer-
tainly there will be many Congressional delegations that would not feel
bound to comply with such a restriction. Moreover, the Israelis would
be able to mount a strong argument—one that would receive sympa-
thetic resonance in some quarters in the U.S.—that such a posture was
inconsistent with our policy of not seeking to redivide the city. If we de-
cide these considerations have the most weight, it may make sense to
keep our response low key and try to get the issue behind us as quickly
as possible.
—The alternative is to decide that to do less than this would do un-
acceptable damage to the credibility of our policy on Jerusalem—in
terms of our relations with the Arab states, the stake we have in eventu-
ally persuading the Palestinians to engage in the negotiations, the diffi-
cult position in which we would place Sadat, and our own image of
consistent and firm policy.
We believe that while the former considerations are important and
must be seriously taken into account, they are outweighed by the latter
arguments. We therefore recommend that if Begin goes through with
his move, we be prepared to issue a statement along the lines of the at-
tached draft, which would restate our policy on Jerusalem and have the
Spokesman say, in answers to a question, that no U.S. official will meet
with Begin in his East Jerusalem office.
Ambassador Lewis reports5 that all the Western European Ambas-
sadors in Israel have received instructions that they will not be per-
mitted to call on the Prime Minister in East Jerusalem. Ambassador
Lewis has several times (most recently on June 25) told Begin that he
would expect to be instructed not to call in East Jerusalem if Begin
moves his office there; some time back Begin alluded to this publicly,
remarking that he and the Ambassador “would do business by mail” in
that case.

392.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
194130. Subject: Possible Move of Prime Minister Begin’s Office to
East Jerusalem.
1. Confidential-entire text.
2. The Secretary is deeply disturbed by the continuing reports that
Begin intends to move his office in the near future to East Jerusalem.
Please deliver the following oral message from him to Foreign Minister
Shamir directly. In conveying this message, you should make clear our
intention to keep this exchange confidential.
3. Begin text:
I am asking Ambassador Lewis to deliver to you today this mes-
sage about the continuing reports indicating that Prime Minister Begin
intends to move his office to East Jerusalem in the near future. As a
long-standing friend of Israel, I feel I have to be absolutely candid with
you. Such a move in my judgment would have seriously adverse conse-
quence for both our countries. As you know, since Camp David both of
us have devoted intensive efforts to conducting the autonomy negotia-
tions, designed to open a new chapter in relations between Israel and
her neighbors. I know that you share our firm commitment to bringing
these negotiations to a positive outcome, building further on the signif-
icant steps toward peace which we already have taken.
At Camp David we agreed to leave the issue of Jerusalem for the
future. This was the wise and correct decision, given the unique signifi-
cance of Jerusalem to all concerned. The move of the Prime Minister’s
office to East Jerusalem at this sensitive stage in the negotiations would
not be a matter only affecting Israel; it would affect all of us. I am con-
cerned that such a move would create very grave problems for our
common negotiating effort.
I therefore urge you to discuss this matter most carefully with the
Prime Minister and sincerely hope that the Government of Israel will
decide not to proceed with such a move. We have gone far together in
fidential; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by J.L. Hirsch (NEA/IAI); cleared by Sterner,
Saunders, and Jane E. Becker (S/S–O); approved by Muskie. Sent for information Imme-
diate to Cairo and the White House.

393.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, July 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Sadat and East Jerusalem (U)
At Tab I is Roy’s Cherokee cable2 on his meeting last night with
Sadat on the East Jerusalem problem. The upshot is that Sadat is
leaning toward a suspension of the talks, but that he really wants to do
what will best help the President, and wants us to coordinate our ap-
proaches. It was not a definitive conversation, however, since Sadat
hadn’t really thought about it (he said). (S)
NEA feels—and I concur—that we should get back to Sadat in
fairly short order, since the Israeli Cabinet decision is supposed to be
made this Sunday, and we will need another full round of exchanges
with Sadat before then. The Friday breakfast would be too late, there-
fore, and NEA will be working up a cable of instructions, for clearance
around and ultimately by the President (probably tomorrow). Prelimi-
nary thinking is that it would say to Sadat:
—we will have a statement (Muskie?) for after the Cabinet decision
(there is a draft in preparation that takes a “more in sorrow than in
anger” approach, but which is straightforward on our Jerusalem
position);4
—Lewis (and other USG officials) will not be going to East Jeru-
salem. However (one variant would state), we will not go public with
this until the move actually takes place; and
—we share Sadat’s dilemma on the continuation of the autonomy
talks, but believe on balance it would be better to keep them going. (S)
At the same time, Begin has complained7 to Sam about press
stories (in Israel, before the Gwertzman piece8) about Muskie’s remarks
to the Cabinet. Muskie has asked that a response9 go to Begin about our
efforts to keep this out of the press; recounting what our approaches
had been to Israel on this; and indicating that the Cabinet session was
private—but the Prime Minister will understand how leaks in a democ-
racy can happen! (S)
Clearly, of course, we remain in a reactive position—though we
have little choice, and USG has collectively been doing a good job lately
in managing a complex effort. (The UNGA speech10—which everyone
but Vanden Heuvel liked—drew praise both from Begin and from Es-
safi (Tunisian Permrep), who also said that the PLO “understood” that
we had to make such a statement. We must be doing something right/
There is no easy way out of the reactive position. One suggestion,
however: that Muskie go out to Egypt and Israel to talk over the situa-
tion, in general—not keyed to Jerusalem (since that is virtually a fait ac-
compli, etc.), but rather to go over the whole complex of issues, au-

394.
Editorial Note
prove the Cohen Bill, thereby making Jerusalem the de jure capital of Is-
rael. (Christopher S. Wren, “Israel Enacts a Law Making All of Jeru-
Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of Israel had four articles: 1) “Integral
[shlema] and united Jerusalem is the capital of Israel;” 2) “Jerusalem is
the seat of the president, the Knesset, the Cabinet and the Supreme
Court;” 3) “The holy places will be guarded against desecration or any
kind of offense or anything that might harm the freedom of access of
members of [all] faiths to sites that are held holy by them or might hurt
their feelings toward those places;” and 4) “The Cabinet will energet-
ically take care to develop Jerusalem and make it prosper. It will also
make efforts to care for the well-being of its inhabitants by allocating
special resources, including giving Jerusalem municipality a special an-

395.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to Secretary
of State Muskie
Washington, July 31, 1980
SUBJECT
Negotiating a Facility at Ras Banas (U)
(S) Given the President’s approval2 in principle of seeking access to
Ras Banas, I propose the following negotiating strategy, on which I re-
quest your agreement so that we can submit it promptly to the Presi-
dent. I regard this as a matter of urgency.
(S) Rationale. Early access to a facility into which we could stage up
to a division and air wing in the relatively early phases of a crisis
would: (a) enable us to move larger forces significantly closer to the
Persian Gulf in response to warning, thereby greatly reducing closure
time; (b) help to deter aggression against Persian Gulf states without
having to position US forces in these states themselves; and (c) allow us
to pre-position certain stocks, thus enhancing logistical support in the
initial stages of a regional conflict.
(S) In order to support even the baseline RDF, (i.e. 31⁄3 division
ground force, plus corresponding air and sea forces), we also need a
rear support base complex far enough from the area of combat to be
safe from easy air interdiction yet close enough to be within unrefueled
Egypt (May–July) 1980. Secret. A copy of the memorandum was sent to Brzezinski.
Region; Arabian Peninsula.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
C–130 range of forward operating bases in the Upper Gulf. This would:
improve our ability to support actual combat operations; provide sites
to assemble subsequent reinforcements; provide a secure logistics sup-
port complex; allow us to mount long-range operations.
(S) Third, we need at least one area site where if necessary we can
train 2–3 times a year in modest strength, because we are experiencing
difficulty in getting approval for individual onshore training exercises.
(S) Lastly, we probably need at least one base in the area for B–52
interdiction operations.
(S) These four needs rank very high on our list of near term prior-
ities—at least as high as any facilities currently programmed.
(S) Preferred Location. We have looked into sites in Diego Garcia,
Turkey, Israel, Somalia, Oman and Egypt. The chief advantage of
Diego Garcia is ready availability. The chief disadvantage is that it is
too small and remote (2700nm from Abadan). Real estate is very lim-
ited, and Navy and Air Force want priority for barracks, which are lim-
ited in any case to an estimated 4500 men—too small for a division-
sized facility. Political obstacles to early availability or usability of
Turkish or Israeli bases rule them out. Berbera is too remote (1250nm
from Abadan) for a staging base, and we might not be able to rely on
early access in a crisis.
(S) We sought a division-sized staging facility at Seeb in Oman this
winter. The Omanis did not want so large and sensitive an installation
near their capital. Masirah or Thumrait are within C–130 range of
Abadan (800nm) but they would be within Soviet tacair striking dis-
tance in event of conflict, and are much farther from CONUS than an
Egyptian site.
(S) Therefore, as we informed the April 23 SCC3 in our PG/IO
“Basing Concept” paper, “Egypt is clearly the preferred location . . . to
support large deployments . . . in advance of a major contingency” (p.
seem the most feasible politically.” Our analysis of these facilities (in-
cluding the Sinai bases, were they to become available), confirmed by
the Ras Banas site survey, has shown that Ras Banas is best suited for
initial development into an austere early deployment base and subse-
quent rear-staging area for contingency operations. Moreover, given
Sadat’s repeated suggestions that we build up Ras Banas and his gen-
Region; Arabian Peninsula.
Region; Arabian Peninsula.

eral responsiveness to our exercise requests, Egypt would be much
more likely to allow us to deploy sizable ground/air forces early in a
crisis than Oman, the only other country with facilities within C–130
range. Oman is particularly unlikely to accept such deployments at
Seeb, which is the closest Omani area to likely PG operations.
(S) Ras Banas is beyond the combat radius of potential hostile
tacair forces. It is located astride both the primary sea and air LOCs to
the region and between 150–250 miles from Saudi Red Sea ports. Only
800nm from Abadan, it is within C–130 radius of the Gulf. Further-
more, by the end of 1981 when refineries at Yanbu and Jiddah are com-
pleted, Ras Banas will have easy and direct sea access to POL. A
rear-staging complex there would greatly shorten deployment times.
For example, the combat elements of a pre-deployed air mobile or air-
borne division brigade could be moved to Dharan within 3–4 days. Fi-
nally Ras Banas is not located near any major Egyptian population
center.
(S) As to rear support basing, we see Ras Banas as an entering
wedge which would facilitate more extensive use of Egyptian rear
bases in event of a major contingency. Egypt has far more in the way of
skilled labor, industrial base, and other infrastructure than Oman and
Somalia combined. If the US were willing to fund construction of Ras
Banas, I believe Sadat would allow us full emergency use. I further be-
lieve that, if we agree to overbuild Ras Banas, Sadat will in turn agree to
allow us to use it 2–3 times a year for exercises.
(S) Ras Banas may also turn out to be the preferred site for B–52 in-
terdiction operations. It is much closer to Abadan (800 nm) than Diego
Garcia (2700 nm). It is far less real-estate limited than Diego Garcia,
though we might have less freedom to use it.
(S) In sum, access to Ras Banas would critically complement the fa-
cilities agreed upon with Oman and Kenya, and potentially with So-
malia, which are mostly for naval and air use. They need to be comple-
mented by a sizable ground force facility. If we can also preposition
certain stocks there (e.g. ammo and POL) it would radically cut down
on airlift requirements.
Estimated Costs
(S) We want to develop Ras Banas in a carefully phased manner.
The first phase outlined below will meet initial staging base and rear
support base requirements. A second and necessary third phase can be
negotiated later, when our further needs have been analyzed.
(S) Phase I: Construction during FY 82–83, with capability to sup-
port full surge operations, pre-deployment of an Army brigade and AF
tac fighter squadron, plus port upgrade to SL–7 (Ro/Ro) capability.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
JCS ESTIMATE OF CONSTRUCTION COST (IN 1980 DOLLARS)
Airfield Upgrade
$57,796,000
Airfield lights/barriers
1,222,000
Water supply system
3,495,000
POL storage/supply system
23,595,000
Power generation and distribution
5,400,000
Cantonment facility (bde & sqd)
25,446,000
Airfield munitions storage and
ammunition storage
1,420,000
Port Upgrade
50,300,000
Airfield spt/opns
3,053,000
TOTAL
$171,727,000
(S) This Phase I package includes $10–12m. in planning and design
(P&D) funds in FY 81 with construction/upgrade to begin in FY 82. At
this or some later date, we may wish to add funds for B–52 upgrade.
(S) Phase II: The above Phase I package is designed to dovetail into
an expanded package ($101m.) increasing from a brigade to a division-
sized cantonment area, more aircraft maintenance, enlarged ammuni-
$239.5m. in then year dollars, additional funding will be required.
(S) Approach to Egypt. The urgency of our needs dictates promptly
starting negotiations with Egypt. This raises the issue of whether a
formal access agreement on the Kenya/Oman model is needed. Con-
gress has made it clear, especially in the FY 81–A hearings, that no
Milcon funds will be provided until adequate access agreements have
been signed. Hence one is probably necessary, and strong Egyptian ob-
jections may not develop. Sadat may even lean on Foreign Minister Ali
to conclude an agreement quickly without drawing out negotiations
over quids. Our construction proposals, once access negotiations are
underway, could then be folded into an improvements package, as was
done with Oman, Kenya and Somalia. We would also want to indicate
our interest in Egyptian participation in the development/construction
plan. DoD is currently studying possible Egyptian funding and partici-
pation. An access agreement of 5–10 years duration is an absolute
requirement.

(S) Congressional Approval of Preferred Construction/Funding Profile.
Getting Congressional approval and funding of expedited construction
will be difficult. Beyond this, accelerated funding, design and construc-
tion will present special problems. Three options are presented below:
OPTION “A”—Normal Procedure. This would involve seeking con-
struction funding in the FY 82 budget, or perhaps an FY 81 supple-
mental, with hearings beginning in January.
Perhaps we could reprogram modest funds now to begin design
work, since Congress usually turns down any construction project on
which design work is not 35% completed. While we doubt that 35%
will be finished by January, Congress might relent if we can show that
the project is vital and that the architects/engineers are hard at work.
We estimate that Phase I construction can be completed by the fall of
1983, and Phase II by fall 1988.
OPTION “B”—Fast Track. This would involve combining the de-
sign and construction stages, as we’ve done in building Israel’s new
Negev bases. On an optimistic schedule, if all went well with Egypt and
with Congress, we could award a planning and design contract by the
end of this fiscal year (technically we can do this without Hill approval
but it is prudent to advise Congress). If Congress then approved an es-
complete Phase I by mid-1983 provided follow-on programming ap-
proval with FY 82 funds. However, we see many potential pitfalls in
this expedited procedure, not least getting Hill approval. Moreover,
these extraordinary actions would at best save perhaps six months in
the construction cycle by permitting selection of a contractor(s), estab-
lishing a mob camp, ordering aggregate, finding a labor source, etc.
OPTION “C”—A combination of military construction funds and Secu-
rity Assistance (FMS Credit). By this means we could, with the coopera-
tion of the Egyptians, initiate construction in FY 81. Since upgrade of
the airfield and port facilities are improvements to what are essentially
Egyptian facilities, there is some good rationale in involving the Egyp-
tians in these improvements through Security Assistance funding. Spe-
cifically, in FY 81 the Egyptians could undertake a portion of the Phase
I airfield upgrade, the highest priority improvement, for about $50m.
One of two strategies could be followed.
—Request, in an FY 81 Supplemental, additional FMS credit funds
(or possibly Security Supporting Assistance) for Egypt.
—Use FMS Credit funds already programmed for Egypt in FY 81,
working out an agreement with Sadat to transfer some of these funds
from projects already agreed upon with the promise of like, or in-
creased, funding in FY 82.
US planning and design work to support, first, the projects which
the Egyptians would execute could begin immediately by drawing on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
SecDef discretionary funds. Additional planning and design funds
could be included in an FY 81 Supplemental request.
Reprogramming
(S) Under any of the above options, DoD may have to reprogram
Ras Banas in timely fashion. DoD regularly has to reprogram funds
every year, but doing so with Milcon presents special Congressional
problems and could involve some small slippage of funds we’ve prom-
ised to Oman and prospectively Somalia. Since we have not yet even
begun to negotiate an access agreement with Somalia, we could request
that $1m. or so in Somalia P and D funds appropriated in the FY 80s
construction be used for Ras Banas and then replaced with FY 82
funding for Somalia. Another source of reprogramming would be
Diego Garcia, where the FY 81A package, which seems likely to sur-
vive, includes $35m. for BEQ/BOQ facilities, which could be deferred
to FY 82.
(S) We will probably have a severe Milcon funding problem for
Oman/Somalia/Kenya as well as Ras Banas since the HAC approved
SASC gave us greater flexibility by authorizing a lump sum for PG/IO
contingencies, but limited it to $200m. Therefore, our best bet is to seek
the full $280m. authorized by the House but the lump sum authoriza-
tion of the Senate. This will be hard to get but is well worth the try.
Harold Brown

396.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt
204700. For the Ambassador from the Sec and Linowitz. Subject:
Consultations With Sadat on Jerusalem Problem. Ref: (A) Alexandria
1. (S) Entire text.
2. You should convey6 following message to Sadat by whatever
means is most effective in time for him to have our views before Sadat’s
own policy council on Jerusalem problem.
3. The President appreciates the opportunity to consult with Sadat
with respect to the Israeli moves on Jerusalem. He has carefully consid-
ered Sadat’s comments and is appreciative of Sadat’s concern to devise
a response that is helpful to our mutual objectives.
4. We are confronted here by two steps of different nature and im-
plications, one of which, the Cohen Bill, is already an accomplished
cret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Sterner; cleared by Saunders, Linowitz,
Hunter, and Jane E. Taylor (S/S–O); approved by Newsom.
Ali in which the latter asked if Atherton had received “reaction from Washington” to the
report of Atherton’s July 29 meeting with Sadat. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P900086–1864)
“We have not been able to reach a final decision on the steps we would take in response
to an Israeli move to transfer the Prime Minister’s office to East Jerusalem. You should in-
form Mobarak/Ali that the matter is still under high-level consideration here and that we
will need further time before conveying our views to Sadat.” (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P900086–2301)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
fact; the other, a decision to move the Prime Minister’s office to East Je-
rusalem, now appears a certainty but may be delayed for several
weeks. The first point the President wishes to make is that, after having
given careful reflection to the considerations Sadat has raised, he does
not repeat not believe that suspending the autonomy talks in response
to either of these moves would be a wise decision. It will clearly not
cause the Israelis to change their position and would leave us in a quan-
dary as to how subsequently we can restore momentum to the peace
process. As difficult as this Israeli move is for us, we should not allow it
to derail us from the peace strategy in which we, Egypt and Israel have
invested so much. The President believes that the latest round of
technical-level talks in the autonomy negotiations covered useful new
ground and revealed a genuinely better atmosphere for making
progress. We are sufficiently encouraged to believe that however our
two governments decide to react to the Israeli moves on Jerusalem
we should not allow this issue to place a further burden on the
negotiations.
5. We nevertheless agree with Sadat that the Israeli moves pose a
definite challenge and that our two governments must make clear we
do not accept them as in any way determining the future of Jerusalem
which can only be resolved through negotiations. We see the Knesset
bill as essentially a legal matter. While we view it seriously, we believe
our reaction to it can be adequately and effectively handled by the
statement we have already issued (reftel D), which states in simple
terms that we do not accept the new law as determining the status of
Jerusalem. The bill does not change anything on the ground as far as we
can determine and we do not contemplate any further action with re-
spect to it at this time.
6. We would also be concerned about Israeli announcement of
moving the Prime Minister’s office to Jerusalem, which, as a physical
act, is likely to evoke a greater reaction in Arab and Islamic countries,
and to have a more negative impact on the prospect for negotiations.
We plan to take the following steps if and when the Israelis carry out
this move:
—(A) We will issue a statement expressing our clear opposition to
and disapproval of the move and reaffirming our policy that we do not
accept such unilateral acts as determining the future of Jerusalem.
—(B) We will maintain our present policy of refusing to allow our
Ambassador or any other administration official to meet with Israeli of-
ficials (including the Prime Minister) in East Jerusalem.
7. We have given careful thought to various ways of responding to
the Israeli moves and believe the course we have outlined would offer
the fewest long term disadvantages. We recognize, however, that the
Government of Egypt will be subject to serious domestic and foreign
pressures as a result of the Israeli move. Only Sadat can make the judg-
ment as to what will be politically sustainable for him in the new cir-
cumstances that we will face, and we will of course understand and re-
spect his ultimate decision.
8. FYI: For the Ambassador. If you find in your discussion that
Sadat is determined to suspend the autonomy talks, you should urge
him to do this only for a specific, limited period of time as a means of
demonstrating his disapproval. End FYI.
9. Following is text of statement which has been approved for is-
suance in the event the Israeli Cabinet approves moving Prime Min-
ister’s office to East Jerusalem. You may share text with Sadat.
Begin text: The decision announced by the Israeli Government yes-
terday is not in keeping with the vital international efforts flowing from
the Camp David Accords to achieve a just and lasting peace settlement
in the Middle East.
United States policy on the issue of Jerusalem is of long standing,
beginning with statements by our Permanent Representatives to the
occasions since then. Our view has been, and remains, that the final
status of Jerusalem should be determined through negotiations among
the parties concerned; that the settlement which is worked out should
leave the city undivided; that it should provide free access for people of
all faiths to the holy places; and that it should take into account the in-
terests of all the city’s inhabitants. As President Carter stated on March
3, 1980: “we strongly believe that Jerusalem should be undivided with
free access to the holy places for all faiths.”
Pending such negotiations, the United States does not believe that
any party should take unilateral measures which alter the status of Je-
rusalem. We do not regard the action taken by the Knesset as pre-
cluding those future negotiations. We made clear to the Prime Minister
and other Israeli officials that we would view the move of the Prime
Minister’s office to East Jerusalem to be contrary to the principles we
believe will be most helpful to the current negotiations and to the
broader effort to bring about a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
The most vital objective for Israel, Egypt, and the United States is
to pursue the Camp David peace process through to success. All the

397.
Editorial Note
On August 4, 1980, a letter from Egyptian President Anwar al-
Sadat to Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, expressing his dissat-
isfaction with Israeli actions which he viewed as impediments to the
peace process, was delivered to the Prime Minister by Egyptian Am-
bassador to Israel Saad Murtada. In the letter, dated August 2, Sadat re-
counted the course of the autonomy negotiations, noting “to our disap-
pointment and to the surprise of many of Israel’s friends, events did not
take the course which was likely to bring us closer to an agreement. On
the contrary, provocative and negative actions have been taken unjusti-
fiably and in open defiance to the process and its very essence.” Sadat
continued, “I am referring here to the actions which are being taken
with respect to Jerusalem and the settlements, together with the repres-
sive measures taken in the West Bank and Gaza.” Sadat reaffirmed
Egypt’s “clear and unwavering” position on the peace process, out-
lining his country’s wholehearted commitment to peace; its adherence
to the “letter and spirit of Camp David;” its preparation to “help our
partners in the peace process and provide them with solutions and way
out even when they fail to see the realities of the situation;” its belief in
the settling of “all matters” at the end of the process; its rejection of “ac-
tions taken by Israel unilaterally and against the universal consensus
with respect to Jerusalem and the settlements;” the need to respect the
“historic and legal rights of the Arabs and Muslims” in Jerusalem
“while keeping different functions in the city united;” the need for Is-
rael to “desist from all settlement activities” and remove settlements
built in the West Bank and Gaza; Egyptian opposition to any encroach-
ment on the rights of Palestinians to determine their own future; and
Egyptian preparation to implement the establishment of a Palestinian
self-governing authority in Gaza as a first step to its implementation in
the West Bank.

Sadat concluded the letter by urging Begin to “take the remedial
action which is necessary for the removal of the obstacles which have
been placed on the road to peace in the past few months. I leave it to
you to choose the appropriate ways and means for achieving that.” The
same day, August 4, Egyptian Foreign Minister Kamal Hassan Ali pro-
vided U.S. Ambassador to Egypt Alfred L. Atherton, Jr. a copy of the
letter, which Atherton sent to Washington from Cairo in telegram
16922, August 4. A copy of the telegram, bearing President Jimmy
Carter’s handwritten comment, “The situation is discouraging. Well
worded, very good message. C.,” is in the Carter Library, National Se-
Sadat’s letter began series of exchanges between the two leaders
over the next three weeks. On August 4, Begin replied to Sadat’s letter,
taking issue with a number of points. Begin asserted that Sadat had
misrepresented the discussion between them at El-Arish on the subject
of water for Israel, that the principles of “good faith, goodwill, mutual
understanding, and promoting peace and cooperation” had been un-
dermined by Egyptian Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Boutros
Boutros Ghali’s influencing African governments to withhold re-
newing diplomatic relations with Israel, votes cast for “hostile,”
anti-Israeli resolutions by the Egyptian delegation at the United Na-
tions, as well as Egyptian public statements inconsistent with the Camp
David Accords. Begin also restated the Israeli position on Jerusalem
and stated a desire to bring Palestinians and King Hussein of Jordan
into the negotiations. Begin concluded by pointing out that Egypt had
unilaterally suspended the autonomy talks on four different occasions
and urged Sadat to “dispense with further unilateral suspensions. Let
us renew our negotiations.” Israeli Ambassador to the United States
Ephraim Evron provided President Jimmy Carter a copy of Begin’s
letter on August 6. This copy, attached to an August 7 memorandum
from the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbig-
niew Brzezinski to Carter in which Brzezinski evaluated the letter as
“not as bad or as ‘door closing’ as Israeli leaks had led us to expect,” is
in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle
Sadat followed up with Begin on August 14. While arguing that “it
is not my intention to get involved into a verbal or rhetorical exchange
which is not likely to serve the interests of any of us, not to mention the
interest of peace,” Sadat provided a lengthy rebuttal of many of the
points raised in Begin’s letter. At the end of the letter, however, Sadat
suggested the convening of a “summit conference in an attempt to
stem” the “lingering differences” between their two countries “before
they jeopardize our mission.” The Egyptians provided Atherton an ad-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
vance copy of the letter, and Atherton sent it to Washington in telegram
eign Policy File, P870047–1535) Atherton met with Egyptian Under Sec-
retary of Foreign Affairs Osama el-Baz on August 15 to suggest edits to
the letter, including replacing the phrase “summit conference” with
“high level conference at an appropriate time.” They also discussed the
timetable for the resumption of negotiations. El-Baz rejected the U.S.
proposal for resuming talks in mid-September and stated that the ear-
liest the talks could be resumed would be mid-October. (Telegram
eign Policy File, P900086–1848) The final version of Sadat’s letter,
which was 35 typewritten pages in length, proposed the resumption of
talks after the U.S. elections on November 4 and the convening of a tri-
partite summit conference after that date. (“Sadat Asks U.S. Role in Au-
was delivered to the Israelis on August 15 and the contents made
public through the press. This, in turn, prompted a lengthy August 18
response by Begin warning Sadat that “if you persist in your negative
attitude, the negotiations will remain disrupted for the simple and only
reason that Egypt repeatedly suspends the talks.” On the summit idea,
Begin stated: “I understand that President Carter was not consulted.
Permit me to say that both he and I should have been consulted
through a diplomatic, confidential exchange. Let us at least now, how-
ever, quietly consider the matter, the venue and the date should all
three parties accept the principle itself. This should not, under any cir-
cumstances, preclude the renewal and the uninterrupted continuation
of the autonomy talks.” The text of Begin’s August 18 response was
sent in telegram 15450 from Tel Aviv, August 19. (National Archives,
Atherton met with Sadat on August 18, to discuss his most recent
letter to Begin. Atherton stressed that Carter “understood the diffi-
culties Sadat faces and that we were not pressing for immediate deci-
sions, but that the President remains convinced the only way to make
progress is through continuation of the negotiating process; it is impor-
tant to demonstrate that the Camp David process is still alive.” “In this
connection,” Atherton noted, “Sadat’s call for a summit after our elec-
tions could be misinterpreted to mean that the USG is unable to move
in the meantime. This would not be a helpful impression to give.” Sadat
responded that the “situation today was different from that which ex-
isted when he authorized Kamal Hassan Ali to agree to resume the ne-
gotiations during his and Dr. Burg’s visits to Washington. Prime Min-
ister Begin was confronting both Egypt and the U.S. with challenges
that could not be ignored—the Jerusalem bill, the pending move of his
office to East Jerusalem and the recent announcement of three new set-
tlements. The negotiations were stalemated and would remain so until

after the U.S. elections and, frankly, until after new elections in Israel.
The only solution was for the U.S. to come forward with a proposal;
this was why he had suggested a new summit meeting. Sadat said his
position was strong and he could wait, if necessary until November,
1981. For now, he wanted to relieve President Carter of the burden of
the Middle East negotiations.” Atherton reported that Sadat “did not
respond to my attempts to ascertain what moves Israel might take
which would be helpful to him but promised to think about this.” Sadat
promised to continue the dialogue with the United States and stated he
had invited Israeli President Yitzhak Navon to come to Egypt, was pre-
paring to send a delegation to Israel to help the normalization process,
and was calling Egyptian media representatives to “put a stop” to fur-
ther press attacks on Begin. (Telegram 18065 from Cairo, August 18;
Ambassador to Israel Samuel W. Lewis met with Begin on August
22, to brief him on the meeting between Atherton and Sadat. Lewis
stressed that Sadat was “anxious to try to keep the atmosphere as posi-
tive as possible,” while efforts were underway to restart negotiations
and cited Sadat’s initiatives to improve relations with Israel. “It is clear
to us,” Lewis stated to the Israeli Prime Minister, “that Sadat hopes that
these initiatives will make such a contribution and will in some way be
reciprocated by Israel.” Lewis suggested the Israeli release of prisoners
in Gaza for the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Fitr as a gesture to Sadat, a
proposal Begin stated “he wouldn’t object to.” (Telegram 15690 from
Tel Aviv, August 22; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
be prepared to release 20 prisoners in Gaza to help the negotiating at-
mosphere. (Telegram 15861 from Tel Aviv, August 26; National Ar-
on August 25, the Department of State announced that President
Carter’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations, Sol
M. Linowitz, would be visiting Israel and Egypt beginning August 29
for talks with Begin and Sadat on restarting negotiations. (Telegram
Central Foreign Policy File, D800406–0410) Shortly before Linowitz’s
visit, Sadat sent a final letter to Begin on August 29, explaining that be-
ginning with his first letter, it was not his intention to “start any rhetor-
ical or polemical exchange,” but was instead motivated by “my keen
desire to explore every available avenue to ascertain whether a
common ground existed for the resumption of the autonomy talks.” He
reaffirmed his interest in the convening of a summit conference and
“looked forward to a meaningful and fruitful exchange.” A copy of
Sadat’s letter was sent to Washington in telegram 19022 from Cairo,
August 29. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-

398.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, August 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Scenario for the Autonomy Talks (U)
At Tab A is a memorandum Chris prepared, based on a meeting2 I
held yesterday on the way forward on the autonomy talks. It lays out a
scenario for getting the talks restarted—one which, however, is highly
dependent on reactions by both Sadat and Begin. Sol concurs in this ap-
If you approve it, we would like to begin implementation immedi-
ately, since Roy Atherton may be seeing Sadat as early as tomorrow
morning, and his being able to lay out our thinking to Sadat could be
critical in shaping the Egyptian reaction to the recent Begin letter. The
Egyptians are already talking of Sadat’s responding to Begin to-
morrow, in view of the Israelis’ having published the Begin letter. (S)
The letter to Sadat which you requested (Tab B) would not be de-
livered, under the proposed scenario, until the last week of August;
thus it can be revised further in light of developments. At that time, you
might want to write it out longhand. (S)
If the proposed scenario worked, there could be as many as three
public events in the near future to demonstrate that the peace process is
moving forward:
—public announcement of continuing bilateral technical talks (late
August);
—announcement in three capitals, during Sol’s next trip, on re-
starting the talks (early September); and
—a possible Begin-Sadat Summit (late September/early October),
with high-level participation from here, where in my judgment Ed
Muskie would be the ideal person. (S)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the scenario presented in the memorandum
from Christopher at Tab A, and provide comments on the draft letter to
Sadat at Tab B.
Tab A
Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State
(Christopher) to President Carter
Washington, August 12, 1980
SUBJECT
Working Toward a Resumption of the Autonomy Negotiations
Attached is a draft letter to Sadat, along the lines you requested. It
has the concurrence of Sol and Zbig. I am sending a copy of the draft
letter to Ed Muskie in New York, together with this memorandum.
Sol, Zbig and I feel that the letter would be most effective if it came
at a time after some preliminary work had been done in the capitals by
our Ambassadors. The following sequence of steps appears to us to be
the one offering the best prospects for success.
1. As an immediate first step, Roy Atherton will make it clear in
Cairo that before the Egyptians send a further letter to Begin, he wishes
to meet with Sadat. He will urge Sadat not to engage in further po-
lemics but rather to use his reply to try to open doors for an eventual
resumption of the talks. Our second objective with Sadat on this occa-
sion would be to give him a sense of the timing of the sequence of steps
that we have in mind as outlined below. In doing so, Roy would make
it clear that while we were not pressing for an immediate resumption of
formal trilateral negotiations, we want to continue work on the Heads
of Agreement through publicly announced bilateral meetings with
each side, and perhaps some technical-level trilateral meetings if Sadat
will agree to them, until formal negotiations are resumed. Because of

399.
Editorial Note
On August 20, 1980, the United Nations Security Council voted
July 29 enactment of the “Basic Law” on Jerusalem, effectively making
the city the de jure capital of the country (see Document 394), character-
izing it as an action constituting “a serious obstruction to achieving a
comprehensive, just, and lasting peace in the Middle East.” The lone
abstention in the vote was taken by the United States. Secretary of State
Edmund S. Muskie explained the U.S. decision in his address to the Se-
curity Council on August 20. While affirming his country’s support for
an undivided Jerusalem, “with free access to the holy places for peoples
of all faiths,” and opposition to “any attempt to impose sanctions
against Israel under Chapter VII [of the U.N. Charter],” he stated that
the resolution was “fundamentally flawed.” “It fails to reaffirm Resolu-
tion 242 as the basis for a comprehensive peace,” Muskie continued.
“Israel, for example, is to be censured—yet there is no censure, indeed
no mention at all, of violence against Israel or of efforts that undermine
Israel’s legitimate security needs. Further, the resolution before us calls
upon those states that have established diplomatic missions in Jeru-
salem to withdraw them from the holy city. In our judgment this provi-
sion is not binding. It is without force. And we reject it as a disruptive
attempt to dictate to other nations. It does nothing to promote a resolu-
tion of the difficult problems facing Israel and its neighbors. It does
nothing to advance the cause of peace. On these specific grounds, we
abstain on the resolution.” The complete text of Muskie’s speech, as
well as the text of Security Council Resolution 478, are printed in the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

400.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel
224677. Subject: Message From Secretary to Prime Minister Begin.
Ref: Tel Aviv 15692.
1. Secret-entire text.
2. You should pass following to Begin as an oral message from Sec-
retary Muskie.
3. Begin text: Ambassador Lewis has reported to me on his talk
with you on August 22 and your expression of concern about the
United States abstention recently in the Security Council and about a
passage from my speech on that occasion.
—I hope you will understand that the United States’ decision to
abstain on the resolution in question was not an easy one for any of us
who were involved. We reached it after the most careful study and con-
sideration. As I made clear in my speech, we view the resolution as
being fundamentally flawed; we specifically reject the call on sovereign
states to move their Embassies from Jerusalem; and we will firmly and
forcefully resist any attempt to impose sanctions against Israel. At the
same time we had to take into account the long-standing position of the
United States on unilateral actions in regard to Jerusalem. In these cir-
cumstances we did not feel we could either support or veto the
resolution.
—I thought it was important, however, that a clear and full state-
ment be made of the United States’ views on the resolution and on the
harmful effect the Security Council’s repeated resolutions are having
on our work for peace. My desire to underscore that point and to try to
stop a continuing succession of anti-Israel resolutions warranted by de-
livering that statement personally. I do not believe the statement needs
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Korn; cleared by Hunter, Newlin, Constable, W.
Scott Butcher (S/S–O), and Raymond G. Seitz (S/S–O); approved by Christopher. A draft
version of Muskie’s oral message is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-
message to Begin over the telephone on August 24. (Telegram 15711 from Tel Aviv, Au-
be reached. At the same time we continue to urge all parties to refrain
from taking unilateral steps that could make the realization of peace
more difficult. End text.
3. Along with foregoing you should convey to the Prime Minister
the Secretary’s assurance of his continued warm friendship for Israel
and for the Prime Minister personally. Please say that the Secretary
looks forward to continuing to work closely with the Prime Minister
and his government for the strengthening of the very close relations be-
tween the United States and Israel and for the achievement of a com-
prehensive and lasting Middle East peace.
Christopher

401.
Memorandum of Conversation
Participants
U.S.
Secretary Muskie
Deputy Secretary Christopher
David Korn, NEA
Israel
Ambassador Evron
Subject
Delivery by Ambassador Evron of Letters to the Secretary from Prime Minister
Begin
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Evron opened by saying that he had two letters to
deliver to the Secretary from Prime Minister Begin, one replying2 to
the Secretary’s oral message of August 23 on the U.S. abstention in
the August 20 Security Council vote, and the other on the oil MOA
negotiations.
The Secretary first read Begin’s letter replying to his oral message
of August 23. The Secretary asked Ambassador Evron to tell the Prime
Minister that he appreciated the Prime Minister’s warm words of
friendship. With respect to the Prime Minister’s comments on the Sec-
retary’s use of the phase “unilateral action” the Secretary said he
wanted to make clear that he considers it the right of any country to de-
termine where its capital should be established, but if there is a negoti-
ating process going on in regard to that particular place many countries
may be involved. In a circumstance such as this, unilateral actions are
not helpful. It is obviously up to Israel to decide what Israel’s position
in the negotiation should be. But on the issues that are the subject of ne-
gotiations, no party should prejudice the result by unilateral actions.
The Secretary said that was all the phrase was intended to convey.
The Secretary recalled the remarks he had made before the Secu-
rity Council on August 20 in regard to the unhelpful nature of the reso-
lutions that had been introduced in the UN this year. We have said this
and we will continue to say this. The only way we have to salvage the
through unhelpful Security Council resolutions or through unilateral
actions, which pose a great danger to the Camp David process.
The Secretary said that when he spoke of unilateral actions he was
not seeking to deny Israel’s sovereign rights. Israel has the sovereign
right to go to war or to accommodate its interests to those of other na-
tions. The Secretary said he did not contest the right of any country to
determine where its capital should be. The problem, however, is that
the Jerusalem issue must be resolved through negotiations. Speaking
then in a more general vein, the Secretary commented that he realized
that all these are hard questions. He wanted to make clear that our deci-
sion to abstain had not been an easy one. We had taken all of the ele-
ments into consideration. It is in the United States’ national interest to
see the Camp David process succeed. We have invested much time and
energy in Camp David, but we have other interests as well and we have
to protect them.
The Secretary said he could understand that Jerusalem is an emo-
tional issue in Israel and it is very difficult to vote against any law on it.
He wanted to make clear, however, that in his view the Cohen bill did
not add anything to Israel’s bargaining position in the negotiations—
not one iota. The only effect of the bill had been to cause the Camp
David talks to be suspended. In this regard the Secretary commented
that he could not recall when his first class in physics had been, but he
remembered clearly learning the law that for every action there is an
equal reaction. This is what has occurred. The Secretary emphasized
that the position he took at the Security Council was not hostile to Is-
rael. In fact, his remarks had been supportive of Israel, and they were
condemned by many Arab countries. The Secretary asked Evron to tell
the Prime Minister that there was nothing personal in the position we
had taken at the UN. He had had to give the President his best judg-
ment, and abstention had been his recommendation. He did believe,
however, that his remarks about the unhelpful nature of the repeated
Security Council resolutions had had an impact on his listeners in the
Security Council.
The Secretary said that as long as people think that by introducing
UN resolutions that can interrupt the Camp David process and pro-
voke Israel into steps that will further disrupt it, they will continue to
do so. The objective of Israel and the United States must be to keep the
negotiations going and maintain their credibility. The Secretary added
that his only doubt about going to the Security Council was that his ar-
guments in favor of Camp David might not seem credible in view of the
fact that the talks were suspended.
Ambassador Evron said there should be no doubt in anybody’s
mind about Israel’s dedication to the continuation of the Camp David

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
process. Referring to the Secretary’s earlier comments, the Ambassador
said he wanted to be sure what the Secretary meant when he spoke of
“sovereign rights.” Evron asked if he could tell Prime Minister Begin
that in the Secretary’s view the sovereignty of Israel in Jerusalem is not
challenged by the United States and that Israel has the sovereign right
to establish its Capital there. Evron said if he understood clearly, the
United States does not deny Israel the right to have its capital anywhere
within sovereign Israeli territory. The Secretary said this raises two
points. First, whether East Jerusalem is part of the West Bank under
Resolution 242 and thus not subject to any claim to sovereign rights by
Israel. Second is the fact that it is agreed that the status of Jerusalem is
an issue that has to be settled through negotiations.
Ambassador Evron said this raises a problem that he wanted to be
able to report very precisely on. The Security Council called on all
states with embassies in Jerusalem to remove those embassies. That in-
volves not East Jerusalem but West Jerusalem, since all the embassies
are located on the western side of the city. Ambassador Evron asked if
he would be correct in saying that at least in regard to West Jerusalem
Israel’s sovereign right in that part of the city is not in question. The
Secretary pointed out that he had made clear in his Security Council
statement that we do not regard the call for movement of the embassies
from Jerusalem as being binding. Mr. Christopher said it was his un-
derstanding that the United States had taken the position at Camp
David that the ultimate status of Jerusalem as a whole would be the
subject of negotiations between the parties, which is the position the
President repeated in New York recently. Ambassador Evron replied
that he had not been at Camp David but he was quite sure that never
once at Camp David had any question arisen regarding Israel’s sover-
eign rights in West Jerusalem. Mr. Christopher repeated that his under-
standing had been that the U.S. position is that the whole question is to
be the subject of ultimate negotiations. He asked Mr. Korn if this was
correct. Mr. Korn confirmed that such had always been our view, and
pointed out that we have never formally recognized Israel’s claim to
sovereignty in West Jerusalem.
Mr. Christopher said what he understood Secretary Muskie to
have said was that any country, for example Mexico, could establish its
capital wherever it wants if it has the power to do so, but that gov-
ernments that do this must take into account the consequences for an
ongoing negotiation. Ambassador Evron responded heatedly that the
United States appeared to be raising new issues here. The American
Ambassadors have presented their credentials in Jerusalem, you fly
your flag in Jerusalem, your leaders meet with our leaders there, he
said. If a question is now raised about Israel’s sovereignty in West Jeru-
salem, Ambassador Evron said, this will become a big problem for our
domestic relations.

The Secretary said he had not meant to say anything different from
what he had said in his UN speech. Defining the present status of Jeru-
salem is a most difficult and complex question. To return to the main
point, the Secretary said, when I spoke of unilateral action my point is
actions taken outside of the negotiations in regard to issues in the nego-
tiations that tend to disrupt the negotiations. That, the Secretary con-
cluded, is really all I have to say. I was not trying to establish Israel’s
sovereign rights in any part of Jerusalem, or anything else.
Evron said the result of the Security Council vote has been to cast
doubt on Israel’s sovereignty in West Jerusalem. He had been surprised
when the State Department Spokesman the previous day had said that
he was not aware that the State Department was taking any position on
the question of other countries moving their embassies from Jeru-
salem. We were taken aback by this statement by the Spokesman,
Evron said. Mr. Christopher said the Spokesman’s statement was not
inconsistent with our position as it has been stated at the United Na-
tions. Christopher distinguished between the UN seeking to tell coun-
tries where to locate their embassies (which we opposed in New York)
and the right of a country to decide on its own whether to move its em-
bassy from Jerusalem (which we would respect). Evron asked what the
United States would do to correct the impression that it does not care
about the Security Council call for removal of the embassies from Jeru-
salem. Mr. Christopher said we have brought the Secretary’s statement,
that we do not regard the Security Council call as binding, to the atten-
tion of those governments which maintain their embassies in Jeru-
salem. Evron urged that the United States find an opportunity “to de-
nounce” the ultimatum given by the Arab countries to the countries
that maintain embassies in Jerusalem. The call for removal of the em-
bassies is “an abuse of Security Council power,” Evron said.
Evron then presented the second letter, on the oil MOA negotia-
tions, and said that Israel urges the negotiations be resumed as quickly
as possible. After reading through the Prime Minister’s letter, the Secre-
tary said the President had agreed that there should be another meeting
in September. Mr. Christopher cautioned that this should not be made

402.
Summary of a Telephone Conversation Among the
President’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace
Negotiations (Linowitz), Vice President Mondale, and
President Carter
SUBJECT
Summary of Telephone Conversation with Ambassador Sol Linowitz in Cairo
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter Mondale
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Personal Representative of the President for Middle
East Peace Negotiations
Ambassador Linowitz said he had just left President Sadat. They
had met with the press and had read a statement which made three
points (text attached):3
1. Both parties reiterated their commitment to the Camp David
process as the only viable path to a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East, and they intend to see the process through.
2. The parties recognize that the negotiations must rest on a foun-
dation of mutual trust and friendship.
3. The parties agree to resume the autonomy negotiations and to
consult on a summit meeting, with times and places to be determined.
The President said that this result made Ambassador Linowitz’ trip
worthwhile.
Ambassador Linowitz agreed and said he had gotten much more
than he had expected. They had intentionally left open the dates for re-
sumption of the autonomy talks and the summit. Sadat wants the talks
to resume in mid-October, with the summit to take place in November
after the elections. He said Begin had been tough as hell on the first
day, and there had been a real fight. Perhaps for that reason, or his
subsequent meetings with a number of Members of the Knesset, Begin
was Mr. Nice Guy on the second day of the talks. Originally, Begin had
wanted an agreement to go back to the table immediately. Linowitz
had said that was impossible and he would not agree. Begin had also
rejected the idea of a summit initially, then went along on the second
day. Linowitz said he had talked very tough to Begin on the questions
of moving his office to Jerusalem and on annexation of the Golan
Heights. He felt he had received pretty good assurances on the Golan.
The President interjected that that was the best news he had had.
U.S.-Israeli relations. A summary is in telegram 238741 to Cairo, Jerusalem, and Tel Aviv,
September 9. (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Linowitz said that he had left Begin in a troubled mood,
which was just right. Begin has a good sense that we will be quite de-
manding with regard to what Begin may do with respect to the Jeru-
salem move and the Golan annexation. Linowitz had also gone over
with Begin in enormous detail the draft (on the autonomy talks?). It
was a process he did not recommend, as the President would
appreciate.
The President commented that he understood Linowitz had spent
five hours with Begin.
Ambassador Linowitz said Sadat did not want to take the draft, but
he would give it to Ali tomorrow. After their meeting, Sadat had
agreed with his proposal and took Linowitz out directly to talk to the
press and announce agreement.
The President said he was glad both leaders were constructive.
The Vice President congratulated Ambassador Linowitz on his
efforts.

403.
Summary of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin
SUBJECT
Summary of Telephone Conversation with Prime Minister Begin in Israel
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin
The President: Good Morning Mr. Prime Minister.
Prime Minister Begin: Good Morning Mr. President. I want to con-
gratulate you on the tripartite agreement to resume the talks.

404.
Memorandum of Conversation
Washington, September 18, 1980
SUBJECT
Memorandum of Conversation: Thursday, September 18, 1980, The Pentagon,
Secretary’s Conference Room
PARTICIPANTS
U.S. Participants (U)
Hon. Harold Brown
Hon. Robert W. Komer, USD/P
Hon. David E. McGiffert, ASD/ISA
Hon. Robert H. Pelletreau, DASD/ISA
Mr. Charles Hill, Political Officer
American Embassy Tel Aviv
BG Carl Smith
Israeli Participants (U)
Foreign Minister Shamir
Israeli Ambassador Evron
MG Meron, Defense Attache
Mr. Bar-On, Director General, MFA
Mr. Rubinstein, Asst Director General, MFA
Foreign Minister Shamir said he would like to discuss the strategic
situation in the Middle East and its implications for the State of Israel.

Israel, he said, had its own worries, did not rely on others and tried to
take care of its own security. It was naturally interested, however, in
the strategic situation in the area. In recent times, there had been many
signs of free world weakness. Israel was very satisfied, however, with
U.S. efforts over the past months to strengthen the position of the free
world in countries surrounding it. These efforts, Shamir said, obviously
affected Israel’s security. (S)
Together with Israel’s satisfaction with this effort, Shamir con-
tinued, concern had to be expressed that Israel with all its possibilities
appeared to be omitted from U.S. planning. Israel knew its weaknesses
and also its advantages. It had experience in the security field and a ca-
pable army. Its stability was assured by a democratic system. It was
committed to free world values. With these possibilities, Israel could
not understand why the U.S. was ignoring it. An additional element to
be considered was that when people in the area, especially Egypt, saw
that Israel was being ignored, this indicated to them that the special re-
lationship was getting weaker. This, in turn, had an effect on the peace
process. In other words, if the U.S. was building closer strategic cooper-
ation with Egypt and Israel was not included, this meant to Egypt that
Israel was not an ally of the U.S. and this perception harmed prospects
for peace in the area. In short, Israel believed it was a mistake from the
viewpoint of the free world to be omitted from U.S. strategic planning
in the area. (S)
The Secretary noted that Minister Shamir had raised two sets of
issues; one concerning Israel and its Arab neighbors and the other con-
cerning Southwest Asia and the Persian Gulf. These were related but
not quite the same problem. Regarding Israel and its neighbors, success
in the autonomy negotiations would be critical to the area in the long
term, both for Israel and for the moderate Arab states. The U.S. recog-
nized that a precondition to this success was Israel’s understanding of
the U.S. commitment by others. This commitment was evidenced not
only by a great deal of unnecessary repetition and reassurance, but also
by U.S. actions. Since the 1973 war over $12 billion had been provided
to Israel, more than half of it during the current administration. Israeli
capabilities had expanded dramatically at the same time as the threat
against them had been reduced. Egypt was at peace with Israel. Despite
all the assistance the U.S. was providing and would provide to Egypt,
its military capabilities had decreased over the past five years and
would continue to decline as its Soviet equipment deteriorated. (S)
In deciding on arms transfers to Israel’s neighbors, the Secretary
continued, the U.S. consistently sought to assure that these transfers
would not have a damaging affect to Israel’s military superiority. That
was an important criterion. It was applied when the U.S. considered
provision of F–15’s to Saudi Arabia and also when the U.S. provided

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
equipment to Egypt and Jordan. On the other hand, in its consideration
of sales to Israel, the U.S. did not ask whether this or that sale would
make Israel too strong vis-a-vis its neighbors. The U.S. recognized that
Israel must be able to defend itself against all its neighbors. (S)
Turning to the overall strategic situation, the Secretary noted that
the collapse of Iran as a bulwark against Soviet expansion had ad-
versely affected the strategic balance in the area. During the past ten
years the U.S., Europe and Japan had become still more dependent on
oil from that region. The importance of the Gulf as a Soviet objective
had therefore increased. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was a
striking reminder of Soviet willingness to use force to obtain its objec-
tives. These considerations taken together had caused the U.S. to begin
planning, programming, creating new forces and redeploying existing
forces. A new military headquarters had been created for planning and
to carry out potential military operations in the area. In only six
months, equipment had been prepositioned on ships in the area to sup-
port a full Marine Amphibious Brigade. Two carrier task forces were
being maintained in the area—the most powerful naval force ever in
the Indian Ocean. In the negotiation of access agreements with coun-
tries in the area, the U.S. had been very careful to keep its visible pres-
ence low. This was a drawback, but it was also a condition of access to
those countries. A high level of U.S. visibility would risk destabilizing
them and easily offset the military advantages of more permanent
bases. This was true even in Egypt, though less so. The U.S. had to be
very cautious politically. (S)
The Secretary said the U.S. saw real value in continuing its strategic
dialogue with Israel even though the previous secret channel could not
be used any more. Both General Jones and Ambassador Komer would
be ready to continue the strategic dialogue during their visits. (S)
Foreign Minister Shamir noted that when Israel heard of U.S. plans
to develop Ras Banas3 it wondered why the U.S. was not equally plan-
ning to utilize the good airbases in Sinai and also the base at Sharm
al-Shaykh. Since Sharm al-Shaykh, under the peace accords, would
have a multi-national force to protect free passage in the Strait of Tiran,
it could easily assume greater responsibility for defense of the Red Sea.
There would be no political difficulties. (S)
The Secretary replied that the Sinai facilities would not belong to ei-
ther Israel or the U.S. Moreover, the geographic considerations of a
possible Soviet attack in Iran would not suggest the use of Israeli bases.
Dr. Brown said that the U.S. had not looked into the nature of the multi-
lateral force under the peace accords. There would be differing views
as to whether the Israeli suggestion might complicate the issue. It went
beyond supervision and enforcement of navigational freedom; it con-
tained an active ingredient. Nevertheless, it was something which
might be worthwhile looking into. (S)
Foreign Minister Shamir referred to Iraq’s effort to create a nuclear
capability. Israel knew that a decision had been taken by the Iraqi gov-
ernment to create nuclear arms. This could not be done without French
and Italian help. Israel was sure this was also a concern of the U.S. and
asked that the U.S. act to stop this dangerous development. (S)
The Secretary replied that the U.S. had no direct influence with
Iraq, unlike with certain other Arab states where the U.S. had the lev-
erage of being the principal arms supplier. The U.S., therefore, would
have to work through its European allies. We would continue to do so,
pointing out to them the dangers of nuclear capability for Iraq. (S)
Foreign Minister Shamir asked the Secretary for his assessment of
the strategic situation in the Eastern Mediterranean. Israel, he said, was
concerned about recent developments in Greece and Turkey and
wanted to know more. (S)
The Secretary replied that the military balance in that area was
somewhat precarious. It had not greatly changed by the transfer of a
carrier battle group to the Indian Ocean (land based aircraft could sub-
stitute for most of that capability), but the political problems were
worse than the military balance. Greece and Turkey each depended for
their security on the other being an ally. This was a necessary but not
sufficient condition for each country’s safety. Relations between the
two, however, had been bad. There was some hope that the Turkish
military government, however deplorable in terms of democratic prin-
ciples, would feel freer to negotiate, and in the short run, this could
help solve the problem. Thus there was some hope of improvement,
but given the complicated problems of Cyprus and Greece’s military
reintegration into NATO, this area would continue to be a political
weak spot. (S)
The Secretary continued that Turkey was particularly vulnerable to
the loss of Persian Gulf oil. It had obtained a larger fraction of oil from
Iran than most countries and the military takeover could create a prob-
lem in this regard. This was another reminder of the grave problem
which would face many countries, Israel included, if Persian Gulf oil
were cut off or fell under Soviet political or military domination. (S)
Foreign Minister Shamir said that Israel would welcome the visits of
Under Secretary Komer and Chairman Jones. The success of their mis-
sions, however, would depend on the political instructions they re-
ceived. Dr. Brown replied that these visits were part of the continuing
dialogue between the U.S. and Israel. The Marshall talks had by agree-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ment been low key and secret, but this channel was no longer pos-
The Foreign Minister reiterated his point that there was no need for
a special effort to hide the strategic dialogue. On the contrary, during
his recent visit to Egypt, he had concluded that the more the Egyptians
realized the closeness of US/Israeli relations, the better Egyptian rela-
tions would be with both countries. (S)
Ambassador Evron amplified by noting that the U.S. and Israel had
differing assessments of the impact of some outward forms of their as-
sociation. Peace became a reality only when Sadat concluded that the
U.S. could help deliver Israel eventually. Israel believed that U.S. sensi-
tivities about Arab reactions to more open strategic cooperation with
Israel were a little exaggerated. If the Arabs interpreted U.S. lack of en-
thusiasm as the beginning of a withdrawal, that would be dangerous.
The two countries could prove that this was not so by doing what many
Arabs suspected them of doing anyway. Why not, therefore, make part
of this strategic cooperation more open? (S)
The Secretary replied that he had been the first American Secretary
of Defense to visit Israel and General Jones would be the first Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to visit Israel. This kind of talk and continual
reassurance, however, was not really necessary. The U.S. did not intend
to turn away from Israel; Israel knew this. In fact, the two countries
were so close that some kinds of formal detailed arrangements were
not really necessary. Under Secretary Komer added that actually the U.S.
was doing more with Israel but because it was also doing more on the
Arab side, this had changed Israel’s perception. (S)
The meeting ended cordially. (U)

405.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts
249328. Subject: U.S. Policy Review on Syria.
1. (S-entire text).
2. At an inter-agency group meeting on September 82 Washington
agencies reviewed U.S. policy toward Syria and the implications for
U.S. interests of the Assad regime’s problematic future. What follows
reflects the meeting’s consensus about the prognosis for the Assad re-
gime and how we can best position ourselves to protect our interests
over what is clearly an uncertain future for Syria. Selected addressees
will be receiving specific instructions to follow up recommended ac-
tions with host governments.
3. The I–G meeting produced broad consensus on following:
A. U.S. and Syrian interests:
—Key U.S. interests with respect to Syria are tied to U.S. regional
objectives of avoiding Arab-Israeli hostilities and promoting a compre-
hensive settlement, denying the USSR greater access to and control
over Syrian policy, and achievement of an acceptable resolution of Leb-
anon’s problems. We also have a strong interest in minimizing the risks
that Syria will be drawn irrevocably into association with a constella-
tion of radical Arab forces (most particularly Iraq) which could pose
major dangers for the stability of the Gulf.
—U.S. endorsement and promotion of the Camp David approach
to an Arab-Israeli settlement has led most Syrians to believe that the
U.S. has paid inadequate attention to Syria’s vital interests (recovery of
the Golan, a Palestinian settlement that will protect Syrian interests and
enhance Syrian influence in the region, and a resolution of the Lebanese
crisis which will safeguard Syria’s security interests and predominate
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
influence in Lebanon). Since these are essentially regional issues, they
are not rpt not susceptible to bilateral solutions.
—The U.S. commitment to the Camp David process as the context
for negotiations will continue to limit our ability in the near term to ad-
dress Syrian interests in a manner sufficiently forthcoming to alter
Syrian estrangement from the U.S. The one exception may be on Leb-
anon where Syrian and U.S. interest in maintaining stability and pre-
venting partition continue to coincide.
B. Assad regime’s future and probable successors:
—Though no one can predict how long the Assad regime will sur-
vive, it is clear that it is dying. Barring assassination, the transition
process is likely to be a lengthy affair and the dynamics involved in
Assad’s struggle to hang on will strongly circumscribe his ability to re-
spond pragmatically or positively to areas of primary interest to the
U.S. In any case, we cannot count on Assad to act with the originality
and pragmatism which characterized his rule in earlier years.
—In order of likelihood successor regimes would probably be:
(a) a regime dominated by the Alawite hierarchy, but without the
Assad brothers, (b) an Alawite/Sunni coalition, (c) a Sunni-dominated
regime. A radical Muslim seizure of power is a remote possibility.
C. Implications for U.S. interests:
—From the standpoint of U.S. interests none of the anticipated suc-
cessors would be preferable to Assad.
—Among them, however, an Alawite-Sunni coalition would prob-
ably be preferable and enjoy the best prospects for stability. It would
stand the best chance of restoring confessional peace by redressing
Sunni majority grievances while protecting minority Alawite/Chris-
tian interests. It would probably pursue the most moderate policies
among the potential successors.
—An Alawite succession would be the most dangerous. A post-
Assad Alawite regime would be ideological, tough, and have the
strongest ties to the USSR among the potential contenders for power. A
Sunni regime might well move to reduce Soviet influence. It would,
however, meet resistance from the Alawite and Christian minorities in
seeking to redress Sunni grievances at the expense of Alawite privilege.
These tendencies would be accentuated to the degree that a Sunni re-
gime found itself beholden to the radical Muslim Brotherhood for
support.
D. U.S. policy
—The best posture for the U.S. at this time with respect to the suc-
cession struggle is one of neutrality and non-involvement. Despite a
clear preference for Assad, it is unlikely that the U.S. can affect his
staying power. At the same time, although we believe that a Sunni/

Alawite coalition would be the preferable successor from our stand-
point, we lack the ability to influence the succession and efforts by us to
do so could actually operate against U.S. preferences. Any effort now
by the U.S. to support or encourage one of the groups arrayed against
the regime would risk our remaining working relations with Assad
without acceptable assurances that we would have influence with
Assad’s ultimate successor.
—While remaining out of Syria’s internal struggle, the U.S. should
take steps to protect our interests in this transition period by con-
ducting ourselves in a manner that will maximize U.S. ability to work
with Assad for now and with whatever regime emerges after him. In
general, this will mean a policy tailored—within the constraints im-
posed by our broader regional objectives—to keep our distance from
Assad while stressing U.S. interest in, and support for legitimate Syrian
national interests. Specifically, our objective will be to stress with
Syrians and selected third parties our determination to remain unin-
volved in Syria’s domestic political struggle and our long-range in-
terest in maintaining Syria as an independent, moderate state.
E. After the regime changes
—Following a change of regime, we would have a limited but ur-
gent agenda with Syria’s new leaders. At the earliest possible moment,
we would want to assure:
—(A) a cooperative relationship on Lebanon;
—(B) maintenance of the Golan disengagement agreement and
Olive Harvest arrangements; and,
—(C) the safety of American official personnel, private citizens
and facilities in Syria.
—In addition, we would want to make clear that Syria continues to
have a Western option and to discourage any move that would take
Syria toward a significantly closer relationship with the USSR.
—In the right circumstances, we would also want to consider tan-
gible ways to underscore the U.S. interest in a constructive relationship
with the successor regime. It is possible that conditions would make an
offer of disaster relief and humanitarian assistance appropriate. We
might also consider emergency financial and economic assistance in co-
operation with other governments.
F. Syria-Libya merger
—The September 10 unity declaration3 by Assad and Qadhafi took
place after the I–G meeting and was, therefore, not discussed. It is De-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
partment’s preliminary view, however, that this step does not alter the
conclusions from the meeting.
4. For Cairo: By septel4 you will receive instructions on how to re-
spond to Cairo 18176.
5. For Jidda and Damascus: I–G meeting produced consensus that
Saudis are the one moderate Arab power with real influence in Da-
mascus now and under likely successor regimes. We will shortly be
sending you an instruction to raise the Syrian situation with the Saudis
in an effort to begin sharing our perception about, and interests in
Syria’s future. In the meantime, we would appreciate Jidda’s best in-
house assessment of the Saudi-Syrian relationship, including Saudi in-
terests and objectives, points of actual or potential friction, and forms of
Saudi assistance to regime and/or its opponents. Conversely, we
would welcome Damascus’ comments on Syrian perception of Saudi
connection.
6. For Damascus, Jidda, Tel Aviv, Cairo, Amman, Beirut and
Baghdad: We are pouching for Ambassador copy of the discussion
paper6 which served as the basis for the I–G meeting discussions. We
could welcome comments and suggestions about paper, as well as con-
clusions from I–G meeting.
7. For all addressees: This cable is for your information only and
should not be discussed with host government officials at this time.
Given the sensitivity and completeness of this report posts should also
ensure that any comment to Department is sent in Nodis channel.
Muskie

406.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Representative
for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter
Washington, October 3, 1980
SUBJECT
Oil Supply Agreement with Israel (U)
Our negotiations with Israel to define conditions for activating and
operating the Oil Supply Agreement will resume Tuesday, October 7.
In addition to our negotiating team, Energy Minister Modai seeks to
meet with Secretaries Muskie and Duncan to press them for an imme-
diate, formal agreement. (C)
State and Energy propose a further liberalization of the US negoti-
ating position for next week’s talks. This and related considerations
are presented in the memorandum from Dick Cooper and Les
Goldman (DOE) to me at Tab A. While the memorandum offers the
option of standing pat on the position we took in the September 23–24
negotiations, none of your advisers recommends this. (S)
State and Energy propose in the attached memorandum that we
amend both of our proposed market tests of Israel’s inability to obtain
adequate oil:
raeli dependence on short-term, indirect purchases of oil (Israel wants a
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(2) lower the price criterion (on Israel’s average oil import pay-
ments) from the highest 10% of US oil imports to the highest 20% (Israel
proposes the top 30%);
State and DOE propose to make these concessions provided Israel
agrees to a substantially longer period of meeting these tests than it has
thus far. (We want at least a 90-day measurement period, Israel has
moved up from 30 days to 60 days.) (S)

407.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting on Oil Negotiations with Israel
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Edmund Muskie
Secretary of Energy Charles Duncan
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Stuart Eizenstat, Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Alfred Moses, Special Advisor to the President
Richard Cooper, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
Ambassador Henry Owen, Ambassador-at-Large, Special Representative of the
President for International Economic Summits
Deane Hinton, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs
Les Goldmann, Assistant Secretary of Energy for International Affairs
Robert Hunter, Staff Member, National Security Council (notetaker)
Rutherford Poats, Staff Member, National Security Council
David Korn, Director of Israel/Arab-Israel Affairs, Department of State
Les Goldmann began by outlining a position on which agreement
with Israel could be reached today: 1) that the Memorandum of Agree-
ment (MOA) could be activated if Israel were paying for oil more than
the average of the top 20% of U.S. imports; 2) we would drop the spot
market test; and 3) we would change our position that there would be a
“strong presumption” for activation if Israel lost either of its two main
suppliers (Egypt and Mexico), to a position in which triggering would
be automatic under this circumstance. At the end of negotiations yes-
terday, our position was that Israel would have to pay a price equiva-
lent to the top 15% of U.S. imports; it would have to buy 66% of its oil
on the spot market; and the Mexican/Egyptian case would only lead to
a “strong presumption” of activation. Secretaries Muskie and Duncan
lowing options: 1) We could move to the top 20% on price and shift the
spot market requirement to 60%. This would not cost us much. If Israel
were paying the equivalent of the top 20%, then it would have to be
buying heavily in the spot market. And we would keep the strong pre-
sumption position. 2) If we want to shift to an automatic trigger, then
we could permit triggering for a 90-day period if either Egypt or
Mexico were lost, at the end of which Israel would have to meet the
price test of 20%.
The President asked whether the Israelis would be likely to accept a
U.S. proposal for 20/60 and automatic triggering if it lost one of the two
main suppliers?
Les Goldmann said that there was a good chance.
Deane Hinton said that he doubted it.
Ambassador Owen asked whether this would be so if the spot
market test were dropped.

Deane Hinton said that that would probably do it. But this is hard to
judge—this had been a wild and discursive negotiation. Modai sees the
“strong presumption” position as very tough, because of the Egyptian
connection. Modai sees this as a backward step, whereas in fact it is an
advance over the MOA. We could not see what would happen until we
tried such a position.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether Israel had adjusted its position in the
negotiations.
Deane Hinton said they had. They had raised the level on the price
criterion, and accepted it in principle, whereas before they had taken
the position that either price or percentage of spot market purchases
should be enough to trigger. That is an advance, since our analysis says
it would be easier for Israel to satisfy the spot market test than the price
criterion.
Les Goldmann said that a logical evolution of our negotiation posi-
tion would be to go to 20/60 while retaining “strong presumption.”
Al Moses said that if we have the 20/60 figures, then Israel would
probably get automatic triggering anyway if it lost Egypt as a supplier.
The President said that wouldn’t be so if it could get cheaper oil
elsewhere. He doesn’t want us to be supplying Israel with oil if it could
get it from Egypt and other countries. Why should we move in to do
so? He had agreed with Begin—and Sadat was involved—that if Israel
lost its supplies, then we would guarantee that it would have oil. Sub-
sequently, Israel put in the price element. He agrees that there is legiti-
macy in this position, if it would mean that Israel were being charged
an exorbitant price—say even $60 a barrel. That would be punitive, and
we would supply oil at a reasonable price. But Israel has moved far be-
yond the original agreement. He favors a reasonable position. With the
20/60 formula, the question of automatic triggering would not be sig-
nificant, from our perspective.
Ambassador Owen asked what we would lose.
Les Goldmann replied that the problem lies in getting independent
criteria. Israel gets 40% now on the spot market. If it lost Egypt, that
could raise the figure to 65%. But what price would that be at? No one
knows for sure. We could get into the position of subsidizing Israeli im-
ports. Israel is looking for an easier trigger.
The President said that he wants to avoid an Israeli self-imposed
triggering, that it might use to get out of having to use the spot market,
or relying upon Egypt and Mexico.
matic triggering provision, then the Israelis could not have a self-
inflicted shortage.
Under Secretary Cooper underlined that the automatic triggering
would be only for a limited period. (The President said he understood).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Deane Hinton said we need a way to deal with Israeli decisions on
this: how can that be written down? We aren’t talking about political
steps: Modai gave the example of adding a single settler leading to a
cut-off of oil from Egypt.
Al Moses suggested separating economic from political factors in
the triggering here.
Deane Hinton said that the agreement needs a little ambiguity. We
need an escape if there is Israeli behavior on oil purchasing that would
lead to self-imposed triggering. It shouldn’t be automatic.
The President said that a verbal assurance from Secretary Duncan
on this point should suffice. The language should stay in. Modai should
be told that the case of a settler, or a breakdown in the autonomy nego-
tiations, wouldn’t be involved. If Israel were to attack Egypt, or try to
take back the Sinai—or something gross—and Egypt stopped sup-
plying oil, then there would be a prohibition. All events can’t be spelled
out in a document.
Ambassador Owen asked about the impact in the Gulf of a 20/60 for-
mula with a 90-day provision for automatic triggering.
Secretary Duncan said that the subtleties of a formula were not that
important. His overriding consideration is that, if there were a trig-
gering in which Israel were getting U.S. oil, then in Saudi Arabia and
other Gulf countries there would be a devastating reaction. It would
have an immediate and dramatic impact.
The President noted that Israel would be permitted to trigger the
agreement (under certain circumstances), and this was said a year ago.
Secretary Duncan said that this was his judgment.
The President said that the agreement with Israel had been publicized.
Secretary Duncan said that Modai is going on a speaking tour of the
United States beginning today. He (Duncan) hopes that Modai will
leave Washington with a good feeling. If we go to the 20/60 formula,
then we should try to hold with “strong presumption.” Goldmann may
be right that we should try to get more room on the spot market crite-
rion, and later leave it out. But he (Duncan) would hate to leave the
spot-market criterion out of the agreement. This is a supply agreement,
though Israel has turned it into a price agreement. This is his intuition.
Ambassador Owen asked about the 90-day provision.
Secretary Duncan said that if the difference lies in whether Modai
walks out of the meeting today feeling bad, then it is good. He
(Duncan) suggests the following tactics: we should move to 20/60, and
hold the line on “strong presumption.” If that does not work, then we
could have the two staffs work out various options, then discuss it
again with Modai when he gets back.
Ambassador Owen asked whether we should introduce the idea of
the 90-day period.

Secretary Duncan said we should, as one option, if this would make
possible a good meeting today. But he hopes we will not have to do it.
Secretary Muskie asked for an explanation of “strong presumption.”
Secretary Duncan said that if Israel lost either Egypt or Mexico as a
supplier, then there would be a “strong presumption” that the MOA
would be triggered.
Ambassador Owen said that this is our existing position.
Secretary Duncan said that there is another possibility: that Mexican
sales to Israel could be expanded. He has had some success here,
stressing collective international efforts. On the 90 days, it means that if
either Mexico or Egypt fell out, then there would be automatic trig-
gering. After 90 days, then Israel must show that it meets either the 20%
on price or the 60% on the spot market.
Ambassador Owen said that the word should be “and”: Israel would
have to meet both tests.
The President said it should be both, since Israel could meet the 60%
spot market test by itself.
Secretary Duncan said that if the Saudis get OPEC price unity, then
there will be a movement towards price unification. If that is achieved,
then there will be few market swings, and Israel could hit the 20% price
formula easily.
Stu Eizenstat said he agreed that we should not enter an agreement
that would permit triggering now. But there are advantages in getting
an agreement now. If the difference is a 90-day automatic provision,
with reversion afterwards to 20/60, then we should do it. There is a his-
tory to this: OPEC knows of the MOA. Our provisions are not easy ones
to meet. There would be a 90-day grace period for Israel in an emer-
gency. It would be good to get an agreement, and put this behind us,
not to extend it. Modai is going on a 12-day speaking tour, and he
shouldn’t go without an agreement.
Ambassador Owen said that we should not just say we will work up
alternatives, but try to close a deal.
Stu Eizenstat said that we should do so, even if we can’t get total
agreement because of other problems.
Secretary Duncan said that there are other issues to be decided, like
how long this agreement should last.
Stu Eizenstat said that the other problems could be managed. We
should be able to announce major decisions, and that we have a concep-
tual agreement.
Deane Hinton said that he has prepared two possible press state-
ments. One says that there has been progress on some issues; the other
says that there has been substantial agreement, subject to review.
Ambassador Owen said that our decision seems to come down to
this: we would go with 20/60, and with “strong presumption.” If that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
does not work, we have a choice between a) Duncan’s options ap-
proach, with the 90-day formula being one such option; or b) as Stu
said, trying to nail down the 90-day provision.
The President said that the overriding objective is that Israel should
feel that, if it has a serious supply problem, we will step in. This should
not just be loss of supply, but also if the price is exorbitant. We must
prevent Israel from self-triggering, however—it would rather rely on
the U.S. than on the spot market or on Egypt. We will not let that
be followed by the 20/60 test, is all right.
Al Moses said it would help if Modai could get this position today.
Ambassador Owen asked how we should conduct the talks with
Modai.
The President said our negotiators need to be tougher.
Secretary Muskie said that there are two ways to go at the 10:30
meeting with Modai—to have the negotiators meet, or to do it at the
Cabinet level, then send it to the negotiators, and then back to himself
and Duncan if need be.
The President said that they should work out the details. The nego-
tiators should tell Muskie and Duncan what not to do when they see
Modai, so that he (Modai) can’t slip anything in. This is an old Israeli
tactic. If they get something in a side conversation that they like, then it
becomes binding—even if it was said by Warren Harding. They say:
“Warren said . . .” (laughter)
Secretary Muskie said that he will make Modai feel good, and
Duncan can be tough (laughter).
The President said that he has the responsibility to see that Egypt
does not turn off the oil for frivolous reasons. Sadat won’t do it; but a
successor might. We need to guarantee Israel’s oil. The position he has
outlined is as forthcoming as it can be; we will go no further, even if the
Israelis go home.
Secretary Cooper raised the phrase “reasons beyond Israel’s con-
trol,” even under the automatic provision ((note: in Israel’s meeting the
criteria on Egypt and Mexico)).
The President said he agreed that one settler wouldn’t be construed
as “Israel’s control.” Muskie can explain this to Modai.
Les Goldmann said that we want to limit this to oil actions on Is-
rael’s part.
The President said yes. We don’t want Sadat to think that Israel has
to agree on points in the autonomy talks for it to get oil. He wishes the
team good luck; they should call him if need be. He thinks it will be ok.
(The meeting ended at 10: a.m.).

408.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts
273839. Subject: (C) US/EC Consultations on the Middle East. Ref-
1. (C-entire text).
2. The EC–9 are continuing work on their Middle East initiative.
Foreign Minister Thorn’s “Contact Mission” to the Middle East in Au-
Confidential; Priority. Sent to Athens, Bonn, Brussels, Dublin, London, Luxembourg,
Paris, Rome, The Hague, and Copenhagen. Drafted by J.H. Madden (EUR/RPE/EEC);
cleared by Robert M. Beaudry (EUR/RPE) and Sterner; approved by Vest. Sent for infor-
mation to Cairo, Tel Aviv, New York, Amman, Jidda, Jerusalem, and Damascus.
Foreign Policy File, D800471–1044)
steps for Chiefs of Mission in European posts to take to monitor EC–9 political delibera-
tions and to contribute to them substantively “in order to encourage the Nine to adopt
positions compatible with our own.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800469–0486)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
gust/September, the nine political directors, working with experts, are
now proceeding to develop common positions on issues related to a
settlement. These efforts will evidently be revealed by Foreign Min-
isters shortly before the nine Heads of Government/State decide at the
East initiative.
3. European diplomat who calls upon us frequently told NEA re-
cently the chances now had to be rated good that the EC Summit would
result in a European declaration setting forth principles for a Middle
East peace going well beyond the Venice Declaration. Source said the
declaration would spell out four basic principles for a peace settlement:
Israeli security; self-determination for the Palestinians; Israeli with-
drawal; and international guarantees. He believed there would also be
a “procedural aspect” to the European declaration in the form of an in-
vitation to the parties to come to a European-organized peace confer-
ence for negotiations based on these principles. Source said that there
was now solid support from Italy, France, Belgium and Ireland for pro-
ceeding in this manner. Holland would be opposed; the Germans
would drag their feet because they didn’t want to displease the US; and
the British were divided among themselves, with Carrington favoring a
strong European initiative but Thatcher holding him back.
4. We have repeatedly made clear to the Nine our views on
achieving peace in the Middle East through the Camp David process
and the need for their support of this process, as well as our concerns
about a separate EC–9 initiative. The Secretary discussed these matters
with several EC Foreign Ministers at the UNGA, and Ambassador Li-
nowitz presented our views to the EC–9 Ambassadors in Washington
on September 15. Most recently, Deputy Secretary Christopher, at a
meeting with several major European Ambassadors on October 9,
stressed very strongly that the EC–9, as they consider their Middle East
plans for their December 1–2 Summit, should not complicate our Camp
David efforts, in particular the President’s upcoming meeting with
Sadat and Begin which may be held at about that same time. FYI. Our
specific concern is that the EC–9 Summit may produce a European plan
for a Middle East settlement that could draw Palestinians and other
Arabs away from the Camp David process and undercut agreements or

409.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Israel and Egypt
1. (S-entire text)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
2. Discussion during the two days of trilateral talks2 focused on
procedural questions: How to describe this and coming meetings and
how to define next steps in the negotiations. There had been serious,
substantive bilaterals with both Israelis and Egyptians in the preceding
days, concentrating on the draft memorandum of understand-ing
(MOU) but the Ministerial level touched only lightly on these matters.
3. The Egyptians used both our restricted trilateral meetings and
our one “plenary” to make strong statements reiterating their known
positions on Jerusalem, settlements, and the need to draw in the Pales-
tinians. The Israelis responded quietly but firmly on Jerusalem and set-
tlements and were positive in their approach toward attracting the Pal-
estinians. The most important aspect of these discussions was Egyptian
agreement to defer discussion of Jerusalem and the settlements until
the summit and proceed in the meantime with the other issues ad-
dressed in the MOU. The Egyptians also pressed for Israeli action on
two bilateral matters: Egyptians in Israeli jails, and the control of a
Coptic church in Jerusalem now in the hands of Ethiopian Copts. Burg
promised to look into these questions personally. He seemed to be opti-
mistic that more could be done with the issue of prisoner release and
was less sanguine that the religious issue could be solved.
4. The principle debate was whether we were “resuming the au-
tonomy negotiations” or “preparing for the summit” and whether the
existing committee structure would be the vehicle for continuing the
discussions or whether a general committee should be created to pro-
vide follow-up. The Egyptians tried to get priority for characterizing
our continued talks as preparing for the summit through a general
committee, but we joined the Israelis in insisting that “resumption” and
“preparation” are two sides of the same coin and must be given equal
weight, as they were in the September 3 statement which Sadat ac-
cepted at Alexandria. The Egyptian team left rather dissatisfied, though
it is not clear that General Ali shares his subordinates’ strong feelings
that Egypt came off second-best. In fact, he was somewhat ironic in his
comments about all these “lawyers” who encroach on his “simple mili-
tary approach” which would be to get on with the business at hand.

Nevertheless, Ali was clearly instructed to let himself be guided by his
“lawyers.”
5. The Israelis agreed that there was no need (or benefit) to trila-
teral sessions until after our elections and privately expressed their
preference for continuing to work with us outside of the trilateral
format provided we do not highlight “bilateral consultations” since
this would be seen as a step back in their relations with Egypt. They ex-
pressed concern that trilateral consideration of the MOU would be pre-
mature and could make progress more difficult. The Egyptians were
relieved by this approach and we had no difficulty setting November
17 as the date of the next meeting. It will be in the area and will prob-
ably not be at the Ministerial level. Meanwhile we will send to both
parties a revised MOU5 and will try to have bilateral discussions of this
new text. The latest Egyptian draft6 is a bit better than their previous ef-
fort and the Israeli draft has promise in that, for the first time, they have
given us Cabinet-cleared language on issues, notably land and water,
which they have avoided treating in a formal way from the outset and
which does not preclude the possibility of compromise. The Egyptians
were clearly interested in Ambassador Linowitz’ characterization of
the Israeli paper and the areas of agreement between the parties. In this
sense the Egyptians may be a bit less negative than they were before the
Oct 14–15 sessions. Privately, they asked us to pass them a copy of the
Israeli paper which we, of course, refused.
Muskie
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

410.
Record of Meeting Between Israeli Prime Minister Begin and
President Carter
Washington, November 13, 1980
President Carter’s Notes Regarding his November 13, 1980
Meeting with PRIME MINISTER MENACHEM BEGIN of Israel
(The White House, Washington, D.C.)
I met with Prime Minister Begin privately. He was ill at ease at
first. I told him that I had accepted the result of the election with equa-
nimity. This seemed to have a surprising effect on him for some reason,
and he mentioned it several times.
I expressed my appreciation for his participation and contribution
to the Camp David Accords and peace treaty, and my gratification that
our bilateral relationships had remained strong in spite of many poten-
tial reasons for disruption of them. I pointed out our own security ad-
vantages from having a strong and free, peaceful, independent Israel.
We discussed the political problems that had derived for us from the
Camp David Accords.
He expressed agreement that the oil commitment was very
satisfactory.
I told him that it would be a serious mistake for Israel to go for-
ward with annexation of the Golan Heights. This would in effect signal
to the rest of the world an abandonment by Israel of a commitment to
UN Resolution 242, and it would open up floodgates of demands from
other nations that the UN Resolution be abandoned or severely modi-
fied—something that we had tried to stop. I told him that in my opinion
it was also a violation of the commitment made in the Camp David Ac-
cords. He didn’t respond, but I think he was impressed.

411.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Menachem
Begin
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Secretary of State Edmund Muskie
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Special Representative of the President
Ambassador Samuel Lewis, United States Ambassador to Israel
Alfred H. Moses, Special Adviser to the President
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Menachem Begin
Ambassador Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to the United States
Yehiel Kadishai, Director, Prime Minister’s Bureau
Yehuda Avner, Adviser to the Prime Minister
Reuven Hecht, Adviser to the Prime Minister
General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister
Dan Pattir, Public Affairs Adviser to the Prime Minister
Jacob Nehushtan, Minister, Embassy of Israel
Eitan Bentsur, Counselor, Embassy of Israel
ister met alone in the Oval Office. The following took place in the Cab-
inet Room beginning at 11: a.m.).
The President said that he and the Prime Minister had talked about
a number of items when they were alone; some they would relate to
their associates in private; many dealt with the Prime Minister’s con-
tribution in an historical way to enhance peace on earth. We have
strengthened ties between our two great democratic countries. He is
grateful to the Prime Minister—and to everyone else at the table. The
Prime Minister had taken constructive and courageous actions. He (the
President) had spent a large part of his political life on these issues, and
there is a new prospect for peace. He is grateful for the opportunity,
and it is his strong intention to continue doing so. Israel will find that
the new U.S. administration mirrors his (the President’s) commitment,
on bilateral relations and on peace, between Israel and Egypt and Israel
and its other neighbors. This includes continuing to work to achieve
full autonomy promised for the West Bank and Gaza; and providing
security for Israel. He hopes that the Israeli government will pursue
this with the same enthusiasm as has characterized its efforts until now.
The Prime Minister and he recalled that the Camp David Accords and
the peace treaty represent solemn commitments, which go beyond the
identity of whoever is in office in the three countries. They should and
will be binding on the peoples and governments; and not cast aside and
abandoned. There are no good alternatives: the intrusion of other coun-
tries is not beneficial; the going back to a convening of a Geneva confer-
ence under UN auspieces would not be beneficial; the weakening of
Resolution 242 commitments would not be beneficial.
Concerning progress in bilateral U.S.-Israeli relations, it is recog-
nized here that there is real importance to U.S. security in Israeli-U.S.
friendship. This is an important development; it may not have begun in
the last four years, but it has certainly been strengthened. Public
opinion here shows that support for Israel is valued by our people, and
is strong. He and the Prime Minister had talked of the need for con-
tinued sharing of intelligence information between our countries.
There is need to restrain the spread of nuclear weapons—to countries
like Libya, Iraq, and Pakistan. The U.S. has taken the lead on this issue,
so far. When he sees Governor Reagan next week, he will impress upon
him the importance of this issue.
On the question of a possible summit, this has been left in a tenta-
tive state. The Prime Minister is willing to proceed if it is advisable. He
(the President) wants to see what both Sadat and Reagan think. We
should proceed cautiously here. It is important to see the peace process
go on. His overall sense is one of gratification and gratitude. The Prime
Minister is a courageous leader, who worked with him (the President)
in achieving much.
The Prime Minister said thank you very much indeed. He says as a
friend, as he did in the Oval Office, that he feels deeply impressed with
the spirit of democracy here, and that in such a way the President had
accepted the decision of the people. American democracy is an ex-
ample to others. He has deep appreciation for it—and it has been an ex-
ample for a long time, for the U.S. and for the world. There is beauty in
democracy, and it shows civil courage.
He wants to express the gratitude of Israel, that in President
Carter’s tenure, Israel’s national security has been strengthened; there
were the Camp David Accords, and the Egypt-Israel treaty. These are
great achievements. The Camp David Accords have two parts—and
are in effect an international treaty. The President of the United States
witnessed the signing—all three leaders signed them. One part has
come to fruition, in the peace treaty reached with the President’s help.
Now normalization is taking place. There are some difficulties; but in
the near future there will be another meeting in Cairo on the autonomy
process. Maybe there will be a summit. He and the President have
agreed that, as the transition period goes on, he (the Prime Minister)
will accept any decision of the President on a summit. If the President
wants to have a summit in these ten weeks, and if Sadat agrees, then
this is all right, but it is the President’s decision. There are voices here
that consider the Camp David Accords a document to be discarded,
and look elsewhere for ideas. Where are these ideas? This sets a bad ex-
ample for other nations. What value therefore would there be in a
treaty? This would be injurious for all; and he (the Prime Minister) be-
lieves that Sadat agrees. Israel stands behind the Camp David Accords,
and wants to bring them to fruition. There will be differences—and
these will be important sometimes. Each party sees that it is taking the
right approach. This is natural. But we can clarify the issues. And we
have proved we can reach further agreement. When it appeared we
were losing agreement, it was caught in mid-air, we brought it to earth
and signed an agreement. Israel stands by the Camp David Accords,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and by free negotiations with the three nations. We should continue
with these efforts. He will wait for the President to decide on a summit.
If the President will let him know what he decides, he will accept it.
The President said that, in the meantime, we should not discuss it
publicly. He does not want it thought that we are taking a unilateral de-
cision. He will talk with Sadat and Reagan. It is likely there will not be a
summit, but maybe there could be one, if it is appropriate.
The Prime Minister agreed.
The President said he wants to find out what Reagan thinks of an
early meeting with the Prime Minister and Sadat (post-Inauguration).
If he (Reagan) reacts positively, this would be the best alternative. He
(the President) will explore this quietly.
Secretary Muskie said that he wanted to express his own apprecia-
tion for the opportunity to be involved, for a few months, with efforts
to keep Camp David going, under difficult circumstances. He appre-
ciates all the cooperation he has received. He compliments both leaders
on their historical achievement, and expressed his thanks to both of
them—and especially to the Prime Minister—for their understanding.
The Prime Minister said thank you.
Dr. Brzezinski said that he will soon be a private citizen, and hopes
to visit Israel, and play a decisive game of chess with the Prime
Minister!
The President said he understood that Dr. Brzezinski and the Prime
Minister are still tied!
The Prime Minister said that Dr. Brzezinski could come to Israel to
play chess with him. But why only one decisive game? (laughter) At
Camp David, the score was two-to-two, and was inconclusive. They
were interesting games; but he (the Prime Minister) needs more
training! (laughter) The games that Dr. Brzezinski and he had played
were the first he had played since he was arrested by the Russian Secret
Service in 1940. It had been 38 years since he had played chess.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the Prime Minister had said this at the be-
ginning of their first chess game at Camp David, and he (Dr. Brze-
zinski) had been suitably unnerved by the historic significance of it. But
at the end, Mrs. Begin had said to him (Dr. Brzezinski) that it was won-
derful that they were playing, because Menachem loves to play chess!
The Prime Minister said that that is right, but he hadn’t! It had been
a hobby when he was a boy. You don’t forget how to play. But he needs
training—a fact demonstrated because Dr. Brzezinski had beaten him
twice! (laughter). Dr. Brzezinski does play very well.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he wanted to join in expressing per-
sonal gratitude for the chance to serve the President on these issues.

This was the most difficult, interesting, satisfying and frustrating expe-
rience of his life. It included his share of heartburn.
Ambassador Evron said that Ambassador Linowitz sometimes gave
heartburn to others, as well! (laughter)
Ambassador Linowitz said that he wished he had! He had played a
small part—but was immensely grateful. There is one point, which he
raised last night with the Prime Minister. He (Ambassador Linowitz)
would be personally unhappy if the process came to a close on Inaugu-
ration Day, without a record of what had been done, either a joint sum-
mary—such as the Memorandum of Understanding or other docu-
ment—or a report. He hopes that there can be agreement to do this, for
the record for the next administration and for history. It would show
we were slowly making progress towards implementing the Camp
David agreement.
The President said that this would please him. The optimum would
be a joint report they could agree upon. Alternatively, Ambassador Li-
nowitz could give him a unilateral report, with a copy to the others for
the record.
Ambassador Linowitz said that we tried this with the Memorandum
of Understanding; but predictably there had been problems. He had
wanted us to be able to say: here we are.
The President asked why not try to have an assessment made of the
progress that has been made, and delineate outstanding items and
areas of disagreement. This might be done at the November 17th meet-
ing. If not, he will ask Ambassador Linowitz for a report.
The Prime Minister said that if it is a problem of a common assess-
ment by the three countries, and a matter of summing up the negotia-
tions, that could cause some unresolved questions to be brought up. He
would favor a document on what we have achieved. Some time was in-
deed lost, but there are achievements. He will need to consult his col-
leagues on the idea. He would prefer as much agreement as possible.
Ambassador Linowitz said that he would be happy to try preparing a
draft.
The President said that we will try.
The Prime Minister said that it should be positive: what we
achieved—for example, that for 32 years there was a state of war and
five wars. Officially there were four wars, but non-officially there were

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
five, since there were hundreds of casualties on both sides from the war
of attrition. Then we could see achievement—as recorded in the pre-
amble to the Egypt-Israel treaty, and in normalization—for the first
time in 32 years in the Middle East: such a thing doesn’t happen! Some
of the things could be stated on autonomy, but not all. A tripartite dec-
laration? He would consult his friends.
The President said certainly. Ambassador Linowitz will try a draft
on the three countries, and will give it to the Prime Minister to accept or
change. He would like to turn over to Reagan what we see as the
progress and the problems. (He then invited the Prime Minister to join
him outside with the press).
(The meeting concluded at 12: p.m.).

412.
Memorandum From William E. Odom of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, December 3, 1980
SUBJECT
Counterterrorism Training for Egypt (S)
As you know, CIA has a trained counterterrorism group for the
Ministry of Interior in Egypt. It is composed of about forty men who
were originally policemen. The Egyptian Ministry of Defense has come
to us with a request [less than 1 line not declassified] to train a somewhat
larger terrorism group in the Egyptian Army. This request was brought
to the attention of the SCC Executive Committee on Terrorism last
To avoid confusion in our own government, I held a meeting this
morning with representatives from the CIA/DDO, DOD/JCS, and

413.
Letter From the President’s Special Representative
for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz) to
President Carter
Washington, January 12, 1981
Dear Mr. President:
I am pleased to submit to you these two brief reports—one sum-
marizing the progress thus far made in the Autonomy Negotiations
and the other the developments in the Egyptian-Israeli normalization
process. These reports reflect my experience in the area over the past
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
year and take into account my most recent consultations with President
Sadat and Prime Minister Begin.
As you know, during my December visit both leaders agreed that
important progress had been made in the negotiations toward realiza-
tion of the objectives of the Camp David Accords and they expressed
their confidence that they would be able fully to fulfill the promise of
Camp David.
President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin also affirmed3 their
strong conviction that the process which you had developed with them
at Camp David is, in their words, “the only viable path toward compre-
hensive peace in the Middle East today.” I share that conviction and
deeply believe that it is in the highest interest of the United States to
press forward in the weeks and months ahead in order to conclude the
negotiations at the earliest possible date.
I have been honored to serve as your representative in these
negotiations.
Respectfully submitted,
Sol M. Linowitz
Personal Representative of the President
for the Middle East Peace Negotiations
Begin. Meeting with Sadat on December 15, Linowitz conveyed to the Egyptian President
a message from President-elect Ronald W. Reagan stating that he would support the
Camp David process. Sadat, Linowitz noted, gave the impression that he remained “fully
committed” to the process and was “most concerned that the new administration under-
stand it is critical for the United States to remain a full partner in the negotiations.” How-
ever, Sadat also gave the impression that he was “suspicious of the Saudis”and “opposed
to any role for Hussein until autonomy agreement has been reached,” and that Egypt
“will take no initiatives at this juncture.” (Telegram 27630 from Cairo, December 16; Na-
with Begin December 16–17, during which Linowitz briefed him on his conversations
with Sadat and conveyed a message from Carter stating that this was a “decisive mo-
ment” for the Camp David negotiations as it was necessary to demonstrate to Reagan
that the peace process was an “active and viable one.” These meetings are summarized in
Policy File, P880139–2142)
by the Camp David Accords.
While significant differences remain on important issues which
will require extensive and intensive negotiations during the weeks and
months ahead, it can fairly be said that a substantial consensus now
exists between the parties on the elements set forth below.
Some of the positions reflected in this report have not yet been re-
vealed by the parties to one another. Moreover, each of the parties has
emphasized that its position on many of these matters is expressly con-
ditioned on the completion of a comprehensive autonomy agreement.
Accordingly, it is important to emphasize that one or both of the parties
might deny aspects of this report were it to be made public. Never-
theless, the existing consensus as reflected below provides a solid foun-
dation for the completion of a comprehensive agreement which will es-
tablish the transitional autonomy arrangements contemplated in the
Accords.
1. Election of Self-Governing Authority
The parties would agree that a single body should be elected by
the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza as the Self-Governing
Authority (hereinafter referred to as the “SGA(AC)”). The SGA(AC)
would select its own officers from among the elected members and de-
termine its own internal procedures.
Proposals have been made by both parties on the SGA(AC)’s size
and structure, and some progress in narrowing the differences has been
made. The parties are proceeding on the basis that these issues are
more appropriately resolved once the scope and nature of the
SGA(AC)’s powers and responsibilities have been more fully defined.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
As called for by the Camp David Accords, the SGA(AC) would be
established and inaugurated within one month after it has been elected,
at which time the transitional period of five years would begin. The Is-
raeli military government and its civilian administration would be
withdrawn, to be replaced by the SGA(AC) as specified in the “Frame-
work for Peace in the Middle East.” A withdrawal of Israeli armed
forces would then take place and there would be a redeployment of the
remaining Israeli forces into specified security locations.
The parties are agreed that there must be free elections based on
the principles of peaceful assembly, free expression and secret ballot,
bearing in mind the need to preserve law and order. Free electoral
campaigning will be guaranteed in accordance with the agreement on
election modalities which has now been virtually completed. A system
for apportioning representation will be determined in the course of the
negotiations once the issue of participation by Palestinian inhabitants
of Jerusalem is resolved.
The election would be organized, conducted and supervised by a
Central Electoral Commission, composed of authorized Israeli civilian
personnel and local Palestinian Arabs agreed upon by the autonomy
negotiators, together with other civilians—individual and institu-
tional—as agreed upon by the negotiators. There will be free access for
international media and for such experts as may be agreed upon by the
parties.
2. Powers and Responsibilities of the SGA (AC)
The parties thus far in the negotiating process have agreed upon at
least the following areas and functions with respect to which the SGA
(AC) would exercise responsibility:
Administration of Justice
Agriculture
Budget
Civil Service
Commerce
Culture
Ecology
Education
Finance
Health
Housing and Construction
Industry
Internal Communication and Posts
Internal Transportation
Labor
Local Police and Prisons
Manpower
Municipal Affairs
Nature Preserves and Parks
Public Works

Religious Affairs
Refugee Rehabilitation
Social Welfare
Taxation
Tourism
Other areas and functions in which the SGA (AC) would exercise
responsibility are under discussion and negotiation.
The parties anticipate that the SGA (AC) would have the powers
necessary and appropriate to the exercise of its responsibilities with re-
spect to the defined areas and functions. These would include the
power to formulate policies; to supervise implementation of the laws
and regulations relating to them; to decide upon the budget and deter-
mine the means of financing it; to employ staff; to sue and be sued; and
to enter into contracts.
Considerable attention has been devoted to defining the nature of
the legislative power appropriate for the SGA (AC) to fulfill its respon-
sibilities. While some differences remain on this issue, the parties have
made significant progress and both agree that the SGA (AC) must be
empowered to promulgate such measures as are necessary to the
proper fulfillment of its responsibilities. The exercise of power would
have to be limited to the defined responsibilities, could not impinge on
issues reserved for resolution in the final status negotiations, and must
be consistent with the transitional nature of the arrangement and all se-
curity provisions and mechanisms called for by the Framework.
In reaching agreement on the above powers and responsibilities, it
has been understood that coordination between the SGA (AC) and Is-
rael will be necessary in some specifically defined areas and the parties
have agreed that mechanisms to achieve this end will be worked out in
the course of the negotiations.
In connection with the issue of land, we can anticipate that lawful
private ownership of land in the territories will be protected during the
transitional period, based on the principle of equal protection under the
law. As to public lands, determination of their ultimate status and uses
will be addressed in the final status negotiations. While extensive nego-
tiations will still be required, proposals have recently been made by the
parties which may offer a basis for resolving the problem of public land
and Israeli settlements during the transitional period.
As to water, final arrangements will be determined in the course of
the final status negotiations. For the transitional period, Israel has pro-
posed that new developments and uses of water should be worked out
jointly between the SGA (AC) and Israel. For its part, Egypt has be-
lieved that the SGA (AC) must control its own water resources but has
recognized that development of water resources which underlie both
Israel and the territories will require substantial coordination between
the two. Both parties appear to favor the establishment of a regional

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
body representing the various peoples of the area in order to develop
and use the water resources for the benefit of all those peoples.
In connection with security, it is agreed that the inhabitants of both
the territories and Israel require assured internal security and public
order during the transitional period. Accordingly, it is recognized that
the strong local police force, to be constituted by the SGA (AC), must
help provide such security. Specific arrangements for liaison between
the local police and Israeli security authorities on such security issues,
as called for in the Camp David Framework, will be worked out in the
course of the negotiations and will be implemented in such a way as to
ensure that security is preserved.
To assure external security, and in the absence of Jordanian partici-
pation as envisioned in the Camp David Framework, the responsibil-
ities for external security set forth in the Framework must be borne by
Israel. The precise arrangements remain to be specified and further dis-
cussion will be required on how to enable Israel to fulfill fully its re-
sponsibilities while minimizing the impact on the inhabitants.
The parties plan the establishment of a Continuing Committee
with Egypt, Israel and the SGA (AC) as members (Jordan has, of course,
the option of joining under the provisions of the Framework), and with
the United States also invited to participate. The Committee would de-
cide by agreement on the modalities of admission of persons displaced
in 1967, together with measures necessary to prevent disruption and
disorder. The Committee would also deal with other matters of
common concern, such as economic cooperation. The Committee
would operate on the basis of unanimity unless otherwise agreed by
the parties.
As you know so well, troublesome problems still remain to be re-
solved and difficult negotiations still lie ahead. It is significant, how-
ever, that on December 18, 1980, President Sadat and Prime Minister
Begin together issued a statement reaffirming their commitment to the
Camp David peace process as “the only viable path toward compre-
hensive peace in the Middle East today.”
With the determined efforts of both parties and with continued ac-
tive participation on the part of the United States, I firmly believe that
the negotiations can be successfully concluded.
Respectfully submitted,
Sol M. Linowitz
Personal Representative of the President
for the Middle East Peace Negotiations
Attachment
Report Prepared by the President’s Special Representative
for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz)
undated
PROGRESS IN EGYPTIAN-ISRAELI NORMALIZATION
ARRANGEMENTS
Since the signing of the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty and the ex-
change of instruments of ratification on April 25, 1979, Israel has com-
pleted on schedule its withdrawal from the Sinai to the interim line
specified in the Treaty, including turning over to Egypt the Sinai oil
fields. Similarly, Egypt has scrupulously adhered to its commitments
under the Treaty.
After the parties established normal and friendly relations on Jan-
uary 25, 1980, they exchanged resident Ambassadors one month later
and then began negotiations on the normalization measures called for
in the Treaty. In March 1980, they signed three major agreements for
cultural relations, civil aviation, and trade and commerce. In addition,
the Israelis and Egyptians concluded five memoranda of under-
standing covering communications and postal services, tourism, agri-
culture, land and sea transport, and arrangements for the travel of Pal-
estinians from Gaza to Egypt.
Flights between Israel and Egypt began immediately and are now
being expanded to six times a week. Telephone and postal links have
been established between the countries, and the newspapers and peri-
odicals of one appear in the streets of the other.
Tourists are free to travel from one country to the other and the
number of official delegations exchanging visits has been increasing.
Teams have been exchanged by the respective Ministries of Agricul-
ture, and they are coordinating their activities to prevent the spread of
animal diseases such as Rift Valley fever.
Israeli agricultural products including eggs, poultry, seeds and ag-
ricultural machinery are beginning to appear in Egyptian markets and
an agreement has been reached to exchange agricultural and industrial
exhibits to promote trade. President Sadat has recently agreed to the
overland transit of goods through El-Arish to supplement the previ-
ously agreed access by vessels of each country to the ports of the other.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Following President Navon’s state visit to Cairo in October, 1980,
Egypt and Israel decided to establish a “peace task force” drawn pri-
marily from the private sector to improve mutual understanding. The
two countries are now considering proposals to open consulates and
cultural centers to support their diplomatic missions.
Both Egypt and Israel have continued to monitor the progress of
the normalization of relations, and when problems have developed
they have quickly resolved the problems through normal diplomatic
channels.
This record of achievement and progress stands out as a dramatic
example to all the countries and peoples of the Middle East of the ben-
efits of genuine peace.
Respectfully submitted,
Sol M. Linowitz
Personal Representative of the President
for the Middle East Peace Negotiations
