574 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI At the Secretary’s invitation, Foreign Minister Shevardnadze opened the discussion. He said he wanted to emphasize that after Malta and after his talks with Secretary Baker in Wyoming and Moscow, our work to define mutually acceptable solutions had picked up speed. In a nutshell, he could say that major differences had been eliminated regarding the ABM and defense problems, SLCMs and ALCMs, mobile ICBMs, telemetry encryption and non-­deployed missiles. Now we could address the remaining issues; this had, in fact, shaped the agenda for this ministerial. He proposed to lay out the issues on which the Soviets believed we needed to make further decisions. START: ALCMs and SLCMs Regarding heavy bombers and ALCMs, Shevardnadze said it now seemed that what we should do is focus on the key issue, the 600 km range cut-­off. He had already informed the Secretary many times that, without agreement on a 600 km range limit, all other understandings that had been reached between the two sides on ALCMs would make no sense. In Moscow he had given the necessary clarifications and arguments as to why the Soviets had raised this issue in such a fundamental fashion. He would not repeat these arguments now, but only say that the Soviet side could not possibly change its position. In Moscow the sides had reached basic agreement on most aspects of the ALCM issue and he could confirm that now. At the same time, Soviet experts had some additional ideas that he thought should be acceptable to both sides. These could be discussed in the working group. In fact, an initial discussion had taken place the previous day. Shevardnadze said that, regarding the “sliding rule,” it would be necessary to reach agreement on numerical levels. The Soviets believed that for the United States there should be a maximum of 90–115 heavy bombers equipped with ALCMs. On this basis we could find a final solution. He reiterated that we should have our experts work on these issues. He just wanted to emphasize again the importance of all elements of the Wyoming package as well as the importance of the 600 km range factor. All these issues had to be discussed in detail. The experts could then report their results back to the Ministers later in the day. The Secretary said that, before Shevardnadze turned to SLCMs, he wanted to respond in light of the in-­depth exploration of this issue they had had previously. He understood that Shevardnadze had no authority on the ALCM range issue. The Secretary said he had no authority to move either. As he had said in Namibia, this might be an issue that would have to be resolved by the two Presidents. The Secretary went on to say that we thought the paper presented by Marshal Akhromeyev the previous day raised a question as to whether the agreements reached in Moscow continued to apply. We could have our experts meet, but a number of the things in the papers
