964 Foreign Relations, 1958ﻗ°±1960, Volume III, Supplement will be considerable, favoring those space systems having the greatest military potential, but designed also to yield the maximum in scientific gains and in propaganda value. 21. Coupled with this power aspect, Soviet economic growth causes communism to appear to much of the underdeveloped world as a successful model for the handling of massive economic probﺁﺝ lems. Moreover, the Soviets have had considerable success in identifyﺁﺝ ing themselves, through propaganda and diplomatic proposals, with worldwide desires for a lessening of tensions, most notably on the issue of nuclear testing, and to a lesser degree on the disarmament question generally. 22. With such assets, the USSR will for the foreseeable future conﺁﺝ tinue to gravely threaten US security and that of the Free World genﺁﺝ erally. Yet as the Soviets seek to expand their influence in the world they confront both external and internal problems, which we believe will arise chiefly with respect to the Satellite situation, Soviet relations with the underdeveloped areas, long-ﺁﺝterm evolution within the USSR itself, and Sino-ﺁﺝSoviet relations. While, at present, we see no basis for estimating that such problems would diminish Soviet internal power or change the basic objectives of the Soviet leadership, they could in the course of time limit the effectiveness or even alter the content of Soviet foreign policy. 23. The Satellite Situation. The present tendency in Eastern Europe generally is toward a stabilization and consolidation of Communist rule, with Soviet authority in political and ideological questions more firm than at any time since 1956. An increase in the degree of internaﺁﺝ tional acceptance of the East German Regime, or any apparent weakﺁﺝ ening in the position of West Berlin, could further strengthen the Soviet position in the Satellites. In the long run, however, the Satellites will remain one of the critical problems with which the Soviets will have to cope, given the likely continuation of deep-ﺁﺝseated antipathy to Soviet domination. During a period of rising popular expectations and greater contacts with the outside world, the Soviets must endeavor to mainﺁﺝ tain political structures that can, on the one hand, ensure the required degree of Soviet control and, on the other, be operated without excesﺁﺝ sive friction, and appear to the world as an attractive image of commuﺁﺝ nism in practice. 24. Soviet Relations with the Underdeveloped Areas. The total Soviet presence and the Soviet trade and aid programs in these areas will undoubtedly increase in coming years and will offer opportunities for expanding Soviet influence as well as for assisting local Communist elements. Furthermore, the desire of many of the newly created nations for development of military forces offers fertile ground for a form of Communist influence which could lead to serious consequences. On
