Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
549
and irresolute. (The latest issue of Foreign Affairs6 makes a very strong
case to that effect, and that is becoming the conventional wisdom.) This
is the direct result not of our policies but of the way in which almost
anyone in the bureaucracy feels free to talk to the press, discuss and
distort the most intimate decision-making processes, and generally
promote themselves or their personal policy preferences. It is extremely
destructive, not only of our foreign policy but of political support for
this Administration. I am afraid I see no remedy to this problem short
of a significant shake-up, particularly in the State Department. There
are faults here in The White House, in the NSC, and certainly in De-
fense. But one cannot have a discussion with any journalist in this city
without gaining the very clear impression that the leaks and misinfor-
mation coming out of the State Department are of unprecedented
proportions.
I am prepared to direct my staff to have no conversations with the
press whatsoever unless specifically authorized by me or David.7 I be-
lieve we can similarly discipline the rest of the White House Staff. We
should save our crackdown on the Pentagon until after we have SALT
ratified; but this is not a major problem anyway, and we can take action
against any outrageous examples of disloyalty or indiscretion (the
Singlaub case8 had a constructive impact in DOD). In the State Depart-
ment, I believe the principal problem areas that require shaking up are:
the Iran desk, which has consistently misrepresented your policy; the
staff in the Human Rights office; some key people in the Secretariat, in-
cluding those who deal with the press; and some Assistant Secretaries,
who grind their own axes with the press (most recently on the question
pertaining to the Kennedy invitation to the Deng dinner).9 All of them,
in different ways, have contributed to the public sense of disarray.
I have hesitated to set down this view for fear it would be misinter-
preted. But I simply feel I would not be honest with you or myself if I
did not express my deepening concern for the destructive impact of the
6 Presumable reference to Foreign Affairs, volume 57, number 3, “America and the
World 1978.” In it, authors surveyed and analyzed the President’s foreign policy suc-
cesses and limitations during the second year of his administration.
7 David Aaron.
8 Reference is to Army Major General John Singlaub, Chief of Staff of U.S. forces in
South Korea, who in 1977 had criticized the President’s decision to withdraw U.S. troops
from South Korea (see footnote 3, Document 53).
9 On January 26, The Chicago Tribune reported that the President, over the objection
of several of his aides, had extended an invitation to Kennedy to attend the January 29
State dinner in honor of Deng. A White House aide confirmed a report by CBS News cor-
respondent Leslie Stahl that the White House had sent the invitation to Kennedy on Jan-
uary 25. The aide indicated that Kennedy supporters had lobbied the White House and
the Department to ensure that Kennedy received an invitation. (“Carter Invites Teddy:
Guess who’s coming to dinner?” p. D–6) See also “Kennedy Invited to Teng Dinner,” The
New York Times, January 26, 1979, p. A–5.
