March 27–December 31, 1979
1023
his actions at Baghdad5 and insisted Saudi policy is not dictated by any
sense of fear of Palestine or anyone else.
When I finally had a chance to say something more, I tried to set
him straight on the history of the efforts to get to Geneva, stressing that
the Syrians had pulled the rug out from that effort. I told him Sadat is
determined to get a Palestinian self-governing authority with wide
powers and responsibilities and a satisfactory solution of the Jerusalem
problem. Fahd might disagree with Sadat’s tactics, but I could assure
him that their objectives are very similar.
Fahd thought that only a statement from you to the effect that
there must be an Israeli withdrawal to the June 1967 borders with
minor rectifications and that Jerusalem must be returned to the Arabs
would help. If Sadat succeeds in his negotiations in achieving these two
objectives, he, Fahd, would be the first to applaud and to urge the other
Arab states to support the peace effort. But he doubted that this would
happen. I told him that you are determined to do your utmost to move
the peace process forward, that we should all by now recognize that
public statements do little to achieve this objective. I urged that he have
confidence in your purposes and support them. Fahd said he has full
confidence in you, but as for Sadat—that was something else.
We then went to the question of a possible dialogue. He turned
down Sadat’s suggestion of a meeting with Mubarak in Washington—
either bilateral or with an American present—or even of having some-
one else do so. What is first needed, he said, is a “period of tranquility,”
i.e., a cessation of mutual public attacks. He said that he was happy that
Sadat agrees with this, but charged that Sadat is the guilty party. I said I
was not seeking to blame anyone, but noted there had also been un-
helpful Saudi press articles. Fahd said that he had given instructions to
the Minister of Information to muzzle the press and not allow attacks
on the Egyptians.
Since you had authorized me to try out what I thought might be
useful, I then suggested the establishment of a hot line between the
two. Fahd didn’t like that, and noted that they already have a secure
channel between them. I said that I assumed he was referring to the in-
telligence channel, but noted that Mubarak had told me a message sent
four months ago had not yet been answered by the Saudis. Fahd simply
shrugged his shoulders. (It may be that Fahd’s growing doubts about
Turkibin Faisal make him uninterested in the intelligence channel.)
I told Fahd that the mischievous efforts of ill-wishers on both sides,
who were seeking to spread disinformation, could only be curbed if
some kind of a channel between Egypt and Saudi Arabia exists and is
5 See footnote 7, Document 91.
