682 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 7. Explanation genesis of above follows immediately.3 End of message. 3 In telegram TEHE 712, August 17, the Station in Tehran urged that the following request be sent to Ambassador Berry in Baghdad: “I urge you to send strongly worded message encouragement to the Shah of Iran who is now in Baghdad. According my information he has latent support majority of Iranian population including its most eminent clerics, including, of course, Borujerdi. However his presence needed Iran to successfully rally populace against tyranny of Mossadeq. In exercising his constitutional prerogatives of dismissing one Prime Minister and appointing another he has placed himself in position having fight to finish. Please have my personal assurances that he issued firman for dismissal of Mossadeq and appointment Zahedi. It is my belief that a word from one so renowned as yourself will encourage Shah return to his country and carry on struggle which rapidly becoming symbol constitution vs. unconstitutional methods.” (Central Intelligence Agency. Transcribed specifically for the Foreign Relations series from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer exists. See “Sources” chapter.) 273. Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence Agency1 Tehran, August 17, 1953. TEHE 717. 1. While initial attempt failed several significant facts remain: A. Firmans established new govt and dismissed old. They are in effect. Mossadeq has actually conducted a revolution. Legally Ambassador is not accredited to him but to Shah who has dismissed him. B. Economic situation will continue to worsen. C. Mossadeq strengthened at moment. Period probably last two months. D. Army still basically Shah. E. Tudeh will occupy more important position than ever. F. Impossible to woo Mossadeq toward U.S. COL will remain in ground and Tudeh will thrive. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret. Transcribed specifically for the Foreign Relations series from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer exists. See “Sources” chapter. All brackets are in the transcribed text.
