Conference powers seemed a rather unwieldy combination. I raised the objection of the national susceptibilities of treaty powers which were not represented in the Washington Conference, experience with regard to which we had had in connection with the joint note of December 9, 1924 from the Washington Conference powers to the Chinese Government.74 I questioned whether it would be beneficial to create a block of Washington Conference powers just in order to expedite results in the present situation as such a block would be either too large or not large enough. 4. Yoshizawa and I agreed fully regarding the attitudes of the French and Italian Governments. The former had completely changed since the settlement of the gold franc issue and now seemed anxious to aid China in every proper way. For this reason the French Minister doubtless would generally be in accord with what I consider to be the American, British, and Japanese policy with respect to China, i. e., a sympathetic attitude toward China’s aspirations, assistance in that direction by proper revision of treaties as fast as the Chinese show ability to fulfill their responsibilities, and the achievement by China of a stable government without foreign interference. Yoshizawa and I agreed that the Italian attitude toward China differed rather sharply from that stated above. We both feel that the Italian Government seems disposed to make the satisfactory settlement by China of the Italian gold franc case and the payment to Italy of certain former Austrian bonds a condition to a sympathetic attitude toward China generally and specifically to wholehearted support to the early convening of the Tariff Conference. Yoshizawa also pointed out that although two months ago France had promised to ratify the Washington Conference treaties she had not yet done so. 5. The Japanese Minister then came to the point which I think was the reason for his appeal to me. He said that he believed his Government contemplated a larger cooperation between the American, British, and Japanese Governments with respect to China than merely cooperation in the affair at Shanghai. He repeated in several different ways this extended idea of cooperation, which gave me every reason to believe that Japan is making a bid on a definite basis for cooperation in China of these three powers. I told Yoshizawa that I could not express an opinion on this very important conception and its many implications but said that I would be glad to comply with his request to report the same for consideration by my Government. At this point I questioned Yoshizawa as to Japan’s attitude toward China. After discussion I summarized its attitude as I saw it as follows: With respect to Manchuria, Japan had taken a position which it believed was vital to Japan’s existence as a nation; but as for the rest of China, Japan wishes it to work out its own destiny free from foreign interference so that an authoritative, stable government may be established, and Japan believes that as concerns treaty readjustment and the like the national aspirations of China should receive sympathetic consideration. Yoshizawa was evidently pleased to confirm this summary as being exactly the attitude of the Japanese Government.
