1078 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI under a major change in U.S. policy, and Argentina also would have to change its policy and defer reprocessing. “Regional equilibrium” would be necessary for any reprocessing deferral, the Argentine representatives had said. Nye stated that at no time did we link stage 3 to stage 1, as Martinez had. 7. Aja Espil stated that Martinez does not make policy. 8. Ambassador Smith raised the Argentine/Peruvian agreement and our earlier understanding that the second research reactor to be provided to Peru (10 megawatts) would use low enriched uranium (LEU). Smith observed that in December, CNEA officials had stated that highly enriched uranium was required. The Peruvians, on the other hand, informed us that the 10 mw reactor would be fueled with LEU. 9. Aja Espil was not briefed on the question of the 10 mw reactor for Peru. He promised to investigate. He inquired about the progress of the quadrilateral agreement (U.S., Argentina, Peru and IAEA) required for the transfer of the zero power reactor fuel to Argentina. Aja Espil was assured that we were close to an accord on the quadrilateral agreement. Vance 430. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Venezuela1 Washington, February 12, 1978, 2024Z 26891. Subject: Venezuelan Concern Over IAEA Nuclear Material. Ref: Caracas 209.2 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780048–0877. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Lorna Watson (ACDA/NP/NX) and McFadden (DOE); cleared by Anne Jillson (IO/SCT), Robert Kelley (S/AS), Louis Cecchini (OES), Robert Sloane (L/OES), and William Sergeant (ARA); and approved by Charles Van Doren (ACDA). 2 Telegram 209 from Caracas, January 10, reported that the United States, per a December request by the Venezuelan government for special nuclear materials, was “prepared to provide a gift of uranium” to Venezuela. Still, Ambassador Vaky relayed “US concern that Venezuela has not yet fulfilled its obligations under the NPT to conclude a safeguards agreement” to Venezuelan Foreign Minister Simon Alberto Consalvi. The United States, Vaky stressed, “urged early completion of these negotiations, and noted that the status of the agreement would be taken into account when the Nuclear Regulatory Commission reviews the required export license” for the gift of uranium. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780015–0479)
