646 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI Pakistan—155mm Self-Propelled Howitzers ($35 million) Pakistan is very anxious to receive this equipment, but we have been withholding approval pending satisfactory agreement on the nuclear reprocessing issue.9 We should therefore continue to defer action on this case.10 Peru—140 Armored Personnel Carriers ($16 million) The buildup in Peruvian military forces has created great uneasiness in the region. For the US to contribute to this buildup at this time would only add to this uneasiness. This is clearly a case that should be deferred for reassessment in light of new policy.11 Sudan—6 C–130 Transport Aircraft ($74 million) The previous administration committed the USG to supply these transport aircraft to Sudan, as a significant step to improve relations with this strategically-placed country. We have already supplied C–130’s to other countries in the area (Israel, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia). This would be the first US military sale to the Sudan in a long time. Deferral of this case would interrupt the trend of improvement in our relations with the Sudanese and strengthen the hand of those in the Sudanese Government who question the value of reliance on the US, which President Nimeiri has espoused. Deferral is nevertheless warranted because of the broader implications of establishing a new military supply relationship without first establishing a policy for the area. Sudan has already requested the purchase of F–5E aircraft and other major items.12 Iran—73 ALQ–119 ECM Pods ($24 million) The proposed sale of this electronic countermeasures system (ECM) raises a technology question and should await the outcome of the arms transfer review. Although it is not our most advanced ECM system, it will add to the electronic countermeasures capability of the Iranian Air Force. We have been told by Westinghouse that the consequence of delaying this case would be plant layoffs, beginning in January 1977. Nevertheless deferral is warranted.13 9 For more on the issue of nuclear processing and Pakistan, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia. 10 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.” 11 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.” 12 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “Might be OK to deliver.” 13 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “defer OK.”
