340 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV and Wehner. It is hard to see how much all this has to do with military power, but it has something to do with it. Turner: On the President’s remarks, the Soviets would not be bothered if Angola turns somewhat to the West. They would still have 20,000 Cuban troops there. The UNITA still gives them reason to remain. As for more trade between the West and Eastern Europe, it is not a major factor in their economy and they are now turning back to the Soviets in any event. On Cuba, we can open relations, but Cuba will still be so dependent on the Soviets that the Soviets cannot be replaced. The Soviets would see all of these steps as retrograde but they would not tremble. Vance: I think we should work with the Germans on Poland. The Germans just turned down a loan. Zbig and I have been discussing this. The Vice President: I think we have made impressive progress in Eastern Europe. In Yugoslavia, we have good relations where before we were barely able to talk to them. The return of the Crown to Hungary had a strong psychological effect.3 We have good relations with Romania. The President: I think our relation with Nigeria is a notable achievement in our African policy. I sense in Harold Brown’s memo4 and in the NIE a feeling of despair and of abject inferiority. I don’t feel this. If I look at the globe from Brezhnev’s standpoint, I see tremendous problems everywhere, starting with uncertain allies. I don’t feel the sense of Soviet superiority that is in these memos. We should start to be more hard-­nosed about our defense expenditures. There are things we can do that would cause the Soviets concern. We should not tell Brezhnev that we are building a big nuclear carrier and a fleet of escorts, and not GLCMs or medium-­range ballistic missiles in Europe. We should focus our defense spending on the most important weapons that show our strength. Our substance is sapped by non-­weapons spending in the defense budget. We should also consider the proportion of the Soviet budget that goes to meet China, to control Eastern Europe, and to build a continental air defense that we don’t have to depend on. We have done too much equivocating with Congress on defense. Brown: Efficient management is important. But we cannot simply pick three or four important weapons. The total amount of money we spend determines our military capabilities. Soviet expenditures are efficient. We don’t think much of Soviet air defenses, but they have a different doctrine and this expenditure contributes to their sense of security. 3 Documentation on the January 1978 return of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XX, Eastern Europe. 4 See Document 75.
