Venezuela  1261
it is very difficult for his Ministry to find qualified people to fill neces-
sary positions.
Ambassador Sparks opened the subject of recent developments 
in the Caribbean and the President’s reaction to them. Mr. Mann 
described how the initial favorable and enthusiastic public reaction in 
the United States toward the successful outcome of the Cuban revo-
lution is now being tempered by second thoughts as developments 
in Cuba and continuing unfriendly and extreme statements by Castro 
are being observed. Pérez Alfonso expressed his understanding of the 
immediate reaction in Cuba to the sudden release from the Batista dic-
tatorship but he showed concern at the continuing lack of discipline 
there and the failure to return to normalcy. President Betancourt made 
clear that he retains his basic sympathy for the new Government in 
Cuba, although being disturbed by present developments, and that he 
intends to do everything he can to advise Castro and to help in bring-
ing some reason back into the situation. Betancourt said that Castro 
is a very young man, that he has a great deal to learn, and that he 
is very naive. The President spoke of Castro’s attempt to obtain from 
Venezuela, when he spoke to Betancourt here in January, a loan of 
$300,000,000. He said also that Castro had suggested that Venezuela 
might sell petroleum to Cuba at a reduced price, in answer to which 
Betancourt said that he had suggested to Castro that presumably. Cuba 
would likewise be prepared to sell its sugar to Venezuela at a discount. 
The President said that a Cuban commercial mission is expected to 
arrive soon in Caracas and he indicated his intention to receive it sym-
pathetically although he expects the mission will have far too much 
optimism in regard to Venezuela’s capabilities in this field. Betancourt’s 
attitude was more one of sadness and sympathy than anything else. In 
answer to Ambassador Sparks’ reference to the experience of Figueres 
in Habana, President Betancourt said he believed that any monetary 
misunderstanding with Castro had been cleared up before Figueres 
left. In connection with Betancourt’s references to Figueres, he took the 
opportunity to recall (as he has done previously) the fact that Figueres 
did not receive an invitation for a State Visit to the United States while 
he was President of Costa Rica.
With regard to the Dominican situation, President Betancourt 
described Venezuela’s attitude as one of forbearance and resistance 
to a break in relations. This has been true despite continued needling 
by Trujillo, such as declaring the Venezuelan Charge “persona non 
grata,” unbridled newspaper and radio attacks on Venezuela and on 
Betancourt, the departure from Caracas and return to Ciudad Trujillo of 
the Dominican Ambassador and so on. Betancourt does not plan to break 
relations nor to take any other direct action but he definitely expects to
