Chapter 4, February–April 1990  587
and the Soviet side would not object to their carrying 10 nuclear war-
heads each. Thus, future heavy bombers would be equipped to carry 
10, and would count as 10. Akhromeyev recounted that Bartholomew 
had asked him to confirm that the 10/20 counting rule would apply 
only to existing bombers. He stated that he had answered in the affir-
mative, i.e., that the Soviet side had not agreed in Moscow to extend the 
number to 20 for future heavy bombers.
Akhromeyev said further that the U.S. side had stated that in 
Moscow the Soviet side proposed to count Soviet heavy bombers with 
8 and show a maximum of 16. This does accord with the Soviet side’s 
minutes, and if the U.S. side insists that the number should be 12, then 
the Soviet side would agree. The changes in the Soviet position had 
come about, Akhromeyev explained, because ratification had reared its 
head in Moscow. During the Moscow ministerial, he stated, the Soviet 
side did not take certain things into account when the United States 
made its proposals. The Soviet side answered the proposals quickly, 
in less than a day, which was an exceptional undertaking, taken on the 
Soviet side’s own initiative.
Akhromeyev continued with the explanation that for purposes of 
ratification, the combination of 8 (counted) and 16 (maximum) would 
be better for the Soviet side than 12. In that case, the Soviet right to 
more heavy bombers would be only 20%, not 40%. However, he noted, 
if the U.S. side insisted on retaining 12, that position should be stated. 
The Soviet side was asking officially that it be changed.
The next issue, Akhromeyev went on, had to do with a sliding 
number of ALCM-­carrying heavy bombers. He noted that he had 
talked to Ambassador Burt in Moscow, with Secretary Baker present, 
and had stated that there should be a set limit on bombers within the 
1600. He then recounted that Burt had indicated the United States 
would not be pleased with such a limit. Akhromeyev then said that 
he had suggested a flexible or floating number. When the issue was 
raised in the plenary session with the ministers present, Akhromeyev 
continued, Secretary Baker had also confirmed that a fixed limit on 
bombers would not be acceptable to the United States. But Secretary 
Baker had seemed to indicate, Akhromeyev said, that flexibility 
would be acceptable. We agreed, Akhromeyev said, that U.S. heavy 
bombers were equipped to carry 40% more warheads than Soviet 
bombers, and that the Soviet Union was to have more ALCM heavy 
bombers as a result.
Akhromeyev then stated that on three occasions Secretary Baker 
had reiterated the point that the United States would not be pleased 
with a fixed limit on ALCM heavy bombers. Baker stated, according 
to Akhromeyev, that the United States insisted on keeping the right to 
deploy as many heavy bombers as it wished within the 1600 limit.
