10 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I to talking concretely about our diplomatic, military, economic and other interests. The term “national security” has dominated our thinking in foreign affairs for three decades. In the late 1940’s, when the National Security Council was established by law,4 we were concerned about a monolithic enemy—the Soviet Union, the Peoples Republic of China, and Communist parties throughout the world appeared to be acting in concert, using every means of diplomacy, military coercion, economic leverage and propaganda, orchestrated on behalf of Soviet imperialistic expansion. With the lessons of Hitler fresh in our minds, we felt, and I believe quite rightly, that we had to meet this threat with a comprehensive national effort. Otherwise we believed that the United States and the American people would ultimately be placed in direct jeopardy. But as the years passed, the Sino-Soviet alliance cracked apart. Communist parties outside the Soviet Bloc began to define their interests to suit themselves and not the Soviet Union. Our own problems became more complicated and the concept of “national security” was not much of a guide to solving them. For example, the idea of national security has militarized our foreign policy to the point of being virtually helpless when confronted by major international economic problems such as energy. All we could do to respond to OPEC’s fourfold increase in the price of oil was to mutter empty threats about invading the Middle East. But even worse, I believe the fog of national security helped to lead us into the tragic swamp of Vietnam, into the morass called Watergate. In the early 1960’s we saw Vietnam as a threat to our overall national security. We could not see that our interests in Southeast Asia were diplomatic, not military. The problem was to contain the threat of Soviet and Chinese Communist influence, and not as some suggested at the time, to defend Hawaii. While there was nothing wrong with encouraging a democratic, pro-U.S. government in Saigon, we failed to recognize that our bottomline interest only required a reasonably independent South Vietnam, regardless of the complexion of its government. Skillful diplomacy, not military intervention, might have achieved—and in fact might still achieve—that basic diplomatic objective. National security confused our objectives at home, as well as abroad. If we wanted to support higher education, we had to justify it in terms of national security. When we wanted to make sensible long- 4 Reference is to the National Security Act of 1947, which President Truman signed into law on July 26, 1947. The Act established the National Security Council, which met for the first time on September 26. For additional information, see Foreign Relations, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment, Documents 196–240.
