3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
169
Moreover, Brezhnev’s Tula speech, besides offering an olive
branch, identified some sore points in the new relationship:
—“adding new questions to those that are currently being dis-
cussed in SALT”;
—“attempting to teach us how to live according to rules that are
incompatible with socialist democracy, with socialist law and order.”
Assurances of cordiality notwithstanding, it was clear the Kremlin
anticipated difficulties even before the SALT negotiations resumed and
before human rights took on an entirely unexpected (for the Soviets) as-
pect outside the CSCE context.
SALT: A Consistent Public Stance
Actual Soviet expectations about the prospects for achieving a
SALT II agreement expeditiously with the new administration may
have been less optimistic than the media or Soviet spokesmen generally
implied. Brezhnev had placed SALT at the head of his list of priorities
in relations with the US in the Tula call for an agreement “on the basis
that we had reached in Vladivostok . . . in the nearest future.” These
two caveats—on the basis of Vladivostok, and in the nearest future—
were also stressed in the media. The Mezhdunarodnaya Zhizn piece
noted that “the Soviet Union is ready to go even further in the fields of
strategic arms limitation but it is first necessary to implement what was
agreed in Vladivostok.” And Izvestiya January 21 made the identical
point.
Thus, the arguments following the Vance visit in March had al-
ready been aired,4 at least in their essential outlines, weeks beforehand;
from Moscow’s viewpoint, the US had clearly been put on notice long
before March about the basic Soviet position.
In any event, the guarded optimism expressed about SALT in Jan-
uary cooled considerably during February and March. USA Institute
head Arbatov, a chief advocate of Soviet-US rapprochement, warned in
Pravda February 5 of a US “psychosis” about a Soviet military threat,
denied the Soviets were seeking more than strategic parity, and
stressed the negative consequences of failure to achieve an agreement
before expiration of the interim accord in October 1977.
A few days later, February 9, on Moscow TV, Arbatov worried
more specifically about the cruise missile as:
“a weapons system on its way which is very dangerous from the
point of destabilizing the situation, not to mention that it will be a new
4 For the disagreements regarding SALT after Vance’s March visit, see Documents
24 and 26.
