in the second part of the fourth reservation and in the fifth reservation. In
this way the status quo ante could be re-established if it were found that the
arrangement agreed upon was not yielding satisfactory results.
It is to be hoped, nevertheless, that no such withdrawal will be made
without an attempt by a previous exchange of views to solve any difficulties
which may arise.
B. His Majesty’s Government agree that the Statute of the Permanent Court
of International Justice annexed to the Protocol of December 16th, 1920,
shall not be amended without the consent of the United States.
RESERVATION V
A. In the matter of advisory opinions, and in the first place as regards the
first part of the fifth reservation, the Government of the United States will,
no doubt, have become aware, since the despatch of their note of February
12th, 1926, of the provisions of articles 73 and 74 of the Rules of Court as
amended by the Court on July 31st, 1926 (Annex A). His Majesty’s
Government believe that these provisions are such as to give satisfaction to
the United States, having been made by the Court in exercise of its powers
under article 30 of its Statute. Moreover, they will be disposed to study with
the United States the possible incorporation of certain stipulations of
principle on this subject in a protocol of execution such as is set forth
hereafter (Annex B), notably as regards the rendering of advisory opinions
in public.
B. The second part of the fifth reservation suggests to His Majesty’s
Government that a distinction should be drawn between advisory opinions
asked for in the case of a dispute to which the United States are a party and
that of advisory opinions asked for in the case of a dispute to which the
United States are not a party but in which it claims an interest, or in the case
of a question other than a dispute in which the United States claim an
interest.
As regards disputes to which the United States are a party, His Majesty’s
Government may perhaps confine themselves to a reference to the
jurisprudence of the Court, which has already had occasion to pronounce
