Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III countries’ resources, and have exerted substantial influence on the receiving countries’ policies. The Brookings report includes the following recommendations: 1. Program Direction: US development assistance should focus on meeting basic human needs, by expanding productive employment, as well as by the direct provision of services and commodities to the poor. This would entail: —concentration of bilateral concessional assistance on the poor countries and the use of concessional aid to support technological collaboration in the middle-income countries and non-concessional aid to meet their other needs; —greater reliance on the recipient country’s responsibility for project design and administration; —a larger effort to mobilize the resources of the private sector, in both the US and developing countries, to promote research, development, and training on problems of direct concern to developing countries; —a PL–480 food aid program directed largely to development and humanitarian goals; —continued support for expansion of multilateral hard lending to middle-income countries. 2. Institutional Arrangements: To improve the US capacity to implement an effective development assistance program: —AID should be replaced by (i) a Development Cooperation Agency (DCA) to carry out existing AID functions, whose creation could be the occasion for needed legislative, procedural, and personnel changes; and (ii) an International Development Foundation (IDF), guided by a board of public and private members, to define and support research, development and training programs on problems of concern to LDCs. —SSA should be administered by the DCA; its funds would be appropriated to, and justified to the Congress by, the State Department. —A Coordinator for International Development Policy should be appointed to ensure that the different types of assistance (bilateral development aid, IFIs, PL–480, etc.) fit together into a coherent program. 3. Funding Levels —The Brookings Study presents alternative funding levels. Under the high option, concessional assistance would double in real terms be-
