884
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
countries’ resources, and have exerted substantial influence on the re-
ceiving countries’ policies.
The Brookings report includes the following recommendations:
1. Program Direction: US development assistance should focus on
meeting basic human needs, by expanding productive employment, as
well as by the direct provision of services and commodities to the poor.
This would entail:
—concentration of bilateral concessional assistance on the poor
countries and the use of concessional aid to support technological col-
laboration in the middle-income countries and non-concessional aid to
meet their other needs;
—greater reliance on the recipient country’s responsibility for
project design and administration;
—a larger effort to mobilize the resources of the private sector, in
both the US and developing countries, to promote research, develop-
ment, and training on problems of direct concern to developing
countries;
—a PL–480 food aid program directed largely to development and
humanitarian goals;
—continued support for expansion of multilateral hard lending to
middle-income countries.
2. Institutional Arrangements: To improve the US capacity to imple-
ment an effective development assistance program:
—AID should be replaced by (i) a Development Cooperation
Agency (DCA) to carry out existing AID functions, whose creation
could be the occasion for needed legislative, procedural, and personnel
changes; and (ii) an International Development Foundation (IDF),
guided by a board of public and private members, to define and sup-
port research, development and training programs on problems of con-
cern to LDCs.
—SSA should be administered by the DCA; its funds would be ap-
propriated to, and justified to the Congress by, the State Department.
—A Coordinator for International Development Policy should be
appointed to ensure that the different types of assistance (bilateral de-
velopment aid, IFIs, PL–480, etc.) fit together into a coherent program.
3. Funding Levels
—The Brookings Study presents alternative funding levels. Under
the high option, concessional assistance would double in real terms be-
tween 1977 and 1982—from $5.04 billion to $9.9 billion in 1977 dollars.
Under the lower options, FY 1982 aid levels would be $7.5 and $8.8 bil-
lion respectively.
The report suggests only a modest increase in bilateral develop-
ment assistance for next year; larger increases would only be requested
the following year, after the proposed changes in aid procedures and
organization had taken effect.
