regulations of the United States, this Government has no serious objection to accepting the modified draft. It was believed, however, that the broader exceptions provided in the original draft would be of advantage to consular officers of foreign countries in the United States as well as of American consular officers in foreign countries, and that as the resulting loss of revenue to Governments would be small, foreign Governments would willingly accept the provision. It was accepted by Germany (Article XXVII), and Hungary (Article XXII). If the provision as revised by you is adopted in the Treaty with Austria, consular officers of Austria in the United States will be required to pay duties on the importation of all personal property not accompanying them or arriving in the United States shortly after their arrival, whereas consular officers of Germany and Hungary, their families and suites will receive free of duty all personal property imported during the incumbency of the officer. While this Government prefers that the first paragraph of Article XXII of the original draft be accepted by Austria without change, yet if, after further consideration in the light of the foregoing statement, the paragraph as originally drawn is unacceptable to Austria, this Government will accept the modified form drawn by you and quoted above from your despatch No. 374 of December 18, 1923. The Department understands that the second paragraph of Article XXII of the original draft is acceptable to Austria whether the first paragraph be modified or not. Article XXIII. Definition of territories and nationals This Government desires to withdraw the second paragraph of Article XXIII of its draft. It would appear that cases might arise in which each party to the Treaty would deem that the same person owed permanent allegiance to it. The provision in the second paragraph would seem to contribute nothing to the solution of such a question when it might arise and would be unnecessary in other circumstances. This paragraph does not appear in the treaties signed with Germany, Hungary or Estonia. Article XXIV. Treaty of August 24, 1921, establishing friendly relations80 You are authorized to suggest that the words “or to Austria or its nationals” be inserted after “nationals” at the end of the fifth line of Article XXIV of
