40 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV (4) Factors that could cause the contraction of Soviet influence. Will Soviet presence provoke a backlash in the areas that they penetrate? What impact would alternative U.S. responses have? (5) Ways in which Soviet military power determines or facilitates their involvement and influence abroad. (6) Competing Soviet interests such as the stake in detente or non-­ military economic goals. How might these constrain Soviet expansive tendencies? 2. National Psychology and Frames of Reference. Soviet leaders do not necessarily perceive international conflict, negotiation, and accommodation in the same way as Western leaders. Both Marxist-Leninist ideology and the historic Russian legacy influence the thinking of Soviet policy makers. These influences contrast markedly with traditional liberal democratic ways of looking at the world. They have implications which affect, among other things, the prospects of success in negotiations. Relevant issues include: (1) Soviet doctrine for nuclear and conventional war. How far do their categories of analysis and measures of significance correspond with those of the U.S. and its allies? (2) Soviet perception of the strategic balance, Western posture and intentions, and judgments of the trends. How can we influence these? In what respects are their concepts determined by the conflict with China? (3) Soviet views of the role of force in current and future circumstances, their understanding of the concepts of “parity” and “superiority,” and the value they place on them. How do their concepts compare with those of American leaders? (4) Soviet views on the distinction between “internal affairs” and international relations. (5) The adequacy of our evidence on Soviet attitudes. How well do we know what they think, and what are the consequences of uncertainty? (6) Conditions under which the use of force, or the threat to use force—­at nuclear, conventional, and diplomatic levels—­will become more or less appealing to the USSR’s leadership. 3. Potential Threats. The growth in Soviet power poses increased military threats to the U.S. and its allies in the event of war, could raise problems for the stability of deterrence, and provides a firmer basis on which the USSR could attempt to exert political leverage in a diplomatic crisis. In addition, there are economic threats, such as might stem from dependence on imported oil. Among the most salient threats are: (1) Strategic attack. The central threat depends on the present strategic balance, actual and perceived changes in the balance, and
