220 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII implying that the misunderstanding was primarily on the U.S. side. Neither Amin’s words nor demeanor suggested that he was prepared to consider any formula which would recognize DRA responsibility for the Ambassador’s death. As for the security of U.S. personnel in Afghanistan, said Amin, you have nothing to fear. “Nobody is out to kill Americans.” 8. Non-alignment. After saying that the USG hoped to be able to maintain a frank and open dialogue about the differences between our countries, I noted our concern that Afghanistan’s previous genuine non-alignment now appears to have gone by the board and merged into positions which to us seem virtually indistinguishable from those of the Soviet Union and Cuba. As examples, I cited the DRA’s rupture of relations with South Korea and the DRA position on Puerto Rico.5 In reply, Amin said that the DRA’s decisions with respect to South Korea, its suspension of relations with Egypt and its recognition of the Polisario had been taken without consultation with any country. In fact, Amin said, the Soviet Union had been taken unawares by these decisions. 9. Following up on the mention of South Korea, I asked Amin if he heard the news that President Park had been killed the previous night. Amin said he had not heard of it. I described the shooting in a way to suggest to him a parallel between the shoot-out in Kabul on Sept. 14 which had left him the undisputed ruler of the Saur revolution. If Amin felt any collegial association with Park, he did not show it. He merely said that “terrorism is to be deplored wherever it occurs.” 10. Amin said Soviet aid to Afghanistan was given without strings or preconditions. The Soviet Union has never asked Afghanistan to take any action which would adversely affect Afghan relations with any other country, whether it be the U.S., India, Pakistan, Iran or China. If Brezhnev himself should ask him to take any action against Afghan independence, said Amin, he would not hesitate “to sacrifice even one second of his life” in opposition to such a request. 11. Extent of Soviet involvement in Afghanistan. When I said that another of our concerns was the growing Soviet involvement in Afghanistan, Amin replied that Soviet aid was increasing and necessary 5 In telegram 7538 from Kabul, September 19, 1978, the Embassy reported the Afghan Government’s decision to sever its relations with South Korea in protest of the ongoing presence of foreign troops in South Korea and out of a desire to see the reunification of Korea under the control of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780383–0515) In telegram 7858 from Kabul, September 28, 1978, the Embassy noted that Afghanistan was “firmly wedded” to the Iraqi-Cuban resolution on Puerto Rico at the United Nations Committee of 24 session of 1978, which called for the independence of Puerto Rico. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780395–1068)
