obligation which might be used as a means to impugn its neutrality. The Department wishes to be informed of the text of this Article, as agreed upon, before deciding whether or not it is acceptable. The Department views the question of full publicity of State and private manufacture as the most important feature of this convention, and desires particularly that its support of complete publicity shall be duly registered in the forthcoming session of the Special Commission. It considers that the concessions referred to which this Government might be prepared to make in regard to Articles 1, 6 and 8 might afford an opportunity of gaining the consent of the other Governments to the form of publicity desired. Under our system of government, Congress has jurisdiction over interstate and foreign commerce, while manufacture or production is generally within the jurisdictions of the several States. Accordingly, the United States Government would be unwilling to sign a convention which incorporated a license system subjecting private manufacturers to Federal control. Should the other delegates insist on retaining, as among themselves, the license system contemplated in the report, the Department desires that you should promptly notify it in order that it may take such action as may seem best calculated to prevent a substantial domestic situation from being represented in any way as an unwillingness to cooperate with other nations. With reference to the selection of the League under Articles 10–15, as the depositary for ratifications and as the means of notification for this treaty if eventually concluded, while the matter does not appear to be pressing at this time, the Department would not, of course, wish to encourage the selection of the League for this purpose if arrangements can be made for deposit elsewhere. As you point out, however, the Department has already accepted deposit at the League as satisfactory in the case of certain other conventions, which, however, have not yet been ratified by this Government. It is believed that it would be undesirable, prior to ratification of these conventions, to commit the Department to such deposit for further treaties when other arrangements can be made. It would, therefore, appear advisable to encourage postponement of the discussion of this question in relation to the present treaty until such time as the treaty itself has assumed a more concrete form.
