Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
289
renovating the existing international system. In so doing, it was moti-
vated by the following central objectives:
1. To engage Western Europe, Japan, and other advanced democ-
racies in closer political cooperation, thereby also promoting wider
macro-economic coordination among them.
2. To weave a worldwide web of bilateral, political, and, where ap-
propriate, economic cooperation with the new emerging regional
powers, thereby extending our earlier reliance on Atlanticism to in-
clude such newly influential countries as Venezuela, Brazil, Nigeria,
Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, Indonesia in a wider pattern of international
cooperation.
3. To exploit the foregoing in the development of more accommo-
dating North-South relations, both political and economic, thereby re-
ducing the hostility toward the United States that in recent years had
developed within the Third World.
4. To push U.S.-Soviet Strategic Arms Limitation Talks into stra-
tegic arms reduction talks, and to widen the scope of American-Soviet
collaboration by engaging the Soviet Union in a wider pattern of nego-
tiating relationships, thereby making detente both more comprehen-
sive and reciprocal.
5. To normalize U.S.-Chinese relations in order to preserve the
U.S.-Chinese relationship as a major stabilizing factor in the global
power balance.17
6. To seek a comprehensive Middle Eastern settlement, without
which the further radicalization of the Arab world and the reentry of
the Soviet Union into the Middle East would be difficult to avoid.
7. To set in motion a progressive and peaceful transformation of
South Africa and to forge closer cooperation with the moderate black
African countries.
8. To restrict the level of global armaments and to inhibit nuclear
proliferation through international agreements as well as unilateral
U.S. acts.
9. To enhance global sensitivity to human rights through pertinent
U.S. actions, comments, and example, thereby also seizing the ideolog-
ical initiative.
10. To renovate the U.S. and NATO defense posture in keeping
with the requirements posed by the Soviet arms buildup.
The basic premise of the foregoing was that the United States
should undertake to play in the world as constructive a role as the one
that it did play shortly after World War II, but in a vastly changed con-
text. The new Administration felt that the U.S. should help in the
shaping of a new international system that cannot be confined to the
developed countries but must involve increasingly the entire interna-
tional community of more than 150 nation-states. Unlike the years
1945–1950, this should call not for American dictation but for more
subtle inspiration and cooperative leadership on a much wider front.
17 In the left-hand margin next to this point, the President wrote: “While protecting
Taiwan/US critical relationships.”
