September 18–December 16, 1978 351 of the word “also,” which reserves Israel’s rights as an integral part of the CDA language. “We will never place this area under foreign control.” The deletion of “also” is a most worrying departure from the CDA which the President witnessed as a “full partner.” 10. Question 4(a) rpt 4(a) and subsequent on Jerusalem: Begin said he wanted to underline that the differences between Israel and the US on Jerusalem are most serious problem between the two governments. He asked that I tell the President and the Secretary that the Israeli people “will never give up part of Jerusalem to anybody. This people is ready to fight and to die for Jerusalem. It’s as simple as that.” Jerusalem, he continued with great passion, is an Israeli city, the capital of Israel and will remain so as long as the Jewish people live. It is not a problem for Israel alone but for all the Jewish people everywhere. For three thousand years, since King David established it as our capital, it has remained so. Sometimes, he said, he asked himself, what is happening to our American friends? 140 capitals are recognized in the world. Why not recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel? He said he realized that the US has other interests, such as oil, but for 30 years, his American friends had not recognized Jerusalem as Israel’s capital.” Two generations had been born in Israel. How long can this go on? What other country in the world does not have its capital recognized? Why is this being done to us? We can’t comprehend it. “And now you repeat it in writing in midst of our peace negotiations with Egypt.” 11. Begin continued that we had a para on Jerusalem at CD. I told the President, he said, that we could not live with this letter. Israel would not have signed on those terms. But then the language was changed. Begin said he had read the Yost speech,6 which differs from that of Goldberg.7 Yost said that East Jerusalem is occupied territory. “In 1948, Jordan tried to occupy all of Jerusalem. It destroyed the Jewish quarter completely, including the synagogues. It never allowed us to come to the Western Wall to pray and almost destroyed the Haddassah hospital and the Hebrew University. On Monday, June 5, 1967, we asked Hussein through the American Embassy not to attack us. At one o’clock, he attacked seeking his share of the supposed spoil, but we fought and we liberated Jerusalem. Now we are called occupiers in the ancient city of David. The Jordanians were the occupiers without basis in international law.” Begin said he “is an old man and an old Jew doesn’t have much time left.” But he must say that “this is one of the greatest wrongs ever done in the history of the world to a nation.” Here in 1978, he said, the Israeli character of Jerusalem is being questioned by the US at a time when negotiations between Israel and Egypt are 6 See footnote 12, Document 64. 7 See footnote 11, Document 64.
