844 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II countries attending the Summit were to conduct similar selfevaluations of their own policies, domestic and international. III. Actions for Summit Attention: Food Security and Increased Production The Commission believes that the President should call the following issues to the attention of other countries attending the Tokyo Summit: A. World Food Security An effective program of global food security must be put into place. The Commission believes this goal will involve the following actions on the part of the Summit nations: 1. An International Wheat Agreement. Although negotiations to establish a new agreement were broken off in February, these negotiations should be resumed and, this time, with greater attention to the needs of the food-deficit countries.3 The abundant harvests of the past several years, and correspondingly low prices for wheat and other grains, provide an unusual opportunity for the international community to establish a truly effective system of reserves at this time. With reduced food production and reserves projected for the next crop year, finalizing a revised and effective Wheat Agreement is of utmost urgency. The negotiation of a new agreement will require additional flexibility by all participating governments, but the objective is well worth the effort. 2. A New Food Aid Convention. While it is important that negotiations on an international system of food reserves be resumed, a more immediately attainable goal is to conclude a new Food Aid Convention. The U.S. has already taken the lead on this issue, by stating that it would be prepared to make available at least 5 million tons out of a 10 million ton target for the Food Aid Convention. While previous attempts to negotiate the FAC have been tied to an overall reserve negotiation, this link is not intrinsically necessary. The Commission believes that a separate Food Aid Convention can be agreed upon relatively quickly, given the cooperation of the Summit nations. B. Assistance to Increased Food Production 1. Research. One of the most effective uses of the resources of the Summit countries and other donors is in research activity directly related to food production problems, particularly those problems of special importance for the Indian Subcontinent and sub-Saharan Africa. At present, both the international research system and the national adaptive research networks need reaffirmed support and additional resources. The payoff on such investments has so far been very impres- 3 See footnote 6, Document 255.
