130 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement bank would need a good push to assure that it would succeed. As of now, the Central American trade amounts to only 4% and it won’t be significant until it reaches 25%, and investment is needed to achieve that figure. Mr. Dillon agreed that it doesn’t do much good to take away barriers to trade unless you have investment for production. The Coal and Steel Community in Europe needed a balancing fund but they found out that the problems were not as great as they had feared. Mr. Dillon asked if there was any reason why the Inter-American Bank can’t loan some of its own funds to the Central American bank. The answer was given that President Herrera was well-­disposed to the Central American Bank and had offered a secretariat and a meeting place in his bank. Subsequent discussion brought out the information that while the World Bank has been thinking of a private Central American bank, the World Bank had aimed at $10 million worth of private Central American capital, and there was general concurrence among the Central Americans present that this was far too much to expect. Moreover, the World Bank was thinking of another private bank operating in five countries. The conclusion was reached that Mr. Mann would arrange for U.S. technicians to talk to Mr. Rochac to discuss a charter and that a meeting would be held at the close of the Bank/Fund meeting at the end of September.4 4 Apparent reference to the meeting held on September 30; for the memorandum of conversation at that meeting, see Document ETA–53. ETA–52. Letter from the Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (Anderson)1  Washington, September 16, 1960. Dear Bob: I am seriously concerned over the threatened decline in the flow of U.S. private investment to less-­developed countries and am certain that you fully share this concern since we just continue to rely heavily 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 820.05111/9–1660. Confidential. Co-­drafted by Edwin M. Martin, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, and Peyton A. Kerr, Director of the Office of International Financial and Development Affairs, on September 9, and retyped in the Executive Secretariat on September 14.
