572  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
military and political usefulness of US nuclear capabilities by attempt­
ing to make US overseas bases untenable and to increase the inhibitions 
attached to any use of nuclear weapons.
100. We believe that despite these efforts the Soviet leaders appre­
ciate that if they launched a general war at present, even with surprise 
nuclear attacks, the USSR would suffer unacceptable damage from US 
nuclear retaliation. On the other hand, they are probably confident that 
their own nuclear capabilities, even though not as great as those of the 
US, have grown to the point where they constitute a powerful mili­
tary deterrent to the US. It is therefore probable that in the Soviet view 
both sides are now militarily deterred from deliberately initiating an 
all-­out nuclear war or from reacting to any crisis in a manner which 
would gravely risk such a war, unless vital national interests at home 
or abroad were considered to be in jeopardy.
101. The Soviets probably see this situation as a great improvement 
over the relation of forces which existed some years ago. Nevertheless, 
we believe that the Soviet leaders will continue to seek ways to achieve, 
if possible, a clear military superiority over the US. To this end they will 
continue their intensive weapons research and development, particu­
larly in such fields as long-­range missiles, aircraft and missile-­launching 
submarines capable of attacking the continental US, air defense weap­
ons and associated equipment. But despite further improvement in 
Soviet capabilities over the next five years, we believe that the USSR 
will still not become confident that it can attack the US without receiv­
ing unacceptable damage in return. This judgment assumes the main­
tenance and improvement of US armed strength and the absence of 
an unforeseen Soviet technological breakthrough of major military 
significance.
102. While strengthening their capability for waging general war, 
the Soviets will endeavor to maintain forces which they consider ade­
quate to insure military superiority in situations short of general war. 
To the extent that Western inhibitions against vigorous reaction in local 
situations are increased by the USSR’s growing capability for general 
war, superiority in forces for local conflict will enable the Soviets to 
exert greater political pressure in local situations, and even give them 
greater freedom to use force in such situations. In sum, the Soviet lead­
ers will view large deterrent and other military capabilities as an essen­
tial support to their foreign policy and to the USSR’s status as a leading 
world power.
Soviet Attitudes Toward Limited and General War
103. As indicated elsewhere (Chapter VI, paragraphs 224–227) we 
believe that the Soviet leaders do not at present intend to pursue their 
objectives by employing their own forces in warfare, limited or general.
