458 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement cannot be brought, either by persuasion or pressure to a whole-­hearted acceptance of the regime. This group probably will maintain attitudes of dissatisfaction and even some oppositional feelings unless changes proceed far faster than is likely. Since these people are in a position to influence the public opinion now emerging in the USSR, they may be subjected to sterner measures in the future. 43. The regime’s chief instrument for managing the reform pro­ cess is the Party. With the downgrading of the secret police, the Party organization assumed new responsibilities for insuring political con­ formity; with the abolition of most economic ministries, it now has a much larger role in carrying out centrally-­determined economic poli­ cies. Its capabilities for these assignments are uncertain; thus far it has demonstrated no marked success in eliminating dissent and has even shown a few signs of being itself infected with the same dissatisfactions which are agitating students and intellectuals. If the Party proves inad­ equate to these tasks, possibilities for success of the regime’s ambitious economic and political programs will be greatly diminished. 44. The role of the Party becomes even more critical when viewed in a perspective extending beyond the period of this estimate. It is far from certain that the Soviet citizen can be educated to a higher level, urged to exercise his own initiative, given increasing opportunity for comparisons with other countries, and encouraged to expect a signifi­ cant improvement in his living standard, and at the same time submit without question to a leadership which incessantly proclaims, and fre­ quently exercises, the right to make all important decisions for him, regardless of his personal desires. The regime’s best hope of manag­ ing the resulting tension lies in the activity of a disciplined minority, able, persuasive, highly resourceful, but completely responsive to the wishes of its leaders. Despite its highly favored position, this minority itself is subject to many of the same tensions as the population at large. Eventually it may turn out that the benevolent totalitarianism which Stalin’s successors seek to achieve is an impossible contradiction and that the forces released in the search for it will require the leadership to revert to earlier patterns of control or to permit an evolution in some new direction. II. TRENDS IN THE SOVIET ECONOMY Shifts in Economic Policy 45. The Soviet leaders continue to view their economy primarily as an instrument for the creation of national power. Thus heavy indus­ try, and particularly military production, retain first-­priority status. But the gap in the priority structure which separates heavy industry from other sectors is being narrowed by a new attitude toward consump­ tion. Along with the traditional emphasis upon heavy industry, higher
