1026 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and cooperative.) Sadat said he is doing so in an effort to see if he can improve relations with the Soviets. He recalled there has always been a Soviet ambassador in Cairo. This action on his part, he wished you to know, will in no way change the Middle East peace process in which you and he are engaged. CONCLUSIONS (a) Sadat remains strong, self-confident and optimistic. In contrast, his Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs are less so. Boutros Ghali is speaking of the need for a “mini-crisis” around the end of January because the autonomy negotiations will not have gotten very far. This would be useful, in his view, as a smoke screen for the exchange of ambassadors. Although Sadat does not seem worried about the ambassadorial exchange, Khalil and Boutros Ghali are very worried about it, especially in the absence of progress on autonomy. Sadat did say the Egyptian ambassador will not go to Jerusalem, only to Tel Aviv. (b) Fahd wants to be helpful, but is not anxious to be counted in at this stage of the game. I do not think he should be pressed too hard, though he should be continued to be reminded of the facts of the Middle East peace effort and who prevented going to Geneva. After yesterday’s Mecca incident,7 he will be even more cautious about sticking his neck out. (c) Our embassies in Cairo and Jidda should monitor closely so that the moratorium on public attacks (including press) is honored. (d) A follow-up should take place in a few months.8 7 On November 20, hundreds of Islamic militants seized the Grand Mosque at Mecca during the annual hajj pilgrimage. The attack was led by a former member of the Saudi National Guard who called for a revolt against the Saudi monarchy, accusing it of betraying Islamic principles by becoming close to Western countries. (Philip Taubman, “Mecca Mosque Seized by Gunmen believed to be Militants from Iran,” The New York Times, November 21, 1979, p. A1) 8 See Document 323. Below this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Eilts will be going back to S.A. & Egypt late in Dec. He will give me prior notice, & I’m sure we will use him in some way. J.”
