34  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
are also called “US spies”. This also has advantage of enabling me main­
tain discussion Downey and Fecteau under agenda item one. As will be 
seen from yesterday’s meeting Wang did not contest my claim they were 
civilians but his ambiguous answer and separate classification lead me 
believe these are probably going to be the most difficult cases. However 
do not believe productive for time being take any further initiative with 
regard to them but await developments from CHINCOM side. Am try­
ing avoid being drawn into futile arguments on merits individual cases. 
It is however probable specific discussion of Downey and Fecteau even­
tually will be necessary and CHICOMS will maintain previous position 
each “criminal case” decided on merits accordance law and Downey and 
Fecteau simply more serious than others and therefore “take more time”. 
Should be noted CHICOMS very careful maintain legalistic position on 
Air Force personnel (as well as all previous cases) and may be expected 
do so on all remaining cases. In general my position has always been that 
I am not interested in what legalistic mumbo jumbo they desire use as 
face saving device but only in fact of release.
If and when specific discussion Downey and Fecteau required I 
will certainly include argumentation on discrepancy of treatment with 
Air Force personnel accused of same offenses but in view forgoing do 
not now believe line that release Air Force personnel destroyed basis 
for differential treatment would be useful or persuasive.
Gowen
31.	
Telegram 328 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 5, 1955, 6 p.m.
328. From Johnson.
Believe public statement along following lines would be very help­
ful in handling press situation here and counteracting possible adverse 
effect on negotiations of numerous erroneous press reports many of 
which originating American press services.
“In order to correct misunderstandings which may exist concern­
ing the present talks, it has been agreed to release the following infor­
mation about the discussion to date:
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–555. Official Use Only.
