Comprehensive Test Ban
525
United States. The first element of verification was on-site inspection in
the event of ambiguous physical phenomena which raised questions
about compliance with the Treaty. On-site inspection would be imple-
mented on a voluntary basis. In general, he would say, the work of
specifying the functions of the personnel to be involved in on-site in-
spection was proceeding rather successfully. There were still some dif-
ferences between the sides on this subject, but Petrosyants did not be-
lieve them to be so important as to warrant airing at so important a
meeting as the current one. He was sure that he would be able to re-
solve them with Warnke.
As for the second element of the verification question—automatic
national seismic stations—there were still quite a few unresolved ques-
tions and quite a few divergent views. The Soviet side believed it
would be best to carry out verification by national technical means, in-
cluding national seismic stations, which were in the possession of all
the states involved. The U.S. Delegation had proposed installation of
so-called automatically operated seismic stations on each other’s terri-
tory. He and Warnke had discussed the various characteristics of such
stations, their range of operation, etc. At their invitation the principal
inventor had come to Geneva, bringing with him documentation and
figures. As a result of discussions with specialists, it had been estab-
lished that to date these stations exist only on the drawing board, and
that one could not expect even one such station to be assembled in the
United States any earlier than October of this year. From a technical
standpoint that station was very complex, and when the Soviet side
had asked how much time would be required for testing it, the inventor
had specified a period of no less than three months. In the Soviet view it
would be impossible to guarantee that a station produced in just one
sample and tested for only three months would operate reliably. He be-
lieved that it would be quite wrong to jeopardize the Treaty by in-
stalling this kind of equipment, since it would be very likely to mislead
people. He did not believe it possible to put one’s faith into the opera-
tion of such a station without having any assurance of the reliability of
its operation. One most important element of that station, the so-called
authenticity block, did not even exist on the drawing board so far, and
would not be completed even by October. For all these reasons he
thought the sides should limit themselves to inspection by personnel
and by using the technical facilities, including seismic stations, which
the sides have at their disposal at present. Finally, the Soviet side be-
lieved that it should be possible to divide the verification question into
two stages. At the first stage verification would be carried out without
the use of national seismic stations on the territory of the other side,
and at the second stage they could proceed to the use of improved
seismic stations.
