226  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
50.	
Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security 
Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 28, 1978
SUBJECT
Items of Interest from the NMCC Visit2
First, I could not hear all of the conversations but the following 
points emerged from what I did monitor. I put them down for our 
record and possible follow-­up.
—The President seems not to have been aware of some of the vul-
nerabilities of our warning satellites (DSP). This also relates to Soviet 
laser R and D, as I understood this part of the discussion.
—Your question about varied Soviet attack strategies raises many 
questions about our command and control which have concerned me 
for a long time. The President responded, as I understood him, with a 
desire to do something about command and control as well as the vul-
nerability of our warning systems (doing something of course requires 
a large step over a number of years; it also requires a change in some of 
our doctrinal assumptions.)
—Harold Brown seems extremely reluctant either to announce a 
launch on warning policy or to allow the impression to emerge that we 
might have such policy. I missed other interlocutors’ responses.
—I will get you some better information on the operational signif-
icance of DEFCON levels.
—Harold Brown’s mention of changing Soviet strategic doctrine 
about limiting use of nuclear weapons raises a key issue in which we 
will possibly see major revisions in the next year or two. The intelli-
gence community has a lot of work yet to be done. [3 lines not declassi-
fied] I have the impression that the President’s view on this is taking a 
rigid shape. He is justified in this view, [less than 1 line not declassified], 
but it is conceivable that they will change.
—Your question on the chances of a false warning from the various 
systems is being researched in the JCS. An answer will be forthcoming 
shortly. In this connection, I do not believe it was made clear that the 
DSP systems are not simply waiting for a Soviet launch. They record 
launches almost everyday, ours, the Soviets, and others world-­wide. 
Thus, we have a vast experience with their reliability and sensitivities.
—Finally, the “feedback” has been very positive. General Rogers 
observed that had we had to go to war at this level a few years ago, 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency 
File, Box 4, Defense Department: 12/77–1/78. Top Secret; Sensitive. Outside the System. 
Brzezinski initialed the top right corner of the memorandum and wrote “good.”
2 Reference is to Carter’s visit to the National Military Command Center on Janu-
ary 28. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No record of the 
meeting was found.
