500.A15 a 1/573a
[Document 150]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
WASHINGTON, August 10, 1927.
MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I suppose with the telegrams that we received from
Geneva and instructions we gave, together with the report which the
Secretary of the Navy made to you, you are well informed on what took
place at Geneva and the reason for the failure of the Conference. While the
British Government assured Mr. Houghton they were perfectly willing for
the United States to have parity on all classes of ships, Bridgeman did not
make this offer in Geneva at all until he was instructed by London and even
in that case I am assured by one of the press men who was present that
when he was asked the question as to whether Great Britain was willing to
make a treaty for parity in ships other than the 10,000 ton class, he said
“Well, we would have to consider that”. Undoubtedly he went there
intending not to grant it and every proposition there made was intended to
deprive the United States of an equal, effective navy. … It became more
and more evident that the only possible way to have a treaty with Great
Britain on this subject was to agree to a total tonnage beyond all reason and
one which would not be a limitation but an expansion. Furthermore, the
Navy insists that we do not want small cruisers and to agree to build them
would give the British a superiority owing to her naval bases and make it
impossible for us to have as effective a navy as Great Britain. The lowest
possible limit which Great Britain proposed was 426,000 tons of cruisers
which might be increased by building fewer destroyers and submarines. In
other words, they proposed the global or total tonnage system which they
had opposed strenuously at the Preliminary Conference. This would give
them the right to build cruisers in tonnage not built in the other classes. Of
course, the New York World and the Times have frequently suggested that
there should have been diplomatic correspondence preceding the
Conference so that each country would have known exactly what the other
country was willing to agree to. If that could have been done, no
Conference would have been necessary. Of course, there is no ground for
