March 27–December 31, 1979
839
Saud said that we must not confuse cause and effect. The Islamic Con-
ference is not isolating Egypt. It is Egypt which has isolated itself. Dif-
ferences between Egypt and the others are clear and arise out of com-
mitments made by Egypt in Egyptian-Israel Peace Treaty which
contravene the commitments made by Egypt to the Arabs on Middle
East peace process and to the Muslim states on Jerusalem. This is what
isolates Egypt. If a change in the isolation is wanted, then a change in
the causes of the isolation must be made, i.e. the Treaty. Closing the
meeting, Prince Saud said that Islamic Conference preparatory com-
mittee has already decided to propose suspension of Egyptian mem-
bership in the Conference.
9. Comment. Saudi Arabia’s withdrawal of funding for F–5s is a
not unexpected shock in view of Sadat’s blast at Saudi Arabia and refer-
ence therein to F–5s (Cairo 8815, para 2).6 We are not sure whether
Saudi move is reversible, and perhaps we should consider letter from
President to King Khalid7 on matter while taking all possible precau-
tions to prevent Saudi action from becoming public. If that approach
yields nothing, we should then dispassionately analyze the situation,
recalling that the Saudi move is yet another step in a rabidly deterio-
rating relationship which, as Embassy Cairo points out (Cairo 8943),8
could get even worse. We think our policy should be to grit our teeth
and bear Saudi Arabia’s actions against our Egyptian friends in interest
of U.S.-Saudi relations.9 Were we now to call into question, for ex-
ample, the F–15 sale to Saudi Arabia on the grounds that it was
somehow packaged with the F–5s for Egypt, other, more overriding
U.S. interests could be endangered in the process.
Gerlach
6 See footnote 4 above.
7 See Document 254.
8 Telegram 8943 from Cairo, May 2. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790200–0595)
9 In a meeting on May 8, Eilts informed Sadat of the Saudi decision in order “to
preempt his hearing about it from other sources and again issuing public blast against
Saudis.” Eilts told the Egyptian President that the United States would “certainly try to
get decision reversed and urged him to say nothing.” Sadat responded that the Saudi ac-
tion “did not surprise him and mused that, if reversal of Saudi decision cannot be ob-
tained, he may ask administration and Congress for assistance.” (Telegram 9359 from
Cairo, May 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850027–2544)
