3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1980
885
tive to each other’s actions. Once confidence has been undermined, it is
very difficult to restore.
The Secretary said that he had long believed in a policy of accom-
modation and before the SALT process had begun had urged a delay in
deployment of MIRVs as a means of avoiding a new spiral in the arms
race. As Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, he had watched
Soviet defense expenditures climb steadily from the early 1960s to the
present. Throughout this period the US had been ready to accept
equality, although a minority disagreed with this policy. Most Amer-
icans supported increased contacts and saw the prospect of building an
enduring peace.
Since then, a single act—the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan—had
turned the situation around. There had been a good prospect of getting
SALT II ratification in January after televised TV debates in the Senate
had shaped public opinion. The Soviets have their version as a justifica-
tion for invading Afghanistan, but the US sees it differently because we
and our Allies rely on Persian Gulf oil. This is a vital US interest in an
area far removed from us logistically. This explains our naval presence
in the region, although we had tried to hold this to a minimum before
Soviet actions in Afghanistan.
Naval powers create fleets to defend their vital interests, Muskie
continued. The Soviets have been recently developing a Navy which
sailed the Pacific, appeared near the straits of Malacca and off US
shores. We see this as legitimate. The US Navy in the Persian Gulf is not
contributing to war but may restrain the combatants. The fact that Iran
has declared the Straits a war zone is causing shipping to back up and
threatening a cut-off in oil flows. If Iran and Iraq began to stop vessels,
what would happen? The presence of the US fleet is designed to re-
strain, not to provoke. It makes no sense to argue that the US presence
is provocative.
The Secretary repeated that it was urgent to call for and implement
a cease fire as soon as possible before one side gained an advantage
over the other. At present, both parties want to obstruct a Security
Council meeting. (Gromyko said he agreed.) It would be best if the non-
aligned called such a meeting or the Islamic countries, but everybody
wants someone else to take the first step. Thus we are immobilized.
Muskie said that US relations with both Iran and Iraq were poor.
We had cancelled the sale of civilian planes to Iraq as well as the sale of
US engines for Iraqi ships in hopes of exercising restraint.
In sum, Muskie said, the US was making two contributions in
order to end hostilities:
—Encouraging a Security Council meeting.
—Using diplomatic channels to promote a cease fire.
