Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 367 topical expressions such as “Palestinian homeland,” “internal settlement” and so on and so on. Nevertheless, words remain important. They convey ideas, and ideas confer power. That is the essence of diplomacy. Some of the more practical in our society might argue that power devolves more from military strength, economic capacity, and technological superiority and that those factors are what enable us to get what we want as we deal with the rest of the world. That may have been the ultimate argument in the age of Bismarck, but I submit that it is neither practical nor in our long-term interest to rely exclusively or excessively on that kind of power today. In today’s world insufficient power comes out of the barrel of a rifle, or the smokestacks of Pittsburgh. No, to the contrary, our influence rests more upon our vision, our ideals, and—yes—our words. The real question is how much our vision reflects the concerns and interests of the community of nations—a community of which we are a part but no longer the proprietor. What we require in 1978 is a vision that is clear enough to be understood by others, flexible enough to take into account the constant changes in world society, strong enough to guide our diplomacy, and worthy enough to be supported by our people. Such a vision will have to be developed with the cooperation of many parties. But the building blocks are obvious: • The vision must address the issues of world security from a larger viewpoint than narrow nationalism can provide. • The vision must address the issues of American welfare from a framework of improving the welfare of the international community as a whole. • The vision must serve to strengthen international institutions and procedures that help more rationally to share power and responsibility. • The vision must embrace human rights in their broadest meaning which involves a commitment to the dignity of human beings in the material and political sense. Always, we will need to back up our vision and our words with resources and action. Even then, we will not always get what we want. But there is no alternative. The dynamics of our society and of world affairs do not permit us either to go on our way or to have our own way. We live in a participatory age, and frankly, I think, we shouldn’t want it any other way.
