438
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
we will not be dependent on Waldheim doing any heavy negotiating
for us.
My French friends and Cottam have said a number of times that
the Foreign Minister was frustrated and disappointed that nothing had
happened as a result of Waldheim’s trip. That must be because he left
the impression that he was sympathetic to their cause and imprecise
about what would have to happen on both sides. As a result, Waldheim
probably has less credibility with them because they will have con-
cluded that Waldheim left Iran convinced of the justice of their own
cause and was blocked by the U.S. from following through.
Enough on that, but I hope that you will keep my harsh com-
ments private.
Because the issue that we are dealing with is so important and
sensitive, I want to make a few points:
1. Absolute confidentiality is essential. Most of the inter-govern-
mental communications on this should be oral and limited to a very
tight group.
2. My personal involvement on a continuing basis is important
and essential in a couple of ways. First, it has been a signal of our
willingness and seriousness to negotiate in a respectful manner. Sec-
ondly, it is important that someone with a political sense of things here
and [in] Iran be involved on a continuing basis.
3. Hal Saunders and I should work on this as a team. He and I
complement one another—he has an understanding of the area, the
personalities, is an excellent draftsman and represents the Secretary
well.
4. If we are able to put this thing together, it is going to be like
one of those trick billiards shots where you have to hit five sides before
the ball goes in the pocket. For this reason, we are going to need to
put together the UN, Panamanian, etc., pieces together. For that reason,
I will need to be involved in every part of the discussion and negotia-
tions. This should not take much of my time, but is essential in terms
of tying this thing all together. Right now, Hal Saunders and I are the
only two people in the government who have a precise sense of both
how this thing can be done and also how difficult and sensitive it will be.
So, at the risk of appearing immodest, I would suggest that you
say sometime during the meeting today4 if we decide to go ahead that
you want Hal Saunders and I to work as a team and that you want
me involved in every dimension of the discussions to both keep you
informed and to measure domestic political impact.
4 Not further identified.
