216 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —Third, most of the international competition for power is conducted with peaceful instruments, and most international issues are resolved by peaceful means. But force, whether in the form of organized military power or of terrorism, continues to be a major factor in the resolution of international disputes. Military power has a substantial influence on the international attitudes of friends and adversaries during peace as well as in war. —Fourth, the relations between the United States and the Soviet Union continue to be marked by both competition and cooperation, with the attendant risk of conflict. However, there are opportunities to stabilize and perhaps to ease these relations—­especially through arms control agreements. —Fifth, where the competition between the two superpowers is non-­military, the United States continues to enjoy a number of critical advantages: in industrial, agricultural, technological, and diplomatic strength; in the energy and enterprise of its citizens; in the appeal of our system—­its responsiveness and plain decency; and in the support of allies and other friends who genuinely share similar aspirations. —Sixth, the Soviet Union, by contrast, suffers from major internal handicaps—­economic, political, and social—­and these handicaps will probably increase with the decline already occurring in birth rates and about to occur in domestic energy supplies and rates of economic growth. The Soviets also suffer from a lack of genuinely committed allies, and they have been set back in their relations with the People’s Republic of China (PRC), India, and parts of the Middle East. Nonetheless, despite these handicaps and setbacks, the Soviets have been acquiring military power comparable to that of the United States. By some measures they are ahead; by others they are behind. (Comparative military capability also depends on such factors as the geographic location of a conflict.) —Finally, while many trends and issues continue to develop independently of relations between the United States and the Soviet Union—­and require our attention and resources—­the Soviet Union remains our principal national security problem: not the only one but the biggest one. We are negotiating (and must continue to negotiate) with the Soviets for specific, equitable and adequately verifiable arms control and disarmament agreements—­agreements that strengthen international stability, curb the arms competition, and reduce armaments: conventional as well as nuclear. We should seek to involve the Soviets constructively in a number of international activities—­social and economic, including non-­strategic trade. We should encourage their cooperation in resolving international conflicts and reducing areas of tension that could lead to confrontation. To the degree that we can channel any United States-Soviet competition into non-­military areas, we will be better off, especially considering our economic, social, and other advantages. However, none of these efforts toward cooperation should cause us to minimize the American commitment to human rights, national independence, and democratic institutions—­or to collective security with
