December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
613
seeking maximum reward in US security support as an incentive for
moving forward. Hussein and the Saudis are convinced that the Camp
David process carries more immediate danger than eventual safety.
They appear to have no constructive, practical alternatives and have
difficulty focusing on the threat that stalemate in the peace process
poses to their security. Neither wants to close the door completely—
their desire for our support in security matters precludes this—but they
both seem to be hoping somehow that the moment of decision will go
away. I believe concentration on Gaza with respect to the autonomy
issue would be a good tactic.
The final objective was to strengthen bilateral relationships.
Overall, I sought to convey the idea that a comprehensive peace settle-
ment and other forms of defense cooperation are far more important to
regional security and well-being than additional arms. I made very few
commitments, handling most requests by undertaking to consider
them on my return to Washington or to arrange for US teams to survey
requirements or make staff visits in order to examine the need in
greater depth. In some cases, I was frank in warning them not to expect
approval.
In the main, however, offers of consultations and joint planning
and intelligence exchange were welcomed but were not enough. We
were judged in this functional area by how favorably we responded to
arms requests. My approach was all right as a stop gap but will not
work for more than a few months. No one was satisfied. Everyone had
his list. Saudi Arabia renewed earlier requests for advanced systems,
such as the XM1 tank, without addressing quantities or timing. Jordan
presented a $2 billion plan for filling shortfalls and for force moderniza-
tion, including F–16 aircraft and ROLAND missiles. Israel scrapped
MATMON C, substituting a new eight-year force development plan for
equipment which could cost $6–8 billion. The new plan does cut back
significantly on MATMON C’s planned force expansion and is said to
be 20–25% less expensive, but most of the savings appear to be in the
later years. Egypt listed equipment which would total $15–20 billion, in
effect an “Americanization” of Egyptian forces.
I’m sure none of these nations expected us to respond fully to their
requests. We cannot ignore them, however. I believe we should now
approve military hardware items at a somewhat faster rate (without in-
creasing dollar levels where credit is involved) than we have in the re-
cent past for Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia. I believe we need to plan
for a sharply increased arms supply to Egypt, including FMS credits, al-
though not to anything like the extent of Egypt’s full request. The
Egyptians have a genuine self-defense need to reverse the continuing
decay of their military forces flowing from loss of Soviet support. And,
with Iran gone, Egypt’s role in regional security becomes more impor-
