452 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX time, complete elections and the establishment of a new government where people have never voted before. President Sadat: Mr. President, the first phase of withdrawal in Gaza is my responsibility. Gaza was taken from Egypt. I am ready to force this issue and I have given you my word that I am ready to proceed in both places, Gaza and the West Bank, if King Hussein is not going to do it. President Carter: Let me ask you this question then, Mr. President. What will be the reaction in the Arab world if Gaza is given special treatment and the process takes place in Gaza and does not take place in the West Bank? President Sadat: This will be a victory for both of us, because it is not a separate agreement in Sinai only. I have declared already that I [am] ready to force this on Gaza because I am responsible for Gaza. Whatever delays there are in the West Bank it will be done to their position with King Hussein. President Carter: I understand your position and we will do the best we can. President Sadat: Please, Mr. President. President Carter: I will try. President Sadat: You know I am ready to take any risk since you have known me. This time this will be detrimental for both of us. President Carter: Let me talk about a couple more things before we hang up. It is very important that you do two things, if you can. One is to emphasize in your public statements the positive aspects of the negotiations and the peace treaties to prepare not only your own people, but the rest of the world for the benefits of peace. I think there is an inclination on the part, and I am going to tell Begin the same thing, of Israel and Egypt to point out the problems with the negotiations because that is what we are trying to discuss at this point. People tend to lose sight of all the many advantages that will accrue to Egypt, the Arab world and the Middle East, if peace can be brought between you and Israel. Let it be possible for us to defend the Middle East against the Soviets, it would make it possible for you to turn your tremendous political and military support to Sudan and the Saudis and others. I hope that you will emphasize the positive result that will be achieved if and when a peace treaty is concluded. Please do that for me. President Sadat: Sure, Mr. President. President Carter: The other thing is that I need to have you to be as flexible as you possibly can on these individual points. I am perfectly willing to come over there to talk to Fahd and to talk to Hussein or to have them come over here to meet with me to try to encourage them to participate in the West Bank negotiations. I need for you to do the same
