January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1173
Prime Minister Begin said that he will read his proposals.5 (See at-
tachment). Some of them are open-ended. It is not correct that they are
agreed, for the heads of agreement, but they are proposals. The first is
about the Self-Governing Authority and its essence of government.
First is what was at Camp David, and a number of proposals which he
will read: “1) The self-governing authority of the Arab inhabitants in
Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district, will be an Administrative Council
freely elected by the aforementioned inhabitants.” This makes clear
that it is an administrative council. What it is based upon is at page 22
of the State Department book on Camp David,6 at point A/1/(c). Thus
the only establishment is of an Administrative Council. If it were not
so, the words “administrative council” would not be in parentheses.
Therefore, how should it be interpreted where the words “self-
governing authority” appear elsewhere? It was clear, when the Presi-
dent talked at Camp David with Barak and el-Baz—who are good
lawyers. The suggestion was made by Barak in the President’s pres-
ence. Barak says that everywhere the reference is to an administrative
council. This is in the minutes, to which we can refer. Therefore, now at
the moment of considering the most basic issues, there is a need to state
what the self-governing authority is. Israel says it is an administrative
council, freely elected. Then there is the number. In an Egyptian docu-
ment,7 it is called an assembly, with 80–100 members, and with an exec-
utive of 11 members. Therefore, that clearly is legislative, and with a ju-
diciary. According to Montesquieu,8 this would be a Palestinian state in
all but name. It is a division of power (which exists here in the U.S., but
not in Britain: Montesquieu was wrong about that).
Minister Kubersky said 1762.
Prime Minister Begin said that Israel does not want a Palestinian
state, nor does the President or Sadat. But it would be that in fact. Am-
bassador Linowitz says that Egypt does not stand by its document. He
(Prime Minister Begin) has not heard from them that they have with-
drawn it, and would like to hear it. It is unacceptable, and contrary to
5 The referenced Israeli draft proposal, attached but not printed, was comprised of
four points: 1) “The self-governing authority of the Arab inhabitants in Judea, Samaria
and the Gaza district, will be an Administrative Council freely elected by the aforemen-
tioned inhabitants;” 2) “The number of the members of the Administrative Council will
be determined by and correspond to, the number and actual and practical functions to be
fulfilled by the Council members;” 3) Israeli citizens, inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and
the Gaza district will be under the jurisdiction of Israel;” 4) “External and internal secu-
rity, including the fight against terrorism, conspiracy to commit acts of violence and sub-
version, will be the responsibility of the Israeli authorities.”
6 Not further identified.
7 Not further identified.
8 Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron de La Bre`de de Montesquieu, eighteenth cen-
tury French political philosopher.
