Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
643
10. A Comprehensive Middle East Settlement. No list of goals would
be complete without this reference, but there is no need to elaborate.
Finally, a postscript about your own activities. I firmly believe that
you should increase your contacts with the American public in the
forthcoming period. This would mean more speeches in the U.S., and
fewer Congressional appearances (where your statements do not get
the attention they deserve). It would mean more U.S. television appear-
ances, which should be undertaken even if it means cutting something
else out.
In such speeches and appearances, I urge that you relax your disci-
pline and discuss your philosophy and concept of American security
and foreign policy. It would be good for the American people to hear it.
And it would be helpful to the President.
125.
Editorial Note
On September 7, 1979, President Jimmy Carter spoke to reporters
assembled in the Old Executive Office Building. The President ad-
dressed the administration’s attempts to modernize the United States’
“strategic triad,” consisting of air, land, and sea defenses. He noted that
the fixed, land-based intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) system
was increasingly vulnerable to attack. Earlier, on June 8, White House
Deputy Press Secretary Rex Granum announced that the President had
agreed to pursue development and deployment of “full-scale,” mobile
ICBMs, known as MX. (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, page 1016)
During the September 7 briefing, Carter referenced this decision, indi-
cating that he had done so to ensure a “strategic deterrent,” and
elaborated:
“The MX will enable us to continue with a modernized, unsur-
passed, survivable strategic deterrent ICBM, submarine-launched, and
heavy bomber triad, armed with cruise missiles. Clearly, the way we
base the MX to enhance its own security from attack is vital to the
ability it has to defend our country.”
“At the time that I made the decision to build the MX, I established
five essential criteria which the basing system would have to meet.
First, it must contribute to the ability of the strategic forces to survive
an attack. Second, it must be verifiable so as to set a standard which can
serve as a precedent for the verifiability of mobile ICBM systems on
both sides. Third, it must minimize the adverse impact on our own en-
vironment. Fourth, its deployment must be at a reasonable cost to the
