256 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement from here. After all our struggle on the phrase the lead says Americans are going to be released “as soon as possible”. Then down in the story it makes the flat statement “the announcement completed the first item of business on their two point agenda”. I can understand Wang’s confusion at yesterday’s meeting if, as is likely, they had read this in our own official output. Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador 195. Telegram 733 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 16, 1955, noon 733. From Johnson. 1. Anticipate that at next meeting Wang will insist on opening to which I cannot object as he deferred to my insistence on opening last meeting. 2. He may as promised at last meeting answer few of questions I asked on implementation agreed announcement, dependent on devel­ opments at that time raise question “invitation” to third countries, and then launch into attack on our refusal discuss item two at this time. 3. I will reiterate any unanswered questions on PRC implementa­ tion, deal as necessary with question “invitations”, give further info on our implementation, and then deal with question of taking up agenda item two. 4. I will appreciate Department’s suggestion or instructions on how I handle questions of “invitations” and agenda item two. 5. On first question of “invitations” have choice of squarely meeting issue if they show similar disposition or attempting avoid direct issue in meeting while being careful not accept his position. We have made our position entirely clear at last meeting as well as publicly, agreed statement is also clear, and it might be that to engage in sharp debate on this with Wang would give them pretext fail implement agreed announcement particularly in view our position on discussion agenda item two. I should be able avoid issue by avoiding further use of word “invitation” simply stating fact both United Kingdom and India now 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–1655. Secret.
