668 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense5 Washington, undated THE MILITARY INVESTMENT BALANCE We have recently assessed the US–USSR Military Investment Balance. Some military expenditures contribute only to current capability, others—­in varying degrees—­to future as well as present military capability, and ought to be considered as investments. The assessment concentrated on future-­oriented activities such as RDT&E, procurement of long-­lived weapon systems, and the construction of military facilities. It examined those current investment flows, and the accumulated stock of past investments, which contribute to future military capability. The assessment, thus, is an indicator of the future military balance. The main message of this balance is that continuing current trends in and differences between US and Soviet military efforts for 5–10 years will place the US in a clearly inferior military position. Focusing on investment makes this clearer, providing a picture less favorable to the US than does comparing overall efforts. The assessment is based on CIA-­produced dollar estimates of Soviet military programs. Those show that: —Soviet military efforts measured in dollars have exceeded ours by a steadily widening margin since 1969 and are now almost 45% greater. —The Soviets have out-­invested us for 10 years and, for the last few years, their investment effort has been about 75% larger than ours. —Projecting current Soviet trends and US plans into the future shows only a slow reduction in the gap in the rate of investment, and even that reduction is uncertain. The Soviet advantage is growing even more rapidly than is revealed by the respective rates of current investment flow, since: —Soviet investment stock value is now about 25% more than ours. —That differential is expected to increase to 40–60% by the mid 80’s, depending on assumptions about the depreciation profile. —The stream of Soviet investment dividends can be expected to exceed those of the US for many years. The analysis also examined several possible, but not very convincing, arguments as to why these investment trends need not be cause for concern. 5 Top Secret; Eyes Only.
