544  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
acquire additional capabilities with advanced weapon systems, and if 
possible to achieve clear military superiority over the US.
21. The present Soviet nuclear weapons stockpile could include 
weapons in a range of yields from about 2 KT to about 8 MT. The USSR 
probably possesses sufficient nuclear weapons to support a major 
attack by its long-­range striking forces, but the supply of fissionable 
materials is probably insufficient for large-­scale allocation of such 
weapons to air defense and tactical uses as well. Since we estimate a 
substantial and high priority Soviet program for the expansion of fis­
sionable material production and considerable further improvement in 
nuclear weapons technology, we believe that current limitations will 
ease during 1959–1963.
22. The principal Soviet military component presently capable of 
long-­range nuclear attack is Long Range Aviation, with about 1,450 
bombers (including some convertible tanker-­bombers), among which 
are about 950 jet medium bombers and about 100 to 125 jet and turbo­
prop heavy bombers. This force—­best suited for attacking targets in 
Eurasia and its periphery—­is capable of large-­scale attacks against the 
US only through the extensive use of medium bombers on one-­way 
missions. While the size of the long-­range bomber force will probably 
decline gradually, Soviet long-­range striking capabilities will increase 
markedly as the stockpile of nuclear weapons grows, improved bomb­
ers are introduced, the readiness and proficiency of the bomber force 
increases, and especially as the Soviet capacity to deliver nuclear weap­
ons by missiles expands.3
23. The USSR will rely increasingly upon missiles as nuclear deliv­
ery systems during 1959–1963. Present operational weapons include 
ground-­launched ballistic missiles with ranges up to 700 and probably 
1,100 nautical miles (n.m.), as well as bomber-­launched air-­to-­surface 
missiles suitable for use against ships and certain other targets. A few 
conventional submarines have probably been converted to employ 
200 n.m. cruise-­type missiles. The USSR will probably achieve a first 
3 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, does not 
concur in the last sentence of this paragraph. He agrees that Soviet long-­range striking 
capabilities will increase markedly but believes that this increase cannot be attributed to 
the introduction of improved bombers of the types and within the strength levels esti­
mated, or to continued training of bomber crews. In his view, the estimated acquisition 
by the USSR of a substantial ICBM capability, along with the anticipated increase in the 
Soviet nuclear weapons stockpile, are factors which far outweigh comparatively routine 
improvements in the existing force. Therefore, he believes that the last sentence of this 
paragraph should read as follows: “The Soviets can be expected to introduce improved 
bombers and to increase the readiness and proficiency of Long Range Aviation units, but 
the size of this force and its significance in a long-­range attack role will gradually decline 
during the period. Nonetheless, Soviet long-­range striking capabilities will increase 
markedly as the Soviet missile delivery capability expands and as the stockpile of nuclear 
weapons grows.” [Footnote is in the original.]
