866  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
been on a government-­to-­government basis. If a diplomat appealed to 
the people of a country over the heads of the leaders, he would, in the 
past, have been rapped over the knuckles. Now, however, practically 
all governments were speaking directly to the peoples of other coun­
tries. This sort of activity was growing very rapidly. Mr. Allen stated 
that some of those who were involved in this aspect of the conduct of 
our foreign relations had to remind themselves of the relatively small 
part that it still played in the conduct of those relations. Diplomacy 
was still the most important means by which nations spoke to each 
other. However, even those activities that were primarily important as 
communication between governments, such as the President’s trip to 
Europe, had an important aspect of communication with peoples as 
well. For example, one important aspect of the President’s trip to Europe 
was his appearance on television with Prime Minister Macmillan. This 
appearance had been credited with having an important effect upon 
the outcome of the British elections.
Mr. Allen then displayed a chart organized on the basis of media 
and showing the share of the Communist World, the Free World, and 
the U.S. in the output of the various means of international communi­
cation. He noted that 600 million books each year crossed international 
boundaries either through direct export or through publication by one 
country in another. Of this world total 25 per cent was Communist, 75 
per cent Free World. The U.S. accounted for 17 per cent of the world 
total and USIA inspired publication of 3 per cent of that total. USIA 
last year published 17 million books of which 9.5 million were in for­
eign languages and 7.5 million in English. Mr. Allen displayed exam­
ples of the books published under USIA auspices in foreign languages. 
He said that these books fell into two main categories: those dealing 
with Americanism and those which were anti-­Communist. In most 
cases USIA inspires publication either by agreeing in advance to buy 
a certain number of copies or by paying for translation and helping 
the publisher obtain copyright privileges. He also displayed student 
editions which were sold for as little as ten or fifteen cents. He said that 
the U.S. had often been rawhided on the grounds that the Communists 
were flooding world markets with literature while the U.S. was doing 
nothing. However, in some cases the U.S. had flooded the market to 
such an extent and put the price so low that the value of a book as paper 
was greater than its value as literature. Thus a book published in India 
in the Gujerati language had been distributed in quantities that were 
greater than the traffic would bear and as a result copies had turned up 
in the paper pulp shops in Bombay.
Turning to the press, Mr. Allen pointed out that one million words 
a day crossed international boundaries of which 30 per cent were 
Communist and 70 per cent Free World. One-­half of the total was 
accounted for by the U.S. and five per cent, or 50,000 words per day,
