1112  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
9. I replied he had spoken of obstacles met in reaching agreement 
on question of renunciation force declaration. He had also referred to 
situation in Taiwan area being most urgent and important question con­
fronting us. I thought we should be clear as to exact nature obstacle now 
confronting us. While he continued speak of renunciation force decla­
ration, he had continued avoid agreement on statement which would 
in fact constitute such declaration. ­Proposition I had put forward here 
very simple. I had repeated it many times. It was simply that while we 
disagree about many things and particularly about origin, nature, pos­
sible settlement dispute Taiwan area we simply say first we not going 
go war about those things. Obstacle we faced and continued face was 
unwillingness his government say this in clear unequivocal language. 
While he continued speak of renunciation force declaration and we had 
discussed various drafts embodying that principle it was clear from our 
discussion here, public statement made by his government and drafts 
he put forward that while he desired on one hand give appearance 
having accepted principle, on other hand he attempted retain freedom 
use force. He had in particular attempted retain for his side freedom 
use force with regard dispute which we both agreed most urgent and 
important facing us. To characterize any such declaration as renuncia­
tion force would be fraud upon world and could only result increased 
misunderstanding and increased tension between us. This was obstacle 
which continued confront us. No playing with words could resolve this. 
This obstacle could be removed only by decision his government. I had 
over past months and continue earnestly hope his government would 
remove that obstacle. If that obstacle removed words could readily be 
found embody principle. I had in past and still continue feel this first 
and most urgent task confronting us.
10. I continued from prepared statement:
A. As I told you at meeting November 3 and also subsequently 
mentioned, I consider there is an inherent relationship between ques­
tion of renunciation force and what you have termed the trade embargo. 
My views this regard have not changed. That is, from my standpoint 
discussion of what you term trade embargo cannot be divorced from 
continued overhanging threat your government will resort use force in 
attempt resolve to its satisfaction dispute in Taiwan area. It unrealistic 
to think my country or any country sensible of its own interests would 
desire economically to strengthen a country which threatens to resort 
hostilities if its demands not met. That is, my country does not consider 
there can be any advantage to it in trade, where goods received in that 
trade can support use of force against it. This should be self-­evident. 
It thus clear there is an inseparable relationship between renunciation 
force and subject of trade and that first had an inherent priority over 
second.
