306
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the Congress and will submit the final package of U.S. and foreign tariff
and nontariff concessions to you for your approval.
97.
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of
International Monetary Affairs, Department of the Treasury
(Syvrud) to Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal1
Washington, January 17, 1978
SUBJECT
United States-Japan Trade Talks—An Insider’s Assessment
In the U.S./Japan trade talks on January 9–13 Ambassador Strauss
laid on the line his personal credibility with the U.S. Congress in return
for the Japanese commitments described below.2 He made it clear that
the credibility of the U.S. Delegation and specifically his own personal
credibility was at stake in these talks. He wanted to insure that the Japa-
nese commitments would permit him to counter effectively the
growing protectionism in the U.S. Congress. I don’t think Strauss was
completely convinced that the statement he went home with achieved
this purpose but he knew that the alternative of not having an agreed
statement was even less acceptable.3
Ambassador Strauss recognized publicly that the agreement did
not eliminate protectionist pressures in the United States but those
forces, he said, would have been stronger without the agreement.4 So
1 Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat,
1978 Files, 56–83–69. Confidential. Sent through Solomon. Printed from a copy that bears
a handwritten notation indicating that Solomon initialed the original. Copies were sent to
Bergsten, Widman, Hufbauer, Karlik, Junz, Leddy, Cross, and Fisher (not further identi-
fied; possibly Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury Richard W. Fisher).
2 Wolff and other U.S. officials met with Japanese officials for two days of trade
talks in Tokyo in advance of Strauss’ January 12–13 discussions in Tokyo. (Telegram 396
from Tokyo, January 10; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780014–0852)
3 The statement issued at the end of Strauss’ discussions with Japanese officials in
Tokyo was printed in The New York Times on January 14. (“Text of Communique Issued
by U.S. and Japan on 2 Days of Trade Talks,” The New York Times, January 14, 1978, p. 4)
4 According to a report published in The New York Times on January 14, Strauss said
of the growth of American protectionism: “I do not think we have eliminated these
forces, but had we not reached agreement, they would have become much stronger.”
(Andrew H. Malcolm, “U.S. and Japan Reach an Accord on Easing of Tensions in Trade,”
The New York Times, January 14, 1978, p. 1)
