1955  207
You will be interested to know that when WSR read the latest text of 
the Agreed Announcement “cold”, without having any of the recent back­
ground, he was amazed at what you had accomplished. He felt that we 
had just about written our own ticket so far as the phraseology went. The 
wording could hardly be better from our standpoint. He felt that we did 
not need to worry too much about fixing an express time limit in terms of 
so many days or weeks, in view of the very explicit treminology used in 
the Agreed Announcement. He observed that if the Communists did not 
release all the Americans “expeditiously” in the literal sense of the term, 
they would be in an absolutely indefensible position. We would have the 
best club imaginable to beat them with. Not even their best apologists, 
such as the Indians, would excuse them if they failed to act promptly on 
all Americans. WSR thinks that their prestige is involved and they know 
it. They may have consciously and deliberately decided to release all the 
Americans in a hurry, if we allow them to do it in their own way and with­
out any suggestion of an ultimatum in terms of so many days. It would 
seem to be part of their general diplomatic campaign to win widespread 
acceptance and respectability.
WSR thinks it very important for you not to imply in any way that 
we think it might take sixty or ninety days to complete the implementa­
tion. “Expeditiously” obviously means a shorter time than that. There is 
a chance that the Americans might be released practically en masse in 
ten days or two weeks. This is what it ought to mean. If we show that we 
don’t really expect them to move with celerity probably they won’t, but if 
we make it clear that we take speedy action for granted, they will be put 
on their mettle, and probably live up to what is expected of them on this 
since it fits in with their accelerated diplomatic campaign. Obviously you 
don’t put them on their honor because you expect them to act for honor’s 
sake, but sometimes it may serve their calculated purposes to deliver 
when they are put on their honor, and this may be such an instance.
It is clearly important not to get into the substance of Item Two 
until all the Americans are out. When we talk about “discussion about 
Item Two” and “what should constitute Item Two” we mean the topics 
that might be appropriate for acceptance under Item Two. Even this 
discussion of what would be appropriate topics should be recessed if 
the Agreed Announcement is not carried out in good faith. WSR’s last 
injunction to me in Richmond yesterday afternoon was to stress the 
importance of not getting into actual substance of Item Two until all 
the Americans are out and that includes of course the hard-core cases. 
We would probably never get the most difficult cases out if we move 
into Item two while they are still held.
We probably won’t inform the Indians of the contemplated arrange­
ments until after the Tuesday meeting. We have already informed the 
British and they are ready to assume their role.
