Yugoslavia 889 include more recently appointed members of the present Presidium (such as Stane Dolanc) as well as top republic party bureaucrats from whose ranks replacements for incumbent old Titoists are likely to be drawn. 32. Although Titoist in crucial respects, a coalition of the latter sort would be far less status quo oriented than its “old Titoist” counterpart and might be ready to introduce a significant amount of incremental change. With respect to the division of authority between the center and the republics, for example, it might be not only willing but eager to sponsor a return to the more decentralized pattern that obtained during the late 1960s, especially in matters of day-to-day administration and management. At the same time, in intrarepublic matters it might be ready to sacrifice significant features of workers’ self-management and self-government in the interest of managerial efficiency and political discipline. 33. Along with these changes in domestic policies, a coalition in which old Titoists played a less dominant role might be prepared to curtail Yugoslavia’s role in an increasingly fragmented nonaligned movement. In addition, such a coalition might be less congenitally suspicious of Soviet intentions than a coalition dominated by men with more vivid personal memories of the original Tito-Stalin split. Nonetheless, mistrust of the Soviet Union will remain endemic and a significant Eastward tilt in Yugoslav policy is unlikely unless Soviet pressures on Belgrade fail to elicit effective Western support. In fact, such a coalition might eventually be more willing than its old Titoist counterpart to permit a gradual Westward tilt in Yugoslav policy in return for economic benefits and credible security reassurances. 34. Even the transformations of one of these potential coalitions into a more or less stable ruling group would not guarantee the sort of post-Tito leadership that might be needed to deal with a severe crisis. However, it would ensure at least a measure of leadership and would provide some safeguards against the kinds of erratic or diluted policy choices that could inadvertently invite foreign encroachments and wholesale withdrawals of domestic support. And it would make it possible and worthwhile for interested foreign governments to support Tito’s successors in their efforts to preserve Yugoslavia’s integrity and independence. IV. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WEST 35. The amounts and kinds of support that Tito’s successors request from the West will vary with time and circumstances. Except under great duress, even a Westward-inclined post-Tito leadership is unlikely to request explicitly or to welcome conspicuous “pro-Yugoslav” changes in Western security policy. During the immediate transition,
