December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 603 for ourselves at Camp David. It is clear to me, after studying Secretary Vance’s report4 of the useful talks between Prime Minister Khalil and Foreign Minister Dayan in Brussels and Ambassador Atherton’s report5 of his latest visit to Egypt and Israel, that all of the remaining issues are closely interrelated and need to be dealt with and resolved together. It is also clear that we must address ourselves to this task as a matter of some urgency, before time begins to work against us and in order to free our energies to deal with our common strategic concerns in your region. The question is how best to proceed. As you know, Mr. President, I recently said that I would, if necessary, be prepared to meet again with you and Prime Minister Begin. I do not believe, however, that we have sufficiently tested whether such a meeting is necessary or would be fruitful, and we both recognize the risks inherent in a summit meeting that failed to result in final agreement. I want to suggest for your consideration, therefore, that the negotiations be resumed at the Ministerial level in Washington among Prime Minister Khalil, Foreign Minister Dayan and Secretary Vance. I would be happy to make Camp David available for these talks, so that the three Ministers and their aides would be able to work in private, without interruption, and away from the pressures and glare of the news media. If it is convenient, I suggest that the Ministerial talks begin soon after Secretary Vance and I return from our forthcoming visit to Mexico,6 specifically, on Wednesday, February 21. I am also communicating this suggestion to Prime Minister Begin. I recognize that Prime Minister Khalil and Foreign Minister Dayan would need to consult closely with you and with Prime Minister Begin, respectively, as the talks progress. I would anticipate that, after several days of intensive discussions, the Ministers might then want to return home to consult with their governments. In making this suggestion, Mr. President, I assure you of my continued personal commitment to the successful conclusion of the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty and to the implementation of the Framework agreed at Camp David for a Comprehensive Peace in the Middle East. I also recognize and appreciate how much you have already contributed toward making a successful outcome possible. We now owe it to ourselves, to the peoples of Egypt and Israel, and indeed to all the peoples of the Middle East, to make a determined effort to realize the vision which led you to Jerusalem. I look forward to hearing from you 4 See footnote 2, Document 162. 5 See Documents 168 and 170. 6 See footnote 6, Document 174.
