March 27–December 31, 1979 911 Palestine Liberation Organization’s Representative to the United Nations Zehdi Terzi at the residence of Kuwaiti Representative to the United Nations Abdullah Bishara on July 26 in contravention of U.S. policy of avoiding meetings with the organization. (Telegram 213698 to all African Posts, August 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790379–1221) President Jimmy Carter was informed of Young’s actions on August 14 and noted in his personal diary: “I learned that Andy [Young] has gotten himself into serious trouble by meeting with the UN PLO representative. This is understandable because Andy is president of the Security Council, but when interrogated about it by the State Department he told them a lie. Later he told the Israeli ambassador the truth and the Israelis very unwisely made this fact public, although Andy’s meeting with the PLO was certainly designed to help the Israeli cause. This is an almost impossible problem to resolve without Andy leaving.” The same day, Carter met with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan, and White House Press Secretary Jody Powell at which Vance stated “in his opinion Andy would have to leave.” Carter wrote: “Cy’s implication was that the choice was between him and Andy.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 351) Earlier, on August 13, Department of State Spokesman Thomas Reston publicly denied that Young had had a “business” meeting with Terzi claiming instead that Terzi had “arrived unexpectedly and that Young departed after observing “social amenities.” The following day, an official protest from the Israeli Government over the Terzi meeting was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 17487 from Tel Aviv. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–2097) Following the protest, and the revelation that Young had given a “more accurate account” to Israeli Representative to the United Nations Yehuda Blum, Vance reprimanded Young for the meeting; a second Department of State statement then acknowledged that Young “knew that Mr. Terzi would probably be there” when he went to Bishara’s residence and that while there Young and Terzi “discussed the question of postponing the Security Council vote scheduled for July 31 on the Kuwaiti resolution” on Palestinian rights. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance Chides Young for Holding Talks With P.L.O. Official,” The New York Times, August 1, 1979, page A1) For additional documentation on the Young resignation, and the circumstances leading to the event, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XXV, United Nations; Global Issues.
