March 27–December 31, 1979
911
Palestine Liberation Organization’s Representative to the United Na-
tions Zehdi Terzi at the residence of Kuwaiti Representative to the
United Nations Abdullah Bishara on July 26 in contravention of U.S.
policy of avoiding meetings with the organization. (Telegram 213698 to
all African Posts, August 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790379–1221) President Jimmy Carter was informed of
Young’s actions on August 14 and noted in his personal diary: “I
learned that Andy [Young] has gotten himself into serious trouble by
meeting with the UN PLO representative. This is understandable be-
cause Andy is president of the Security Council, but when interrogated
about it by the State Department he told them a lie. Later he told the Is-
raeli ambassador the truth and the Israelis very unwisely made this fact
public, although Andy’s meeting with the PLO was certainly designed
to help the Israeli cause. This is an almost impossible problem to re-
solve without Andy leaving.” The same day, Carter met with Secretary
of State Cyrus Vance, Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher,
Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan, and White House Press Secretary Jody
Powell at which Vance stated “in his opinion Andy would have to
leave.” Carter wrote: “Cy’s implication was that the choice was be-
tween him and Andy.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 351) Earlier, on
August 13, Department of State Spokesman Thomas Reston publicly
denied that Young had had a “business” meeting with Terzi claiming
instead that Terzi had “arrived unexpectedly and that Young departed
after observing “social amenities.” The following day, an official pro-
test from the Israeli Government over the Terzi meeting was trans-
mitted to the Department of State in telegram 17487 from Tel Aviv.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–2097)
Following the protest, and the revelation that Young had given a “more
accurate account” to Israeli Representative to the United Nations Ye-
huda Blum, Vance reprimanded Young for the meeting; a second De-
partment of State statement then acknowledged that Young “knew that
Mr. Terzi would probably be there” when he went to Bishara’s resi-
dence and that while there Young and Terzi “discussed the question of
postponing the Security Council vote scheduled for July 31 on the Ku-
waiti resolution” on Palestinian rights. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance
Chides Young for Holding Talks With P.L.O. Official,” The New York
Times, August 1, 1979, page A1) For additional documentation on the
Young resignation, and the circumstances leading to the event, see For-
eign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XXV, United Nations; Global Issues.
