March–August 1953
737
had a big Council of War in one of the houses in the compound and
consisting of General Zahedi, [1½ lines not declassified] and myself. We
smuggled these people in and out in the bottom of cars and in closed
jeeps, and strangely enough never at any time was there any attempt to
stop cars going in or out of the American Embassy, which was just as
well, but, of course, there is an awful lot of traffic. I mean people . . .
hundreds of cars come in and out of there. Well, this conference was
going on, and I would have to leave it occasionally and go over and see
Ambassador Henderson, and General McClure was sitting out in front
of his house in the compound worrying over Ambassador Henderson’s
forthcoming interview with Mossadeq and McClure’s previous inter-
views with Riahi, and they would say to me, “Now we must be able to
assure the Prime Minister that we are not hiding out any Persians in the
compound,” and I would say, “Please give them every assurance,” and
we would discuss the matter for a while, and I would say, “Excuse me
for a few moments,” and then I would go back to this meeting. Hen-
derson knew perfectly well what was going on. He told me afterwards.
He said, “You did the only thing you could do. You had to tell them,
but you also had to do your business.” I don’t think McClure knew. The
decision was eventually reached that night. It was a typical Persian dis-
cussion. It went all around the God damn map for about four hours. I
felt no compunction coming in, and going out, and reassuring Hen-
derson from time to time, and then eventually obviously someone had
to make some decisions, and so we decided that we were going to make
our play on Wednesday, and that we were going to send off three mes-
sages outside of Teheran, and that we were going to continue and in-
tensify our activities inside Teheran, and the three messages were to be:
[3 lines not declassified] and that we were then going to build up a ter-
rific demonstration on Wednesday around the religious theme that it
was time for all loyal army officers, and soldiers, and the people of Iran
to rally to the support of their religion and the throne.
Then we wanted some outside military support from outside of
Teheran, and it looked to us as if the two best bets within reach were
the troops at Kermanshah under Colonel Bakhtiar and the troops
at Isfahan under Brigadier General Mahmud Davalu. [6½ lines not
declassified]
[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
Of course, the build-up that had gone on over the previous
months, and particularly, I think, the material produced by the head-
quarters here, the cartoons and the articles, etc., had an accumulated ef-
fect by this time. I mean seeds weren’t falling on barren soil at all. You
could see that there was a response, but Tuesday was a bad day none-
theless because there was nothing much we could do. [12 lines not
declassified]
