3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 384 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI “Woodbridge Two” Foreign Minister Gromyko asked the Secretary if he could tell him anything regarding the small delicate matter he had raised with him last week.2 Secretary Vance said that he had looked into this matter and that there was nothing he could do at this time regarding the two individuals in question. He was afraid that the trial would have to go forward. As to the matter of reducing bail, Marshall Shulman had been in touch with the Soviet Mission to indicate that the Mission’s lawyers would know best how to go about getting the bail reduced. Gromyko said that he certainly regretted this answer by the Secretary. What were the prospects for the future? The Secretary expected that the trial would have to go forward, and then, after completion of the trial, we would see what would be possible at that time. Gromyko said that he would not repeat to the Secretary what he had said when they last discussed this matter, because he did not want to get into an argument and lose time. The Secretary would be aware of how such a turn of events would be evaluated on the Soviet side and the consequences that might follow. Penetration In the meanwhile Gromyko wanted to inform the Secretary that his people had discovered more than 50 listening devices installed in various Soviet premises in Washington, San Francisco and New York. He would give the Secretary three packages of photographs, together with a list referenced to the photographs, containing a brief description of each. The information sheet was in Russian, but he was sure the Secretary would get it translated. Of course, his people had many more photographs of the same kind in their possession, and they might have made them public long ago if they had wanted to. However, proceeding from a broader approach to Soviet-American relations, they had refrained from doing so, especially since the U.S. side, too, had intimated that it would not like to see matters of this kind made public. In addition, Gromyko wanted to draw the Secretary’s attention to the fact that Soviet nationals working in the U.N. General Secretariat had been the targets of numerous approaches by agents of the U.S. side. By Soviet count, at least 200 U.S. citizens in the Secretariat had links to the special services of the United States. He repeated that the Soviet side had many such photographs at its disposal, some of which were 2 Reference is to Rudolf Chernyayev and Valdik Enger. See Document 109 and footnote 6 thereto.
