616 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement those recently exiled and who were in forefront in leading cheers for Castro now being given second echelon posts. Turning to coup itself, evidence rapidly accumulating that it masterminded by and executed under direction of ex-­president Osorio. Substantial evidence also indicates that nerve center in Ministry of Defense, with Generals Parada and especially Lopez Ayala utilizing Guardia Nacional rather than army to carry out overthrow. Also good reason to believe that Osorio, in planning coup, effected marriage of convenience with extreme leftist and other dissident oppositionist forces, including General Quintanilla and Captain Buitrago, who confirmed as actual Lemus abductors. There can be no arguing that coup masterpiece of planning and execution. No bloodshed, no disruption of public services. Although impressive number high ranking army officers given short period opt for or against junta and number those refusing subsequently relieved, no resistance any nature offered. Considerable evidence however that large sums of money changed hands, some of which reportedly of Cuban origin. In putting together this military-­civilian coalition, Osorio doubtless reasoned that he could control it. He probably also reasoned that cooperation with left was necessary both in planning stages and now for overthrow to be successful at this time. Inclusion this civilian element probably intended as sop to students and PRAM elements in effort gain their cooperation in stabilizing situation and gaining as wide acceptance of overthrow as possible until he prepared for next move. It may be that he intends move in on pro-Commie elements then in Rakosi2-­ like salami tactic. Present indications, however, are that plan is to allow junta to govern until regular election time in 1962 when Osorio will emerge as favorite son candidate. It seems to us that many dangers are inherent in this reasoning and that situation as it stands today leaves many extremely important questions unanswered: 1. Osorio has not yet shown his hand and while it is generally assumed that he is man behind throne, is he in fact? Neither the public nor we have any real proof. 2. If he is in fact the strong man, how deep does his control extend, especially into the civilian side? Will he be able to control the Commies in his government? 3. What commitments did he make in order to gain left-­wing cooperation? 4. What are his real intentions with respect to life span of junta and free elections? 5. Where did the money used in the coup come from? 2 Mátyás Rákosi, former Hungarian Communist leader.
