710
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the question of implementation. Maybe it would not be possible to im-
plement the agreement in West Bank, so we might start in Gaza.
Prime Minister Begin: I am sorry, I have to differ. If we deviate from
Camp David, and we agree to deal with Gaza first, then that is the end
of Egypt’s negotiations with Israel on autonomy in Judea and Samaria.
Egypt can give us nothing on the eastern front. We can’t change our
mind on this. Our foreign minister likes the idea, provided that Egypt
drops Judea and Samaria. We’ll call on the Jordanians and the Pales-
tinian Arabs to negotiate. Autonomy is our idea, but not with Egypt. I
suggest that we return to the original language.
Secretary Vance: You will have done so in the letter. The only ques-
tion is the implementation, not the negotiation.
Minister Weizman: If we finish in Gaza, and if Jordan does not come
in, will Egypt act for Jordan in the West Bank? We prefer to talk to the
Palestinian Arabs.
President Carter: Let me preside.
Secretary Vance: The modalities, and the powers and the responsi-
bilities for both areas will have been negotiated together.
President Carter: Then the question of holding elections arises.
Secretary Vance: Later, the West Bank Palestinians may say okay
we’ll join, but we need some adjustments for the West Bank. They
would want to just add to what had already been negotiated.
Foreign Minister Dayan: Let me repeat what I said to you and Prime
Minister Khalil. It would take more than just one change to adjust what
had been agreed for Gaza to the West Bank. Now we are talking about
one unit of the autonomy. There will be representatives from Gaza, and
from Judea and Samaria. There would be one council.
If Gaza goes first, then you have to make a change. Gaza would
have the full power to run the self-governing authority in Gaza; while
in Judea and Samaria, it would not be done that way. We would have to
agree that there would be two units first. The self-autonomy in Gaza
alone is possible. I told Khalil and Secretary Vance that I don’t exclude
it. People in Gaza are not Jordanian citizens. They have no close ties to
Jordan, but Hussein may retaliate against the Gazans. We can’t be sure
that they will like the idea.
If we do go Gaza first, then we have to look at the second part.
Some West Bank representatives go to the Parliament and are
members. Khalil was surprised to learn this. They sit there as part of the
Jordanian parliament. At Camp David, we agreed on Jordanian partici-
pation in the police force. I said this was no problem since all of the in-
habitants in Judea and Samaria are Jordanians. King Hussein won’t
send people from Trans-Jordan. He will choose locals. It doesn’t matter
to us which side of the river Jordanian citizens come from. In Jerusalem
