838
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Iran-Based Organizations
The Islamic Revolution Liberation Front of Afghanistan (Jabhe-Azadi-
bakshi-Inqilabi-Islami-Afghanistan), led by Sheikh Mohammed Asif
Mohsini. At the Islamic Foreign Ministers conference in Islamabad in
May, Iran’s Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh included Mohsini (as well
as five leaders from the IALA) in the Iranian delegation. Mohsini’s
front is a grouping of some 10 smaller bands, primarily Hazaras, that
operate in the central provinces of the country. Some of the Front’s
groups may also belong to one of the two Hazara umbrella organiza-
tions, the National United Front of Afghanistan (Jabhe-Mujahed-Melli-
Afghanistan) and the United Front of Freedom Fighters in Afghanistan
(Jabhe-Mobarazin-i-Mujahed-Afghanistan), which together subsume
some 15 insurgent bands, operating in the central and northern
provinces.
Thunder (Radh) is led by Sheikh Zadeh, based in Qom. It is a
revolutionary organization comprising Hazaras operating in the moun-
tains of central Afghanistan. It probably has ties with other Hazara
organizations.
310.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
Islamabad, August 21, 1980, 1119Z
8306. Subject: (S) Chemical Warfare Allegations in Afghanistan:
Need for Reflection? Ref: State 220611.2
1. (S) Entire text.
2. I do not wish to appear the Cassandra on this issue, but I would
like to introduce a note of caution into our planning to exploit allega-
tions of Soviet use of chemical warfare agents in Afghanistan, as illus-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 59, Pakistan: 8/80–1/81. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that
was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 In telegram 220611 to USUN and Geneva, August 19, the Department informed
the posts that the United States, working in concert with both allies and non-aligned
countries, was interested in co-sponsoring a resolution on chemical warfare at the upcom-
ing UN General Assembly meeting. The telegram directed the recipients to explore this
proposal with their counterparts. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
[no film number]) For an overview of UN activity relating to the control of chemical
and biological weapons, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, pp. 70–74.
