Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 127. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, September 21, 1979 SUBJECT NSC Weekly Report #110 1. Opinion The Parallel: 1961 but not 1962 Most people think you are in a situation now which parallels that of Kennedy in 1962: the Cuban missile crisis. Accordingly, subconsciously (and in the case of politicians, expedientially) most people will compare the outcome, and you personally, to Kennedy’s “success” in October–November 1962. Yet the situation is really not analogous; we face a political challenge, and we cannot fully undo the reality we don’t like, whereas in 1962 we faced a direct military challenge, and we could—through direct military pressure—undo it. Yet if the outcome in the end appears to be inadequate, most people will declare you as having been “defeated” and perhaps even blame you for both generating the problem (note what Javits said at the meeting) and then for being timid in responding to it. In fact, you are facing a situation much more like that faced by Kennedy in 1961, when the Soviets suddenly put up the Berlin wall. That situation was “unacceptable,” but we had no choice except to live with it. Kennedy was not prepared to knock it down. Neither are we prepared to create a military confrontation in order to get the Soviets to remove their troops from Cuba. But Kennedy did something else also, and hence the foregoing argument is not an unexpected plea from me for acquiescence. Kennedy responded to this “unacceptable” situation, with which he had to live, by taking a number of steps designed to indicate to the public that he would assert U.S. interests, and if necessary, be prepared to use force. He sent additional troops to Berlin, and he put more emphasis on our overall defense efforts—in addition to adopting a very tough public posture on the Soviets. At the same time, he did not pretend—through some cosmetic formula—to have solved the problem. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
