522  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
is in bombers and ALCM carriers which can achieve enhanced surviv-
ability by higher alert rates.
11. Chart 6 illustrates the marked and growing asymmetries in the 
composition of Soviet and US intercontinental offensive forces, using 
residual potentials after hypothetical surprise attacks as the example.8
—The left-­hand graphs display the continuing heavy Soviet depen-
dence on silo-­based ICBMs. Soviet SLBM RVs, while increasing in num-
bers, add very little to residual lethal area and hard-­target potentials 
because of their relatively low yields and poor accuracies. In this cal-
culation, bombers make no contribution to Soviet residual potentials 
because the USSR keeps no bombers on alert—­hence, we assume that 
none would survive a US surprise attack. Because virtually all of the 
USSR’s residual potential would be in ICBMs having short flight times, 
strikes against the United States by Soviet residual forces could arrive 
promptly.
—The right-­hand graphs illustrate that the US force mix is more 
balanced at present, but that silo-­based ICBMs would be reduced to 
only a negligible fraction of residual potentials in the future. The pro-
jected increases in the US residual potentials in the middle and late 
1980s are caused by US deployment of Trident SSBNs and especially 
ALCMs.
—Increasing US dependence on aerodynamic vehicles (bombs, 
SRAMs, and ALCMs) is illustrated by their growth as a proportion of 
US residual potentials. With respect to hard-­target potential, for exam-
ple, in the case of a Soviet surprise counterforce attack in 1988, more 
than four-­fifths of the US residual potential would be in aerodynamic 
vehicles having relatively slow flight times and subject to attrition by 
Soviet air defenses.
12. The results displayed in this Estimate are not to be taken as 
indicators of the results which might occur in war. Clearly, just the 
technique of allocating all residual forces against either hard or soft 
targets of nominal hardness before comparing them fundamentally 
divorces these analyses from the world of reality. Instead, the technique 
is intended only to display the general characteristics and qualities of 
the forces in comparable terms, and to illustrate trends in the two forces 
over the period of the next decade. Specifically, the calculations seek to:
—Compare gross capabilities against hard or soft targets in compa-
rable situations in order to display whether one force or the other has 
more of an accent toward hard or soft target capability.
—Compare the relative capabilities of the two forces to absorb a 
first strike, by displaying how much retaliatory potential would sur-
vive on the side attacked (a factor which a side contemplating a first 
strike would have to consider along with its own remaining potential).
—Display the relative reliance of each weapons mix upon one type 
of weapon or another.
8 Chart 6 is attached but not printed.
