July (170) To the Minister in China (tel.) Comment on the Minister’s suggested changes in wording of the U. S. draft reply to the Chinese note of June 24, and approval of his recommendation as set forth in telegram No. 292, July 27. [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 662] July (300) From the Minister in China (tel.) Further expression of opinion, in connection with the wording of the U. S. draft, that the phrase “tariff autonomy” ought not to be used, and that the wording of the sentence in question is not clear as it stands; suggestion of substitute wording. [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 664] July (301) From the Minister in China (tel.) Conversation with the Japanese Minister, in which he suggested the establishment of a close working relationship between the U. S., British, and Japanese Legations, looking toward a more definite leadership by those powers having the greatest responsibilities and interests in China. [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 664] July (173) To the Minister in China (tel.) Instructions for wording of the passage in the U. S. draft regarding the tariff, so that the U. S. position will be clear. [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 665] July (723) From the British Chargé Information that, as the U. S. draft differs so radically from the Anglo-Japanese text, the British representative in China has been authorized to discuss the two texts with the U. S. Minister and his other colleagues in the hope of combining both in a new agreed text. British disapproval of the statement in the U. S. draft with regard to the Extraterritorial Commission, and objection to the term “tariff autonomy.” [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 666] Aug. (180) To the Minister in China (tel.) Secretary’s conversation with the Japanese Ambassador, who indicated Japanese disagreement with U. S. proposal to make reference in the powers’ note to China to the questions of extending the scope of the tariff conference and also of tariff autonomy. Secretary’s reiteration of U. S. position and explanation of the phraseology which will be acceptable to the United States and which it is hoped will meet the objections of the Japanese Government. [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. and Doc. 667]
