Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  347
bring the sides closer to completing a START agreement, but it also 
made the question of effective verification more urgent. In that spirit, 
Burt said, the U.S. side had given the Soviet side a list of additional 
elements of common ground for the verification of mobile ICBMs. He 
asked whether the Soviet side was ready to discuss them, emphasizing 
that the U.S. side was seeking to identify individual points of common 
ground, and did not consider its proposed elements to be a “take it or 
leave it” package. Burt hoped the sides could concentrate on those ele-
ments the Soviet side found constructive and work on those.
14. Nazarkin welcomed the idea of elaborating additional elements 
of common ground. He said the Soviet side had tried to study the U.S. 
proposals the previous day but had run out of time. He thought the 
Soviet side would be prepared to return for more productive work on 
this subject at the next meeting. Nazarkin asked Burt to clarify how the 
U.S. side saw the relationship of these additional points with the exist-
ing document on common ground:2 was this intended as an entirely 
new document? As a replacement for the previous document? Burt 
replied that the U.S. side had no clear-­cut plan. If agreement could 
be reached on the additional elements, then the sides could examine 
the existing document to see how the new elements fit. Alternatively, 
during the course of this week’s meetings the sides could produce a 
new document which would contain additional elements of common 
ground. In the longer term, the sides could use these areas of agree-
ment not so much to change the previous common ground document, 
as to provide a basis for further work in Geneva. The ultimate aim was 
to produce something that could be incorporated into the JDT. Burt 
made a practical suggestion: the sides should focus first on the new 
elements of common ground, then examine the older document to see 
whether there were any inconsistencies or problems. Nazarkin agreed. 
He thanked Burt for the clarification and called Burt’s approach a good 
and practical one. Burt said the U.S. side would study the old elements 
of common ground to see whether there were any problems, so these 
could be addressed in the sides’ discussions.
Unit of Account
15. Burt turned next to the issue of unit of account, and asked 
whether Nazarkin had any brilliant ideas on that issue. Nazarkin said 
that after discussion amongst themselves the Soviet side had concluded 
that their formula was more logical. The order did not change the sub-
stance, but Soviet experts believed that putting launchers first was 
more logical because missiles were associated with launchers, and not 
the reverse. This was especially the opinion of Col. Koltunov, who was 
2 Not found.
