World Hunger and Food Policy World Hunger as an Issue World food production is increasing faster than population, on average, yet the imbalanced distribution remains a serious problem. Between 1954 and 1975, per capita food production in South and West Asia barely held stable while in Africa it declined. As a result, many developing countries are heavily dependent on imported foods, especially grains. And current projections call for these import requirements to grow still larger by 1985. Since many of these nations will not have enough foreign exchange to fill their needs commercially, they will be dependent on some form of food aid. In short, world hunger is an important issue and one that is likely to remain important for many years to come. Also, it is an issue that this nation is uniquely well qualified to address. And, as Bourne notes and the President remarked at the June 6th Cabinet meeting, it is somewhat of a “natural” for this Administration with its human rights emphasis.4 It is also a “natural” for the President, given his farm background. Thus, I would agree with Bourne that the issue is a prime candidate for a major policy initiative. Activities Underway I have serious reservations over the approaches Bourne has suggested, however. In part, these reservations stem from Bourne’s failure to relate his suggestions to a large number of activities already underway. These activities include: • Secretary Bergland’s June 20 address before the World Food Council in Manila5 where he pledged U.S. support of an international system of grain reserves and a more reliable food aid program with greater emphasis on the use of food aid in support of development projects. • The International Wheat Council meeting in London June 27–30 to explore a possible international grains agreement. The U.S. position was discussed at the EPG meeting of June 2.6 • A current USDA study of foreign food assistance; final recommendations to be forwarded to the President on August 15.7 • The Development Coordination Committee (chaired by AID) full scale review, under joint NSC–EPG auspices, of all development
