World Hunger and Food Policy 771 242. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne) to President Carter1 Washington, February 2, 1978 SUBJECT Meeting with Congressional Delegation Concerning a Presidential Commission on World Hunger, February 3, 1978, 9:45 AM, Cabinet Room2 I. Purpose These are the key sponsors of the resolutions passed in both Houses calling on you to establish a Presidential Commission on Domestic and International Hunger and Malnutrition. The purpose of the meeting is to allow them the opportunity to convince you to act on the resolutions and establish such a commission.3 It is also an opportunity for you, whether or not you are willing to establish the commission, to reaffirm your deep interest in the problem of world hunger. II. Participants, Background, Press a. Participants Senate House Henry L. Bellmon Anthony Beilenson Dick Clark Paul Findley Bob Dole Thomas Foley Patrick Leahy Donald Fraser George McGovern Benjamin Gilman John Sparkman Richard Nolan Richard (Dick) Stone James Weaver 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1978. Sent under cover of a February 9 memorandum from Erb and Thornton to Brzezinski and a February 3 note from Inderfurth to Erb instructing Erb to “send Brzezinski a recommendation by the early part of next week.” (Ibid.) A notation in the President’s handwriting reads: “Bob—Peter—Stu—Zbig, Have me a final option paper to set up Commission within 2 weeks—J.C.” Another copy of the memorandum is in the Carter Library, Office of the Staff Secretary, Handwriting File, Presidential File, Box 71, 2/3/78. The final version of the options paper is printed as Document 244. 2 The meeting took place on February 3 in the Cabinet Room from 9:47 to 10:10 a.m. Following the meeting, the President met privately with Dole in the Oval Office. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) Minutes of the meeting were not found. 3 See footnote 3, Document 227.
