Hungary the task of maintaining and building on the recent progress in U.S.– Hungarian relations. Although both sides have signaled a desire to maintain positive aspects of the bilateral relationship, Hungary has quietly exhibited some nervousness about being placed in an embarrassing position relative to the Soviet Union by being ostensibly favored by the U.S. in the framework of our differentiated policy toward Eastern Europe. Hungary also is concerned about the degree to which U.S. export-control measures directed against the Soviet Union may impinge on it. We, in turn, have concerns about the potential diversion of U.S. grain or technology to the USSR. (C) Domestic Affairs The Communist Party leadership retains control over political life. However, through its “alliances” policy the Party encourages participation of Communists and non-Communists alike in building “socialist” Hungary under the maxim, “who is not against us is with us.” (U) Party First Secretary Janos Kadar has gained a large degree of acceptance among the political elite and the public, and Hungarians credit the government with having achieved substantial improvements in living standards, a relaxed cultural atmosphere, and political and economic stability over the years since 1956. (U) In 1968 Hungary introduced an economic reform called the New Economic Mechanism (NEM) which is in large part responsible for Hungary’s relative domestic prosperity. The NEM provides for a large degree of enterprise and managerial autonomy in making production and pricing decisions. In mid-1979 Hungary began to implement a series of measures to revitalize this mechanism to make the economy more efficient and internationally competitive. The new measures have already entailed major consumer price increases which, coupled with energy conservation stringencies, portend a pause in the increase in living standards. (U) Although the Hungarian Government does not encourage religion, it tolerates it. It is at peace with Protestants and Jews, and has reached a modusvivendiwiththeVaticanandwiththeCatholicChurchinHungary. Laszlo Cardinal Lekai was recognized in 1976 as head of the Catholic Church in Hungary, the first primate since Cardinal Mindszenty. (U) Hungary permits a significant degree of freedom of travel for its citizens to Western countries. Some 355,000 Hungarians (out of a population of 10.6 million) currently visit the West annually. Hungary’s record on permitting emigration is modestly positive. (U) The Twelfth Congress of the Hungarian Socialist Workers Party in late March endorsed Hungary’s unique (in communist terms) economic reform measures while reiterating Hungary’s allegiance to its alliance with the USSR and support for Soviet foreign policy positions. Billed as
