266 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 only to Japan. The instruction will set forth what we are asking the Japanese in very clear form and request that these be implemented directly. The Japanese will also be advised that sanctions under Chapter VII remain a possible next step.5 (S) 2. World Court. The ICJ order is expected today.6 State will see that VOA picks this up and broadcasts the text of the order in Farsi to Iran. (C) 3. White Paper. State recommended and all agreed that we should not proceed with a formal statement of our position for release in the form of a White Paper. In the past, such documents have provided a target for all to shoot at and have promoted, rather than discouraged, dispute. Instead, State proposes to collect the necessary information and provide position papers on particular issues which can be used as required. It will not be our intention to release a single document, however. The documents will be held in the White House.7 (S) 4. Lawyers for Tribunal. Lloyd Cutler has been working with a group of 40 lawyers who are preparing themselves in the event counsel is required for Americans on trial in Iran. At this point, they are relying primarily on the New York Times Index and other unclassified sources. State is making available some open source information. It was agreed that press guidance should be prepared for discussion at the Monday meeting. We wish to avoid any moves which would lend legitimacy to a trial in Iran,8 while recognizing the rights of Americans to legal counsel. Political-Military Issues: 1. Shah. Press guidance had been prepared by Jody Powell for the Shah’s departure to Panama this morning.9 The guidance was reviewed and approved by the SCC for use as soon as Panama makes its announcement or when the story breaks. Congressional leaders were briefed this morning and a circular is being sent to all posts alerting them to possible demonstrations or reactions. Mr. Cutler reviewed the 5 As recommended in a memorandum from Platt to Brzezinski, December 18. (Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 107) 6 The ICJ unanimously ruled December 15 that Iran should restore the Embassy to the United States, that Iran should release all hostages and provide them with diplomatic protection, and that neither country should take any action that would aggravate the situation. Argumentation before the ICJ and the court’s ruling are in Department of State Bulletin, February 1980, pp. 40–53. 7 Carter approved the item with a checkmark and wrote in the margin: “ok, but I want it complete for our selective use.” 8 Carter underlined this sentence to this point and wrote in the left margin: “important.” 9 For the December 15 White House statement on the Shah’s departure, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, p. 2251.
