1955  205
announcement. You should argue on Tuesday for time agreement but 
if not forthcoming you should indicate your agreement ad referendum 
that in next meeting PAREN presumably on Friday PAREN there should 
be agreement on announcement quoted reftel and manner and timing 
thereof without our insisting agreement on time release Americans. 
Make clear however that word QUOTE expeditiously QUOTE means 
just that and we expect announcement to be carried out in that sense. 
Would like your views on timing of publication of announcement. We 
believe announcement should be simultaneous Geneva, Peiping and 
Washington or Denver at agreed time.
FYI Following announcement we believe meetings should con­
tinue not oftener than twice a week at which the subject for discus­
sion would be implementation and details and progress in carrying 
out agreed announcement. Discussion about item two should not 
be engaged in until it is clear that agreed announcement is initiated 
in good faith. Under such circumstances discussions can be had as to 
what should constitute item two on agenda. Such discussions should 
be recessed whenever it becomes apparent Communists are not carry­
ing out agreed announcement in good faith.
Hoover
158.	 Telegram 678 to Geneva1
Washington, September 2, 1955
678. For Johnson.
Your 661. You may your discretion use following information in 
reply Wang’s remarks on Chinese in US.
Paragraph 16: INS affirms no restraining orders in force since 
March 24, except in case Tsien, whose restraining order revoked 
August 3. Hence return to PRC of any Chinese National in US, and 
timing such return, depends on volition individual, not on implemen­
tation agreed announcement.
Paragraph 20: Wang’s request for list all Chinese in US of course 
will not be considered. Tsien Hsue-shen, only specific case mentioned 
by Wang, has advised INS his intent depart Los Angeles ­September 17 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–3155. Confidential; Priority. 
Drafted by Nagoski and Osborn; cleared by Sebald and in draft by Phleger. The time of 
transmission is illegible.
