714
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
246.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Miller to
President Carter1
Washington, July 1, 1980
SUBJECT
Automobile Industry
Following your meeting of May 14 with the domestic auto pro-
ducers and the UAW leadership,2 you asked for an interagency review
of the industry and its problems. This memorandum reports on the re-
sults of that review; describes a package of recommended actions to
help the industry, its workers, and affected communities; and seeks
your decision on one issue—short-term import relief.
I. The Outlook for the Industry
The current situation faced by the industry can be divided into two
parts: (1) the dramatic change in energy prices has shifted consumer
preferences sharply toward smaller, more fuel-efficient cars, a shift for
which the domestic industry was ill-prepared; and (2) business condi-
tions have deteriorated sharply since mid-March, compounding the in-
dustry’s unemployment and profitability problems.
The Present Situation
—Production and Sales—In 1978, sales of domestically-produced
automobiles peaked at 9.3 million units. By the final quarter of 1979,
sales had fallen to a seasonally-adjusted annual rate of 7.5 million units,
reflecting the plunge in demand for larger and less fuel-efficient cars.
Spurred by rebates and a generally strong economy, sales reached
7.9 million units during the first quarter of 1980. Initial production
plans for the second quarter were for 7.3 million units. However, as the
economy weakened, these plans were continuously revised down-
ward, so that actual second quarter domestic production will be close
to a rate of about 5.5 million units. Truck sales are off even more
sharply than auto sales. Both Ford and Chrysler have permanently
closed plants.
—Employment—By the third week in June, indefinite layoffs had
grown to 239,000. The Ford and Chrysler permanent plant closings
mentioned above account for about 33,000 of these indefinite layoffs.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
File, Box 194, 7/3/80. Confidential. Watson and McDonald forwarded the memorandum
to Carter under cover of a July 1 memorandum, which Carter initialed. (Ibid.)
2 See footnote 3, Document 245.
