718
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
300.
Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
Department of State1
London, August 24, 1953, 6 p.m.
771. Altho Fonoff highly gratified at improvement Shah’s position
and downfall of Mossadeq, its attitude towards Zahedi, as revealed in
recent conversations with us, reflects considerable reserve.
Fonoff attributes Mossadeq’s fall from power primarily to reaction
against his steady march towards dictatorship (much of it at Shah’s ex-
pense) and to his inability deliver promised benefits under extreme na-
tionalist program (particularly profitable exploitation oil industry).
Cautious British attitude towards Zahedi seems derive partly from
distrust as result their war-time experience with him, but more impor-
tantly from fact that they regard him as opportunist. They are, for ex-
ample, concerned about association Zahedi appears have formed with
extreme nationalist elements such as Kashani, even though they recog-
nize former has been forced take his support where he could find it.
British foresee period of grave difficulty ahead. As they see sit-
uation, Zahedi faces three main immediate problems: (1) Extreme na-
tionalism; (2) disorganized administration; and (3) empty coffers.
Combination these three factors creates situation capable Communist
exploitation. Re first, British see no reason believe that events which led
up to Mossadeq’s downfall portend any lessening of nationalist fervor
in Iran and therefore look for little change in immediate future. How-
ever, second and third factors amenable to Govt action and British will
be carefully watching see what corrective measures Zahedi takes.
Altho, for foregoing reasons, British still uncertain how Zahedi’s
accession to power will affect their interests, they recognize that it may
be better at this juncture that Prime Minister’s office be filled by
someone with an anti-British reputation than by a Said.
We have impression that despite foregoing, British would like and
hope be able improve their relations with new Govt. They have been
encouraged, for example, by press reports of statements by Zahedi
which are inferentially critical of Mossadeq’s anti-British policy. For
present, however, British seem likely maintain attitude of friendly re-
serve and watchful waiting. We see little prospect British taking initia-
tive renewal diplomatic relations or oil question until Zahedi’s position
and policies become clearer.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, London Embassy Files, classified general
records, Box 34. Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Palmer and cleared by Penfield.
Repeated to Tehran and to Moscow by pouch.
