136 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Huntington defined four elements of a policy toward the USSR on which “competitive engagement” can be built. a. Maintenance of military deterrence. b. Containment of Soviet expansion where deterrence fails. c. Offers of politically conditioned economic benefits. d. Reduction of Soviet influence over client states, bloc states, and minority nationalities in the USSR. A number of things have been accomplished over the past three years to provide the programs and policies for “competitive engagement” over the next four years. When they are specifically related to the four elements of the policy, a clear view of how to proceed in East-West relations begins to emerge. That follows for each element. a. Maintenance of military deterrence through military pre-eminence. The doctrinal changes marked by the “strategic” PD–41, 50, 53, 57, 58, and 594 provide the direction our military programs must take to maintain deterrence in the 1980s. The gap between our political objectives and our military capabilities must be reduced. This can be accomplished through simultaneous improvements in our force posture and meaningful arms control agreements. —Force Improvements. We must address our military deficiencies in a three-pronged attack which includes: —The Budget. Not only must the budget be increased, but Defense, FEMA, and the DCI must let the strategic PDs guide their program choices. To date, they have yielded little to the new doctrine. —Organization. All three agencies must be reorganized to improve “factor productivity,” with particular emphasis on the Pentagon. The President tried to reorganize DoD once, but the effort failed. He succeeded with FEMA. He must succeed in the next term with DoD. —Manpower. We must also solve the military manpower problem. That probably means a return to the military draft. 4 Presidential Directive (PD) 41, “U.S. Civil Defense Policy” was signed by Carter on September 29, 1978, and directed that Civil Defense capabilities be used to enhance deterrence and stability in conjunction with strategic offensive and strategic defensive forces. PD–50, “Arms Control Decision Process”, was signed on August 14, 1979. It directed that any new proposal or modification in arms control negotiation posture be tested against several criteria including whether it contributed to achieving defense and force posture goals. PD–53, “National Security Telecommunications Policy,” was signed November 15, 1979, and established policies for national telecommunication during and after a national emergency. PD–57, “Mobilization Planning,” was signed March 3, 1980, and directed that mobilization scenarios be coordinated among interested Federal agencies. PD–58, “Continuity of Government,” was signed June 30, 1980. PD–59, “Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy,” was signed July 25, 1980. It established that the most fundamental objective of U.S. strategic policy was nuclear deterrence. U.S. strategic nuclear forces were required to deter nuclear attacks not just on the homeland, but also on forward bases, allies, and friends, and contribute to the deterrence of non-nuclear attacks. (Ibid.)
