March 27–December 31, 1979 815 However, the March 28 conference sessions were marked by intense debate over the proposed sanctions. Jordan announced it would recall its Ambassador from Cairo but would not break relations; the Omani Government, which had boycotted the conference, issued a statement praising the Peace Treaty as it brought the return of Sinai to Egypt. The delegation from Saudi Arabia only agreed to the “minimum sanctions” against the Egyptians which had been agreed at the Baghdad Summit the previous November, a position which drew rebuke from Arafat. (Marvine Howe, “Arabs, Deeply Split, Bar Stronger Steps Against U.S., Egypt,” The New York Times, March 29, 1979, page A1) Addressing the conference, Arafat attacked what he viewed as Saudi Arabia’s lack of support for the Palestinian cause and its “soft” position on imposing sanctions upon Egypt or the United States. The speech provoked a “heated exchange” between Arafat and Saudi Foreign Minister Saud bin Faisal, followed by a walk-out by the Libyan, Syrian, and P.L.O. delegations. The Saudi Deputy Foreign Minister Abd al-Aziz al-Thunayyan informed Ambassador to Saudi Arabia John C. West that Arafat’s attack was “most serious and completely unexpected.” “The Saudis,” West reported, “had expected to implement the Baghdad sanctions and to achieve a consensus but the Arafat accusation had upset all plans and calculations. Thunayyan said that he could not understand why Arafat attacked as he did and he did not know what the outcome of the Baghdad meeting would be.” (Telegram 2602 from Jidda, March 29; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790144–0446) In the end, on March 31, a set of compromise resolutions, imposing an extensive diplomatic and economic boycott of Egypt, was unanimously approved by all the delegations in attendance. While no decision was taken to withdraw Arab funds from Egyptian financial institutions, impose exchange controls on Egypt, or impose an oil embargo on the United States, the delegations resolved to suspend diplomatic relations with Egypt; to suspend Egyptian membership in the Arab League and all associated ministerial councils as well as other specialized Arab organizations; to transfer Arab League headquarters from Cairo to Tunis; and to halt all financial and technical aid programs. Moreover, the resolutions stated intent to seek the suspension of Egyptian membership in the non-aligned movement, the Islamic Conference, and the Organization of African Unity for “violating the resolutions of these organizations pertaining to the Arab-Israeli conflict.” The full text of the Baghdad resolutions is printed in Keesing’s Contemporary Archives, 1979, pages 29952–29953. Meeting with West to discuss the resolutions on April 3, Saud explained that his country had “worked hard to prevent radicals from carrying the day at Baghdad.” The Conference had ended in a “com-
