March 27–December 31, 1979
815
However, the March 28 conference sessions were marked by in-
tense debate over the proposed sanctions. Jordan announced it would
recall its Ambassador from Cairo but would not break relations; the
Omani Government, which had boycotted the conference, issued a
statement praising the Peace Treaty as it brought the return of Sinai to
Egypt. The delegation from Saudi Arabia only agreed to the “minimum
sanctions” against the Egyptians which had been agreed at the
Baghdad
Summit
the
previous
November,
a
position
which
drew rebuke from Arafat. (Marvine Howe, “Arabs, Deeply Split, Bar
Stronger Steps Against U.S., Egypt,” The New York Times, March 29,
1979, page A1) Addressing the conference, Arafat attacked what he
viewed as Saudi Arabia’s lack of support for the Palestinian cause and
its “soft” position on imposing sanctions upon Egypt or the United
States. The speech provoked a “heated exchange” between Arafat and
Saudi Foreign Minister Saud bin Faisal, followed by a walk-out by the
Libyan, Syrian, and P.L.O. delegations. The Saudi Deputy Foreign Min-
ister Abd al-Aziz al-Thunayyan informed Ambassador to Saudi Arabia
John C. West that Arafat’s attack was “most serious and completely
unexpected.” “The Saudis,” West reported, “had expected to imple-
ment the Baghdad sanctions and to achieve a consensus but the Arafat
accusation had upset all plans and calculations. Thunayyan said that he
could not understand why Arafat attacked as he did and he did not
know what the outcome of the Baghdad meeting would be.” (Telegram
2602 from Jidda, March 29; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790144–0446)
In the end, on March 31, a set of compromise resolutions, imposing
an extensive diplomatic and economic boycott of Egypt, was unani-
mously approved by all the delegations in attendance. While no
decision was taken to withdraw Arab funds from Egyptian financial in-
stitutions, impose exchange controls on Egypt, or impose an oil em-
bargo on the United States, the delegations resolved to suspend diplo-
matic relations with Egypt; to suspend Egyptian membership in the
Arab League and all associated ministerial councils as well as other
specialized Arab organizations; to transfer Arab League headquarters
from Cairo to Tunis; and to halt all financial and technical aid pro-
grams. Moreover, the resolutions stated intent to seek the suspension of
Egyptian membership in the non-aligned movement, the Islamic Con-
ference, and the Organization of African Unity for “violating the reso-
lutions of these organizations pertaining to the Arab-Israeli conflict.”
The full text of the Baghdad resolutions is printed in Keesing’s Contem-
porary Archives, 1979, pages 29952–29953.
Meeting with West to discuss the resolutions on April 3, Saud ex-
plained that his country had “worked hard to prevent radicals from
carrying the day at Baghdad.” The Conference had ended in a “com-
