Yugoslavia 899 273. Telegram From the Embassy in Yugoslavia to the Department of State1 Belgrade, November 23, 1979, 1552Z 8762. Subject: (U) Secretary Vance’s Visit to Yugoslavia—Briefing Materials: Overview. 1. S-entire text 2. This message provides for Secretary Vance our overview assessment of the current Yugoslav scene.2 3. You will find Yugoslav leaders deeply troubled by the current world scene. They see detente in jeopardy, a quickening arms race, a deepening world economic crisis, a widening North-South gap, and unsettling instability in key areas such as Iran. They are concerned by Soviet intentions, the increasing resort to force and military intervention around the world, and what they see as indecisive leadership in the West. Finally, they sense, despite brave public words about the Havana Non-Aligned Summit, that Yugoslav influence in the non-aligned world may have begun a slow decline. The country is in the throes of severe economic problems, including high inflation, excessive industrial growth and a severe trade imbalance, with a substantial rise in imports while exports stagnate. This has been seriously aggravated by the Montenegrin earthquake last spring and floods this fall, and a poor wheat crop plus ever-increasing oil prices. Inflation is running at about 25 per cent, and correction measures have thus far failed measurably to help. Shortages in consumer goods—by no means as severe as elsewhere in Eastern Europe—are causing grumbling, not least, because in this consumerist society the populace is unaccustomed to austerity. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790544–0137. Secret; Priority. Vance was scheduled to travel to Belgrade December 14–15. His trip to Yugoslavia and Romania was canceled after the U.S. Embassy in Tehran was seized by protesters on November 4 and U.S. diplomats taken hostage. See Document 219. 2 The Embassy drafted a list of possible topics of discussions between Vance and the Yugoslav leadership in telegram 8287 from Belgrade, November 5. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790528–0060) In telegram 8847 from Belgrade, November 28, the Embassy reported that negotiations for a new consular convention between the two countries were complete except for the status of dual nationals. Yugoslavia, which required compulsory military service of all male citizens over the age of 18, had in the past arrested U.S. citizens with dual citizenship visiting the country. The Yugoslav Government informed the Embassy that a new law on military obligations, which was to be adopted shortly, exempted dual citizens from military service under certain conditions. The Embassy recommended an exchange of separate but binding letters on the issue, which, if agreed to by the Yugoslav Government, would allow Vance to sign the convention while in Belgrade. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790547–0680)
