because of political considerations which would have to be taken into
account. At the present time there are no geographical institutions in
America making a special study of boundary questions between the
American nations except the American Geographical Society, which has
long specialized in the subject and continues to do so in connection with its
program of Hispanic-American research, now in its seventh year, and
having to do with the creation of a great map of Hispanic-America on a
scale of 1:1,000,000, to be published in 100 sheets. Since this society is in
active communication with all other geographic societies throughout the
world there is nothing lacking in the way of cooperation under existing
arrangements.
It is desired that the American delegates should adopt a neutral though
friendly position towards the plan provided for in this item of the agenda,
making no commitments or offers in connection with it, and being
especially careful to say nothing in connection with the boundary disputes
or political considerations which might give offence to other nations. If a
workable plan for the establishment of such an institute results from the
labors of the Conference, it will then be time for the United States
Government to consider to what extent it may desire to participate in the
work of that institute.
Topic 2. Recommendation to the countries of America that in their
legislation they levy a minimum duty on the importation of books and
minimum postal rates on books and periodicals.
This item contemplates changes in the tariff which can only be
accomplished by legislative action. You should not oppose, however, the
adoption of any reasonable resolutions which can properly be submitted to
the United States Congress for such action as that body may desire to take.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Topic 3. Recommendation to the countries, Members of the Union, that
have not yet done so, to publish geodetic, geological, agricultural maps,
etc., which will give an idea of their natural resources, possibilities of
development, and also of their means of communication.
