XII. Pacific Settlement of International Conflicts. The purpose of this
project, in form and in substance that of Pan American Union No. 27, is to
gather in an ascending series into a single convention, the various forms of
pacific settlement, good-offices and mediation, commissions of inquiry,
conciliation and friendly composition, arbitration and judicial decision.
There is little or nothing new to be found in its 23 articles; whenever
possible the exact language of approved texts has been used, so that there
might be no doubt as to the acceptance of the project as a whole.
The articles relating to good offices, a word of advice to one or other or
both of the disputants by a third and disinterested party; and mediation,
similar to good offices, but bringing the process a step forward by
suggesting a solution, are taken from the Pacific Settlement Convention[s]
of the Hague Peace Conferences.31 The Commission of Inquiry is, in an
abbreviated form, the so-called Gondra Convention.32 It was adopted in
1923 by the Fifth Pan American Conference of Santiago de Chile, and it has
already been ratified by Brazil and the United States. It is based upon the
commissions of inquiry of the Hague Peace Conferences and Secretary of
State Bryan’s Treaties for the Advancement of Peace.33
The advantages of Commissions of Conciliation have been much discussed
in recent years, but it is only yesterday that they have been given definite
form in official conventions.
The present project adopts the method of settling disputes in a conciliatory
manner, and makes of the Governing Board of the Pan American Union a
permanent Commission.
Friendly composition was much used in the past, but appears to have been
overlooked in recent years. It was, however, resorted to by Chile and the
United States for the settlement of the Alsop Claim by the King of England
acting as friendly compositor in 1911.34 Its usefulness has been made
manifest by the most Southern and Northern of the American Republics,
and its acceptance by the Commission recognized it as an adequate method
for classes of disputes where the settlement is desired to depend upon the
good faith of a single person in whose good judgment and sense of equity
the parties in controversy have confidence.
