1104  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
16. Nazarkin asked why the U.S. side had deleted eleven non-­
deployed rail-mobile peacekeeper ICBMs from the memorandum of 
understanding. Brooks said he was unaware of any deletion and would 
look into the subject. (Comment. Nazarkin was wrong. End Comment.)
PPCM Issues
17. Nazarkin asked about the number of road exits at monitored 
facilities, asserting that the sides had agreed on two road exits of one 
meter width for personnel exits. Brooks said that Nazarkin was correct, 
but noted that Moscow had rejected the agreement. If Nazarkin could 
agree to those figures, Brooks was prepared to agree as well. Nazarkin 
said he believed that he could agree.
Relationship between INF and START
18. Nazarkin said he wished to raise the relationship between INF 
and START. Brooks said that he could accept the Soviet proposal not 
to have simultaneous inspections. He might be able to accept a few 
hours’ period between inspections to avoid overlap. The Soviet posi-
tion of no inspections within 12 days was, however, unacceptable. 
Further, the U.S. side would not accept the Soviet proposal to have a 
single inspection count under both START and INF. Nazarkin said the 
two should discuss the issue when they reviewed inspection protocol 
issues. Brooks agreed.
Acts Defeating the Object and Purpose
19. Nazarkin said he was instructed to suggest that the sides under-
take an obligation to refrain from acts which would defeat the object 
and the purpose of the treaty after signature but before ratification. 
Nazarkin provided the text of a possible statement to this effect.3 The 
Soviet proposal, Nazarkin continued, was based on the Article XVIII of 
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. In response to Brooks’ 
question, Nazarkin said there were no specific acts the Soviet side had 
in mind. The idea came from Moscow lawyers, not Moscow political 
officials. Brooks said he would study the issue and consult with dele-
gation lawyers.
20. Documents exchanged: English language copy of Washington 
ministerial elements of common ground. Soviet proposed statement on 
refraining from acts which would defeat the object and purpose of the 
treaty.
Brooks
3 Not found.
