North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 persons with expert knowledge, who will be more pragmatic and more desirous of achieving real results, rather than rhetorical victories. Standing back from the North-South dialogue as a whole, I believe we have been in a predominantly defensive posture, and we have allowed the developing countries to seize the moral ground. I believe we have to regain the initiative in two respects: 1. Whenever developing countries propose an area for negotiation, we should quickly address the issue with a proposal that we find acceptable, rather than simply responding negatively to proposals—or broad suggestions—put forward by the developing countries.5 At CIEC, we were in a strong position on external debt, even though the developing countries did not accept our proposal. We showed them we took the issue seriously by seizing it and responding to it. The US stance is also very good on sugar, where it is widely recognized that we made a constructive proposal even though it has not yet achieved general agreement. 2. We must find a number of areas to take the offensive. The President’s position on human rights represents an example outside the economic area. Our proposal on illicit payments is another example. Still other possible examples where we might take the offensive is in urging developing countries, in their own interests as well as ours,6 to reduce their very high levels of tariff production and to take visible and effective domestic actions to help correct the extraordinary maldistribution of income within developing countries. I will try to develop an analysis of possible areas where the US and other industrial countries can take the offensive in multilateral discussions. The purpose is not to be strident or acrimonious, but rather to show that we also care how the world system operates and to make clear that we consider developing countries to be part of it, not a privileged group outside it. The purpose will also be to regain the moral ground in international debate that has been captured by leaders in developing countries—sometimes with genuine commitment, but often with cynical opportunism—but that is historically and philosophically ours. 5 Vance highlighted this sentence and wrote “OK” in the adjacent margin. 6 Vance highlighted the portion of this paragraph that begins with “Our proposal on illicit payments” and ends with “in their own.”
