Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX the four defendants were convicted and sentenced on October 18. Reportedly two of the four received prison terms and two suspended sentences. 2. During an Eastern European Embassy reception on evening of October 17, EUR/EE Deputy Director raised subject of the trial with Czechoslovak Ambassador Johannes, who, claiming that he had only seen US press reports, said trial was not connected with Charter 77. Department officer said he thought this would be hard for the American public to believe in light of fact that most of the defendants were prominent figures in the Charter 77 effort. He indicated we were concerned by implications of the press reports we had seen and noted his view that such events could not help but have a negative effect on the atmosphere of our bilateral relations. Johannes reacted rather sharply, saying that the trial was an internal Czechoslovak action and that the US should not interfere in such matters. In response, Department officer said we had no intention of interfering in Czechoslovakia’s internal affairs; he had simply wished to point out how such actions would undoubtedly be perceived in this country. 3. Septel contains text of contingency press guidance prepared for Department’s noon press briefing on October 18, and the exchange between the spokesman and reporters which took place. Action addressees may draw on this guidance as required.3 4. Action requested: The Ambassador should, as soon as convenient, convey to the Czech Government the following: —The trial and the convictions of four Czech citizens reported in the press appears inconsistent with the provisions of the CSCE Final Act regarding the freer and wider dissemination of information of all kinds. —Moreover, three of the individuals tried had been directly associated with efforts to support full compliance with the Helsinki Final Act. —This trial taking place during the opening phase of the Belgrade Conference raises questions about the seriousness and intent of the Czech Government regarding the objectives of this conference and the Final Act itself. —We raise this issue in the spirit of the Helsinki Final Act fully realizing that judicial proceedings are essentially an internal matter. 3 The Department forwarded press guidance in telegram 250946 to Prague, October 19, following the speedy trial and conviction of the four Charter 77 leaders. (National
