826
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Yugoslavia, Belgrade, Serbia. A copy of the original document and an
English translation are available at the Woodrow Wilson Center’s Cold
War International History Project (CWIHP), from which the excerpts
provided below were drawn.
The first of two conversations between the two leaders started in
the Cabinet Room at the White House at 11:15 a.m. and lasted until
12:40 p.m. and included several U.S. and Yugoslav officials. (Carter
Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
The conversation between the two Presidents focused on interna-
tional affairs, specifically, the situation in the Horn of Africa, the Middle
East, and North Korea. Tito told President Carter: “Just prior to my
arrival with the delegation to the U.S., I received messages from some
heads of states in which they express their positions, and are asking
me to convey them to you.” Tito continued: “I have accepted the
invitation to visit the U.S. with great pleasure because I wanted an
exchange of opinions about the current international situation as well
as convey my impressions about some countries that I visited.”
President Carter began by summarizing the administration’s posi-
tion on the crisis in the Horn of Africa and calling for Somali troops
to withdraw from the Ogaden as well as stressing that Ethiopian,
Cuban, or Soviet troops should not cross the border into Somalia. Carter
told Tito: “Our country is refraining from sending arms, be it to one
or another party. When the conflict ends, when the border is back to
its original place, Soviet and Cuban troops should be withdrawn from
that territory.”
On the basis of his extensive relationship with Ethiopian Emperor
Haile Selassie and with Somali President Siad Barre, Tito described
his understanding of how the situation reached a flash point. The
revolutionary Government in Ethiopia “visited Yugoslavia three
times,” Tito explained, and discussed the situation in Ethiopia with
the Yugoslav leadership. “We advised them to go for an autonomous
federation,” Tito recounted, but “they replied that it was not yet time
and that this would have to be resolved by military means.” Tito
continued: “Similarly, Siad Barre was also in Yugoslavia and I spoke
with him about the question of Ogaden. He also said that it would be
good for it to be federation, i.e. autonomy, but that Ogaden should be
part of Somalia.” Tito also stressed that it was Belgrade’s understanding
that other African countries were opposed to Somalia’s invasion of
Ethiopia, and feared that a Somali victory “would set a precedent and
that the war would spread throughout Africa, because there isn’t a
single country there that does not have some border issue.”
“We believe,” Tito concluded, “that it is necessary to resolve the
question of Eritrea and Ogaden, but within Ethiopia—to create an
autonomous region within a federation. But this would require the
