723.2515/1644b: Telegram [Document 235] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) [Paraphrase] WASHINGTON, October 19, 1925—7 p.m. For Pershing: Ambassador Mathieu called on Mr. White at the Department this afternoon, and stated that Señor Barros Jarpa entered upon his duties as Minister for Foreign Affairs last Thursday; he is in complete agreement with Mathieu’s point of view and has given Edwards instructions to comply with substance of your resolutions. Army will be reduced to number you ask, or even fewer. Ambassador stated that term of service of most of conscripts in Arica Province expires November 1, and that they will then be discharged from service and sent out of the provinces. Their places will not be filled by others. Administrative arrangements of similar nature will be taken to reduce carabineers and police force. Full text of Edwards’ instructions have been sent Mathieu who will show me copy as soon as decoded. I shall advise you after seeing them. I am sure you realize as well as I the importance of making any arrangements which will spare amour propre of both parties concerned in arbitration. Neither Department nor Arbitrator wishes to humiliate either party but does wish to obtain a fair election. Your resolutions have had their effect in bringing about desired action. Any arrangement which accomplished aim sought and spares feelings of either party is most desirable. I feel sure that Chilean authorities now fully understand situation which they had apparently not appreciated before, and for that reason I suggest that any action on part of either of the parties to dispute that you may deem necessary be submitted informally to that party, and that it be given ample time for compliance as of its own volition before matter is formally submitted to Commission. The Chilean Ambassador said that he understood resolutions will be brought to vote on October 21 and he expressed hope that if Edwards asked for postponement of two or three days it would be granted. I think it would be well to accede to this request. KELLOGG
