1040
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
319.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 13, 1979
SUBJECT
My Lunch with Ambassador Evron
The Ambassador told me that Begin is extremely concerned about
the proposed U.S. military aid package for Egypt,2 on which he was
briefed by Sol.
I explained to Evron that we have no intention of scaling it down
because we have legitimate long-term interests in Egypt that we need
to protect, and that these interests are also to Israel’s advantage. More
specifically, I said:
1. That Israel’s qualitative edge over Egypt will be preserved in the
years ahead in part because of what the U.S. is doing for Israel and in
part because of what the Israelis are doing for themselves. And we are
confident of this;
2. That the U.S. has to make certain that there is a wider constitu-
ency in Egypt favoring U.S.-Egyptian ties, and it is especially important
that the military be part of that constituency. The Egyptian military ca-
pabilities have become degraded and the Egyptians cannot help but
notice that the Soviets are providing very advanced equipment to Syria
and Algeria. It would be damaging to all concerned if the only basis for
Egyptian-U.S. ties and for further progress of the Camp David peace
accords were Sadat himself;
3. That we are encouraging the Egyptians to redirect the focus of
their defense efforts away from Israel and toward regional stability—
including the Sudan and perhaps eventually some contingencies in
Saudi Arabia. This is clearly also in Israel’s interest.
Evron is going home for Christmas and he would like to be able to
convey the above as an authoritative expression of U.S. thinking. He
says he has spoken about this to the Vice President and he hinted that
he would like to see you personally in order to get a message to that ef-
fect. I made no promise, but an alternative would be for me to phone
him and restate the three points above as representing an oral comment
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presiden-
tial Advisory Board, Box 72, Middle East: Box 5. Top Secret. In the upper right-hand
corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig. J.”
2 In the right-hand margin next to this phrase, Carter wrote: “What pkg. have I
approved?”
