Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 619 summit meetings have seemed of such little value and on occasion even dangerously misleading. The tone and approach to summits was set by President Roosevelt, who had great confidence in his own ability to deal with foreign leaders, and he saw Stalin largely in terms of an adversary who could be won over by powers of persuasion. Because the actual substance of the wartime meetings was secret, they were represented as dramatic success stories. The inevitable post-war disillusionment made all summits appear dangerous traps, in which the Soviets received major concessions. The death of Stalin in 1953, however, revived summitry; Churchill sensed that the Kremlin might be in some disarray and wanted to confront the new leaders; Dulles was skeptical, but even Eisenhower was intrigued. He wrote: “ . . . a major preoccupation of my mind throughout most of 1953 was the development of approaches to the Soviet leaders that might be at least a start toward the birth of mutual trust.” The quest for “mutual trust” was in fact the theme of the Geneva summit of July 1955, and the subsequent “spirit” the meeting engendered.25 The meeting was not the intimate conclave Churchill had wanted but a formal, ritualistic series of meetings, with little substance and no achievements. Within days Khrushchev had repudiated any semblance of cooperation on Germany (one purpose of the meeting) and the USSR was moving into the Middle East with arms sales to Nassir—a subject not even raised. If the summit of 1955 was a leisurely, cosmetic affair, the subsequent meetings, held under Soviet pressures on Berlin, were, in effect, safety valves to drain the threatened crisis of a separate German peace treaty. The well known summit in Paris of May 1960, was aborted by the U–2 incident, though most observers believe that Khrushchev had concluded beforehand that there was little hope of getting his demands on Berlin.26 The Kennedy summit of 1961 in Vienna was an example of the fecklessness, not to say the danger, of turning summit meetings into ideological debates.27 25 See Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. V, Austrian State Treaty; Summit and Foreign Ministers Meetings, 1955, Documents 180–250. 26 See footnote 4, above. 27 See footnote 5, above.
