Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III c. Steel The domestic steel industry has repeatedly pressed its concerns about adverse effects from import competition. Following a period of improvement during the first half of 1976, the industry is suffering from a setback in production, employment and profits. This follows a very poor year in 1975. Imports are increasing. A major objective of U.S. steel industry is an international agreement which would regulate “cyclical distortions” in steel trade (in times of reduced demand, foreign producers tend to maintain output and employment and cut price; U.S. producers tend to maintain prices and cut production). Partially in order to bring pressure for negotiation of such an agreement, the industry has pursued a variety of domestic remedies, including a successful import relief action on specialty steel (quotas are now in effect), a major suit under the countervailing duty law against an Italian state-owned steel producer, and an action under Section 301 of the Trade Act3 against the EC/Japanese steel understanding. There is consideration in the industry of bringing a number of additional actions against imports. Further problems are likely to be caused by the EC’s adoption of its Simonet Plan,4 which could result in the dumping of European steel here as well as in diversion of non-EC steel exports to this market. d. U.S. Agricultural Exporters’ Complaints A series of petitions has been filed with STR against a number of European trade measures fundamental to the EC’s current Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). These apparently valid complaints by U.S. agricultural exporters against EC export subsidies, and a variety of EC import restrictions is a growing and major irritant to the EC. We are trying to resolve the cases, which concern important U.S. interests, through GATT proceedings but some basic accommodation to the U.S. will be necessary in the MTN to avoid a continuing series of conflicts with the EC on this subject. If this problem is not adequately dealt with, it could easily grow into a major political and economic confrontation
