450
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
be a self-government set up in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank before
you give the entire Sinai back. It would not be a separate agreement.
President Sadat: It would be a separate agreement without anything
in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. The difficulty is that Gaza is some-
thing that they have already taken from Egypt. Our European friends
are behind the idea of Gaza—Callaghan, Schmidt, and all the others.
This I cannot accept.
President Carter: What do you see as an alternative, Mr. President?
President Sadat: If they agree about 1979, it is okay for me. The first
phase of withdrawal in Sinai can be nine or ten months, but with it let
there be Gaza and the West Bank. The West Bank can be at the end of
the year, but Gaza should be linked with our timetable, Mr. President.
President Carter: It would be hard for me to explain why we treat
Gaza better than we treat the West Bank because the Palestinians move
back and forth between the two. I thought that you and I had always
agreed that we should not separate the Gaza Strip from the West Bank.
President Sadat: I don’t agree with the first phase of withdrawal
without at least Gaza. If it is Gaza and the West Bank, it is okay. I can
wait until October for Gaza and the West Bank to come together with
the first phase of withdrawal in Sinai.
President Carter: When you say Gaza and the West Bank, you are
talking about the self-government elections, correct?
President Sadat: I am talking about the start of full autonomy with
the first phase of withdrawal in Sinai.
President Carter: In other words, you want the first phase of with-
drawal in the Sinai to be the same time as the elections for the self-
government and autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza.
President Sadat: Not the elections, but the start which will mean
nine months from now. In one month we can sit down and discuss and
then make the election, but in nine months the first phase of with-
drawal will take place at the same time the autonomy starts. We should
complete it before the elections.
President Carter: The autonomy will start at the time of the elec-
tions. It is going to be a complicated matter, as you know, to arrange for
the elections because its a long tedious process to get people registered
to vote. As you know, women have never voted in those elections. I just
believe that if you insist upon this it is going to delay the first phase of
withdrawal from the Sinai even if everybody works as eagerly as pos-
sible to get the elections completed. I don’t believe that we can do it,
Mr. President, before the end of 1979.
President Sadat: No, this process will not take more than one
month: but I am giving nine months from the first phase of withdrawal
and the start of autonomy. I can’t take the first phase of withdrawal and
