186 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Para. 6 (page 3) New subparagraph (6–­b) basically alters present strategy by call­ ing for active, intensified pressures on the Sino-Soviet Bloc, including deployment of U.S. forces to back up bold political moves. Purpose of new offensive is to splinter and reduce existing Communist structure. Para. 8, last sentence (page 4) Military posture to meet all contingencies is required in order to convince Communist leaders that the U.S. is willing and able to make any aggression unprofitable for them. Para. 9 (page 4) Two major changes in military thinking: 1. Use of force is to affect will of enemy, not merely to destroy him. 2. Massive retaliation can no longer insure the security of the Free World. It can only be used as a threat, and in the event of general war, as reprisal. Para. 10–­a (page 4) Two major changes in the use of nuclear weapons: 1. Main, but not sole reliance on such weapons in general war. 2. Limited war to be fought with or without nuclear weapons. Para. 13 (page 5) Major changes are: 1. Sufficient nuclear retaliatory power to reduce Soviet power com­ plex to impotence must be under U.S. control. 2. As nuclear retaliatory power approaches invulnerability, (a) it can be reduced in size, and (b) launched only after due consideration rather than, as now, automatically or hastily to prevent its destruction in the event of surprise attack. 3. No continental defense can prevent large-­scale damage to the U.S. in event of general war. Vital areas in U.S. should be defended to the extent that a significant enemy effort is required to destroy them. Para. 14 (page 5) Two now introductory sentences to alternate para. 14: 1. Defines limited war as an armed conflict in which U.S. national sur­ vival is not at stake. (Explanation of this definition in Appendix A, para. 4–­d, states that direct conflict between the U.S. and Soviet forces may be included within the new definition.) 2. Estimates that future armed conflicts will probably be charac­ terized by mutually accepted limitations on objectives, locale, weapons and participants. Para. 19 (page 7)
