2  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
State of the Union Message (CP 58–76)—The Cabinet discussed in 
great detail the content and wording of the message, each Cabinet 
member having full opportunity to suggest changes so as to achieve 
precisely the right tone and shade of meaning.
Some of the more significant comments follow:
The President stressed the desire to talk common sense, because 
so vast a part of America is common sense-­minded and have made it 
evident by newspapers other than in New York and Washington.
Sec. Dulles believed that care should be taken to avoid emphasis 
on military “superiority”, a concept that could only result in invidious 
comparisons. He preferred to stand on the concept of having sufficient 
military power to deter aggression.
Sec. Dulles favored giving attention to the fact that new hazards 
result from the advent of any new weapons but that the destructive 
potential of missiles is not greatly different in character or scope than 
what could be delivered by the bombers against which we have made 
our preparations.
The President felt that, although he needed to refer to the increased 
rate of missile development in recent years, he ought not try to pin 
precisely the party responsibilities involved, especially since his major 
effort must be directed to constructive accomplishment while others 
would have opportunity to establish any other pertinent facts.
The President recounted for the Cabinet how the Administration 
set out at the beginning to take a new look at national security, particu­
larly with regard to modern weapons, and how the Killian Committee 
was set up in 1954 to make some necessary studies which were reported 
to the NSC in 1955.
Dr. Killian pointed to the need for discussion by the military experts 
of the paragraph relating to the retaliatory power of the Strategic Air 
Command, which might be actually too categorical. Sec. Dulles reiter­
ated his point that only the means of delivery had been changed, then 
added that the major need was for something to provide greater warn­
ing. The President commented that the possibility of the Russians having 
intercontinental missiles before we do was not catastrophic since that by 
no means removed the power of our bombers.
Sec. Folsom stressed the need for sacrifice by the American people 
by way of eliminating luxury items so as to allow not only for security 
planning but also for other necessities such as schools and hospitals. 
The President agreed that the country is capable of making all neces­
sary sacrifices at a time when we must concentrate on essentials rather 
than non-­essentials.
Sec. Dulles saw some possibility that the message would be crit­
icized as being on the complacent side and he called attention to the
