International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
285
would not have a substantial adverse impact on the domestic specialty
steel industry. The remaining Commissioner advised that moderate
(6.7%) increases in the second and third year quotas for each product
category would not have a serious adverse economic effect.8
In December, the Secretaries of Commerce and Labor reported to
you their advice regarding reduction or termination of relief.9 The Sec-
retary of Labor determined that such action would have a deleterious
effect on domestic specialty steel employment, and thus advised that
no change be made in the status of import relief. The Secretary of Com-
merce also recommended that the existing import restraints not be ter-
minated or modified at this time, stating that such action would have a
detrimental effect on the domestic industry.10
The picture that emerges of the recovery of the domestic industry
from the 1975 recession is mixed, with some segments showing sub-
stantial improvement and others remaining depressed. Employment
increases have generally lagged behind gains in shipments and pro-
duction. Price performance has also been mixed with some products
showing no downward flexibility while others have moved up and
down in line with demand conditions. Profits have improved but re-
main low relative to earlier peaks and the overall manufacturing av-
erage. There have been substantial increases in investment by the in-
dustry since the quotas were put into effect.
While there has been considerable grumbling by other countries
about the quotas, there is little expectation that the quotas will be elimi-
nated in view of the overall domestic U.S. steel problem. At the mo-
ment, the major concern abroad is with the trigger price system for
carbon steel (specialty steel will not be covered).
There is no provision for a Congressional override of your decision
on this issue. However, there has been considerable Congressional in-
terest in this case, especially from representatives of steel-producing
states such as Pennsylvania, Ohio, New York, and Maryland. At least
100 members of the Congress have written you or me on this issue and
they almost unanimously support no modification of the quotas. In ad-
dition, there have been submitted to us petitions signed by over 100,000
Pennsylvanians as well as petitions and resolutions from numerous
other communities urging no change in the quotas.
8 Carter wrote “2 Keep, 1 Term[inate], 1 reduce” in the margin adjacent to this
paragraph.
9 These reports were not found.
10 Carter wrote “Labor Keep, Com[merce Keep]” in the margin adjacent to this
paragraph.
