Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 641 We should work especially hard to prevent the border from continuing as a source of friction. The domestic political overtones of anything we do vis-a-vis Mexico will have to be assessed with special care. (d) Caribbean. Substantial effort should be devoted to following up on Phil Habib’s analysis and discussions regarding the Caribbean.7 To do so, we will have to challenge the prevailing wisdom that aid to the Caribbean must be taken “out” of the aid funds for Latin America as a whole. I am not reluctant to argue that it is in our national interest for us to put a disproportionate amount of our aid resources into development of countries in the western hemisphere. 2. The Genocide Treaty. Human rights will be one of the hallmarks of this Administration. However, some are beginning to suggest (wrongly, I think) that the human rights initiative has run out of steam and that the Administration is trimming its sails. A decisive counter to this insinuation would be a strong Administration effort to ratify the Genocide Convention, which was first submitted to the Senate thirty years ago. While requiring some Presidential and Senatorial time, this goal could be within reach after the SALT debate. I recommend that we make it one of the highest foreign policy objectives for 1980. If we succeed, we could then turn to the other human rights conventions.8 3. Indochina. Our interests have been served well by our policies in the PRC/Vietnamese conflict and Cambodian debacle. Recent developments, however, may require a more aggressive role during the next 18 months. We may have to take the lead in mounting initiatives regarding the famine in Cambodia, the Vietnamese security threat to ASEAN nations and the possibility of renewed PRC/Vietnamese military conflict. 4. South Asia. The instability and uncertainties in India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan provide great opportunities for creative diplomacy. In India, we should move briskly with the new administration to avoid slipping back to the pre-Desai attitudes.9 Pakistan presents a striking challenge to our capacity to blend our non-proliferation policy with our other foreign policy objectives. In Afghanistan, we need to avoid over-eagerness which might rescue the Soviets from a major failure. 5. North-South Dialogue. Our generalized intention to give more attention to the North-South dialogue will require some specific initiatives. I understand that Tony Lake is developing and scrubbing a list of possible approaches. We should meet on this subject sometime during 7 Habib had served as Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until 1978. Vance later asked Habib to serve as an Ambassador at Large and “troubleshooter” on various regional issues, including the Caribbean. (John M. Goskho, “Caribbean Ministates New Source of Concern,” The Washington Post, July 6, 1979, pp. A–1, A–10) 8 The Senate did not ratify the Genocide Convention until 1988. 9 Desai resigned as Prime Minister in July, and Chaudhary Charan Singh became Prime Minister.
