116 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement The next item was for anti-­submarine warfare—$91 million. This would provide a greater capability for keeping track of submarines once detected. The President recalled that we have put tremendous amounts of money into SONAR, and now it is apparently not satis­ factory. Dr. Killian indicated the difficulty is that the total system has not been properly integrated. There has been some tendency not to concentrate funds on the basic technical system, but to disperse them over a wide range of facilities and activities. Dr. Killian said the next proposal is for $100 million for solid propellant development. The present intent is to put this work into ARPA. The President agreed with this proposal. Next was a project for an air-­to-­surface missile called GAM–77, at $91 million. This would extend the range and penetration of the B–52. These funds are for development purposes. The President indicated concurrence. Next was the provision of $100 million to ARPA. Dr. Killian thought this should be made with the understanding that when the new space agency is established, this allocation will be reviewed. It was next proposed to provide an additional $100 million for the TITAN program, intended to accelerate development, achieve stor­ able propellants, and harden the TITAN bases. The President said he would like to see the TITAN project given to ARPA. He did not con­ sider that the existing Services had any proper claim on future systems development. The final project reported by Dr. Killian was an intelligence type radar for the Far East at $10 million. (Checking on this subsequently, he determined that it is similar to one in Turkey, and is to go into the Aleutians.) Dr. Killian then took up a memorandum to the President from Secretary McElroy requesting authorization for certain ARPA projects. The President indicated his general approval, subject to checking out certain specific details. A.J. Goodpaster Brigadier General, USA
