Arms Control and Disarmament  1589
I feel sure that Department is taking adequate measures to reassure 
certain key people on the Hill as to exactly what we have agreed to, but 
suggest that before too long it might be appropriate for Phil Farley to 
hold a background press conference in which these and other points 
might be made in order to clarify the U.S. position. 
As can be seen from verbatims, both U.S. and U.K. delegations 
have been sparing no pains to make sure that Soviet distortions of 
the record on this are corrected immediately, and as of yesterday we 
received Tsarapkin’s assurance that he understood our position per­
fectly. This, of course, will not stop Soviet propagandists from making 
whatever hay they may wish to in broadcasts and articles emanating 
from Moscow, but I would like to feel that the appropriate people in 
Washington know in advance that such propaganda is distorted and 
that we have not yielded a single principle in this veto business. As you 
know better than anyone, denial of a charge by a Senator is 100 times 
harder than obviating the necessity for the charge by giving him the 
full picture.
Villard
435.	 Telegram Supnu 323 From Geneva1
Geneva, March 8, 1959, 5 p.m.
Supnu 323. Eyes only for Acting Secretary. On assumption that 
no firm decision on recess will be agreed with British until after Mac­
millan’s Washington visit we face here a difficult tactical situation. We 
have been keeping focus on control issues for a long time. And in the 
course of the past two weeks we have also been filling out the U.S. posi­
tion by tabling articles. We expect to table the last important articles, 
duration and review, Monday. There is not much that we can say now 
about the control issues that does not get us into danger of either ero­
sion of our position or premature discussion of dangerous issues. There 
are already pressures from the British for compromises on staffing and 
inspections and for ways around the veto. In connection with inspec­
tion we are already skirting the edges of the tricky issues of threshold 
and phasing. And in all of this we are hampered right now by difficul­
ties in our local relations with our British colleagues. We are clearly at 
1 Source: Seeks advice on tactics in nuclear test suspension talks. Secret. 3 pp. 
NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/3–859.
