National Security Policy  595
with even limited effectiveness against ballistic missiles until the very 
end of this period or later.
Ground Forces and Tactical Air Forces
169. The Soviet ground forces represent the largest part of the 
Soviet military establishment and are closely supported by tactical avi­
ation, consisting of fighters trained in the ground attack role (in addi­
tion to their air defense role) and light and medium bombers trained in 
ground support bombing techniques. These forces are well-­balanced, 
ably led, and equipped for the most part with excellent materiel of 
modern design. Units are distributed among 17 military districts in 
the USSR and three groups of forces in the European Satellites. The 
strongest concentrations are in East Germany, the western and south­
ern border regions of the USSR, and the Maritime area of the Soviet Far 
East. Stockpiles maintained in these areas are believed sufficient to sup­
port large-­scale ground combat operations for several months without 
replenishment from current production.
170. The order of battle of Soviet Army ground forces is estimated 
at about 175 line divisions plus supporting units. These divisions prob­
ably average about 70 percent of authorized wartime strength, although 
the manning level in some interior districts may be as low as 30 per­
cent. All units probably have a high proportion of authorized officer 
strength, however, and full equipment is believed to be kept locally 
available. These peacetime manning practices, together with standard 
conscription and stockpiling programs, would probably enable all 
Soviet line divisions to be brought to full strength by M+10. Conversion 
to a war footing could be executed rapidly, and about 125 additional 
line divisions could be mobilized by M+30.
171. There has been an extensive program over the last several 
years to modernize and reorganize the Soviet ground forces to meet 
the requirements of modem warfare. More advanced designs of practi­
cally all types of equipment have appeared. The firepower of individ­
ual units has been increased markedly, additional vehicles (including 
amphibious vehicles) have been provided, and communications equip­
ment has been augmented.
172. A reorganization in the Group of Soviet Forces, Germany, 
during 1957 produced a new type of Soviet line division—­the motor­
ized rifle division—­which appears well-­adapted for fast, hard-­hitting 
action. The mechanized divisions were converted to the new motorized 
type by removing heavy tank and assault gun units, and the rifle divi­
sions were converted by addition of medium tanks, armored personnel 
carriers and rocket launcher. During the same period a resubordina­
tion of divisions resulted in the creation of “tank armies” composed 
exclusively of tank divisions to provide for rapid, deep exploitation
