January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1141
Begin agrees), Israel, and Jordan (if and when it will join—he doesn’t
know when). We also need to specify that the SGA can act in ways to
promote harmony with others. Its relations with us are secondary:
what Egypt and the SGA agree to is all right with us. We need, Presi-
dent Sadat and him, to reach an understanding on external defense and
foreign affairs. He sees no reason that the SGA should have any. There
is no need to specify that any one has control of foreign affairs. The
SGA is not a nation, and has no foreign policy to define. Israel prefers to
have control over foreign affairs. He prefers just to say that the SGA
does not have it.
Once this group is inaugurated—which he believes is the term
from Camp David—then the Israeli military authority would be with-
drawn, the civilian government would be disbanded, and Israeli forces
would go to specified locations. We have discussed that this should be
on the periphery of the West Bank. We can presume that this would
take care of external defense. He does not want the SGA to have tanks,
howitzers, or heavy weapons. Israel would continue to have these for
the West Bank.
Difficult issues remain—e.g. public lands, water development, and
the number and kind of refugees who could go back to the territories.
This is a very important issue (the refugees), and could be decided by
the Continuing Committee. Some were specified in the Camp David
Accords, and in a number of 1967 refugees’ going back. This committee
could turn over an agreement—say in August—to the SGA, as with
water rights, and it would then in turn be the responsibility of the SGA
to administer the agreement. On another point, the security committee:
He prefers that it be headed by General Ali and Minister Weizman. So
far, when various issues come up, Israel says that they are security
issues. It uses this argument to delay decisions that are not related to se-
curity. There is a difficult line to be drawn here. There are genuine de-
fense needs and the control of terrorism. Israel requires some role in
anti-terrorism. As to where to draw the line, we need negotiations.
Camp David calls for strong police forces—the word “strong” was put
in particularly—and they need to deal with Egypt, Israel, and Jordan.
He would like to see, over time, the role of the police increase. As it
proved itself to be effective against terrorist acts, it would play a useful
role.
He has written down, for President Sadat’s study overnight, these
various points.3 They reflect his best judgment. Sol Linowitz under-
stands that these points are what he and Khalil worked out. He (the
President) modified them to take into account some points made by the
Egyptians this morning.
3 The list of points is attached but not printed.
