700.00116/193
[Document 50]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)70
WASHINGTON, January 26, 1924.
[No.] 829
SIR: The Conference on the Limitation of Armament at Washington adopted on February
4, 1922, a Resolution71 for the appointment of a Commission representing the United
States, the British Empire, France, Italy and Japan to consider the following questions:
(a) Do existing rules of international law adequately cover new methods of
attack or defense resulting from the introduction or development, since The
Hague Conference of 1907, of new agencies of warfare?
(b) If not so, what changes in the existing rules ought to be adopted in
consequence thereof as a part of the law of nations?
Article IV of the Resolution declared:
“that the Commission shall report its conclusions to each of the Powers
represented in its membership. Those Powers shall thereupon confer as to the
acceptance of the report and the course to be followed to secure the
consideration of its recommendations by the other civilized Powers.”
With the unanimous concurrence of the Powers mentioned in the above resolution an
invitation to participate in the work of the Commission was extended to and accepted
by the Netherlands Government. Moreover, it was agreed that the program of the
Commission should be limited to the preparation of Rules relating to Aerial Warfare,
and to Rules relating to the Use of Radio in Time of War.
A Commission of Jurists representative of the six Powers mentioned met in conference
at The Hague from December 11, 1922, to February 19, 1923. That Commission has
prepared a set of Rules for the Control of Radio in Time of War,72 and also a set of
Rules for Aerial Warfare73 which were reported to the Powers aforesaid by the
Commission. In its Report the Commission expressed belief “that if these sets of rules
are approved and brought into force, it will be found expedient to make provision for
their reexamination after a relatively brief term of years to see whether any revision is
necessary”.73a
