Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III to be taken in the period ahead will be less difficult if the industrial democracies act together. Energy dominated the economic discussions and Afghanistan the political. Participants reached a common assessment of the strategic importance of these and related challenges facing the Western world, as the communiques make clear. Their language is strong, forthright, and unambiguous; the positions and decisions are fully consistent with, and indeed supportive of, US policies. Whether the long-term goals the principals endorsed at Venice will be given effect will depend on sustained follow-up action by all the Summit countries. 2. The communique´s are being repeated to all diplomatic and consular posts: the “Declaration of the Venice Summit”, which is the major statement on key economic issues;4 the separate political communique on Afghanistan, Secto 04021; the statements on hijacking, and on refugees.5 Posts have already received the Summit declaration on the taking of hostages, State 177830. 3. For the first time since the economic summits were initiated in 1975, one of the main sessions in the two-day period was set aside for political discussion. The other two sessions were devoted to the economic agenda. In addition, the participants took their meals together, the Heads of Government in one group, the Foreign Ministers in another, and the Finance and Energy Ministers in a third group, at all of which there were useful wide-ranging informal discussions. The Summit also provided opportunities for bilateral meetings. President Carter met separately with each of the Heads of Government and with the President of the EEC Commission. Thus the value of the Summit meeting lies not only in the decisions reached but also, and equally important, in the expanded contacts and understanding among national leaders that the two-day meeting encouraged. It lies also in the benefits derived from the preparatory process and follow-up. The work of pre-
