Bolivia 169 To date, the ICA has advanced $500,000 to the Bolivia Government out of U.S. special assistance for fiscal 1959. The agreement represented by the October 4 letter would limit U.S. cash grants and drawings from the IMF to $1 million by the end of October, $2 million by the end of November and $3 million by the end of December, 1958, except in “unusual circumstances” and after agreement with the fund. Nevertheless, on October 16 the Foreign Minister made a request to Ambassador Bonsal for $1.5 million additional to be advanced from fiscal 1959 cash grants, “due to an abnormally high demand for dollars.” The dollar drain has continued heavy in spite of an increase in the exchange rate to 11,600 on October 16. The Bolivian government has allowed the exchange rate to depreciate but apparently not enough thus far to meet the high level of demand of the moment. Ambassador Bonsal and the Acting Director of the USOM in Bolivia are concerned that the request of the Bolivian Government implies a desire to keep the exchange rate from moving in accordance with market forces. The Embassy-USOM and IMF representative also consider the current dollar demand to be abnormal. In their opinion it reflects general belief in Bolivia that there will be a further serious devaluation due to the deterioration of the economic situation, and the belief that the Government will not maintain its stated positions on such matters as credit policy, restriction of budget deficit, and wage control. The Department, with the concurrence of Treasury, plans to instruct the Embassy to inform the Bolivian Government that the U.S. would consider an additional drawing at this time if the IMF is satisfied with Bolivian performance on the exchange rate and recommends the drawing. We believe the ICA should be prepared to advance $500,000 now, and as it is understood there have been several heavy non-­recurrent exchange requirements during this month, consideration might be given to an advance of another $500,000 before the end of the month, if Bolivian performance is satisfactory. There has been some speculation in Bolivia on the possibility of instituting selective exchange controls but the Department is strongly opposing this and has informed Embassy La Paz we do not believe there is any effective alternative for Bolivia to maintenance of a free exchange system. Furthermore, we propose to instruct the Embassy to encourage the Bolivian government to take a firm stand now on wage and other stabilization issues, since it appears that a “show down” on issues of inflation is inevitable, and the present moment may be the most propitious for a show down.
