December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
565
seemed to respect each other and for the first time there was a highly
sophisticated discussion of broad regional strategic concerns. (S)
Khalil took the lead in arguing that events in Iran and elsewhere
increased the importance of concluding an Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty that would not isolate Egypt from the other Arabs. As he sees it,
Egypt should be in a position to play a stabilizing role in Sudan, North
Yemen, and Saudi Arabia. Egypt is better suited to take action in sup-
port of moderate forces there than is Israel, and he implied that Israel
would profit from peace with an Egypt which has influence in the sur-
rounding area. The Soviet threat to the region was also discussed in
some detail. In brief, compared to anything that could have been talked
about between an Egyptian and an Israeli leader just a year ago, this
was a remarkable performance. (S)
On the specific issues in the negotiations, Dayan made useful sugges-
tions on how to handle the less controversial items: (S)
—Article 4. Dayan agreed to an interpretive note saying that there
will be a review of security arrangements at the request of either party,
but he urged deletion of reference to a mandatory review after five
years. Khalil agreed.
—Article 6. Dayan proposed dropping the interpretive note to
paragraph 2, but said that a US legal opinion on the entire Article could
be provided to both parties which would include the language of the
interpretive note. Israel would probably also ask us for some additions
to our legal opinion. Khalil seemed to think this procedure would be
acceptable. We may find that Begin will be unwilling to proceed in this
manner, but it does seem to be a reasonable approach.
—Joint Letter on West Bank/Gaza Negotiations. Dayan now agrees
that there should be such a letter signed by both parties. He still op-
poses any mention of a target date, but did suggest that the letter could
be strengthened in other ways to make it more attractive to Sadat. This
remains a major problem.
—Exchange of Ambassadors. This is the most difficult issue for both
parties. Dayan offered to strengthen the joint letter if Egypt would
agree to return to the original formulation on exchanging Ambassadors
one month after the completion of the interim withdrawal. Both sides
are pretty well dug in on this and we are in a weak position to urge
Sadat to reconsider.
Procedurally, both Dayan and Khalil agreed that further talks at
their level, with our participation, would be useful. After they have re-
cember 24. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840153–1449)
Quandt, who was present for the meetings, later wrote that though Dayan and Khalil
“appeared to get along well,” the Brussels talks made “no real headway.” For his account
of the meetings, see Camp David, pp. 292–293.
