3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
40
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
quences. I am also confident that with mutual good will, we should be
able to reach agreement regarding such matters as conventional arma-
ments, tactical nuclear weapons, and throw weight.
I do not underestimate for a moment the difficulties that stand in
our way. The resolution of these issues will require perseverance, pa-
tience, and determination. It is with that consideration in mind that I
would like to make two further suggestions, both designed to help in
resolving the differences between us.
First of all, I think it would be extremely useful if you were to indi-
cate to us your views regarding greatly reduced strategic force levels
which we might reach four or five years from now. In previous stra-
tegic arms limitation talks, we have tended to take small steps toward
an uncertain future. I am suggesting that instead we seek to define a
specific longer-term objective which we can then approach step-by-
step with more assurance of success.
Secondly, our search for a stable accommodation would be en-
hanced by the rapid conclusion of a formal agreement between us on
those issues on which both of us seem predisposed to agree.3 We
should exploit the fact that we are in agreement or might reach an early
agreement on such issues as:
a) a limit of 2400 (or a mutually agreeable lower limit) on strategic
delivery vehicles;
b) a limit of 1320 (or a mutually agreeable lower limit) on launchers
with multiple independent warheads;
c) provisions for mutually satisfactory verification;
d) prior notification of missile test launchings;
e) a comprehensive test ban, including a temporary provision for
the conclusion of ongoing peaceful programs;
f) agreement not to arm satellites nor to develop the ability to de-
stroy or damage satellites;
g) the demilitarization of the Indian Ocean;
h) a limit on civil defense efforts;
i) mutual restraints on arms sales to Third World countries;
j) elimination of mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles.
The above list is certainly not all-inclusive, and other relatively
noncontroversial matters could easily be added to it. The point is to
move forward without delay on those issues on which we are able to
agree, thereby generating the needed momentum for coping immedi-
ately thereafter with more intractable questions.
3 The end of this sentence originally read “substantial consensus already exists.”
Carter struck through these words and substituted “both of us seem predisposed to
agree.”
