Human Rights 393 jective to promote basic economic and social rights (e.g., adequate food, education, shelter and health). 2. Greater reliance should be placed on positive inducements and incentives, acknowledging improvements in human rights through, whenever appropriate and possible,8 preferential treatment in political relations and economic benefits. 3. To this end, countries with a good or9 improving record of human rights observance as defined above,10 will be given special consideration in the allocation of U.S. foreign assistance. Programs for each fiscal year shall be reviewed in this light. 4. In the evaluation of the human rights condition of a foreign nation, and in the course of the implementation of this directive, primary emphasis shall be placed on longer term trends rather than on specific events.11 5. The U.S. shall not take any action which would result in material or financial support to the police, civil law enforcement authorities, or internal security forces of governments engaged in serious violations of human rights. 6. U.S. human rights actions within the International Financial Institutions shall be designed and implemented so as not to undermine the primary U.S. interest of preserving these institutions as effective economic instruments. I therefore direct the Interagency Group to prepare a report:12 —Analyzing the effects of recent U.S. actions in the IFIs:13 • on the IFI’s themselves (including an assessment of the legality of our actions),14 • on Congressional attitudes and prospective legislation; and • on the advancement of U.S. human rights objectives. 8 The President rewrote this part of the sentence to read: “acknowledging improvements in human rights whenever appropriate and possible through preferential . . .” 9 The President inserted the word “substantially” after “or.” 10 The President deleted the words “as defined above.” 11 The President rewrote this paragraph to read: “In the evaluation of the human rights condition of a foreign nation in the course of the implementation of this directive, primary emphasis shall be placed on longer term trends and on the cumulative effect of specific events.” 12 The President deleted the colon. 13 The President rewrote this to read: “Analyzing the effect of U.S. actions in the International Financial Institutions, including:” 14 The President rewrote this bulleted point to read: “adequacy of information received from the IFI’s and the propriety and legality of action we may take;” and deleted “on” in the second and third bulleted points.
