1955  179
(Mytel 402) and August 25 draft. It was much more extensively used in 
draft given Wang August 15 (Mytel 463) which was based upon draft 
contained Deptel 466. Also first sentence Wang’s August 25 draft where 
this term appears is identical with first sentence our August 16 draft. 
With respect “return” vs “repatriation” it seems to me former term 
preferable even though latter was used in July 25 statement by two 
governments. “Repatriation” could carry connotation of force unless 
modified by “voluntary” and status of belligerency between parties 
whereas “return” is broader term and avoids undesirable connotation 
of “repatriation”.
2. (A) While Wang obviously attempting give “agreed announce­
ment” greatest possible character of agreement between two govern­
ments believe he has valid point that our phrase “will authorize” does 
not accurately represent fact that request to GOI made by PRC and US 
is accepting that designation. Same situation mutatis mutandis with 
respect UK.
(B) On other hand “agrees” as used in Wang’s text would also 
inhibit our ability unilaterally to cancel arrangement unless “agreed 
announcement” accompanied by understanding or unilateral US state­
ment on time limit for release Americans which if broken by CHICOMS 
would give basis for cancellation.
(C) To meet these points suggest consideration following language 
“US accepts designation by PRC of GOI to assist return to PRC of those 
Chinese who desire do so as follows”.
(D) Foregoing language also eliminates “entrusted”.
3. Believe important delete “on behalf of the PRC” because protect­
ing power connotation. I would propose argue not applicable case US 
as payments if any would in most cases probably be on behalf family or 
firms. PRC can make whatever arrangements it wishes reimburse GOI, 
need not be mentioned “agreed announcement”.
4. Concur deletion words “in any such case” would appear give 
basis GOI investigate any case at PRC request. Believe we should insist 
on restoration this phrase.
5. Cannot reach decision on most appropriate wording for 
“promptly” until tactics for next meeting determined. Several different 
words could be used, important thing is that whatever word used there 
be common understanding of what it means.
Gowen
Note: Mr. Waddell (FE) notified 8/26 5:20 pm - E.H.
