256  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the specified period of non-­withdrawal which compels the U.S. to 
enter into a renegotiation of the terms of the ABM Treaty, which would 
inevitably result from a negotiation on the U.S. unilateral assurance. In 
the event of a decision offer up our testing rights for renegotiation, we 
would have to anticipate that this process would result in restrictions 
on the SDI program beyond those we accepted in 1972, thus undercut-
ting the President’s decision on SDI.
(S) Furthermore, the alternative to our current position suggests 
that renegotiation of ABM Treaty obligations is the only way in which 
we can gain explicit assurance of testing rights which we have had 
since 1972. OSD flatly rejects this proposition. From the perspective of 
OSD, the United States is not interested in modifying the ABM Treaty 
to conduct prohibited tests. We are interested in having the Soviets 
acknowledge our existing rights to conduct tests permitted by the ABM 
Treaty. Finally, as a point of principle, the President’s legal freedom of 
action with regard to SDI testing, as represented by our current posi-
tion, should be preserved apart from an immediate desire to exercise 
that freedom and apart from any putative political benefit which sacri-
ficing the President’s freedom might have in Congress.
DST 002: Rights after the Non-Withdrawal Period
(S) The goals of the SDI program are unchanged: to produce 
options to deploy effective defenses against ballistic missiles at the 
earliest opportunity. It follows that our current DST objective remains 
valid. The current U.S. position in DST was designed to support a strong 
SDI program by maximizing flexibility in its development and testing 
phase and by removing potential political obstacles to the deployment 
of ballistic missiles in the future.
(S) It has been improperly suggested that our current DST position 
regarding deployment rights provides the Soviet Union with a deploy-
ment opportunity or right which it does not already have, or that it 
may increase the possibility of a unilateral, near-­term Soviet deploy-
ment of strategic defenses. Under Article XV of the ABM Treaty, the 
Soviet Union already has all the legal rights it needs to deploy defenses. 
Technically, the United States enjoys the same legal rights, but using 
this right would pose a serious political barrier that would not be expe-
rienced by the Soviet Union. Eliminating this practical inequity would 
have little effect on Soviet deployment options, but could be essential 
in providing the United States with a meaningful deployment option. 
Moreover, even if the Soviet Union did not have deployment rights 
under the ABM Treaty, the history of Soviet violations of arms control 
agreements demonstrates that the lack of such rights would not deter 
the Soviet Union from deploying defenses. Because the Soviet Union 
makes military decisions less on the basis of legal limitations than on 
that of military advantage, the best means of countering the possibility
