842  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
	
Annex B
	
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council1
Washington, undated
SOVIET NUCLEAR THREAT TO U.S. LEADERSHIP
(TS) A critical question in the COG problem is, if the Soviet Union 
were to attack the United States, would the civilian and military leader-
ship infrastructure be attacked as well? The evidence suggests that they 
would. Soviet doctrine stresses the importance of effective command 
and control for the successful conduct of military operations. Accord-
ingly, Soviet military planning emphasizes the neutralization of enemy 
C3 assets. In the case of a conflict within a theater of operations, there is 
an extensive body of information regarding Soviet planning for attacks 
on opposing command posts and communications centers. Targeting 
of such facilities is accorded the highest priority, equivalent to target-
ing nuclear weapons of opposing forces. In the case of intercontinental 
conflict, there is no direct evidence of recent vintage. However, a con-
siderable body of indirect evidence suggests that targeting priorities 
are similar.
(TS) Although direct evidence of Soviet intentions is not available, 
it is considered highly unlikely that the Soviet Union would launch a 
major intercontinental strike against U.S. military forces that would 
not include strikes against key command, control, and communica-
tions centers, including the National Command Authority (NCA). 
Since the locations of the primary U.S. federal relocation sites are pub-
licly available, it is again considered highly unlikely that these would 
not be targeted. Thus, it must be assumed that the Soviet Union would 
apply as many weapons as necessary to ensure the destruction of 
these key sites. The single warhead versions of the SS–17, SS–18, and 
SS–19 (in particular, the SS–18) would be the most likely candidates 
for attacking [1 line not declassified] given our estimate of their damage 
expectancy.
(S) There is some dated evidence of Soviet intent to use SLBMs 
against command posts and communications centers. Although cur-
rent Soviet SLBMs have a much lower damage expectancy than more 
modern ICBMs, SLBMs have the advantage of shorter flight times, 
which reduce the amount of warning time available. However, it is not 
believed that the Soviet Union would consider a “decapitation” attack 
alone, that is one aimed solely at the NCA command and control, to be 
1 Top Secret.
