18 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX to the fore around which they could rally. Popular engagement is, of course, further limited by the lack of a free media and the efficiency of the organs of control. But the absence of overt popular support for the dissidents does not necessarily mean that the East Europeans will permanently accept the status quo. Nationalist sentiments appear not to have diminished, and many East Europeans do not identify their interests with those of the Soviets, nor with their own rulers. This is understood in Moscow and in the East European capitals, and it is why the Communist leaders are always nervous about internal order. Goals It seems unlikely that any group of dissidents has developed a serious long-range, defined strategy aimed at achieving fundamental or revolutionary political changes. While the dissidents are, almost by definition, visionaries, they are also aware of their limited resources, the lack of active popular support, and, most important, the everpresent threat posed by the Soviet Union and its troops. They try to modify the strictures which prevail so as to gain elbow room to push for eventual change. This is not an inconsequential objective, for if the dissidents succeeded in expanding the limits of permissible political activity, they would be creating the preconditions for more fundamental change. This is one reason the regimes feel they cannot give ground by recognizing the kind of broad “rights” the dissidents assert, even if, in practice, they are willing or are compelled to tolerate their activities. In no instance are the dissidents explicitly or overtly pressing for a change in the system of government or adopting anti-party or antiregime positions. They have focused instead on the failure of the several regimes to observe specific human rights which all have formally acknowledged both in internal legislation and international treaty. The Chartists, for example, are championing a full range of human rights, including the right to have work commensurate with education and training, access to educational institutions, freedom of religion, the right to voice minority opinions, and freedom of movement.5 Most of the dissidents, including the East Germans and the Yugoslavs, have stressed the right to travel, partly, we suspect, because there is a significant constituency for this right among the technical and educated elites. The Chartists and other groups evidently hope that the pressure they and the West are bringing to bear on human rights may prove irresistible. They are probably hoping that Moscow will allow the East 5 Some of these “rights” are speaking to the plight of large numbers of party members purged after the 1968 Soviet invasion, who have had trouble finding good jobs and whose children frequently cannot get into universities. [Footnote is in the original.]
