328
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
warfare organizations and resources for activation in support of United
States political and military aims”.7
7. The following restrictions on the scope of this plan are imposed
by the Department of State in the above referenced Memorandum for
the Record:
a. That the tribes be given no indication of this plan before the
emergency arises and that there should be no change in pace or em-
phasis in our liaison with them.
b. That the weapons and other mate´riel not be delivered to the in-
tended users in advance of the emergency.
c. That the weapons and other mate´riel not be delivered to the in-
tended users without concurrence of the Department of State.
E. Factors Bearing on the Situation
1. In the event of civil war between Communist and non-
Communist groups for control of the central government, it is believed
that certain tribal groups in southern Iran would prove the most effec-
tive opponents of a Communist regime.
2. Since the major tribal group, the Qashqai, have been closely as-
sociated with American agencies for several years and are strongly mo-
tivated against Communism, they are assessed by this Agency as
America’s strongest potential weapon against possible communist sei-
zure of all Iran.
3. In event of a successful Tudeh (Communist) Party coup against
the central government, there appears little prospect of any effective
armed intervention other than in the southern tribal areas.
4. The Qashqai, as the strongest and best armed tribal group,
would be expected to lead such opposition in an attempt to hold the
southern part of the country against the Communists and to prevent all
Iran from falling behind the Iron Curtain.
7 Apparent reference to Annex D to the Iran Country Plan as of June 10, 1952. The
“Country Plan for Iran” is undated, but in its final form probably dates from late De-
cember 1951. Drafted in the Office of Policy Coordination in the Directorate of Plans, a
Country Plan aimed to describe OPC objectives and activities within a given country. The
introductory remarks of “Operational Annex D” established the need for the United
States Government to prepare for the contingency in which Communists might take con-
trol of the Iranian Government. It assumed that “in the event of general war, resistance to
communist occupation of Iran will be conducted by the Qashqais and perhaps other
tribes which are strongly antipathetic to communism and the Russians.” Therefore, the
United States, through OPC, must provide enough assistance to the Qashqais to enable
them to “sustain an effective guerrilla warfare campaign.” It behooved the United States
to provide such assistance since it was rapidly becoming the only Western country ca-
pable to doing so. (Central Intelligence Agency, DDO–IMS Files, Job 80–01795R, Box 8,
Folder 2, Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) History 21Dec51–27Dec51)
