March–August 1953
727
lion. The most difficult problem confronting us was how to develop
revenues for Iran out of her oil. We can’t very well subsidize Iranian oil
when we can’t make full use of present resources available to us. Since
we must not, however, miss this second chance, Secretary Dulles sug-
gested that we ought to select quickly an individual knowledgeable in
the petroleum field, and a skillful negotiator, and then turn over to him
full power to negotiate a settlement. In order to pick such a man
quickly and get him started, Secretary Dulles recommended that the
choice be entrusted to a committee consisting of himself, the Secretary
of the Treasury, the Secretary of Defense, and Mr. Stassen.
Mr. Cutler inquired whether such an individual would be a special
representative of the President. Secretary Dulles replied that he could
represent the President or the Secretary of State. In any case, he would
head up a task force. The main thing is to assure that all the mani-
fold ideas for achieving a settlement should channel through this
individual.
Secretary Dulles’ proposal was well received by the Council, and
CIA asked to be included in the committee if its representation thereon
appeared useful.
Mr. Cutler then reminded the members of the Council of the task
which it had asked the Attorney General to perform, noted that Judge
Barnes had been appointed by the Attorney General to carry out this
task, and that Judge Barnes was planning a committee of three indi-
viduals to perform the task. Mr. Cutler stated that Judge Barnes had al-
ready produced a tentative statement of the problem to which his com-
mittee should address itself. Mr. Cutler further pointed out the
relationship between Judge Barnes’ assignment and the committee
which had been contemplated in NSC 138/1, which, of course, had
never materialized.4 Mr. Cutler assured the members of the Council
that Judge Barnes would consult with the heads of appropriate depart-
ments and agencies before completing his report, which he hoped to
have ready by December.
Secretary Dulles inquired whether any new consideration was
now being given to postponing the civil suit against the so-called oil
cartel. As he understood it, open hearings on the case were scheduled
to begin in September, and while he sympathized with the problem
confronting the Attorney General, to whom was entrusted the task of
carrying out the law of the land, he was still very worried over the im-
plications of this suit for the national security and for our foreign rela-
tions. It would be highly advantageous, said Secretary Dulles, if the
case could possibly be settled out of court.
4 See Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. IX, The Near and Middle East, Part 1, p. 637
(Document 279).
