736
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
had to be able to be in quite constant contact with them, so we took this
chance.
Mr. Wisner: Where was this famous “cave” that Zahedi was sup-
posed to be in?
Mr. Roosevelt: It is entirely mythical as far as I know. Zahedi was
in our hands from Monday morning on. He took care of himself
Sunday night. He was turned over to us on Monday morning.
[1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]
Well, by Monday morning . . . of course, the news of the Shah’s de-
parture arrived Sunday afternoon, and that was no particular surprise
and really no particular shock.
Mr. Helms: He just took off?
Mr. Roosevelt: He just took off. He never communicated with us at
all. He just took off. He was up in the Caspian. That was no concern ex-
cept that we were concerned about getting either him on the radio,
which I could see was difficult, or at least the statements from him on
the radio from Baghdad in Persian, and I do feel that the British let us
down on that. They should have been able to do that, but they didn’t.
They struggled. I think the British seriously struggled, but the Foreign
Office was just thumbs down definitely.
Monday was devoted largely to circulating photostatic copies of
the firman, which had a tremendous effect, particularly among the
Army, and trying to arrange for follow throughs from Zahedi. We got
additional statements. We tried to place them. We tried to get the pre-
vious evening’s statement placed, and we tried to get the firman
printed in as many papers or even just single sheet emergency papers
as possible. [1 line not declassified] It was really an amazing thing, and I
don’t know how they did it, but they carried the firman; they carried
the fake interview with Zahedi; they carried the next day the real inter-
view with Zahedi; they carried more copies of the firman photostats;
and they kept attacking Mossadeq; and they still continued publishing.
I just don’t know how they managed. Now we haven’t had a bill for it,
but that was the general tenor of Monday’s events, and there were
more talks between McClure and Riahi, and McClure himself was ar-
guing at the time that the best thing to do was to make a deal with Riahi
and hope that in due course he would overthrow Mossadeq.
The Ambassador arrived back Monday afternoon, and Monday
was a day in which there was still a certain amount of pro-Mossadeq ri-
oting in town and no particular indication of pro-Shah feeling except
that these firmans were obviously having an effect. Everyone was
asking about them. Was it true that the Shah had issued a firman? If so,
why was Mossadeq lying about it? And wasn’t that a most reprehen-
sible thing to do? Monday evening was a curious evening for me. We
