642  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
The President also said that he recognizes the MINUTEMAN vul-
nerability problem and the nation’s longstanding commitment to the 
concept of Triad. He noted, however, that his decision was made more 
difficult by the fact that he had been presented with options that were 
stated only in counter-­force terms. He remarked that we should also 
pay more attention to the capabilities of ALCMs and bombers. He also 
said that he sensed that many in the group did not sufficiently share 
his concerns about the effects this decision might have on SALT, and 
that his own attitude was not a question of timidity. He said that he 
needed the assistance of the assembled group, and he remarked at the 
progress that had been made in getting the Congress to accept the idea 
of proceeding with an M–X missile, which was quite a reversal of their 
previous attitudes. He also remarked, however, that there are limits on 
the amount of money available for military expenditures, and that large 
increases in military spending must be recognized for the threat they 
could pose to our economy. (TS)
The President suggested that the group should make a greater effort 
to put themselves in his shoes—­that he was not interested in destroying 
SALT and then having to embark on a massive arms race. He suggested 
that the group had not explored nearly enough means for solving our 
strategic forces problems and that getting on with a solution was not a 
question of lack of will to solve the problem or dollars. He remarked 
that the effects on SALT III of this decision are very important. The 
President suggested that a longer meeting would be required to discuss 
the M–X issue and that an evening meeting be scheduled. Finally the 
President asked Secretary Brown if he needed more guidance concern-
ing theater nuclear forces. (TS)
Secretary Brown remarked that he thought that he had enough 
information on TNF to proceed. He then stated that he thought that 
the President should make as much of the decision on M–X as possible 
before the Summit. He noted that there are two general options. The 
first is Option A; this option preserves the Triad and presents opportu-
nities for scaling-­back production of new strategic forces later on. Thus 
it would be compatible with reductions achieved in SALT III. Option 
B, on the other hand, is more of a force increase and is thus somewhat 
less compatible with our ultimate goal of reduced strategic forces. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski noted that if the President is interested in choos-
ing Option B, he should do so before the Summit. It was important 
that such a decision not be seen as the result of his discussions with 
the Soviets. Dr. Brzezinski also argued that the missile decision can be 
made before the Summit. (TS)
The President responded that the missile decision is easy; it’s just 
a question of money. The basing decision, however, is a much tougher 
question, and until late last night he had not even heard of the covered
