52
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
22.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, May 31, 1978, 1201Z
4422. Subject: Is the New Afghan Regime Communist?: Evidence
to Date.
1. Summary: Although the top leaders of the Democratic Republic
of Afghanistan (DRA) have Marxist-Leninist backgrounds and their
People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) possesses a typical
Communist structure, members of the revolutionary leadership con-
tinue to claim that they are not Communist and that their government
is democratic, nationalistic, and respectful of Islam. Thus far, their
actions have not significantly belied their words, although these may
be short-term tactics, while the regime consolidates its grip on the
country. On the foreign policy side, the new Afghan Government has
not taken any stance on non-aligned issues appreciably different from
those of the Daoud regime. On the other hand, Afghanistan’s special
relationship with the Soviet Union is very clear.2 Economic agreements
with the USSR are announced almost daily (about 15 so far), while the
only others signed so far have been one each with Czechoslovakia, the
German Democratic Republic, and Yugoslavia. Like its predecessor
regimes since the 1950s, the DRA is clearly dependent on the USSR
for most of its economic and military support. However, Soviet pres-
ence and influence in Afghanistan has appreciably increased since the
coup. On balance, while it is clearly in the Soviet sphere of influence,
there still is not enough evidence available to call Afghanistan a “Com-
munist country” or a satellite of the Soviet Union, although these could
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780227–1122.
Secret; Priority; Noforn. Sent for information to Islamabad, London, Moscow, New Delhi,
Ankara, Tehran, USLO Peking, CINCPAC (for POLAD), and CINCEUR (for POLAD).
2 In telegram 11903 from Moscow, May 26, the Embassy described the desk officer
for Afghanistan in the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs as “defensive and reluctant to
discuss nature and orientation of new Afghan Peoples’ Democratic Party. He downplays
Soviets’ links with and support for the new Afghan regime and emphasizes Afghan
view of India as model for Afghanistan to emulate in its development efforts.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Program Files for Soviet-Asia
Relations, 1960–1978, Lot 90D320, Afghanistan, January–June 1978) Conversely, in tele-
gram 4559 from Kabul, June 6, the Embassy reported that the Iranian Ambassador to
Afghanistan “sees the Taraki regime as an intermediate regime between that of the
Daoud regime—which destroyed the monarchy—and a full Soviet-backed Communist
takeover.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780242–0104)
