Afghanistan
831
against the road, however, was near Sarubi in eastern Kabul province.)
Conditions in Jalalabad had also begun deteriorating, and part of the
Jalalabad garrison mutinied in October 1979. Nevertheless, Nangarhar
was the most peaceful of the provinces along Afghanistan’s eastern
border and the scene of one of the few unqualified Afghan Army
successes, the defeat of a large band of Pathan Mohmand tribesmen
who had invaded the province from Pakistan in June 1979.
The Soviet invasion brought a major increase in insurgency both
in Jalalabad and in the countryside. Jalalabad airport was attacked
several times, the city was unsafe for Soviet or Afghan soldiers for
weeks at a time, and rural insurgents seized control from government
officials in most districts. The Soviets stationed troops permanently on
the outskirts of Jalalabad to keep the main road to Pakistan open, to
assist Afghan troops in rural districts, and to support operations in the
Konar Valley. Insurgents have been driven from some districts, and
the road is now usually open. Government authority in Jalalabad city
has increased, but unrest in the province is greater than before the
Soviet invasion.
Paktia4
The first resistance to the Marxists broke out among the Mangal
tribe in eastern Paktia province within a week of the coup in April
1978. Fighting quickly spread, and prior to the Soviet invasion, the
government’s counterinsurgency problems were more serious in Paktia
than in any other province except Konarha. Control was limited to a few
garrisons. In October 1979, Afghan troops—apparently commanded
by Soviet officers—staged the only major Afghan offensive of the war.
Although Afghan units reached their geographic objectives, they estab-
lished no permanent control. Within days the insurgents were once
again in control of most of the province, and government forces were
besieged in a few isolated posts. Some analysts have argued that the
failure of this offensive was one factor in Moscow’s decision that
Afghanistan could be saved only by Soviet troops.
Since the invasion, there has been little military activity in the
province. Government garrisons are isolated and seem to do their best
to avoid actions likely to bring an insurgent response. In June, however,
there was a significant Soviet incursion into the province, probably in
battalion strength, in an apparent effort to open roads to the main
garrisons. The Pathans responded by ambushing Soviet columns at
4 Since the Communist takeover, there have been changes in provincial boundaries,
the most important of which was the formation of Paktika province from parts of Paktia
and Ghazni provinces. To avoid confusion, the pre-Communist provincial boundaries
have been used throughout this paper. [Footnote is in the original.]
