Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 691 Brzezinski then responded to questions concerning Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan, and India. He concluded his remarks by thanking the participants, adding: “I wish this could go on longer because we are dealing here with some vital issues. But I wish you well. And I think particularly at this time it is terribly important that the American public, through you, look at the problems we face in a realistic way—but also not in an overly dramatized fashion. I think what they have to understand is that this is a long haul proposition. The competition has lasted for 40 years; it is not going to end quickly; there are not going to be victors or losers in it very quickly, unless we fold up entirely, which we do not intend to do.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Schecter/Friendly (Press) File, Box 1, Brzezinski Briefings and Backgrounders (Press and Public): 1/80) 138. Address by President Carter on the State of the Union Before a Joint Session of Congress1 Washington, January 23, 1980 Mr. President, Mr. Speaker,2 Members of the 96th Congress, fellow citizens: This last few months has not been an easy time for any of us. As we meet tonight, it has never been more clear that the state of our Union depends on the state of the world. And tonight, as throughout our own generation, freedom and peace in the world depend on the state of our Union. The 1980’s have been born in turmoil, strife, and change. This is a time of challenge to our interests and our values and it’s a time that tests our wisdom and our skills. 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 194–200. The President spoke at 9 p.m. in the House Chamber at the Capitol. O’Neill introduced the President. The address was broadcast live on radio and television. Additional information about the preparation of the State of the Union address is in the Carter Library, Hertzberg Donated Historical Material, Speech Files, Box 12, State of the Union Drafts With Staff Comments, 1/23/80. In telegram 21783 to all diplomatic and consular posts, January 26, the Department provided background information for use in discussions with host country officials concerning the address or broader foreign policy themes. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800044–1090) 2 Reference is to Magnuson and O’Neill.
