World Hunger and Food Policy 831 the Helms Amendment4 and the other would encourage the Administration to upgrade the level of participation at international food and agricultural conferences such as the WCARRD and the FAO Conference. They would suggest that the US delegation be led by a cabinet level official. Orville Freeman called the FAO a “questionable agency” and said that the Director General was “demagoging unmercifully on the international scene” and “drove the ICP out of the FAO and the UN system”. He said the Director General was anti-private industry and Freeman could not support any statement that was supportive of the Director General. Steven Muller also criticized Saouma’s leadership in the FAO but said that the U.S. could be more effective there if we sent high level representatives to the larger meetings. Linowitz said that their opinion of the Director General was unimportant but they should think of the effect on the LDCs if the US sent higher level officials to the FAO meetings. The Commissioners agreed that Linowitz should scrap the idea of a statement and convey to the President the thought that a significant number of Commissioners believe the U.S. should upgrade its level of participation at international food conferences. The Commissioners were very uncomfortable with the Helms Amendment statement. By this time the Congressional members of the Commission had departed and most of the Commissioners indicated that they would appreciate their view on this matter. Linowitz mentioned that Senator Dole had told him that the Commission should not try to lobby the Congress. Rep. Gilman’s assistant said that it was a very contentious issue in the House and that hearings on it would be held in late February or early March. He suggested that some of the Commissioners might want to testify at those hearings. It was decided that Linowitz should discuss the statement with the Congressional members of the Commission and forward their thoughts to the President. 4 In September 1978, Congress passed the FY 1979 omnibus appropriations bill (H.R. 12934), which included the Department of State appropriation. The bill included an amendment authored by Senator Jesse Helms (R–North Carolina), which struck $27.7 million from the amount the United States was obligated to contribute to the UN specialized agencies and further specified that none of the funds appropriated could be used for technical assistance by the UN or its agencies. (Don Oberdorfer, “U.N. Dues From U.S. Imperiled,” The Washington Post, October 14, 1978, pp. A–1 and A–12) Although the President signed the Departments of State, Justice, and Commerce, the Judiciary, and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of 1979 (H.R. 12934; P.L. 95–431; 92 Stat. 1021–1045) on October 10, he issued a statement critical of the amendment: “If allowed to stand, this action would cause the United States to violate its treaty obligations to support the organizations of the United Nations system. Withholding of, or assigning conditions to, U.S. contributions to assessed budgets of these organizations would make it virtually impossible for these organizations to accept such contributions, would seriously impair their financial and political viability, and is contrary to the policy of collective financial responsibility continuously advocated by this Government since the establishment of the United Nations system.” (Department of State Bulletin, January 1979, p. 48)
