World Hunger and Food Policy the Helms Amendment4 and the other would encourage the Administration to upgrade the level of participation at international food and agricultural conferences such as the WCARRD and the FAO Conference. They would suggest that the US delegation be led by a cabinet level official. Orville Freeman called the FAO a “questionable agency” and said that the Director General was “demagoging unmercifully on the international scene” and “drove the ICP out of the FAO and the UN system”. He said the Director General was anti-private industry and Freeman could not support any statement that was supportive of the Director General. Steven Muller also criticized Saouma’s leadership in the FAO but said that the U.S. could be more effective there if we sent high level representatives to the larger meetings. Linowitz said that their opinion of the Director General was unimportant but they should think of the effect on the LDCs if the US sent higher level officials to the FAO meetings. The Commissioners agreed that Linowitz should scrap the idea of a statement and convey to the President the thought that a significant number of Commissioners believe the U.S. should upgrade its level of participation at international food conferences. The Commissioners were very uncomfortable with the Helms Amendment statement. By this time the Congressional members of the Commission had departed and most of the Commissioners indicated that they would appreciate their view on this matter. Linowitz mentioned that Senator Dole had told him that the Commission should not try to lobby the Congress. Rep. Gilman’s assistant said that it was a very contentious issue in the House and that hearings on it would be held in late February or early March. He suggested that some of the Commissioners might want to testify at those hearings. It was decided that Linowitz should discuss the statement with the Congressional members of the Commission and forward their thoughts to the President.
