546
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
194.
Briefing Notes Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency
for Director of Central Intelligence Dulles1
Washington, April 21, 1953.
THE IRANIAN SITUATION
The failure of the Iranian Parliament to meet during the past week
again
underscores
Prime
Minister
Mossadeq’s
current
political
weakness.2 A report sponsored by the Prime Minister, aimed at further
reducing the Shah’s powers, has been before parliament for the last
month. Mossadeq’s supporters, however, have been unable to secure
the necessary quorum to act on it.
Eight opposition deputies have left Tehran and thus have blocked
all efforts to convene a quorum. Mossadeq reportedly asked the Shah to
dismiss parliament, but the latter refused.3
Mossadeq’s extensive but disunited opposition is also in a weak
position, mainly because of the Shah’s unwillingness to take any initia-
tive. General Zahedi and other leading political figures who have been
plotting against Mossadeq have, according to late reports, postponed
plans for a coup, awaiting a more propitious time.4 Mullah Kashani,
president of parliament, a long-time critic of Mossadeq, has moved
cautiously in the present situation. Opposition elements to Mossadeq
in the army are apparently not well coordinated with his political
opponents.
Mossadeq controls the Army Chief of Staff and he has a large pop-
ular following which the Communist Tudeh party has temporarily
joined.5 While he has not been able to secure parliament’s cooperation
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 80R01443R, Box 1, Folder 14,
NSC Briefing 22 Apr 53. Secret; Security Information. Prepared for DCI Dulles for his
briefing of the NSC on April 22. The official minutes of the April 22 NSC meeting record
that DCI Dulles gave an oral briefing on Iran and that the NSC noted the March 20
Progress Report on NSC 136/1 and directed that “all outstanding copies of this Progress
Report be recalled by the Executive Secretary.” (National Archives, RG 273, Records of
the National Security Council, Official Minutes 1947–1961, Box 26, 140th Meeting) The
Progress Report is Document 180. The memorandum of discussion at the NSC meeting of
April 22, drafted by Gleason, notes that “Mr. Dulles spoke briefly about the situation in
Iran. He noted a further decline in both the prestige of the Shah and the power of Mos-
sadegh. He described the situation as one of perpetual crisis, but predicted no dramatic
turn of events within the next several weeks.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC
Series, Box 4, 140th Meeting of the National Security Council)
2 This sentence is underlined by Dulles.
3 This paragraph is underlined by Dulles.
4 Most of this sentence is underlined by Dulles.
5 Most of this sentence is underlined by Dulles.
