893.00/5952: Telegram [Document 417] The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State PEKING, January 18, 1925—11 p.m. [Received January 18—9:15 p.m.] 28. 1. At noon January 17th British Minister came to confer with me in regard to a telegram dated January 16, 8 p.m., he had just received from British Acting Consul General Pratt, Shanghai, of which pertinent portion was as follows: “The China Association representing leading British interests in Shanghai have made representations to me that measures should be devised to prevent a recurrence of fighting in immediate vicinity Shanghai. Various proposals have been made involving the sending to Shanghai of an international military force. The grave difficulties attending despatch of such a force are obvious, nevertheless I am of opinion that the time has now come when this step should be taken. Result of next conflict may well be that large bodies of soldiers may wish to enter Settlement but may refuse to surrender their arms. Specific measures taken is a military question but my own opinion is that it would probably suffice to occupy two strategical points, namely, North Railway Station and Lunghua Junction, thus denying use of loop line to Chinese troops.” 2. I pointed out to my colleague that this telegram (1) did not state that the present international naval forces and local volunteers were insufficient to protect life and property in the settlement, and (2) did not claim that the military objective indicated and military measures suggested had the approval of any military or naval authority. I also said that the course proposed by Pratt and his China Association was an act of forcible intervention on Chinese territory. I declared emphatically that my Government was opposed to such a policy and that I would not even consider it unless the naval authorities reported that it was imperative necessity for the protection of American and other foreign lives in Shanghai. The British Minister shared these views and so telegraphs Pratt January 17. 3. In case the Chief Executive succeeds his policy of detaching Sun Chuan-fang from the alliance with Chi Hsieh-yuan under which aggressions [aggressive] hostilities against Lu Yung-hsiang were begun in the neighborhood of Shanghai, it is probable that Chi will be defeated and in that event his soldiers might get out of hand, might refuse to give up their arms and might loot Shanghai. Bui: the alternative is equally
