This stipulation must receive a strict interpretation; in particular, it shall be understood to mean that patents applied for during the period of priority are independent, both as regards the grounds for refusal and for revocation, and also as regards their normal duration. This stipulation shall apply to all patents already existing at the time when it shall come into effect. The same stipulation shall apply, in the case of the accession of new countries, to patents in existence, either on one side or the other, at the time of accession. ARTICLE 5 The introduction by the patentee into the country where the patent has been granted of objects manufactured in any of the countries of the Union shall not entail forfeiture. Nevertheless, each of the contracting countries shall have the right to take the necessary legislative measures to prevent the abuses which might result from the exercise of the exclusive rights conferred by the patent; for example, failure to use. These measures will only provide for the revocation of the patent if the granting of compulsory licenses shall not suffice to prevent such abuses. In all cases the patent will not be subject to such measures before the expiration of at least three years from the date of its grant and if the patentee produces just excuses.

The protection of designs and industrial models cannot be liable to cancellation by reason of the introduction of objects corresponding to those protected. Articles shall not be required to bear any indication of registration for recognition of this right. If in a country the use of a registered trade-mark is compulsory, the registration cannot be canceled until after a reasonable period, and only then if those interested cannot justify the causes of their inaction. ARTICLE 5 BIS A period of grace of at least three months will be granted for the payment of taxes prescribed for the maintenance of industrial-property rights, together with a surcharge if the internal legislation of a country so provides.
