890  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
I. THE NEED
As the nuclear weapons balance between the US and the USSR 
evens off, it seems that the chances will become smaller that nuclear 
weapons can be used effectively by the US in wars in the Middle East, 
Far East and Southeast Asia. Since we did not use nuclear weapons in 
limited war when we had, in effect, a monopoly, it hardly seems likely 
that we would use them after losing the monopoly. It also seems quite 
unlikely that the USSR would initiate the use of nuclear weapons in a 
limited aggression. Under such circumstances, a tacit ban on the first 
use of nuclear weapons may well come about.
In order to retain military influence around the world at a time 
when both sides will probably be deterred from using nuclear weapons, 
we should develop a significant non-­nuclear military force while retain­
ing an adequate nuclear retaliatory force for insurance. The existence of 
a significant non-­nuclear military force may also be a necessary condi­
tion precedent to getting on with safeguarded nuclear disarmament.
II. THE CAPABILITY
It is gradually being recognized that there is no inherent lack of 
conventional force capability in the free world. American example and 
strategy have been the key influence in free world military thinking. 
This example and strategy have not put a premium on conventional 
force build-­up by industrialized countries.
Now, however, the strong economies and reviving peoples of 
Western Europe have the manpower and the industrial potential to 
support non-­nuclear forces adequate to deter or to hold off a Soviet con­
ventional attack in Europe. The missing element seems to be American 
leadership and incentive and determination here and abroad to make 
the necessary effort.
Non-­nuclear deterrence of Chinese communist aggression in the 
Far East is obviously a tougher problem. However, it should be well 
within the bounds of possibility for the combined beefed-­up conven­
tional forces of the US, the UK, Japan, Canada, Australia, and New 
Zealand, and the free Southeast Asian countries, as well as the present 
forces of the Chinese Nationalists and the Republic of Korea, to deter or 
stand off Chinese communist conventional attack.
The Korean war occurred at a time when the US was the only free 
nation with any real military power. In the coming era, the situation 
could be far different. We have many allies with large non-­nuclear force 
potential.
III. THE PROSPECT
It must be admitted that there would be great difficulty in moving 
away from our present policy of threatening to use nuclear weapons to
