Romania Armitage and Desk Officer Silins also participated. Meeting lasted just over one hour. 3. Counselor said we are troubled and distressed by events of recent months in Romania, particularly by what appears to be purposeful anti-US press campaign and arrest and imprisonment of persons such as Goma, Georgescu and Ton who appear to be doing nothing more than speaking in support of Helsinki principles. Counselor noted that both he and Armitage had testified before House International Relations Committee in support of earthquake aid and, in response to several questions on human rights in Romania, had painted generally favorable picture and said we know of no imprisonments. So far the present situation has not become a major public issue, and we have not made any public statements. President Carter and Secretary Vance have made clear the US is not interested in interfering with or overturning other governments, but have made it equally clear US must speak out when clear violations of human rights are involved. We would not want to have public issue on human rights in Romania unless absolutely necessary, but with MFN renewal process, earthquake aid appropriation, and Belgrade Conference coming up, questions are bound to arise, and it will be difficult to avoid comment. We are confused by these latest Romanian actions because we do not perceive threat to the Romanian leadership, which appears popular and strong. Nor do we believe the US has caused any affront to Romania which would justify the anti- US press campaign. We hope the situation can be cleared up so as to avoid a public debate; hence this private talk. Armitage added that some of those arrested have expressed a desire to leave Romania; obviously the reaction in the US will be different if people are allowed to leave than if they received harsh sentences. 4. Nicolae replied that Romanian interest in good relations with the US remains high. President Ceausescu had reaffirmed this to Nicolae during his recent consultations in Bucharest. GOB also appreciates US offer of earthquake aid. However, it is important to keep in mind Romanian interests. As Foreign Minister Macovescu had explained to Ambassador Barnes, GOR was surprised at “unpleasant attitude” of US newspapermen, which caused certain articles to go beyond criticism to insult.3 Even “sensitive matters” had been reported on, such as
