Romania
537
Armitage and Desk Officer Silins also participated. Meeting lasted just
over one hour.
3. Counselor said we are troubled and distressed by events of recent
months in Romania, particularly by what appears to be purposeful
anti-US press campaign and arrest and imprisonment of persons such
as Goma, Georgescu and Ton who appear to be doing nothing more
than speaking in support of Helsinki principles. Counselor noted that
both he and Armitage had testified before House International
Relations Committee in support of earthquake aid and, in response to
several questions on human rights in Romania, had painted generally
favorable picture and said we know of no imprisonments. So far the
present situation has not become a major public issue, and we have
not made any public statements. President Carter and Secretary Vance
have made clear the US is not interested in interfering with or overturn-
ing other governments, but have made it equally clear US must speak
out when clear violations of human rights are involved. We would not
want to have public issue on human rights in Romania unless absolutely
necessary, but with MFN renewal process, earthquake aid appropria-
tion, and Belgrade Conference coming up, questions are bound to arise,
and it will be difficult to avoid comment. We are confused by these latest
Romanian actions because we do not perceive threat to the Romanian
leadership, which appears popular and strong. Nor do we believe the
US has caused any affront to Romania which would justify the anti-
US press campaign. We hope the situation can be cleared up so as to
avoid a public debate; hence this private talk.
Armitage added that some of those arrested have expressed a
desire to leave Romania; obviously the reaction in the US will be
different if people are allowed to leave than if they received harsh
sentences.
4. Nicolae replied that Romanian interest in good relations with the
US remains high. President Ceausescu had reaffirmed this to Nicolae
during his recent consultations in Bucharest. GOB also appreciates US
offer of earthquake aid. However, it is important to keep in mind
Romanian interests. As Foreign Minister Macovescu had explained to
Ambassador Barnes, GOR was surprised at “unpleasant attitude” of
US newspapermen, which caused certain articles to go beyond criticism
to insult.3 Even “sensitive matters” had been reported on, such as
3 In telegram 2473 from Bucharest, April 4, the Embassy reported on the recent
anti-American campaign in the Romanian media and the meeting on April 3 between
Barnes and Macovescu on the subject. Macovescu explained that Romania felt the need
to strike back as a result of negative stories in the U.S. press and negative RFE reporting
and commentary. Macovescu accused the U.S. Government of intentionally planting
anti-Romanian stories in the U.S. press, and accused the U.S. press of focusing on negative
aspects of the post-earthquake recovery and attacking President Ceausescu personally.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770187–0096, D770116–0953)
