893.00/6110: Telegram
[Document 433]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, March 29, 1925—8 p.m.
[Received 6 p.m.]
127. Department’s telegram No. 56 of March 27, 5 p.m.
1. Frequently and recently I have warned the Department that further fighting
will inevitably take place in China.
2. For the last three years the grounds for the action now proposed in the first
paragraph of the British note have existed not less flagrantly in substantially
the same form with only slight change of names. The Chinese have suffered
terribly during all this time and foreign trade has been greatly handicapped.
Transportation by railway was almost completely paralyzed from September
1924 to February 1925. The Peking-Mukden, Tientsin-Pukow, and Shanghai-
Nanking lines, in which controlling financial interest is British, were among
the railways included.
3. The statement in the British note that Japan is the great power most
directly concerned, is not true, the British standing foremost in the
commercial interests for which all nations alike cultivate China. The leading
position of Japan is true only in respect to the imperialistic position which
has been acquired forcibly in Manchuria by the Japanese. The Soviet Union
is a formidable rival in this respect as well as in geographical proximity. I
believe that this British proposal reestablishes in effect the Japanese
contentions as to her dominant position in relation to China which was
crystallized in the Lansing-Ishii Agreement23 which the Washington
Conference happily canceled,24 or at least that it offers an opportunity to
reestablish these contentions.
4. Probably railway construction in China and the development of commerce
are not the chief motives of the British Government. Since the World War,
Great Britain is more than ever dependent upon foreign trade for its
economic life. Owing to military and political disorders the Chinese market
has come far short of the expectations of the British financial and trading
