746  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
170.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, December 10, 1979
SUBJECT
Taking Stock of the Defense Program
As we approach the final quarter of the Administration’s first term, 
I would like to take stock of the major developments in the Depart-
ment of Defense during the past three years. Though we face severe 
challenges in the form of military capabilities of potential adversaries, 
there have been tremendous accomplishments, of which we, our mili-
tary leadership, and the Nation can be proud. I have summarized some 
of the most significant of these below.
I
Four general developments, which will be remembered long after 
the individual decisions are forgotten, stand out from a review of this 
period in the Department’s history.
First, and by far the most important, we have without question 
entered a new era in the establishment of a strong national defense. 
This is not an expression of judgment; it is a finding of fact. The defense 
programs of this Administration have reversed the adverse trends and 
the neglect characteristic of the prior decade. We have made U.S. stra-
tegic and conventional forces more modern, more ready, and more 
capable.
Second, forceful U.S. leadership has been instrumental in revi-
talizing NATO’s defense efforts. Not only have we invested heavily 
in upgrading our own NATO contribution, but we have brought our 
Allies along in making similar efforts.
The third overriding theme that emerges from a review of the 
past three years is that this Administration has been scrupulous in 
recognizing cost as an important consideration in all defense deci-
sions, large and small. We are not buying inferior products, but we are 
insisting that precious tax resources only be spent for cost-­effective 
programs.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, 
Box 6, Defense Department: 12/79. No classification marking. Brzezinski sent the memo-
randum to Carter under cover of a December 18 memorandum in which he wrote: “The 
memorandum is unclassified and provides a very useful recapitulation of an impressive 
record, which you initiated with your PD–18 of August 1977, and which we have strongly 
backed from here.” (Ibid.)
