1204  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
announcement of about 150 words with some blanks left to be filled 
in at the last minute was a necessity. Governor Hoegh pointed out 
that that conditions varied a great deal from one DEFCON situation to 
another. The President said the thermonuclear bomb did not vary very 
much and was the bomb which made all these preparations necessary. 
He believed it was desirable to tell the people what to do. In response to 
a question from Governor Hoegh, the President said the draft broadcast 
should be kept secret and would be a part of the Presidential Emergency 
Documents.
Mr. Gray then pointed out that the Planning Board proposed to 
amend Footnote No. 3 of the chart to include CINCLANT as one of 
the commands which can declare DEFCONs outside the continental 
U.S. He went on to indicate that Dr. Kistiakowsky’s representative on 
the Planning Board had raised the question whether warnings Yellow 
and Red would be transmitted directly to the White House from 
CINCONAD instead of being routed through the Joint War Room. The 
President said extra time was consumed by having additional people 
transmitting messages. General Lemnitzer said no delay resulted from 
routing the warning through the Joint War Room. Transmission of the 
message to the White House was only a matter of pushing the button 
which caused a prepared tape to be played. Secretary Gates, however, 
saw no objection to transmitting these warnings directly to the White 
House if this proved to be feasible. Mr. Gray said he would have this 
matter looked into.
Mr. Gray then pointed out that Dr. Kistiakowsky’s representative 
in the Planning Board had felt that Warning Yellow as described in the 
proposed chart should be based on “warning indications” rather than 
on “intelligence” that hostile aircraft or missiles are suspected of being 
enroute to the U.S. Secretary Gates felt the word “intelligence” was cor­
rectly used in the chart proposed by the Committee.
The President said that every war started under unexpected con­
ditions. Therefore, he wished to place a caveat on all delegations of 
Presidential authority, that the President should he consulted if feasible. 
Such consultation might require better communications, for example, a 
telephone line direct from the War Room to the White House. Mr. Gray 
said he would ask the Committee to examine this matter. The President 
said he had no serious quarrel with the procedures described in the 
chart but he believed if the President could be reached, he should be con­
sulted. Secretary Gates pointed out that the President was on the com­
mand line. As soon as command conferences are set up, the President 
would be consulted. General Lemnitzer said the President could be 
in various places at various time. The important communication was 
the message from the War Room to the White House Communications 
Center, which knows where the President is at all times and is able to
