268 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX dence, would be discussing with the GOB specific ways in which we might improve relations. 4. Zhivkova expressed GOB’s satisfaction that US-Bulgarian relations had improved and deepened since the signature of Helsinki Final Act. She stated that there are no “weighty” outstanding issues between the US and Bulgaria, and indicated that a Bulgarian representative would come to the US soon to sign a document resolving financial problems which date back to the 1930’s. (N.B. Zhivkova was apparently alluding to a final settlement with US holders of Kingdom of Bulgaria bonds.) US and Bulgarian leaders, said Zhivkova, owe it to their peoples to develop bilateral relations further. The GOB is conscious of the fact that US is a huge country and a great power with vast resources and human potential. Bulgaria, although very small, has a rich historical and cultural heritage. A crossroads between East and West, Bulgaria survived 500 years under Ottoman bondage and has become a developed and vigorous country. Every country must make its contribution to a better future for the world and the contribution of Bulgaria, as a small country, must be qualitative rather than quantitative. Bulgaria, said Zhivkova, is ready to make its contribution to all aspects of relations including trade and scientific-technical and cultural cooperation. 5. The Secretary agreed that the US and Bulgaria should strive to find more common ground in their relations. He expressed support for continuing US-Bulgarian contacts in the CSCE context and noted that we will hold CSCE consultations with Bulgaria this fall. 6. One area of relations which remains to be settled, said Zhivkova, is that of trade and economic cooperation. Relations in this area should be put on a stable basis, and the issue of MFN should be considered in this context. The Secretary asked Ambassador-designate Perry to explore on his behalf concrete ways of improving relations in this sphere. 7. Zhivkova welcomed Ambassador-designate Perry to Sofia. She noted that the GOB has recognized Ambassador Garthoff’s work in improving relations by giving him the award of the Madara Horseman, First Class.3 The Secretary thanked Zhivkova for honoring Ambassador Garthoff, observing that this award reflected Bulgaria’s desire to improve relations. 8. The Secretary expressed particular satisfaction that Assistant Secretary Vest, his “strong right arm”, would be visiting Bulgaria next month. Zhivkova welcomed the Vest visit as an expansion of contacts 3 For his account of the award, see Raymond Garthoff, My Journey through the Cold War, p. 323.
