56 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The Analysis There are many interacting factors bearing on your choice of an alternative. In order to make the structure of Harold’s analysis and the key points as clear as possible, we have set out the high points with a minimum of detail. Harold begins his argument by noting that the residual target destruction capability on both sides following a Soviet pre-­emptive counterforce strike is projected to shift in favor of the Soviets before 1980, and will be more than 2:1 in their favor by 1985. While admitting that the real wartime significance of this advantage is uncertain, he says that perceptions of this Soviet advantage could have adverse effects, that we should do something about it, and that improvements in our bomber force are the only realistic near-­term solution to the problem. I believe that Harold is making too much of this measure. First, an assessment of the balance should compare similar things. A more appropriate assessment of the overall strategic balance would thus compare the situations in which the Soviets strike first to those in which we strike first. The Soviets’ impression of the balance is undoubtedly strongly influenced by this second situation. In fact, our best estimate projections suggest that the ratio of U.S. to Soviet bomber and ICBM weapons remaining after a first strike by the U.S. is in our favor now and will be increasing in the early 80’s. Second, I question how meaningful “target destruction potential” is at higher levels. At the levels considered by Secretary Brown, we and the Soviets have long since run out of worthwhile targets. Should we spend vast sums to “make the rubble bounce?” Finally, it doesn’t seem appropriate to use any single measure as an indicator of the perceived balance. Perceptions of the balance are molded by many indicators and given current intelligence projections, we will be ahead in enough of them to be able to claim strategic parity or even some superiority for at least the next five to seven years, whether or not we modernize the bomber force.3 I would therefore argue that any need to modernize our bomber force with the B–1 requires an argument that the force we have is becoming unsatisfactory and that the B–1 is the right answer. Harold continues by arguing that the bomber force plays an important role by hedging against possible reductions in the effectiveness of our ballistic missile forces, and by creating severe planning problems that can frustrate Soviet attempts to destroy both our bombers and ICBMs at the same time. Further, while the B–52 force is currently 3 Carter wrote “?” in the left margin next to this paragraph.
