1194  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
conducted under Defense auspices, [illegible in the original] that meet­
ing that the President requested NASA to present to the Council a 
report (a) on the outer space programs now being conducted under 
the auspices of NASA, and (b) on the level of effort the United States 
should devote to non-military outer space activities in the future.
(CALL ON: DR. [illegible in the original])
The second part of the first item is a presentation by Dr. Kistiakowsky 
of a report by the Science Advisory Committee on “Man in Space.”
(CALL ON: DR. KISTIAKOWSKY)
283.	 Memorandum of Discussion at the 470th NSC Meeting1
Washington, December 20, 1960
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 470th Meeting of the National Security Council, December 20, 1960
Present at the 470th meeting were The President of the United 
States, Presiding; the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense; and 
the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Administration. Also pres­
ent were Mr. Fred C. Scribner, Jr., for the Secretary of the Treasury; 
the Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Director, National Science 
Foundation (Item 1); the Administrator, National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (Item 1); the Special Assistant to the President 
for Science and Technology (Item 1); the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of 
Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Acting Director, U.S. 
Information Agency; the Special Assistants to the President for National 
Security Affairs and for Security Operations Coordination; the White 
House Staff Secretary; the Deputy Director, OCDM; Mr. Gerard 
C. Smith and Mr. J. Graham Parsons, Assistant Secretaries of State; the 
Deputy Administrator, NASA (Item 1); the Associate Administrator, 
NASA (Item 1); Mr. Franklyn W. Philllips, NASA (Item 1); Mr. Herbert 
York and Mr. Haydn Williams, Department of Defense; Mr. Douglas 
R. Lord, Office of the Special Assistant to the President for Science and 
Technology (Item 1); Mr. Huntington Sheldon, Central Intelligence 
Agency (Item 1); the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy 
Executive Secretary, NSC. 
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1 Source: Agenda item 1: Outer Space Programs Under the Auspices of NASA. 
Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—7 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. 
Drafted on December 21.
