3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 July–December 1979 645 on many occasions, the Soviet side is adhering in good faith and intends in the future to adhere to its part of this understanding, on the assumption, naturally, that the USA will strictly fulfill its own part. Raising questions not related to this understanding, to which the US side has resorted more than once, introduces absolutely unnecessary complications into US-Soviet relations. Moscow would like to expect that the US side will properly evaluate the clarifications set forth and will take the necessary steps to close the question it has artificially created. ment 99, however, sheds light on the secret portion of the negotiations, which was acknowledged decades after the fact. (Ibid.) Dobrynin provides an overview of the Kennedy-Khrushchev negotiations in his memoirs. See Dobrynin, In Confidence, pp. 86–91. 220. Telegram From the Department of State to All American Republic Diplomatic Posts1 Washington, September 9, 1979, 1725Z 236643. Subject: Soviet Ground Forces Unit in Cuba. 1. (Secret-entire text) 2. Recent confirmation of a Soviet ground forces unit in Cuba raises new concerns about Cuba’s increasingly close military and economic ties with the Soviet Union. We would hope that all countries in the hemisphere share our concern about the Cuban/Soviet relationship. Accordingly, addressees should approach host governments to sensitize them on this. The purpose of this demarche is to explain recent events relating to the Soviet combat forces in Cuba and to begin to encourage host governments to think about the Soviet-Cuban problem. Posts may draw on following talking points as well as recent state- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790411–0637. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to the U.S. Interests Section in Havana. Drafted by Ralph Braibanti (ARA/CCA); cleared by Newsom, Viron Vaky (ARA), Mark Parris (EUR/SOV), Robert Pastor (NSC), David Smith (INR/RAR), Miles Frechette (ARA/CCA), and Jeffrey Buczacki (S/S–O); approved by Vance.
