350
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Iranian crude for its refineries and tankers presently being constructed.
These would be owned by private Brazilian interests and by the Bra-
zilian Government. In regard to availability of tankers, the Depart-
ment’s experts have concluded that there are sufficient independent
tankers available to move 100,000 to 150,000 barrels per day of Iranian
oil.
3. It is recommended that the United States Ambassador in Tehran
be instructed to inform Dr. Mosadeq that the United States Govern-
ment is not in the oil business but that it stands ready if requested to en-
courage private U.S. firms to assist Iran to produce and sell its oil. He
should be authorized to state that the United States, if requested, will
explore with major and independent oil companies various means of
buying and marketing Iranian oil in substantial quantities. He should
state that independent American technicians will be encouraged to as-
sist in the production and refining of Iranian oil although the U.S. Gov-
ernment will not contract for them. In this connection it is noted that
Drilexo has already been asked by the Iranian Government to handle
the drilling and pipe-line operations for the NIOC and a reputable
American engineering consultant has been asked to assist in the man-
agement of the oil industry.
4. It is recommended that simultaneously or immediately after
Ambassador Henderson’s de´marche, the United States should publish
a statement of its attitude toward the Iranian situation, briefly re-
viewing in general terms the numerous U.S. efforts to bring the parties
in the oil dispute together and declaring that it seems impossible at the
moment to go farther in this role of moderator. Ambassador Hen-
derson’s instructions should be publicized with the statement that the
United States Government hopes that Iran will utilize its natural re-
sources by making commercial arrangements with oil companies, as-
suming that the products of the Iranian oil industry would be available
for purchase on reasonable terms by the AIOC as well as others in such
a path as to minimize the disruption of normal commercial flows in the
international oil trade. The statement could contain a declaration that
this United States action does not imply judgment on the merits of
British claims in the oil dispute and reference could be made to the pro-
vision in the Iranian nationalization law which sets aside a percentage
of oil revenue on the assumption that an eventual settlement of British
and Iranian claims arising out of the oil dispute will be reached through
amicable negotiation.
5. It is recommended that the U.S. go slowly in the situation re-
garding the question of budgetary aid to the Mosadeq Government. Dr.
Mosadeq’s relations with the free world have been characterized by an
assumption that strategic dangers implied in the loss of Iran to the free
world can be used to cloud any issue of a primarily commercial nature.
