1955  521
shift in position as would be involved in issuance any satisfactory 
renunciation of force declaration in Taiwan area without receiving what 
they would consider satisfactory assurance substantial value in return.
6. Next meeting will be “my turn” speak first and it will be import­
ant I have carefully prepared and considered statement. Would appre­
ciate Department’s suggestions on additional points I might make or 
those made in past which Department believes would be most useful 
emphasize.
Gowen
378.	 Letter 26 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 26
Washington, November 18, 1955
Dear Alex:
You are not the forgotten man despite the rather long interval 
between letters recently. With our forces rather widely scattered, there 
has not been much that I could give you which would add to what you 
were getting in the official telegrams. That is still essentially the case. 
So this letter will be rather short. I have just checked with both Mr. 
Robertson and Bill Sebald. They have no special sidelights on messages 
to convey and suggest that I defer any long letter until early next week. 
We are meeting with Herman Phleger at noon today. By Monday we 
should be able to take his views and the latest thinking of the Secretary 
into account.
We have a feeling that we may be getting into a fairly tight cor­
ner on the renunciation of force item although basically our position 
is unquestionably sound. It seems to us in FE that we are suffering 
from our inability to state our precise position fully and frankly to key 
friendly governments; from the need to pull our verbal punches to 
some extent at Geneva in order to insure the continuation of the talks; 
from the increasingly serious misgivings of the Chinese Government 
(see Taipei’s 463 of Nov. 17 transmitting the note of Foreign Minister 
Yeh to the Secretary); from the clever way in which the Chinese Com­
munists are attempting to seize the initiative on the renunciation of 
force item and masquerade as the real sponsors of the renunciation of 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; 
Official–­Informal.
