196 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 Mosadeq’s foreign policy has been set and he can be expected to follow it unswervingly. Since the purpose of this study of Mosadeq’s techniques is to find a pattern which new nationalist leaders must follow or at least understand, it is important here to state, that, in the writer’s opinion, the national aspirations described above will be factors in any political movement in the near future in Iran. The words and actions which Mosadeq has used to cater to and excite these emotions are not the only techniques possible. However, they have proved successful and he will likely hold to them. Another man could probably score equally well, if he follows Mosadeq’s example. Social Discontent The Gap Between the People and Their Rulers The causes and the character of social discontent throughout Asia have been described by other writers. The depressed people of Iran share the suffering and the slim margin of existence of other Asiatic masses. The great, sordid contrast between their misery and the luxury of their masters is apparent to the most casual observer. Iran is ripe for social revolution. Mosadeq described this situation to Ambassador Grady in their first conversation.22 “There has been in Iran a gap between the government and the people . . . This gap, combined with miserable economic conditions, has produced deep discontent . . . The greatest force in this country is public opinion and no government can stand which does not close the gap between itself and popular opinion.” In his first speech as Prime Minister, Mosadeq assured his people that he understood and would take care of their discontent. “The shadows which were covering our unhappy country will soon give way to the sun of happiness.”23 The organized tours of Tehran slums which officials and newspaper correspondents had to take in the summer of 1951 emphasized this aspect of National Front propaganda. National Front speeches always make some reference to present misery and future blessings if Iranians will support the National Front. It has been apparent, however, that Mosadeq has not made any move which might tear the present social fabric of Iran. He has no program for reform; he claims no panacea for progress beyond nationalization of the oil industry. Through hope of social change, Mosadeq has gained a following of liberal Iranians who see its necessity and who support the National 22 Memorandum of Conversation, May 2, 1951. [Footnote is in the original. Grady reported on the conversation in telegram 2650 from Tehran, May 2, printed in Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954, pp. 45–46 (Document 17).] 23 Address to the nation, April 30, 1951. [Footnote is in the original.]
