North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 769 RECOMMENDATIONS (1) Do not accept Option No. 1 (The Straight Approach). (2) Do not accept Option No. 2 (The Two-PRM Approach) unless you find it preferable to Option No. 3 (Radical Surgery), Option No. 4 (Radical Alternative), or a combination thereof. (3) Accept Option No. 3 unless you feel that the potential conflict this might create between the NSC and some major Departments is a risk you are not prepared to accept at this point in time. (4) If you feel that the system is not ready for the risks entailed in Option No. 3, approve Option No. 4. If you do so, we (Hormats, Thornton and Hansen) can explore the relative merits of a new PRM versus the “study group” approach. My apologies to both you and Bob Hormats for not consulting with him on the actual wording of this memorandum. I have discussed it in general with him, but he has been so busy I have not consulted him on it in any real detail. And perhaps I am acting too hastily, but right or wrong my personal judgment is that you may have to make a decision on this issue by early next week at the latest, or lose the flexibility you still retain at this time. 256. Memorandum From Roger Hansen of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, February 16, 1977 SUBJECT Suggested Approach to the “Second Track” of the PRM–8 Process As I interpreted the results of this morning’s meeting,2 the following scenario will unfold over the coming 2–3 months: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 25, PRM–08 (1 of 3) [1]. Confidential. Sent for action. 2 Apparently a reference to the meeting referred to in footnote 1, Document 255. No memorandum of conversation was found. Hansen described the conclusions reached at the meeting in a February 17 memorandum to Thornton. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, International Economics, Guy Erb File, Box 42, PRM 8: 2–4/77)
