1164  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
(c) Each Party shall limit the number of non-deployed mobile 
launchers of ICBMs located at training facilities for ICBMs to no more 
than 40. Each such launcher may contain only a training model of a 
missile. Non-deployed mobile launchers of ICBMs that contain training 
models of missiles shall not be located outside a training facility.
(d) Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of test launchers to 
no more than 45 during the seven-year period after entry into force of 
this Treaty. Within this limit, the number of fixed test launchers shall not 
exceed 25, and the number of mobile test launchers shall not exceed 20. 
Thereafter, the aggregate number of test launchers shall not exceed 40. 
Within this limit, the number of fixed test launchers shall not exceed 
20, and the number of mobile test launchers shall not exceed 20.
(e) Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of silo training 
launchers and mobile training launchers to no more than 60. ICBMs 
shall not be launched from training launchers. Each such launcher may 
contain only a training model of a missile. Mobile training launch-
ers shall not be capable of launching ICBMs, and shall differ from 
mobile launchers of ICBMs and other road vehicles or railcars on the 
basis of differences that are observable by national technical means of 
verification.
3. For heavy bombers and former heavy bombers:
(a) Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of heavy bomb-
ers equipped for non-nuclear armaments, former heavy bombers, and 
training heavy bombers to no more than 75.
(b) Each Party shall limit the number of test heavy bombers to no 
more than 20.
4. For ICBMs and SLBMs used for delivering objects into the upper 
atmosphere or space:
(a) Each Party shall limit the number of space launch facilities to 
no more than five, unless otherwise agreed. Space launch facilities shall 
not overlap ICBM bases.
(b) Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of ICBM launchers 
and SLBM launchers located at space launch facilities to no more than 
20, unless otherwise agreed. Within this limit, the aggregate number 
of silo launchers of ICBMs and mobile launchers of ICBMs located at 
space launch facilities shall not exceed ten, unless otherwise agreed.
(c) Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of ICBMs and 
SLBMs located at a space launch facility to no more than the number of 
ICBM launchers and SLBM launchers located at that facility.
5. Each Party shall limit the number of transporter-loaders for 
ICBMs for road-mobile launchers of ICBMs located at each deploy-
ment area or test range to no more than two for each type of ICBM for 
road-mobile launchers of ICBMs that is attributed with one warhead
