358 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I curity dimensions to our relationship. I will be providing further suggestions to you. —UN: The Special Session on Disarmament will be an opportunity to place the monkey on the Soviets’ back to be forthcoming in response to your neutron bomb decision, on MBFR and in other forums.13 We should press them hard but avoid picking up for the sake of propaganda some longstanding ideas in the disarmament community which will provoke an extremely bad reaction among crucial defense-oriented Congressmen as well as our NATO allies. I believe we can have an an aggressive posture in the SSOD without creating fears that we have become soft. [Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.] 13 See footnote 5, Document 24. In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the President wrote “Let’s push SS 20 argument.” 74. Article by the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Maynes)1 Washington, undated The Maturing of American Diplomacy How does one describe the trends of American diplomacy today? Were it 30 years ago, in the full flush of American power and opportunity, we might adopt Dean Acheson’s metaphor and proclaim ourselves “present at the creation.”2 But American strength, while greater absolutely, is now matched relatively by the strength of others, and American opportunity too often seems transformed into foreign challenge. Moreover, American confidence seems to have given way to American self-examination. We no longer seem to enjoy the grandeur of simplicity in our foreign policy. Our goals seem more distant and unattainable; our resources inadequate; our people fed up; our gov- 1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, September 1978, pp. 48–51. All brackets are in the original. Maynes’s article is based on an address he delivered before the Conference on International Studies at Columbia University in New York on April 7. 2 Reference is to Acheson’s memoirs, entitled Present at the Creation: My Years at the State Department (New York: W.W. Norton, 1969).
