January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1189
The President said: all.
Prime Minister Begin said that that is a serious answer. Then we
don’t need the line (in the paper referring to U.S. membership). We do
not need to single it out. We should just agree that the U.S. will take
part, as on all committees. Otherwise, it will seem as though we are
changing Camp David. It (the reference) is not needed. Therefore, we
should not write it down, but agree that the U.S. representative or dele-
gate will be in when the Continuing Committee is set up. He would like
to consult on the U.S. paper, and reply definitely tomorrow. (The Israeli
delegates conferred among themselves).
Minister Burg said he would like to strengthen the last point. In his
Weltanshauung, he has no ideological homeland but the West—that is
the United States—ideologically or philosophically. The Prime Min-
ister has said two things: Here it is written Egypt, Jordan, and the Self-
Governing Authority. To add that the U.S. would be in would mean
changing a paragraph of Camp David. Sometimes that is a little bit bad.
Other changes would be possible. People would say: why were you not
against this change? It is a matter of formulation. Second, the U.S., as a
full partner, would also here become involved in administration in a
certain sense. If the U.S. is interested in this, Israel would love and like
it to do it. But does the U.S. need this? (laughter) These are two strong
points: first, the change in formulation; and second, the U.S. will take a
role leading to its being a full partner. If the U.S. were involved in the
practicalities, therefore administratively there would be a “superau-
thority” on the Self-Governing Authority. Please think this over, as Is-
rael will do.
Professor Lapidot said that Article 3 of Camp David says: “. . . repre-
sentatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and the self-governing authority will
constitute a continuing committee . . .” This expresses who should be-
long. To add the United States, we would need to amend Camp David.
The President asked Ambassador Linowitz to describe the Egyptian
position. The U.S. is not asking gratuitously to inject the United States
into the Continuing Committee. This means added problems. Ac-
cording to the Associated Principles, paragraph 5, the United States is
in: “The United States shall be invited to participate in the talks on
matters related to the modalities of the implementation of the agree-
ments and working out the timetable for the carrying out of the obliga-
tions of the parties.”
Prime Minister Begin asked where this is found.
The President said in point C–5.
Secretary Vance said: on page 26.
The President said that if Egypt agrees that the U.S. will not serve,
this is fine with us.
