North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979 1043 differentiation among developing countries when it comes to specific economic and development policies. —Moving forward, preferably with other developed countries, in proposing concrete programs in energy, food, technology, trade, and finance. The Next Six Months Over the next six months, we need to continue the program we launched this spring. Events we can use include the Tokyo Summit, final approval and funding of the Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation (ISTC), launching of the IDCA, the release of a report by the President’s Commission on World Hunger, the COW and IDS in the UN, the UNCSTD and WCARRD (World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development) conferences, approval of the MTN package, and the opening address to the UNGA, presumably to be given by you.5 Substantively, the following program is suggested: —Energy: The current international energy situation makes more timely than ever a major effort to assist LDCs with energy problems. We should push forward our ideas regarding energy financing and regional research centers, while increasing our current programs of energy assessments and technical assistance. • Energy Financing: The IBRD’s new program to finance exploration and development of mineral fuels is getting into gear. Response from developing countries has been strong, and several proposals are now in the pipeline. We believe the first projects under this program should go to the Executive Directors within two to three months. In response to your Seattle speech, Fred Bergsten has sent a letter to Ed Fried officially requesting that the IBRD be asked to study what special financial arrangements might be required to encourage investment in renewable energy technologies in the LDCs.6 Funding of renewable energy technology will be aired at the Tokyo Summit. Also in response to your speech, Treasury, through our executive directors, has asked the regional banks to report on their current energy activities with a view toward encouraging more activity in the field. The Inter-American Development Bank staff has prepared a proposal to provide investment guarantees and insurance for petroleum and mineral exploration and development. The idea has aroused interest in 5 For Vance’s September 24 address to the UN General Assembly, see the Department of State Bulletin, November 1979, pp. 1–6. In a September 5 memorandum to Vance, Maynes, Hormats, and Lake discussed “seven proposals in the area of North/South dialogue and how they relate to your UNGA speech.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–January 1981, Lot 82D298, Box 5, S/P-Lake Papers—9/1–15/79) 6 The letter was not found.
