192
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
East, but perhaps for the international political and economic order as
well.
As we go forward in our mediating role, we will have to expect
from time to time to have differences with both sides. But these will be
differences as to tactics. Our overall objectives will be those that we be-
lieve are now shared by all sides: A permanent and enduring peace in
the Middle East.
This is obviously a difficult task and there is always the possibility
of failure. But it is a historic responsibility that requires the fullest pos-
sible support of the American people.
I believe we have this support. And as we go through the difficult
days ahead, this support will sustain us. It will provide the strength we
need to encourage all parties to put aside their fears and put trust in
their hopes for a genuine and lasting Middle East peace.
John Kennedy once described the formula for peace not only in the
Middle East but throughout the world, and I would like to close with
his words [at the U.N. on Sept. 25, 1961]:
If we all can persevere—if we can in every land and office look
beyond our own shores and ambitions—then surely the age will dawn
in which the strong are just and the weak secure and the peace
preserved.10
10 For the text of Kennedy’s speech to the UN General Assembly, see Public Papers:
Kennedy, 1961, pp. 616–626.
45.
Editorial Note
On June 19, 1977, reporters Bob Clark and Barrie Dunsmore of the
American Broadcasting Company’s (ABC) News Division interviewed
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance on the ABC television and radio public
affairs program “Issues and Answers.” During the interview, Clark
commented that Vice President Walter Mondale had stated in his June
17 address to the World Affairs Council of Northern California (see
Document 44) that the United States would not use the threat of re-
ducing military aid to induce the Government of Israel to give up the
occupied territories. Referring to the position of incoming Israeli Prime
Minister Menahem Begin concerning the occupied territories, Clark in-
quired as to whether the United States would need to “apply pressure
of some sort if it is going to play a significant role” in securing peace in
the Middle East. Vance responded:
