development, and water supply to the area concerned. It would seem to be very
doubtful, however, whether it is practical to secure affirmative action of the Congress,
except under a joint agreement of the several States.
The Government has already expended large sums upon scientific research and
engineering investigation in promotion of this Colorado River project. The actual
progress has been retarded for many years by differences among the seven States in the
basin over their relative water rights and among different groups as to methods. In an
attempt to settle the primary difficulty of the water rights, Congress authorized the
Colorado River Commission which agreed on November 24, 1922, upon an interstate
compact to settle these rights, subject to the ratification of the State legislatures and
Congress. All seven States except Arizona at one time ratified, the Arizona Legislature
making certain reservations which failed to meet the approval of the governor.
Subsequently an attempt was made to establish the compact upon a six-State basis, but
in this case California imposed reservations. There appears to be no division of opinion
upon the major principles of the compact, but difficulty in separating contentions as to
methods of development from the discussion of it. It is imperative that flood control be
undertaken for California and Arizona, preparation made for irrigation, for power, and
for domestic water.
Some or all of these questions are combined in every proposed development. The
Federal Government is interested in some of these phases, State governments and
municipalities and irrigation districts in others, and private corporations in still others.
Because of all this difference of view it is most desirable that Congress should consider
the creation of some agency that will be able to determine methods of improvement
solely upon economic and engineering facts, that would be authorized to negotiate and
settle, subject to the approval of Congress, the participation, rights, and obligations of
each group in any particular works. Only by some such method can early construction
be secured.
WATER POWER
Along with the development of navigation should go every possible encouragement for
the development of our water power. While steam still plays a dominant part, this is
more and more becoming an era of electricity. Once installed, the cost is moderate, has
not tended greatly to increase, and is entirely free from the unavoidable dirt and
disagreeable features attendant upon the burning of coal. Every facility should be
extended for the connection of the various units into a superpower plant, capable at all
times of a current increasing uniformity over the entire system.
RAILROADS
