1956  1177
August 23 has exhausted all possibilities for rescue of any survivors. The 
bodies of Albert Perry Mattin, USN and Lt. Commander James Pansford, 
USN, were recovered by ship research group in the same area in which 
floating wreckage of the plane was located. The Chinese Communists 
have announced the recovery of William Frederick Haskins, USN and 
Jack Albert Curtis, USN. They further reported that the bodies of Haskins 
and Curtis were delivered by them to British Consul General, Shanghai 
on September 12. It is expected that the bodies will be returned to United 
States authorities in Yokahama, Japan via the S.S. Ouwerkatt leaving 
Shanghai about 22 September. Next of kin of those recovered have been 
previously notified by the Navy Department.
713.	 Telegram 300 to Geneva1
Washington, September 17, 1956, 7:33 p.m.
300. For Johnson.
Following is excerpt relating to Taiwan from Liu Shao-­chi speech 
September 15 Chinese Communist Party Congress:
QUOTE Furthermore in order to defend our country we must 
continue to strengthen our national defense, we must continue to 
strengthen our national defense army—the glorious Chinese people’s 
liberation army. Our armed forces must strive to raise their fighting 
capacity to a higher level, guard our frontiers and coast lines vigilantly 
and defend our territorial integrity.
Our territory Taiwan is still under the occupation of the US impe­
rialists. This is a most serious threat to the security of our country. The 
liberation of Taiwan is purely China’s internal affair. We are willing 
to bring Taiwan back to the embrace of the motherland through the 
peaceful means of negotiation and avoid the use of force. If force has 
to be used it would only be when all possibilities for peaceful negoti­
ation have been exhausted or when peaceful negotiations have failed. 
Whatever means we adopt we are convinced that we will win the ulti­
mate victory in the just cause of liberating Taiwan. END QUOTE
Dulles
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–1756. Official Use Only; Limit 
Distribution. Drafted by Clough.
