946
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Our foremost problem with the proposal is that it does not
require the withdrawal of Soviet forces, but does require the recogni-
tion by other states of the current Soviet-installed Afghan regime as a
precondition for negotiations. It does not take into account the interest
of the majority of Afghans who are struggling for their right of self-
determination against the Soviets and the Babrak Karmal regime.
E. Iran
1. Suggested Points
—The release of our people remains a paramount interest of our
policy toward Iran. As the President’s recent actions clearly demon-
strate, we will not tolerate continuation of this situation.17 We will not
relax our effort until the hostages are free;
—We appreciate the helpful role which Yugoslavia has played in
this crisis, particularly in talking to the Iranian authorities about the
condition of the hostages and the need for Iran to put this problem
behind it to better focus on the real problems facing the country.18 We
hope the Yugoslavs can continue to exert their considerable influence
on Iran. We believe that Iran’s problems of internal unrest and economic
development are now overshadowed by the increased Soviet threat to
the countries of the region;
—Our rescue attempt was a humanitarian one and was not directed
against Iran or the people of Iran; and
—Now, and especially later, when the hostage question is finally
resolved, the Yugoslav Government can do much to keep Iran truly
nonaligned. Such a foreign policy course would be in the best interests
of Iran and other countries.
17 Reference is to Operation Eagle Claw, which failed in its attempt to rescue the
hostages in Iran on April 24.
18 In telegram 2569 from Belgrade, April 1, Eagleburger reported that “the GOY
has publicly and unequivocally supported the release of our hostages in Tehran. They
have expressed this in statements in Belgrade and by their words and actions at the
UN.” However, Eagleburger cautioned, the Yugoslav leadership had limited influence
on Iran’s new leaders. Belgrade, he continued, intends to develop closer ties to Iran in
order to strengthen its own position in the Non-Aligned Movement, and could not be
expected to give much more support or welcome a tougher U.S. stance on Iran. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800164–0318) Vrhovec recounted his “very
frank” conversation with Iranian Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh on May 12. Vrhovec told
Eagleburger that he had stressed with the Iranian Foreign Minister the need to free the
hostages, that many prominent non-aligned leaders shared that view, and that, as long
as the hostage situation continued, “it would be difficult for the non-aligned states fully
to support the other ‘legitimate and progressive’ aims of the Iranian Revolution.” Vrhovec
also told Eagleburger that Ghotbzadeh responded that Iran wants to free the hostages,
but, in light of the recent U.S. rescue attempt, “the Iranian people ‘would neither under-
stand nor accept’ their being set free now.” (Telegram 3751 from Belgrade, May 12;
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800235–0692)
