650  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
In connection with small weapons, Mr. Quarles continued, the mil­
itary has stated before Congress that we need a figure much higher 
than that submitted by the Department of Defense. This has made the 
Joint Committee highly critical of us.
The President again repeated his concern with the impact on 
Congress. If we state that we have a requirement now which will 
not become available until 1968, Congress will be tempted to spend 
$20 billion this year in this field alone. The President understands the 
need for small weapons in air defense and missile defense, although 
he pointed out that the three scientists who had visited him the day 
before (Drs. Land, Purcell and Killian) had shown less enthusiasm 
than he has heard at other times in this area. The President continued 
that when we come to supplying small yield weapons for the Infantry 
and the Marines we are getting in to the area of marginal utility. 
He does not visualize great stockpiles of these weapons around the 
periphery of the USSR. He pointed out further that our total current 
megaton capability is estimated so high that if we should employ this 
quantity of atomic weapons, the fallout from our own weapons could 
destroy our own country, and indeed the entire Northern Hemisphere. 
He further expressed the view that we are taking council of our fears. 
He reiterated that we should push atomic weapons for air defense 
but be more moderate in development of tactical atomic weapons. He 
suggested that we indoctrinate ourselves that there is such a thing as 
common sense. Mr. McElroy agreed and stated that the Department 
of Defense had fought this line of reasoning when they cut service 
requests.
The discussion then turned to the subject of military experts, with 
the President expressing the view that if you try to fight a war with a 
Board of Political Directors, you will soon find all military command­
ers being told by Congress exactly what they need. Mr. McElroy also 
pointed out the number of military “experts” available in Congress. 
The President illustrated the types of difficulties under which the mil­
itary works in wartime, citing anecdotes from his own experiences 
in the Operations Division of the War Department right after Pearl 
Harbor.
John S.D. Eisenhower
