62
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
that you will have to take the following steps, which could affect the US-Israeli
relationship:
—Go to the American public with a full explanation of US national
interests in the Middle East (strategic relations with Soviets, economic in-
terests, oil, cooperation with moderate regimes).
—Explain the scale of US aid to Israel ($10 billion since 1973, or
nearly $4000 for each Israeli citizen). Despite this, Israel is unwilling to
reciprocate by showing flexibility in negotiations.
—We will be prepared to spell out publicly our views on a fair settlement.
—We will be unable to defend Israel’s position if the negotiations
shift to the UN or Geneva.
—Both Sadat and Begin can be assured that progress toward peace
will mean a strong relationship with the United States, including in the
economic and security areas, and enhanced ability to control develop-
ments in the region in ways that will serve our mutual interests.
8. The absolute minimum you want from each leader is the
following:
—From Sadat:
—Acceptance of a long-term Israeli security presence in the West Bank/
Gaza.
—A five-year interim regime for the West Bank/Gaza; no independent
Palestinian state; deferral of negotiations on borders and sovereignty
until end of five-year period.
—Acceptance of less than an Israeli commitment to full withdrawal and
Palestinian self-determination as guidelines for negotiations.
—Willingness to negotiate guidelines for West Bank/Gaza even if
Hussein does not come in.
—Repetition of “no more war” pledge; willingness to renew UNEF
in October; honoring terms of Sinai II, including commitment to
peaceful resolution of differences.
—A willingness to negotiate seriously if an agreement on prin-
ciples is reached.
—From Begin:
—Acceptance of all the principles of 242, including withdrawal
and the “inadmissability of acquisition of territory by war,” as appli-
cable on all fronts.
—Modifications in “self-rule” proposal in order to make it sufficiently
attractive to moderate Palestinians to bring them in as participants and
to increase prospects of their accepting its main features (open borders,
some Israeli security presence, some Israeli rights to live in West Bank,
self-government) beyond five years. These modifications require an Israeli
acceptance of the principle of withdrawal; a moratorium on organized settle-
ment activity, in contrast to the rights of individuals to acquire land on a recip-
rocal basis; a visible termination of the military occupation at the outset of the
five-year period; devolution of authority for the new regime from an agree-
ment among Israel, Egypt, and Jordan; and genuine self-government for the
Palestinians.
