511.3 B 1/138: Telegram
[Document 15]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Grew)
WASHINGTON, February 2, 1924—6 p.m.
9. Reference Department’s 8, February 1, 6 p.m.
In the event that you should be requested to express your views respecting
the regulation of the traffic in arms you should refer to the Department’s
note to the British Embassy of August 5, 1922,20 and the communication to
the League of Nations dated September 12, 1923,21 copies of both of which
are in the files of the Legation. You may also in your discretion explain the
scope of the joint resolutions mentioned in Department’s telegram No. 53 of
September 12, 1923,22 as well as the policy of this Government not to
encourage the sale of military supplies or the shipment of war material to
the troubled areas of the world. (See Department’s telegram No. 61 of
September 27th last.23 ) You may point out that the Saint Germain
Convention was not drawn on the theory of limitation of armament and that
it imposed on the signatories no restriction on production or on the supply
of arms inter se. You may also say that you understand that your
Government would not be willing to restrict its entire freedom of action
respecting the shipment of military supplies to countries of Latin America.
In connection with matters of administration, the fact that the United States
is not a member of the League of Nations should not be overlooked.
[Paraphrase.] It is the view of this Government that the Convention of Saint
Germain is a political arrangement for the protection of existing
governments, leaving them free to make and supply all the arms they wish
as between themselves, and that it does not represent a bona fide effort to
restrict the arms traffic. This Government has not been led to any different
conclusion by the endeavor to arouse favor for such a convention by
representing it as a genuine attempt to fulfill the wishes of those who are
anxious to have the arms traffic restricted. Congress cannot be expected to
