March–August 1953
651
256.
Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Iranian Affairs,
Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Stutesman) to
the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian
Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African
Affairs (Richards)1
Washington, undated.
SUBJECT
Measures which the United States Government Might Take in Support of a
Successor Government to Mosadeq
Assumption—a coup against Mosadeq has firmly established a suc-
cessor government we wish to support.
Problem—What measures might the United States Government
take to support the successor government?
I. Psychological Measures
Public
1. It would be literally fatal to any non-communist successor to
Mosadeq if the Iranian public gained an impression that the new pre-
mier was a “foreign tool”. The U.S. Government should confine any
comment upon a change in government in Iran to a repetition of our
traditional unwillingness to interfere in the internal affairs of a free
country and our willingness to work with the government in power.
The U.K. Government should give no indication that it considers a suc-
cessor to Mosadeq to be ready to serve U.K. interests or that the British
had a hand in bringing him to power. Naturally, there should be no ex-
pression of regret that Mosadeq has departed from the political scene.
2. The U.S. Government should avoid any statement that the oil
question is involved in a change of government in Iran. It is important
that neither the U.S. nor U.K. Governments should rejoice publicly over
expectations of a more reasonable Iranian attitude towards solution of
the oil problem.
3. To show that the U.S. is not antagonistic to the successor gov-
ernment, an official comment could be made that we are, as always, in-
terested in helping any free country to build its strength against com-
munist subversion and will work with the present government of Iran
to that end, if so requested by the Iranians.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 80–01701R, Box 3, Folder 8,
TPAJAX Vol. II. Top Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Stutesman. Printed from an
uninitialed copy. A handwritten note in the upper right-hand corner of the memo-
randum reads: “late July?”
