Afghanistan
809
Aaron: I just want to emphasize that we may not have to be in the
front line of response. We should certainly try to keep out of it.
Brzezinski: We need to give a signal to everybody that it would be
unwise to internationalize the conflict.
Newsom: I think it might be better if we entered our consultations
with the Pakistanis through intelligence channels rather than directly
with Zia or Agha Shahi. Can we do this?
Turner: Yes.
Muskie: Given the most probable scenario as described by CIA, do
we have a clear idea of what Pakistani requirements would be? Could
we meet these requirements without taking the matter up with Con-
gress? Is there a scenario that we should discuss with Congress?
Turner: The Pakistanis have told us what their needs are in terms
especially of man-held anti-aircraft and anti-tank weapons. They have
not however defined their own requirements precisely. They do not
want to make a request to us on an overt basis because of the past bad
experience they had with the $400 million offer.
Muskie:
We
have
to
understand
the
full
impact
of
their
requirements.
Jones: The basic level of assistance needed for correcting the most
glaring deficiencies is about $600 million. If you add fighter aircraft to
this the figure goes up to $1.3 billion and there are incremental packages
that would increase it $2.1 and $6 billion depending on the level that
you wanted to reach.
Brzezinski: The State Department paper lists various kinds and
types of equipment. Would that represent the $600 million package?
Would that not be the kind of package to talk to Congress about as
the requirement if there were a Soviet military threat?
Christopher: The Senators we would have to talk to would respond
poorly to such a suggestion.
Newsom: But if we were to decide that we had to respond we will
have to get a 36B waiver if we are to respond quickly, even using Saudi
money.6 Therefore we should forewarn Congress.
Muskie: But deterrent action vis-a-vis the Soviets raises the risk of
escalation. Congress will automatically assume that you are underesti-
mating the dangers.
6 Under Section 36(b) of the Arms Export Control Act, Congress must receive 30
days advance notice prior to a Presidential administration concluding a government-to-
government sale of military equipment valued at $14 million or more, defense articles
or services valued at $50 million or more, or design and construction services valued
at $200 million or more.
