682 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX size of Hungarian minority, its concentration in geographical center of country, its distinct language and culture, its ties to separate religious denominations, and its psychological perception of being discriminated against by Romanian majority provide potentially combustible ingredients of which GOR is keenly aware. We detect no serious effervescence in Hungarian areas at present, no embryonic “liberation” or other organized movement, and no charismatic leaders capable of fanning grievances into political flames. We further doubt that spontaneous combustion would take place, barring a major and unlikely change in present circumstances such as a gross reversal of GOR’s minority policy. Nevertheless, a relatively rapid deterioration could occur, especially if such outside actors as the Governments of Hungary and Soviet Union were actively involved. 23. Germans. Ethnic German community, while numerically significant (circa 350,000), is not now a factor for instability. Once a source of Hitler’s SS divisions as well as an effective and active FLT column for Nazi Germany, German community was shattered by wartime losses and immediate postwar repression including deportations, and today is dispirited, demoralized, and interested primarily in emigration to West Germany. As long as issuance of emigration passports continues at a substantial rate, as it has for last two and a half years, there should be no problem. 24. Gypsies. As elsewhere, Gypsies in Romania constitute a true underclass—loathed by all other elements in society, ignored by outside world, relegated to most menial tasks, and butt of real and serious discrimination. None of this is qualitatively new in centuries-old saga of Gypsies and their wandering, and record of Ceausescu regime toward them is probably as good as any previous Romanian Government. There is no overt sign of restiveness in Gypsy community or of political mobilization to correct grievances, but it is doubtful if any non-Gypsy, including GOR leaders, has any real idea of what Gypsies are doing or thinking. There is not even any good estimate of their actual numbers, although there is a universal belief that birthrate among Gypsies is significantly higher than among any other ethnic group. Consequently, while we see little present danger to regime from Gypsies, we do see an increasing social problem which will probably get worse before it gets better (if it does). Interactions 25. While interrelationships of policies and groups is a complex social and political phenomenon, we wish to note three points which strike us as especially significant: (a) there is a close tie between religious affiliation and ethnic membership; (b) unlike such Communist countries as Poland, there is no discernible worker-intellectual linkage here; and (c) GOR will not tolerate existence of any organization, irre-
