711.252/3: Telegram [Document 376] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State SANTIAGO, October 6, 1927—6 p.m. [Received October 7—9:03 a.m.] 146. Minister of Foreign Affairs after studying German treaty is willing to negotiate on those general conditions but says Bolivia would have to be excepted because of economic situation and existing treaties and future political reconciliation. Last night Under Secretary told me both Peru and Bolivia would have to be excepted but Minister of Foreign Affairs mentioned only Bolivia. I told Under Secretary exception was too great. Minister of Foreign Affairs said he would have to create a commission on which Minister of Hacienda and Minister of Fomento would be represented. … Minister of Foreign Affairs said he would discuss matter with two colleagues mentioned and perhaps could give me a memorandum Monday, but when I asked if he would like to have you prepare a draft treaty he said yes enthusiastically. I suggest you rush it to me unless you can cable me what to draft by reference to German treaty. I have presented matter in such a manner that Minister of Foreign Affairs almost thinks he suggested it and I believe I have convinced him that to conclude a treaty would cover him with glory. [Paraphrase.] He informed me that he had recently negotiated commercial conventions with Germany and Spain. [End paraphrase.] I do not believe this is generally known. He assured me that nothing in them would prevent entering into treaty with us along these lines, that there is no favor granted that would be obstacle to our negotiations. I think I have inspired Minister of Foreign Affairs with desire to negotiate at once and it is barely possible that a treaty could be concluded in time to submit to Congress at its special session which it is now thought will convene on October 17th. I do not think any treaty can be concluded unless Bolivia is excepted and it is likely that Congress will insist Peru also be excepted. Minister of Foreign Affairs thinks congressional discussion would make it impossible to
