644 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 245. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1 Washington, April 7, 1980, 9–11:30 a.m. PARTICIPANTS The President The White House The Vice President Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski Mr. David Aaron State Mr. Hamilton Jordan Secretary Cyrus Vance Mr. Lloyd Cutler Deputy Secretary Christopher Mr. Jody Powell Defense CIA Deputy Secretary Claytor Admiral Stansfield Turner JCS NSC General David Jones Gary Sick (Notetaker) Justice Attorney General Civiletti MINUTES The President read the latest report of telephone contact with Bourguet in Tehran,2 then opened the meeting noting that the only item on the agenda was Iran. The last week had shown a profound change in the situation. The militants had offered to let the hostages be transferred to the custody of the Government, and the Government had refused. We are close to the point where we must take forceful action. We should inform the Allies privately and then publicly that they should break diplomatic relations with Iran, and we should prepare for forceful action, including the interruption of commerce. They need to know we have a very serious situation on our hands. We have bent over backwards, we have been patient and long suffering, and we could not have been more willing to wait for responsible action by Iran. The President saw no way we could raise the level of our activity on the diplomatic or negotiating front, including the actions of the five individuals (Capucci, Noland, Lang, Villalon and Bourguet) who have formed themselves into a crisis commission in Tehran. We have an 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H– Files), Box 57. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. 2 Not found. Swiss Chargé Kaiser reported that the final discussions within the Revolutionary Council took place “against the background of drastically worsening relations with Iraq, which are the actual dominating topic of the afternoon news.” He also noted: “These most recent developments with Iraq, behind which is also seen the work of U.S. imperialism, leave the impression that this issue is now the priority concern.” (Message from Kaiser to the Department of State, April 7; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 32, Subject File, Iran [Retained] 4/80)
