Arms Control and Disarmament 1235 not been high-­lighted, as it should be, and could be lost entirely in any future negotiations with the Soviets. It is this provision which would assist significantly in diminishing the threat of nuclear warfare. The cessation of nuclear testing, per se, need not contribute at all to the effec­ tive control of nuclear weapons. This fact was recently emphasized in the Eisenhower cablegram to Nehru, dated 15 December 1957, in which President Eisenhower said, “. . . however, I do not believe that we can accept a proposal to stop nuclear experiments as an isolated step, unac­ companied by any assurance that measures—which would go to the heart of the problem—would follow.” c. The new inspection zones proposed by Mr. Stassen are weighted heavily in favor of the Soviet Union. The Western USSR-­Central Europe zone includes the great majority of NATO installations and troop dis­ position while it covers only the East European satellites and a small portion of western USSR. The second zone proposed in Eastern Siberia, the Arctic, Northwestern United States, and Western Canada includes a sizable portion of the United States with many important military and industrial installations in exchange for a negligible coverage of compa­ rable Soviet territory and military installations. The Joint Chiefs of Staff do not object to the establishment of inspection zones in the general areas mentioned, but they take serious exception to the inequality in military and industrial significance of the zones proposed by Mr. Stassen. 3. In view of the foregoing, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, while recogniz­ ing the desirability of maintaining a reasonable position in the eyes of the world, recommend: a. Against the adoption of Mr. Stassen’s proposal. b. Adherence to the basic principles of the Four Power Proposals of 29 August 1957, while maintaining flexibility in stating our positions. For the Joint Chiefs of Staff: N.F. Twining Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff 290. Letter From Stassen to Eisenhower1 Washington, February 14, 1958 Dear Mr. President: On March 19, 1955 you requested that I make the studies and sub­ mit the recommendations for the policies of the United States in the 1 Source: Letter of resignation. No classification marking. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Administration Series, Stassen, Harold E., 1957.
