893.5045/137: Telegram [Document 534] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State PEKING, July 20, 1925—midnight. [Received July 21—6:44 a.m.] 282. Your telegram number 159, July 18, 4 p.m., concluding paragraph. 1. Shanghai Municipal Council has never actually proposed to the interested Legations to hold judicial inquiry. It has all along been dissatisfied, however, with the sending of the commission of diplomatic secretaries which investigated in behalf of the interested Legations; and in order to discredit the conclusions based thereon, certain members and adherents of the Council have instigated a vigorous agitation in the press to the effect that Council had been unfairly treated in having criticism of its action, based upon administrative rather than judicial inquiry. The suggestion most nearly approximated concrete form in an identic telegram of July 16, 5 p.m., in which American, British, and Japanese consuls advise their Legations (in connection with one of these incidental phases of the situation which I have not thought it worth while to take up with the Department by telegraph) that members of the Council had said they anticipated that Shanghai rate payers might pass resolution calling for judicial inquiry to be held on the understanding that the Council would abide by its findings. 2. It would seem that decision of heads of mission to act on the basis of report of the commission of secretaries was actuated by what at the time appeared to be the prospect that such treatment would most quickly and effectively tend to abate the antiforeign feeling aroused by the incident of May 30th. This expectation was disappointed by opposition on the part of the Council which was abetted by the British consul general and which has now received the support of the British Government in opposition to the recommendations of the British Chargé d’Affaires here. I make this comment on the failure of the method adopted by the heads of mission, not in criticism of their action (for my feeling is that had I been here I should probably have joined in their decisions), but in recognition of the fact that a new state of affairs has now been brought about which will necessitate something in the nature of a judicial inquiry in order alike to satisfy Chinese feeling and to avoid the perpetuation of such antagonism between the Shanghai community
