Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II tions. For the same reason, food supplies for hungry people in the poorest countries were curtailed when their needs were critical. In order to create a pattern for dealing with international food and agriculture, the Department of Agriculture is analyzing these programmanagement instruments and how they fit together: —Farmer-controlled stocks to be used primarily for stabilizing domestic market conditions in the interests of producers and consumers in the United States. —Government-controlled stocks to be used primarily for exercising the United States’ obligations in international agreements—both multilateral and bilateral—and in food-security and developmental arrangements with poor, food-deficit countries. —Adjustments in agricultural production in the United States, through acreage adjustments and other means, to maintain appropriate supplies for stocks and for current demand. —Bilateral and multilateral trading arrangements as they interact with the above instruments. We intend to complete much of this analysis by the end of 1977. We expect this analysis will yield legislative recommendations. Also, in analyzing the food and agricultural situations in developing and developed countries abroad, we are examining the range of instruments available to the United States for dealing with individual countries. Particular countries may be candidates simultaneously for food assistance, scientific and technical collaboration, commercial export-promotion, bilateral agreements, and multilateral commodity agreements. To fit this range of instruments to individual countries requires information, planning, and management which by and large have not been done until now. We also intend to complete a first round of these country plans by the end of 1977. Action I have outlined the several actions underway in the Department of Agriculture. The FY 1979 budget and the legislative agenda for 1978 will be vehicles for your taking decisions on items which represent significant new departures or financial commitments. Many of the items in this report should be included in formal Presidential messages at the beginning of 1978 and in speeches between now and then. My colleagues will work with Stuart Eizenstat to see that you receive recommended language for these messages and speeches. If you agree it will be useful, I will plan to present informal reports on international food and agriculture to you and the members of the Cabinet each quarter.
