December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
709
country to the Egyptians. They unlawfully occupied it. It was invaded
by Farouk.9
President Carter: They don’t claim Gaza.
Prime Minister Begin: I agree. We stand for that. But they were there
for nineteen years. So we must take that into account. We will negotiate
Gaza, and Judea and Samaria, also if Jordan does not join. But if Sadat
suggests Gaza first, I would not reject it, provided he leaves Judea and
Samaria. Sadat cannot give us peace in the east. Only Jordan can do
that. Only Jordan can work with us to introduce autonomy in Judea
and Samaria.
We must also write the words administrative council after self-
governing authority. We are not Bolsheviks. They dismissed the demo-
cratic elected assembly in 1917. This was the end of the only democratic
assembly in February. We don’t want to disperse a legislative council.
If it is an administrative council and it declares a Palestinian state, we
shall arrest them. We need iron-clad guarantees. The words adminis-
trative council should be added. We will negotiate with Egypt on Gaza,
if they give us a clear commitment that Egypt will not then be a party to
the negotiations on Judea and Samaria.
President Carter: That is a deviation from Camp David.
Prime Minister Begin: A deviation begins with the idea of Gaza first.
If Sadat departs by taking out Gaza, then we can change it. Let us go by
Camp David. If there is a deviation, we may consider it, but only on this
condition. I speak on behalf of the Government of Israel. Even if we get
together with Judea, Samaria, and Gaza, or we separate Gaza, then we
don’t deal with Egypt on the autonomy for Judea and Samaria. I re-
serve my right to consult with my colleagues on this.
Secretary Vance: Under Camp David, Israel, Egypt, and Jordan have
responsibility for negotiating the establishment of the self-governing au-
thority in Judea, Samaria, and Gaza. This letter precedes to do just that.
But if the implementation of the agreement on the West Bank proves to
be difficult, then the letter suggests that the implementation might take
place first in Gaza.
Prime Minister Begin: Yes, but then Egypt cannot be a partner to the
autonomy in Judea and Samaria. Together is all right, but if they are
separated, Egypt has no more to do with Judea and Samaria.
Secretary Vance: Let me clarify. There will be negotiations for one
year after ratification. There are three tasks: agreement on the modal-
ities on elections; agreement on the powers and responsibilities of the
self-governing authority; agreement on other related matters. Agree-
ment would have to be reached on three topics. Then there would be
9 Farouk I, King of Egypt from 1936 until 1952.
