National Security Policy 765 Admiral Parker. Admiral Radford then said that Parker’s briefing was not very good. He recalled that we are concentrating on small weap­ ons. He said that General Lemnitzer and Admiral Burke had told him that there was no real difference between the State and the Defense language, but that they preferred the State language. Admiral Radford said that the State language would require a US capability to fight a limited war with or without nuclear weapons. He pointed out that the earlier policy on nuclear weapons had already been watered down. Their use now is only authorized to meet national objectives and not military objectives. He said this change fuzzed up the issue. The President then speculated about what type of force one would have to employ, say, if our intervention in Cuba was requested. He later concluded that no nuclear capability would be required in such case. The President said that he thought we were having difficulty because we were trying to find generalized language to cover a multitude of contingencies. The President said we need plans to guide the various levels of the military. Certainly our forces need to have nuclear weapons. The real problem was when would the weapons be used. Admiral Radford said that if there was any chance that our forces would have to fight without nuclear weapons, a whole different force structure would be required. The President said that he had seen studies indicating that the availability of nuclear weapons does not result in a saving of manpower. Admiral Radford then went back to the 1953 decision on the “new look”. The President recalled that the pre-­Korea military budget had gone down to about $11 or $12 billion and that was where he and Louis Johnson differed. The Secretary then reverted to the Cuban discussion and agreed with the Presidents conclusions. The President said that we have no lack of conventional weapons. Secretary McElroy pointed out that nuclear weapons were not useful for close-­in fighting. It was generally agreed that the Latin American area offered no problem. The President said what we needed was a meeting of the minds and not fixed slogans. He said all agreed that one should not use a sledge hammer to drive tacks. Secretary McElroy said that the present language suited him and that any changes would be misinterpreted to suit the preconceptions of various people. He said that unless a policy change was to be made, we should not change the language.
