1264
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
with me in order to discuss how to get the negotiations moving again
and to make plans for the next negotiating sessions.
It will not be possible to get word from Egypt until sometime
Sunday8 as to whether this course of procedure is agreeable, and we
shall then have to make sure that Israel is fully in accord. Conceivably
all this might be worked out in time for Ed Muskie to say something
about it in the course of his speech Monday noon.
8 June 8.
381.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Israel and Egypt1
Washington, June 7, 1980, 1220Z
150415. For Ambassador for Urgent Delivery June 7. Subject: Letter
for President Sadat.
1. (S-entire text)
2. Please deliver the following message from President Carter to
President Sadat as soon as possible.2
3. Begin text:
Dear President Sadat:
I have been, as you know, greatly concerned about the hiatus in the
autonomy negotiations. I believe that it is of the foremost importance to
the success of these negotiations that they be resumed as soon as pos-
sible. I am convinced that failure to resume the negotiations will only
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat,
1–6/80. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original
was received in the White House Situation Room. Drafted by A. Marks (S/SN); cleared
by Sterner, Raymond G. Seitz (S/S) and Jane E. Taylor (S/S–O); approved by Linowitz.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880143–1901) The draft version
of the message was forwarded to Carter for his approval under a June 6 covering memo-
randum from Brzezinski. Initialing his approval on the covering memorandum, which
states that the message was drafted by Linowitz, Carter added a handwritten note: “It
sounds like nothing. I hope it works. J.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-
zinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt:
President Anwar al-Sadat, 1–6/80)
2 Atherton delivered Carter’s message to Mubarak on June 8 for delivery to Sadat
who was in Ismailia. (Telegram 12715 from Cairo, June 8; Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 19, Egypt: 6/80)
