598 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV We have some specific concerns about the military, political-­ diplomatic and economic areas of the US/Soviet balance as assessed by CNA–78. Military Balance—CNA appraisals of strategic and power projection force trends are too somber, the positive NATO trends may be somewhat overstated and theater nuclear forces are discussed only eliptically. —Strategic Forces. We agree that the Minuteman survivability problem will be with us earlier than anticipated but the paper conveys undue alarm. • This year’s CG shows a substantial increase in US capability, whether or not we deploy MX, and a US advantage over the Soviets after 1986. If MX is not deployed, we will almost certainly advance the Trident II and CMC IOCs and accelerate production of missiles, submarines, CMCs and cruise missiles. • The report does not address the survivability of each side’s forces. For example, only 20% of our warheads, but 70% of theirs, are in ICBMs. Both sides’ ICBMs can become vulnerable, placing the Soviets in a worse situation. • The statement that adverse strategic trends result from US program trends is not sound. In fact, we are in the midst of a major strategic forces modernization drive—­with ALCM, Trident SSBNs, Trident I missiles and MK–12A all coming on line soon. • The CNA recommendation for greater emphasis on limited nuclear options (LNO) is a highly contentious one which would require detailed interagency study. • The paper does not consider the capability of US forces to meet their basic deterrent tasks. —European balance. As far as we can tell, the CNA judgments are not based on any rigorous analysis of changes in NATO and Warsaw Pact forces (e.g. ratio of Armored Division Equivalents or of tactical aircraft). We agree that NATO has begun to improve the military situation but the CNA may be too optimistic given Western economic constraints. This year’s CG shows that no significant change in the balance can yet be measured and that we need to pursue the LTDP and maintain our European emphasis through the 1980s to have an important impact on the balance. —Theater Nuclear Forces (TNF). CNA–78 expresses concern over the evident political problems but does not analyze the complex military issues involved and exaggerates the implications for Germany. It also fails to note encouraging allied progress toward a dual modernization/arms control strategy and the real possibility that these two policy instruments may be able to resolve our TNF problem. —Power Projection. The paper offers no evidence to support the judgment that the trend has favored the Soviets during the last two
