422 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX addition to Soviet directives, a feeling of insecurity and ineffectiveness within the GDR leadership. 6. Poorer GDR economic performance: This ineffectiveness was most apparent in the economic field where a decline in the quality and availability of moderate-priced consumer goods was quite evident after a one-year absence. All contacts believed that this deterioration was genuine and would be of long duration, reflecting the basic inefficiency of the East German economy and the poor planning and economic leadership of the regime. Most assumed that the worsening of inner- German ties would lead to even poorer economic performance in the future due to reduced access to Western technology and lower worker motivation as Western consumer goods become more scarce. In general, most contacts saw a difficult period ahead for the East German economy and especially for the average working family. 7. GDR domestic political climate: Internal political policies of the regime appear to have tightened in the past year but not to the point of affecting people’s day-to-day lives. None of the reporting officer’s contacts were in any way reluctant to meet with him openly. The change was more one of a loss of confidence in the ability of a freethinking individual to coexist with the GDR system without encountering serious problems in the future. The emigration of many prominent cultural and dissident figures to the West in the past year was mentioned frequently as a reflection of the increasing inability of the East German system to accommodate any publicized differences of opinion on political and social questions. The departure of Guenter Kunert and Rudolf Bahro were particularly cited as having deprived East German society of figures of moral and intellectual stature. Partly as a consequence of this loss of confidence, the reporting officer observed a sharp increase among his non-church contacts of interest in the possibility of following these writers to the West. 8. Comment: When the reporting officer arrived in East Berlin in mid-1977 the popular mood was one of cautious but genuine optimism about the future of East-West relations, broadening of ties with West Germany, and East German economic, political and cultural prospects. By the time of his departure in mid-1979 this optimism had considerably eroded but there still existed a general view that the coming years would be ones of progress and gradual improvement in these areas, albeit more slowly. By mid-October 1980 this optimism had collapsed. In its place is a general negativism about the future of life in the GDR and a genuine dread that Europe may once again be on the road to war. Even those individuals who believe that their own lives will not be significantly worse in the years to come foresee a more difficult life for the average East German and considerable social problems for the society in the near future. It is the reporting officer’s impression that
