First Responses to Tunis was cut short because of the Mecca incident,5 he probably did not have the opportunity to raise it. Still, it is worth a try.) I asked Fahd if he thought that the Lebanese Shi’a leaders might have any influence on Khomeini. Fahd noted that since the disappearance of the Imam Musa Sadr, there is no acknowledged Lebanese Shi’a leader. He frankly did not know whom to suggest, but said he would consider the matter further. Later in the conversation, he suddenly reverted to this theme and said he would be seeing Lebanese politician Saeb Salaam the next day and would ask him. (I am not sure Salaam can help much, since he is Sunni.) It might be worth following up on this with Fahd, although the prospects are limited. Fahd had two other points on Iran. First, he was extremely curious about the Shah’s state of health. Did the Shah really have cancer and, if so, how serious is it? (I think his curiosity was prompted primarily by suspicion that we may have allowed the Shah in under a pretext of the need for medical treatment.) In asking these questions, he showed no signs of hostility toward the Shah, but also no particular affection. Second, after I had told him that the blocking of Iranian assets was prompted by the need to assure that American claims against Iran will be settled, Fahd wanted to know what the extent of these American claims might be. Again, he did not criticize our action, but I did sense an underlying uneasiness on his part over the freezing. Since I did not have specific information on either of these two points, I limited my comments to an assurance that I understood (a) the Shah is indeed seriously ill and (b) the American claims are sizeable, though I had no specific information on their exact amount. You may wish to consider instructing Ambassador West to provide clarification to Fahd on these two points. Talk With Chatti (November 16) Chatti, who has just taken over the function of Secretary-General of the Islamic Conference, had relatively little to offer. [Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
