First Responses
109
to Tunis was cut short because of the Mecca incident,5 he probably did
not have the opportunity to raise it. Still, it is worth a try.)
I asked Fahd if he thought that the Lebanese Shi’a leaders might
have any influence on Khomeini. Fahd noted that since the disappear-
ance of the Imam Musa Sadr, there is no acknowledged Lebanese Shi’a
leader. He frankly did not know whom to suggest, but said he would
consider the matter further. Later in the conversation, he suddenly
reverted to this theme and said he would be seeing Lebanese politician
Saeb Salaam the next day and would ask him. (I am not sure Salaam
can help much, since he is Sunni.) It might be worth following up on
this with Fahd, although the prospects are limited.
Fahd had two other points on Iran. First, he was extremely curious
about the Shah’s state of health. Did the Shah really have cancer and,
if so, how serious is it? (I think his curiosity was prompted primarily
by suspicion that we may have allowed the Shah in under a pretext
of the need for medical treatment.) In asking these questions, he showed
no signs of hostility toward the Shah, but also no particular affection.
Second, after I had told him that the blocking of Iranian assets was
prompted by the need to assure that American claims against Iran will
be settled, Fahd wanted to know what the extent of these American
claims might be. Again, he did not criticize our action, but I did sense
an underlying uneasiness on his part over the freezing. Since I did not
have specific information on either of these two points, I limited my
comments to an assurance that I understood (a) the Shah is indeed
seriously ill and (b) the American claims are sizeable, though I had no
specific information on their exact amount. You may wish to consider
instructing Ambassador West to provide clarification to Fahd on these
two points.
Talk With Chatti (November 16)
Chatti, who has just taken over the function of Secretary-General
of the Islamic Conference, had relatively little to offer.
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
5 On the morning of November 20, approximately 200 Islamic students attending
the Islamic University of Medina, attacked and occupied the Grand Mosque in Mecca.
The attackers were led by Juhaiman ibn Muhammad ibn Saif al-Utaibi, who claimed to
be motivated by opposition to the Saudi ruling family. After receiving permission from
the ulema to bear arms in a holy place, the Saudi Arabian National Guard (SANG) tried
unsuccessfully to regain control of the mosque. Approximately 127 people died. Two
weeks later, a coordinated assault by the Saudi military, under instructions from three
French special operations commanders, defeated the students, leaving 250 dead and 600
wounded. By November 27, the Saudi Government had regained complete control of
the mosque. Al-Utaibi was subsequently found to have been a member of SANG. Sixty-
three people, including al-Utaibi, were publicly beheaded on January 9, 1980, for partici-
pation in the attack. For the U.S. reaction to the attack, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula, Documents 201–205.
