International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
81
lightful a setting as Puerto Rico or as splendid as Rambouillet,2 but
there is a small garden in the back if you wish to walk around. In the
past we have made a major effort to keep the same group together
throughout all meetings. But I know that the French Prime Minister
must return to Paris tomorrow and his place will be taken by M. Boulin.
I know President Carter also wants to make a change, but as far as pos-
sible we should try to keep the same people around the table.
Also it was agreed that at this meeting the EC would be repre-
sented by the President of the Council, namely me. The President of the
Commission will be present on matters of EC competence—trade,
North-South and energy—to be discussed tomorrow.
As far as agenda is concerned, I propose that we start with a dis-
cussion of the economic situation and, if you agree, devote the after-
noon to proliferation and human rights. I would like to ask President
Giscard to begin the discussion of the world economic situation. I will
inform President Jenkins today of any matters which arise which are in
the competence of the EC.
With regard to substance, I feel that there has been good prepara-
tion for the Summit by our officials. They have met and exchanged
views, thereby providing us with a valuable starting ground. Some of
these issues are most easily handled by officials, but some will require
the thoughtful consideration of those of us sitting around this table. On
North-South, for instance, it is a matter of high importance that we de-
velop a common view. We do not necessarily have to put in the com-
munique everything we decide. We can make a general statement, but
more important is what we agree among ourselves.
GENERAL ECONOMIC SITUATION
If you will allow me to put the ball into play. There are a range of
different views on the health of the world economy. We ought to record
our successes. For instance, a few years ago we all thought it unlikely
that you could have the sort of deep depression we have had and resist
protectionism so successfully. There are of course examples of protec-
tionism, but there has generally been strong resistance. This has been
helped by the Puerto Rico and Rambouillet Summits and the OECD
trade pledges.3 This is a success we should record. None of us believes
in protectionism and the best way now to avoid it is if we give one an-
other combined strength.
2 See footnote 7, Document 21.
3 See footnote 6, Document 4.
