Hungary 521 4. (C) Hungary in the 1980’s—Although Hungary’s economic performance and management has been better than in most Eastern European countries, the nation will confront serious problems in the next decade, over many of which the Hungarians have no control. —As elsewhere in Eastern Europe, Hungary faces the prospect of significantly decreased economic growth in the 1980’s. Hungary is particularly vulnerable to international economic pressures, worldwide inflation and the rising cost and uncertain availability of energy) since it depends on imports for 80 percent of its raw materials and now exports 50 percent of its GNP (25 percent of its trade is with the West). —As a result, the next five-year plan projects only a 7–9 percent increase in personal income. Over the last decade, however, the Hungarian populace has been accustomed to steady, perceptible increases in the standard of living. The political cost of a modest, albeit realistic, economic strategy designed to preserve rather than improve existing lifestyles will be a major factor in the Hungarian leadership’s calculations over the next five years. An austere economic policy could also hinder the Party’s ability to implement fully the economic reform program. —The Helsinki Final Act and relaxed East-West atmosphere of the 1970’s served as an umbrella by which Hungary promoted its economic, political and cultural ties with Western Europe and the US. Any additional chill in East-West relations forcing a cutback of these relations will have serious implications for Hungary. —The uncertainties surrounding the Soviet succession and the possibility of the passing of the now 68 year old Kadar also raise questions about the long-term outlook of Hungary. “Can Kadarism survive Kadar?” remains an important question. Kadar has changed the perspectives of a generation of Hungarians and his overall approach has been widely accepted. But many of his policies are more stylistic adaptations of Communist policy rather than substantive institutional changes. For the moment Kadar appears healthy enough. Most Hungarians, however, prefer not to think about what might happen when he goes. 5. (C) Implications of Polish events—The Hungarian Party has reviewed the internal situation in the wake of Polish events. It has congratulated itself on the efficacy of Kadar’s economic reform policies but has also taken steps to promote a more aggressive, public role for Hungary’s controlled trade unions. Underlying the Party’s professions of confidence (bordering on smugness) that it has the situation under control is a genuine fear that the Polish example could present a political alternative and challenge to the Party. The Hungarian populace seems to be impressed that the Polish workers have so far “got away with it” by creating their own unions and base of power. The 1956 experience, however, continues to condition the Hungarian perspective toward the
