156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 44. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, July 14, 1977, 10–11:35 a.m. PARTICIPANTS The President The Vice President The Secretary of State The Secretary of the Treasury Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski Ambassador Walter Stoessel Ambassador Henry Owen Assistant Secretary of State George Vest Gregory F. Treverton, NSC Staff Member, Notetaker Harry Obst, State Department Interpreter The Chancellor Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher Ambassador Berndt von Staden State Secretary Manfred Schueler State Secretary Klaus Boelling Assistant Secretary for Political Affairs Juergen Ruhfus Assistant Secretary Dieter Hiss Director, Political Office, Klaus Blech Mrs. Gisela Niederste-Ostholt, Interpreter for Minister Genscher [Omitted here are opening remarks and discussion of MBFR and SALT.] General Economic Issues Secretary Blumenthal commented that there was total agreement in his discussions with the Chancellor the previous day on the nature of the economic problems facing the developed countries and on the need for full cooperation between the FRG and the U.S., and among the developed countries, although there were some differences of emphasis on particular measures which should be applied.2 The rise in oil prices has caused large imbalances on current account in many countries, ac- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 35, Memcons: President: 7/77. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. Schmidt paid an official visit to Washington July 13–15. During a meeting on July 13, Carter and Schmidt discussed, among other issues, the multilateral trade negotiations. Noting the importance of “rapid movement in MTN,” Carter asked for Schmidt’s help in encouraging French movement in the negotiations. Carter and Schmidt also discussed the problems posed by Japanese trading practices. (Memorandum of conversation, July 13; ibid.) 2 Blumenthal, Solomon, and Bergsten met with Schmidt on July 13 from 5 until 6:15 p.m. at Blair House. A memorandum of conversation of the meeting is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Files of Walter J. Stoessel, 1959–82, Lot 82D307, Box 3, Ambassador—Chron Memos for the Record—1976–77.
