Chapter 2, January–June 1989 59 goals, such as finding a solution that permits both sides to explore the feasibility of strategic defenses while providing them with predictability about the evolution of the future strategic relationship. NST resumption. Looking beyond Moscow to NST resumption, there will be strong support (from OSD, the VP’s office, and perhaps ACDA) for maintaining our current positions. The argument will be made, with justification, that sorting out the impact of the President’s SDI decision on the pace and structure of the program will take time, and changes in our negotiating position would therefore be premature. Reinforcing that view is the widespread belief that the impasse in D&S is likely to last until START is nearing completion; so there is no need to move now. There is merit in this argument. If budgetary and technological realities force continued delays in the SDI program and if progress in our ICBM modernization programs alleviates at least some of our concerns about vulnerability, the necessary compromises on D&S may become politically easier. However, some issues will always be politically difficult (e.g., “right to deploy”), especially in the endgame, and a case can be made for disposing of them soon. The START/D&S dilemma. Theoretically, there are three ways the obstacle created by Soviet linkage can be removed: — De-­link. The Soviets would drop their linkage and allow START to enter into force while D&S remained unresolved. While this is not likely, it is possible, especially if the Soviets grew impatient for START and if they calculated that, given Congressional, budgetary, and, technological constraints on SDI, additional legal constraints were unnecessary. For us, the benefit of this approach is that we could achieve START without having to face tough choices in D&S. A downside is that, with SDI testing issues left unresolved, the Soviets might try to manipulate our internal SDI debate by threatening to end START if we exceeded the narrow interpretation. — D&S agreement on our terms. START could be completed without de-­linkage if the Soviets agreed to our D&S proposals. Not only would START go forward, but winning Soviet approval for the broad interpretation could insulate SDI from domestic pressures. But it is hard to imagine the Soviets agreeing to this unless they have a complete change of heart on SDI. — D&S agreement on compromise terms. This would require finding compromises on tough issues such as testing. But if solutions could be found compatible with a healthy SDI program, this approach would enable us to have START as well as a clear regime on ABM testing that would insulate the program from Soviet pressures. The downside is that any compromise solution short of legalizing full broad interpretation testing rights will be criticized by some as selling out SDI.
