964
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
305.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, June 15, 1978
SUBJECT
Legislative Constraints on Foreign Assistance
Secretary Vance’s memo at Tab A, prepared at your request,2
transmits a detailed list (Tab 1) of existing legislative constraints on our
authority to carry out U.S. military and economic assistance programs
and a list of proposed renewals or new constraints (Tab 2).3 He also rec-
ommends actions to deal with these restraints.
This list offers persuasive evidence that your complaint about leg-
islative interference is well founded. Secretary Vance points out that
the restrictions fall into three general categories:
1. Conditional Restrictions. These are provisions that allow certain
actions to be taken only if it is first determined that specified criteria are
met and that the Congress is so informed.
2. Prohibitions. These prevent the granting of assistance by naming
countries explicitly or by setting forth criteria that trigger such action
automatically.
3. Congressional Veto. Some restrictions provide for Congressional
approval or veto of actions you propose to take.
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
File, Box 92, 6/19/78 [2]. Confidential. Sent to Carter under cover of a June 17 note from
Hutcheson, who wrote: “The attached memorandum was received by my office midday
today. Dr. Brzezinski’s office has requested that you review this memo at your soonest
convenience as the State Department must testify on Monday [June 19]. Due to time con-
straints, I have been unable to get thorough White House staff review of this memo, par-
ticularly from Frank Moore’s office. This is being forwarded to you at this time for your
information.” (Ibid.)
2 During a May 25 news conference in Chicago, Carter made a statement on foreign
assistance programs in which he said: “Some of the legislation governing these foreign
aid programs has the effect of placing very narrow limits on where and when they can be
used. Some of these limitations, though they were enacted many years ago and under
special circumstances, continue to be entirely appropriate and advisable today. Others
may be outmoded. For that reason, I have concluded that we should review the full range
of legislation which now governs the operation of these programs. I’ve asked the Secre-
tary of State to conduct this review and to consult with Congress constantly in preparing
the study for me. We want to take a careful look at whether our legislation and proce-
dures are fully responsive to the challenges that we face today.” For the text of Carter’s
statement, as well as the ensuing question-and-answer session with members of the
press, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book I, pp.
972–979. No written request to Vance to undertake this review was found.
3 Neither of the tabs to Vance’s memorandum was attached.
