3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
762
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
ZB: Is this consistent with the conversations which we had with
the Soviets on the subject?
HB: We did not like what the Soviets were doing before and we do
not like this.
Lloyd Cutler: We have to keep in mind that the Church2 reservation
is now on the record and that it complicates the President’s decision.
ZB: CIA should bring us up to date on what we have.
Bruce Clarke: [1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified]
ZB: How often have such exercises taken place in the past?
BC: About semi-annually.
ZB: Is this normal training or are the Soviets perhaps sending us a
signal?
Secretary Vance: I think that may well be what they are doing.
LC: In the various consultations we had with the Soviets about this
we certainly gave Anatoly3 the word not to hold such exercises.
BC: We flew an SR–71 mission two weeks ago [1 line not declassi-
fied] We also have an SR–71 on standby. [1½ lines not declassified] You
should all be aware that in connection with the Jack Anderson article of
Tuesday,4 a man from our staff met with Senator Percy, Bader, and Rick
Inderfurth and gave essentially the same commentary that Hodding
Carter made the day before. We left the group with an impression and
this will have to be corrected.
David Aaron: The first operational question is how we handle this
as an intelligence matter. Then we have to deal with Congressional and
public aspects.
ZB: How long do we have before we must be ready to make a
public statement?
CV: Not more than 24 hours. Some time tomorrow we have to de-
cide what to say publicly about this.
ZB: David should hold a meeting with State and with others to
draft Q’s and A’s and to make recommendations on how we deal with
the subject.
DA: One thing the President raised previously on SR–71 flights is
the question of why we should not cross the island, instead of flying up
and down alongside it, thereby minimizing its exposure. DOD should
consider this suggestion and come up with a reply. Any public state-
2 Senator Frank Church (D-Idaho). See “Senator Church Charges Moscow Has a
Brigade of Troops in Cuba,” The New York Times, August 31, 1979, p. A2.
3 Soviet Ambassador to the United States Dobrynin.
4 Reference is to Jack Anderson’s February 26 article in The Washington Post, entitled
“Kremlin Stirs a New Crisis in Cuba.”
