World Hunger and Food Policy 829 ment Decade. Harry Chapin picked this up and said that the Commissioners should be fully informed of these conferences and the U.S. position in them. Grant also suggested that as an alternative to the existing food aid program, there should be a global food stamp program. He estimated that this would cost about $5 billion. The second agenda item was the discussion of an overview paper,2 which had been prepared to highlight those areas that the Commissioners believed they should address. They accepted that their overriding priority is to work for the “amelioration and eradication of hunger as experienced by the poor”. Then there was quite a bit of talk about the appropriate definition of hunger and malnutrition and whether the Commission should categorically state that the “trickle down” theory of development has been a failure. The paper mentioned that 20 million Americans were hungry. Some Commissioners noted this and stated that the Commission should investigate hunger in the US and what official programs were addressing the problem. Senator Dole and Orville Freeman agreed that dwelling on the hunger in the US would be counter-productive, that adequate programs are available and U.S. hunger is not as serious as it once was. It was generally agreed that the Commission maintain an international focus. In its discussion of famine, the paper suggested that the U.S. establish an International Emergency Food Reserve. Most of the group was enthusiastic about this. Orville Freeman noted that famine would be averted in many cases if a pricing mechanism were in place that stabilized the price of wheat. The issue of whether hunger can be eradicated at this point in time became quite contentious. John Denver said that there was enough food in the world and the American people deserve to know it. Norman Borlaug and Walter Falcon stressed that Denver was missing the point, the problem is to produce where hunger is prevalent. The paper then broke the overall problem of hunger into 4 basic components: a) production, b) accessibility, c) consumption, and d) trade. a) Production—Borlaug and Falcon both cited the need for more research on semi-arid growing conditions. Harry Chapin brought up the issue of land reform and argued that it was the basic step in increasing production. Freeman and Falcon cautioned him that land re- 2 Not found.
