Bolivia 199 production had dropped considerably in the first quarter of 1960 and a sizeable deficit was probable this year.3 He said we understood that Mr. Clark4 of the IMF had talked to President Siles about this matter.5 It appeared that action was needed in order to take those measures, such as the dismissal of a large number of surplus miners and elimination of commissary losses, which were required if a bad inflationary spiral were to be avoided.6 Mr. Rubottom hoped that the necessary action would be taken, although he realized it might not be possible to institute some measures until after the elections. Mr. Rubottom also referred to the attack by a large number of demonstrators on April 26 against the building housing the Servicios in Cochabamba. He said that he understood that the police had eventually arrived and provided adequate protection, but he deplored the irresponsible actions of the Confederation of Construction Workers.7 Andrade replied that he was not familiar with this incident, but would inquire regarding the circumstances. Following the discussion in Mr. Rubottom’s office the Ambassador and Mr. Pitts continued the discussion along the following lines: Should an agreement be reached with Patiño, Andrade said the GOB would probably then approach the Department in an effort to obtain assistance in financing such a settlement. The Ambassador pointed out that the Bolivian government simply did not have the required funds with which to pay Patiño and would, therefore, have to look to lending institutions of the United States Government or to the IBRD and commercial banks for help with this matter. Mr. Pitts replied that he could not encourage Andrade regarding possible action by the USG. Andrade commented that he had been assured that once a settlement of Bolivia’s outstanding bonded indebtedness had been concluded, the GOB would be able to obtain funds from the IBRD. Although an agreement was reached and payments were being made to the bondholders, the GOB had not obtained assistance from the IBRD as it was unable to finance the studies required before presenting proposals to the IBRD. Andrade added that COMIBOL was badly in need of funds with which to purchase new equipment and improve its activities. He said that should a settlement with Patiño not improve the GOB’s credit standing to the 3 Reference is to telegram 619 from La Paz, April 27, 1960, which reported that Comibol’s deficit might be predicted at $12 million for 1960. (824.10/4–2760) 4 George J. Clark, resident IMF representative in Bolivia, June 1959–June 1961. 5 Telegram 619 reported that Clark informed Siles on April 25 that the Government of Bolivia must take drastic measures to cut Comibol losses or face a serious financial crisis. 6 Telegram 619 stated that the situation required dismissal of large numbers of surplus miners, closing marginal mines, elimination of commissary losses, and other drastic measures, but stated that Siles was unlikely to take such action before elections. 7 The incident was reported to the Department in telegram 615, from La Paz, April 26, 1960, 724.00/4-2660, and telegram 620, from La Paz, April 27, 1960, 724.00/4-2760.
