30
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
from the tribes or the religious conservatives, or had become embroiled
in a confrontation with Pakistan.
Although Islamabad would be less inclined than Tehran to inter-
vene in Afghanistan, an Afghan-initiated confrontation with Pakistan
appears more likely. Moscow, however, would try to discourage
Afghanistan from embarking on any confrontation at least until the
Taraki government consolidates its power. The Afghan Communists
may well see a revival of the Pushtunistan dispute, which involves the
status of western Pakistan, where Pushtuns predominate, as a way to
win domestic tribal support or distract attention from any increasingly
repressive measures introduced in Afghanistan. Moreover, the Com-
munists have tended to press the issue, and have been critical of
Daoud’s accommodation with Islamabad. As Communists they would
expect stronger support from Moscow against Pakistan than previous
Afghan governments, and probably would receive it. There already
have been a few indications—such as the flying of Pushtun flags in
Kabul after the coup—that the new government does see Pushtunistan
as an issue it can use. Moreover, a few of the leading supporters of
Pushtunistan in Pakistan are Communists.
Pakistani reaction will depend on how hard Kabul pushes the issue.
The Pakistanis are capable, in the absence of more aggressive action,
of putting up with propaganda on the issue although they would
reciprocate in kind. If the Afghans become too strident or too active,
Pakistan can close the main roads across the border, interrupting a
large part of landlocked Afghanistan’s foreign trade. Such a move
would increase Afghan dependence on the USSR for a trade route.
There is some evidence that a serious tribal rebellion in 1975 was
instigated by the Pakistanis when they decided Daoud had gone too
far in supporting separatists in Pakistan. Should the Afghans become
too active in support of separatists, Pakistan might resort to punitive
and preemptive raids into Afghanistan. The possibility of a Soviet
reaction, however, would probably deter the Pakistanis from a full-
scale invasion of Afghanistan.
The Soviet View
The Soviets welcome the establishment of a pro-Soviet, Commu-
nist-controlled government in Afghanistan. In itself a major gain for
Moscow, this development is significant also as the first leftist victory
in a year otherwise marked by the establishment of moderate and
conservative governments in South Asia.
Moscow’s interest in Afghanistan predates the Bolshevik revolu-
tion. Over the last quarter century, the Soviet Union has made a consid-
erable investment in its southern neighbor. Afghanistan was the first
recipient of Soviet aid, and is still among the 10 largest recipients
