National Security Policy  371
this meeting could be an important springboard for proposing vital 
questions looking to the future of our defense posture.
I recalled to the President’s attention that the current study was 
based upon an attack pattern not addressed strictly to military targets 
but was based upon his directive that the attack pattern be designed 
to paralyze the Russian nation without, however, excluding military 
targets which would contribute to this objective. Thus, the study was 
an urban industrial-military mix with the emphasis on industrial urban 
resulting in effective paralysis with fewer weapons and less kiloton­
nage than used in the 1957 attack pattern. Incidentally, I reported to the 
President that in my judgment, he would not find the 1958 study “too 
academic in nature” as he had feared and had indicated to me in an 
earlier conversation.
Inasmuch as our military force requirements, including numbers 
and types of weapons and delivery systems were based entirely upon 
the purposes of our retaliatory force, the targeting system was central 
to our long-­range planning with overwhelming implications for future 
defense budgets.
I then said to the President that I felt this was very closely related 
to the review of 5410/1 now in process. I reported that Robert Cutler 
had started this review in April and I had carried it forward at innu­
merable meetings of the Planning Board without an agreement as to the 
kind of paper that should go to the Council. I indicated to the President 
that in my judgment, we could not separate the question of effective 
deterrence from the question of war objectives and neither could be 
separated from our targeting plans. I then posed for the President the 
first problem in connection with 5410/1, which was whether we needed 
such a paper at all, expressing the judgment that the paper, as written in 
March 1954, was out of date and should either be updated or rescinded.
The President expressed his doubt as to our ability to do effec­
tive planning against a situation of mutual devastation. However, he 
approved the notion of bringing a discussion paper to the Council.
I suggested to him then that he might wish, following the presen­
tation by the Net Evaluation Subcommittee, to ask for a study of the 
targeting system for his consideration.
The President felt that I should raise this question and that I had a 
sufficient basis for it by reason of the directive he gave for the different 
targeting system to be used in this year’s exercise. I then told him that I 
would make the effort to relate such an appraisal to the question of war 
objectives and seek to pull all of these matters together, which would 
also include weapons requirements.
I then reported to the President that with respect to the Defense 
budget, one of the recommendations he might have to face was one to 
cancel out the TITAN program. I reminded him that this might present
