1108
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
mediately. Congressional action could be taken as early as Friday3 of
this week, or certainly during the first week of December before the
Congress adjourns.4
G. William Miller5
3 November 21.
4 The House of Representatives did not pass the bill, H.R. 6811, before the end of the
year. According to Congress and the Nation: “The House was to have taken up HR 6811—
H Rept 96–1015 during the lame-duck session, but proponents of the bill could find no
more than 25 to 30 Republicans who would vote for it—not enough to ensure a majority.
And C.W. Bill Young (R–Florida), threatened to offer amendments that could have
snarled the bill in lengthy floor fights. At that point, the House leadership decided to
drop the bill for 1980.” (Congress and the Nation, vol. V, 1977–1980, p. 88)
5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
354.
Paper Prepared by Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff1
Washington, undated
NORTH-SOUTH AFFAIRS: EVALUATIVE COMMENTS—
RETROSPECTIVE AND PROSPECTIVE
The United States was not ready during the past few years for a
forward policy across the broad range of North-South affairs. The
Carter Administration occurred during a time of tight resources. Had
resources been more abundant we could have made more of an impact,
but even in a time of plenty it is questionable whether the United States
would be willing to devote the kinds of resources required to make a
qualitative change in North-South relations. And this is a vital
consideration:
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 34, (NSC
Accomplishments—North/South Policy: 12/80). No classification marking. On De-
cember 5, Thornton sent Brzezinski another paper entitled “The Carter Administration
and North/South Issues: The First Year (The View from the NSC).” In his cover memo-
randum, Thornton wrote that he had “put together a history of the first year of
North-South policy in the Carter Administration. This was the formative period and the
one where I was most concerned;” he also indicated his uncertainty as to whether “this is
exactly what you wanted but it is the most useful thing that I could put together.”
Thornton concluded his cover memorandum to Brzezinski: “Having been put into a re-
flective mood by all of this (and, more important, having had time for reflection for the
first time in four years) I may also do a shorter, more evaluative piece. If so, I will send
you a copy.” (Ibid.)
