90 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI In the future, conventionally-­armed SLCMs may have sufficient accuracy to hold some of the same targets at risk. (S) Thus far, U.S. attempts to find an effective verification regime for nuclear-­armed SLCMs have been unsuccessful. Verifying a ban or limits on nuclear SLCMs—­with the requirement to distinguish between nuclear and conventional SLCMs—­remains very difficult at best. Verification schemes would also have to be designed so as not to disrupt naval operational plans or undermine our policy to “neither confirm nor deny” the presence or absence of nuclear weapons on ships. These elements make verification of SLCM limits in START particularly difficult. (S) The United States deploys nuclear-­armed SLCMs to perform a number of important missions. First, nuclear-­armed Tomahawk SLCMs provide a continuously-­deployed, world-­wide nuclear deterrent presence that is both visible and free to move in international waters. Because SLCMs are spread over a large number and variety of platforms (some of them submarines), they complicate any Soviet effort to destroy U.S. nuclear retaliatory capability, and thereby enhance stability. Second, these systems help deter Soviet attacks on our naval forces by Soviet land-­based naval bombers armed with nuclear anti-­ship missiles, by threatening nuclear retaliation against naval and air bases on Soviet territory. Threatening to retaliate with nuclear weapons against Soviet surface ships alone is an inadequate deterrent, for the Soviets would accept such a trade, given the far greater U.S. dependence on naval forces for security. Deployment of nuclear-­armed, land-­attack SLCMs underscores U.S. policy that we will not permit the Soviets to confine a nuclear war to the sea. Third, a portion of the deployed nuclear-­armed SLCM force will be dedicated to the nuclear reserve force; because they are highly survivable (especially on submarines), highly flexible, and carry a single warhead, they are ideally suited for this role. The remainder of the nuclear-­armed SLCM force will be available to theater commanders, and may ultimately play a vital role in support of flexible response options in post-INF Europe. (S) None of these requirements would be eliminated under a nuclear SLCM ban. However, there are differing views as to whether other systems could perform them effectively. One such view is that nuclear SLCMs’ contribution to deterring attack by Soviet land-­based naval bombers may be relatively small. This view also holds that SLBMs and mobile ICBMs may be at least as useful for a nuclear reserve role as SLCMs, which would be on numerous ships with other important wartime missions. Assigning SLBMs and mobile ICBMs to the nuclear reserve force role now planned for SLCMs, however, would require an expansion of those forces beyond current plans and currently-­ envisioned START constraints.
