638
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
reports of torture; movement from military to civilian rule in many
countries; and the awareness of those tempted to overturn election re-
sults that it would cost them in their relations with us and in their
broader international standing—are familiar to us but will need fre-
quent stress to an increasingly skeptical public.
We should always, however, couple recitals of what we are doing
for others with its relevance to concrete US interests:
—Support for peaceful change is support for stability.
—And it puts us in better position to work with change when it
does happen. Even in countries where our human rights advocacy has
strained relations with repressive governments, civilian professional
and business classes—and in some cases younger military—who
should always have looked to the US as a model and source of hope no
longer see a disconnect between the freedoms we insist on for our-
selves, and our support of dictatorships over them.
(2) The Legal Basis of US Human Rights Policy
We should soon end the anomaly of the US proclaiming itself as a
leader of international human rights efforts, but not yet having ratified
the basic human rights Covenants and Conventions of the United Na-
tions and Organization of American States.
Five are before the Senate: The Genocide Convention, the Interna-
tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Cov-
enant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination and the American
Convention on Human Rights. The Genocide Convention merits top
priority. Adopted by the UN in 1948, it has been ratified by more than
80 states and has deep symbolic significance.
The next term should also leave a legacy of a consistent body of do-
mestic legislation that will help ensure continued attention to human
rights by future Administrations, while giving them (and ourselves)
the flexibility necessary for pragmatic implementation of a policy that
can maintain domestic support.
—All programs designed primarily to promote US exports should
have the same human rights criteria (OPIC is now more restrained than
ExIm or CCC). US policy options are to treat these as we do other forms
of USG assistance, or to interfere with them only when there is a strong
chance that doing so would actually lead to human rights improve-
ments (not just for “distancing”). Given what injecting human rights
into these programs already has done to arouse opposition to the policy
by US business interests—and the marginal incremental effect on most
human rights problems of adding use of these programs to our other
pressures—we favor the latter.
