562
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Options
Our present review conference language (“to consider the ques-
tion of whether there should be a replacement treaty”) is directly based
on language used in PD–38. One approach is to stick with this formula-
tion in the negotiations. Another is to hold to the present formulation
but, at an appropriate time, to pursue an agreed understanding with
the British and the Soviets to clarify that the intent of the treaty lan-
guage is to assure that all options are open regarding the future of the
treaty. Alternatively, we could decide to propose a new formulation,
inserting one of the phrases listed below after the words “review the
operation of the treaty and”.
Option “A”
“consider the question of extending its provisions”
Option “B”
“consider the question of subsequent treaty prohibitions”
Option “C”
“consider the question of whether there should be future treaty
arrangements”
While there are many more possible variants, the above options
represent a range of formulations which would demonstrate some
movement if we decide to change our review conference proposal. Op-
tion “C” closely parallels the latest British suggestion (p. 4) and would
involve the least change in the PD–38 language. On the other hand, Op-
tion “A” uses the word “extending” and represents greater contrast
with the language used in PD–38 than do the other two options. Option
“B” drops the conditional “whether” and uses the term “prohibitions”
rather than the broader word “arrangements”.
The dependent clause
Regardless of which option is selected, there is agreement that it
would be advantageous to propose a final clause to the review confer-
ence provision, as follows:
“, taking into account all relevant factors.”
The Soviets have proposed a final clause that refers specifically to
the question of continued testing by non-parties. The clause set forth
above is broad enough to reflect our stockpile reliability concerns and
may simultaneously meet a Soviet need for some reference to testing by
non-parties.
