472
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Overall Soviet-US Relations4
Gromyko had to tell the President quite frankly that over the re-
cent period our relations had worsened. It was true, of course, that he
did discern a somewhat more positive note in recent statements by the
President’s representatives, in the President’s comments today and in
some press articles, indicating that in5 the most recent period, during
the past month perhaps, there had been somewhat of a turning point
for the better. That might be so, but he had to say that he had not dis-
cerned anything truly substantive to indicate an improvement in our
relations. The fact that our relations had become worse as compared to
the past was known to the whole world, and this could not fail to con-
cern and perplex the Soviet Union. He wanted to convey this to the
President in all frankness. He had taken note of the President’s pro-
nouncement, contained in his message to Brezhnev, where the Presi-
dent had used words to the effect that we should not try to place the
blame for the worsening of relations between us, but should look
ahead.6 This was quite understandable, but he would point out that the
Soviet Union was not prepared to assume any blame for the worsening
of relations and he wanted the President to know that.
Gromyko noted that in those matters where our respective views
did not fully coincide, or did not coincide at all, affairs could be con-
ducted in a number of different ways. These differences could be dis-
cussed without crossing a certain line, throwing back the relations be-
tween us.7 These relations had been laboriously built up between the
Soviet Union and the United States and the process had not been easy.
Quite the contrary, it had been an arduous and difficult road. On the
one hand, relations between us could be conducted with the use of fine
instruments, seeking ways to bridge gaps and to come to mutual un-
derstanding. On the other hand, one could also use an axe, raising and
dropping it repeatedly to sever the threads that existed between us.
Again, speaking quite frankly, he would point out that in his view the
latter method was the one used by the United States quite frequently in
the recent past. Of course, such a situation could not but have a nega-
tive impact on the delicate process called international detente. He
4 Krimer added the title of this section by hand.
5 Krimer added this preposition by hand.
6 Presumable reference is to the President’s September 2 letter to Brezhnev. In it, the
President commented: “I am distressed, as I know you are, that relations between our
two countries have not developed well. We would each have our own explanation of
why this has been the case, but I do not believe it would be useful to repeat familiar argu-
ments about who or what is to blame.” The President’s letter is printed in Foreign Rela-
tions, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 142.
7 The sentence originally began with “These.” Krimer deleted it and capitalized
“differences.”
