National Security Policy 475 92. We believe that the highest priority objective of Soviet military policy during the period of this estimate will be to maintain, and to develop further, such formidable nuclear capabilities as to continue to deter the US from resorting to all-бґout nuclear conflict on any provoбґ cation save the most extreme threat to national survival and to supбґ port continuation of an aggressive foreign policy. But the Soviets must recognize that the possibilities of miscalculation in crisis situations are such that general war might nevertheless occur, and that preparedбґ ness for it is therefore essential. For this and other obvious reasons they aim eventually to achieve a clear military superiority over the US. Accordingly, the Soviet planners probably desire to achieve a nuclear attack capability sufficient, together with the USSRБ─≥s air defenses, not only to deliver a devastating attack on the US, but also to neutralize a US nuclear attack on the USSR (i.e. to prevent unacceptable damage to the USSR). 93. Given foreseeable technological developments and maintenance of US armed strength, however, the Soviets may regard the capability to neutralize US nuclear attack capabilities as unattainable during the period of this estimate. On the other hand, they probably consider that although they cannot prevent, even with surprise attack, a crippling retalбґ iatory blow, they can maintain such capabilities to damage the US as will deter the US from resorting to general war. To this end they must keep a strong long-бґrange bomber striking capability, while they are working to acquire an additional nuclear delivery capability with advanced weapon systems, including long-бґrange missiles. But the Soviet planners may nevбґ ertheless think the prospects for development of advanced weapons sysбґ tems so promising that they can accept a temporary risk of maintaining their manned bomber force at something less than they would otherwise consider desirable.9 94. In our view a major corollary aim of Soviet military policy, to which the maintenance of a strong deterrent posture is an essential conбґ comitant, is to provide the Soviets with military superiority in situaбґ tions which they may estimate can be dealt with short of all-бґout nuclear war. To the extent that such superior capabilities can be developed and 9 As estimated elsewhere in this NIE, the USSR must recognize that the possibiliбґ ties of miscalculation in crisis situations are such that general war might occur, and that preparedness for it is therefore essential. The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, therefore believes that the Soviet leaders will not be likely to accept needlessly the risk of maintaining their long-бґrange bomber capability at less than they otherwise would conбґ sider desirable, and he believes a conclusion should be added to the paragraph as folбґ lows: Б─°However, we think it unlikely the Soviet leaders will take such a risk.Б─² [Footnote is in the original.]
