National Security Policy  475
92. We believe that the highest priority objective of Soviet military 
policy during the period of this estimate will be to maintain, and to 
develop further, such formidable nuclear capabilities as to continue to 
deter the US from resorting to all-­out nuclear conflict on any provo­
cation save the most extreme threat to national survival and to sup­
port continuation of an aggressive foreign policy. But the Soviets must 
recognize that the possibilities of miscalculation in crisis situations are 
such that general war might nevertheless occur, and that prepared­
ness for it is therefore essential. For this and other obvious reasons 
they aim eventually to achieve a clear military superiority over the US. 
Accordingly, the Soviet planners probably desire to achieve a nuclear 
attack capability sufficient, together with the USSR’s air defenses, not 
only to deliver a devastating attack on the US, but also to neutralize a 
US nuclear attack on the USSR (i.e. to prevent unacceptable damage to 
the USSR).
93. Given foreseeable technological developments and maintenance 
of US armed strength, however, the Soviets may regard the capability 
to neutralize US nuclear attack capabilities as unattainable during the 
period of this estimate. On the other hand, they probably consider that 
although they cannot prevent, even with surprise attack, a crippling retal­
iatory blow, they can maintain such capabilities to damage the US as will 
deter the US from resorting to general war. To this end they must keep a 
strong long-­range bomber striking capability, while they are working to 
acquire an additional nuclear delivery capability with advanced weapon 
systems, including long-­range missiles. But the Soviet planners may nev­
ertheless think the prospects for development of advanced weapons sys­
tems so promising that they can accept a temporary risk of maintaining 
their manned bomber force at something less than they would otherwise 
consider desirable.9
94. In our view a major corollary aim of Soviet military policy, to 
which the maintenance of a strong deterrent posture is an essential con­
comitant, is to provide the Soviets with military superiority in situa­
tions which they may estimate can be dealt with short of all-­out nuclear 
war. To the extent that such superior capabilities can be developed and 
9 As estimated elsewhere in this NIE, the USSR must recognize that the possibili­
ties of miscalculation in crisis situations are such that general war might occur, and that 
preparedness for it is therefore essential. The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, 
therefore believes that the Soviet leaders will not be likely to accept needlessly the risk of 
maintaining their long-­range bomber capability at less than they otherwise would con­
sider desirable, and he believes a conclusion should be added to the paragraph as fol­
lows: “However, we think it unlikely the Soviet leaders will take such a risk.” [Footnote 
is in the original.]
