Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks and focusing on weaponry alone, a 10 percent cut would be an appropriate number. Significant New Systems Vance and Warnke recommended: adoption of restrictive guidelines; enunciation of a principle that we would not be the first to introduce significant systems into a region; and, prohibition of transfer at least until the system was deployed with U.S. forces. Brown and Smith supported the prohibition of transfer at least until U.S. operational deployment. Brzezinski and Brown were hesitant about establishing the principle prohibiting our first introduction of a significant system, because it might be beneficial in selected instances to introduce limited quantities of new significant items to preclude proliferation of lesssignificant, but still dangerous, weaponry. If dollar volume ceilings are established, Brzezinski recommended only adopting restrictive guidelines. New Technology Developed Solely for Export Brown, Warnke, and Lance recommended that systems developed or modified solely for export normally be approved only if a special need exists and comparable capabilities cannot be provided by an existing U.S. system. Brown stated that he is against U.S. suppliers becoming so involved in foreign markets that they develop a vested interest. Vance recommended an even more restrictive control, allowing transfers of this type only to key allies. Brzezinski recommended establishment of extensive guidelines, rather than the other two controls. Coproduction Brzezinski and Lance recommended prohibition of coproduction agreements except in very limited circumstances. Brzezinski noted that it would be inconsistent to approve coproduction agreements while restricting U.S. exports of military equipment. All other participants recommended adoption of restrictive, but not prohibitive, guidelines, although Brown, Warnke, and Benson stated they could accept the guideline calling for prohibition. Sensitive Weapons Most of the participants agreed that a list of sensitive weapons needs to be established. Vance, Brown, Smith, and Brzezinski recommended keeping the list private, Brown asserting that a public list could be an attractive nuisance. Lance recommended maintaining the current system of informal, unpublished guidelines, while Warnke said that a list would be unnecessary if we established a presumption against sales.
