Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
669
and focusing on weaponry alone, a 10 percent cut would be an appro-
priate number.
Significant New Systems
Vance and Warnke recommended: adoption of restrictive guide-
lines; enunciation of a principle that we would not be the first to intro-
duce significant systems into a region; and, prohibition of transfer at
least until the system was deployed with U.S. forces. Brown and Smith
supported the prohibition of transfer at least until U.S. operational de-
ployment. Brzezinski and Brown were hesitant about establishing the
principle prohibiting our first introduction of a significant system, be-
cause it might be beneficial in selected instances to introduce limited
quantities of new significant items to preclude proliferation of less-
significant, but still dangerous, weaponry. If dollar volume ceilings
are established, Brzezinski recommended only adopting restrictive
guidelines.
New Technology Developed Solely for Export
Brown, Warnke, and Lance recommended that systems developed or
modified solely for export normally be approved only if a special need
exists and comparable capabilities cannot be provided by an existing
U.S. system. Brown stated that he is against U.S. suppliers becoming so
involved in foreign markets that they develop a vested interest. Vance
recommended an even more restrictive control, allowing transfers of
this type only to key allies. Brzezinski recommended establishment of
extensive guidelines, rather than the other two controls.
Coproduction
Brzezinski and Lance recommended prohibition of coproduction
agreements except in very limited circumstances. Brzezinski noted that
it would be inconsistent to approve coproduction agreements while
restricting U.S. exports of military equipment. All other participants
recommended adoption of restrictive, but not prohibitive, guidelines,
although Brown, Warnke, and Benson stated they could accept the guide-
line calling for prohibition.
Sensitive Weapons
Most of the participants agreed that a list of sensitive weapons
needs to be established. Vance, Brown, Smith, and Brzezinski recom-
mended keeping the list private, Brown asserting that a public list could
be an attractive nuisance. Lance recommended maintaining the current
system of informal, unpublished guidelines, while Warnke said that a
list would be unnecessary if we established a presumption against
sales.
