1977  167
asymmetry (i.e., the US is more concentrated in cities than Soviet pop-
ulation) and the smaller yields of US warheads. (SIOP analyses in 1972 
estimated 123 million US fatalities compared to 82 million Soviet fatal-
ities in a maximum level nuclear exchange between the US and USSR, 
i.e., both sides fully generated with the USSR striking first.)
—The Soviets might be able to reduce the US ability to destroy 
Soviet population by massive civil defense programs. Although the 
extent and effectiveness of these programs were unknown, their exis-
tence created uncertainty in the estimates of Soviet civilian fatalities we 
would be able to achieve.
—The Soviet and PRC leadership might have a higher tolerance 
for casualties than perceived by the US, and might not be deterred by 
the threat to destroy the percentage of the population and industry 
defined by the US. Historically, the Soviets have accepted enormous 
human costs to secure the objectives of the communist regime. Millions 
of deaths are estimated to have occurred (though over years, not days) 
during the agricultural collectivization and Stalinist purges preceding 
World War II in which twenty million Soviets are estimated to have 
died.
—The US deterrent strategy, out of moral concern, should not 
emphasize the killing of non-­combatants.
(TS) The NSSM–169 study group was not unanimous in believing 
that a threat to post-­attack recovery targets would be more effective 
than some other targeting objective in terms of enhancing deterrence. 
Whether a criterion of comparable fatalities and damage was required 
was open to debate, and some held that the revised targeting crite-
ria would not result in significant differences from the then currently 
declared threat of major retaliation against population. (This in fact, 
appeared to be the case when analysis of the first SIOP developed 
under NSDM–242 criteria showed—­without considering possible 
Soviet civil defense—­a decrease of only about two percent in expected 
Soviet fatalities. The political, economic, and military institutions are, 
in the large, where the population is). All of the NSSM–169 study group 
agreed, however, that the new criteria would not decrease deterrence of 
a major nuclear attack.
IV. Current Nuclear Employment Policy and Planning Guidance
(TS) The concepts developed by the NSSM–169 study group were 
incorporated in NSDM–242 issued by the President on January 24, 
1974. NSDM–242 defined general employment planning objectives 
and broad targeting policy for US nuclear forces including for the first 
time, provisions for a strategic reserve force. It also established proce-
dures for the development of further guidance and Presidential review 
of employment plans, as well as certain objectives and tasks for com-
mand, control and crisis management. The broad policies directed by 
NSDM–242 have been more definitively elaborated by the Secretary 
of Defense as Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy (NUWEP), and
