National Security Policy 487 improved jet light bombers will probably be introduced into service, including the USSR’s first bombers with supersonic “dash” capabili­ ties.22 Ground attack regiments, formerly equipped with piston aircraft, have been re-­equipped with jet fighters, and there is continuing evi­ dence of the employment of jet fighter regiments of Tactical Aviation for both ground support and air defense missions. 130. Long Range Aviation. The capabilities of Soviet Long Range Aviation have continued to increase during the past year. Its esti­ mated strength in bomber aircraft has grown from about 1,300 to some 1,500. The number of bomber regiments has also increased, although at a somewhat slower rate than during the preceding year. The trend in training activities during the year is believed to have been toward larger-­scale operations and longer-­range flights out of home base areas, including flights to potential forward staging bases. Inflight refueling has been under development for both the BISON jet heavy bomber and the BADGER jet medium bomber, apparently using convertible tanker-­bomber versions of these aircraft, and is at least in limited use by BISONs assigned to operational units. Finally, there is evidence that the USSR has established nuclear weapons storage facilities in the vicinity of Long Range Aviation bases. 131. Recent evidence indicates that Soviet production of BADGERs, and the number in operational units, are considerably in excess of our previous expectations. We now estimate that there were about 850 BADGERs in Long Range Aviation units as of mid-1957, and on the basis of current evidence we believe BADGER strength will continue to increase during the next year or two. At the same time, the USSR apparently continues to employ the BULL piston medium bomber for training, reconnaissance, bombing, and other purposes, and it is being phased out of Long Range Aviation at a slower rate than for­ merly estimated. We do not now expect BULLs to be entirely phased out until about 1960. Thereafter, there will probably be some decline in jet medium bomber strength in Long Range Aviation as a result of the increased availability of heavy bombers, the assignment of more medium bombers to naval and probably to tactical aviation, and the advent of significantly advanced delivery systems, including lon­ ger range air-­to-­surface and surface-­to-­surface guided missiles. The BADGER will remain the primary medium bomber through 1962, although by mid-1961 a new medium bomber with supersonic “dash” capabilities may be introduced.23 22 For estimated performance and dates of operational availability of Soviet light bombers, see Annex, Table 7. [Footnote is in the original.] 23 For estimated performance characteristics of Soviet long-­range bombers, together with estimated dates of operational availability, see Annex, Table 6. [Footnote is in the original.]
