830 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Soviets on the text is even slower. A recent treaty scrub reveals dozens of minor problems requiring fixes to agreed language. Thus the longer it is until we have agreed positions, the more risk there is that either (a) we won’t finish, or (b) we’ll have INF-­type problems because of obscure or ambiguous drafting. 4. The working level in Washington doesn’t think we will or can finish this year. In a number of recent conversations with various Geneva players, no individual below the Assistant Secretary level expected to finish START in 1990 or considered that doing so was important. The delay in Washington responsiveness is one manifestation. On important and time sensitive issues, for example, Saturday meetings in Washington are common; to our knowledge no meeting on Saturday has ever been held in Washington based on a need to get things to Geneva on time. Another manifestation is that reports from meetings (once again below the Assistant Secretary level) never include any discussion of negotiability or timeliness. In a nutshell, the President’s announced decision to complete START this year has had no discernable effect on the working-­ level in Washington. Neither procedures nor attitudes have changed. One thing is thus clear: We lack a firm deadline. One reason that the working level is unconvinced that completion in 1990 is a real goal is the lack of a scheduled summit. Past experience suggests that many issues simply won’t be resolved—­in Moscow or in Washington—­until a summit or some other “action forcing event” is scheduled. What do we need to do? Just as there is no single cause for our problem, there is also no single solution. If we are serious, however, there are steps we can take, many of them somewhat radical. They include; 1. Make more effective use of the ministerial process. We should: — Agree with the Soviets now that there will be a Ministerial every month until START is signed (late September, late October, late November). — Agree that no later than 10 days before each Ministerial each side will send a letter listing the issues it wants to solve at that Ministerial and its proposals for solving them. — Agree that the traveling team will arrive 24 to 48 hours in advance and begin discussions at once in order to prepare issues for the Ministers decision. — Organize internally so that we can make real-­time decisions at Ministerials to settle issues and insist that the Soviets do the same. — Where possible, record ministerial decisions in treaty text form at the ministerial itself to speed up the implementation process. — At each Ministerial, give Shevardnadze a list of technical issues being worked in Moscow which are of special concern to us. Ask Shevardnadze to use this list to lean on his technical experts and the Moscow bureaucracy in order to spring loose specific issues which are hung up in the Soviet bureaucracy. (This is similar to the practice we have used on human rights cases of special interest.)
