1955  133
106.	 Telegram 545 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 19, 1955, noon
545. From Johnson. Deptel 562.
August 16 draft correct. Understand transmission error already 
corrected.
Mytel 540 gave Wang’s amendments our August 16 draft. However 
avoid any possibility error following is full text first portion Wang’s 
draft. Second portion same mutatis mutandis:
“The Ambassadors of the PRC and the USA have agreed to 
announce the measures which their respective governments have 
adopted with respect to return of nationals of each located in the coun­
try of the other. With respect to American nationals residing in the PRC, 
Ambassador Wang Ping-nan on behalf of the Government of the PRC 
has informed Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson that:
1. The PRC recognizes that American nationals in the PRC who 
desire to return are entitled to do so and declares that it has adopted 
and will further adopt appropriate measures so that they can exercise 
their right to return.
2. The PRC agrees that the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK 
in the PRC will be authorized to assist the return to the USA of those 
American nationals who desire to do so follows:
(A) If any American national believes that contrary to declared pol­
icy of the PRC he is encountering obstruction in departure he may so 
inform the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK and request it to 
make representations on his behalf with the Government of the PRC. If 
desired by the US the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK may also 
make investigation on the facts.
(B) If any American national in the PRC who desires to return to the 
US has difficulty in paying the return expenses, the office of the Charge 
d’Affaires of the UK may render him financial assistance needed to per­
mit his return.
3. The Government of the PRC will give wide publicity to the fore­
going arrangements and the office of the Charge d’Affaires of the UK in 
the PRC may also do so.”
Gowen
Note: Mr. Waddell’s office (FE) notified 10 a.m. 8/19/55 EMB (CWO)
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1955. Confidential; Priority.
