1480  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
to serious discussion, let alone acceptance of, arrangements for control. 
Delegation appraises Soviet position as firm. We believe firmness stems 
from probability Soviets believe public attraction their call for agree­
ment in principle cease tests for all time contrasts favorably with US–UK 
position of conditioning duration of treaty on year-­by-­year determina­
tion not only of satisfactory progress in installing control system but 
also of progress in the field of disarmament. Given this Soviet position, 
US delegation does not rpt not place much stock in tactical approach 
such as that proposed by UK (ref Nusup 73) as device for bringing Sovi­
ets to grips in discussion of controls. Any tactical approach, whether 
that proposed by UK or for that matter tactical approach preferred by 
US delegation itself, such as trying to operate without agenda or trying 
eventually to reach compromise agreed agenda appears likely fail to 
bring serious negotiation controls so long as Soviets stand on position 
agreement in principle cessation tests must first be achieved. This is not 
to say conference will not be dealing with matters of substance. As del­
egation has already pointed out, conference, under guise agenda dis­
cussion, has already been dealing with central substantive question of 
whether Soviets willing have treaty which includes effective controls. 
We believe public acceptance this fact well enough established so that 
there is little danger imminent break by Soviets occasioned by devel­
opments connected with present state negotiations within conference.
US delegation has concluded that most profitable general approach 
now would lie in sharpening contrast between Soviet and US–UK 
attitude toward controls and at same time weakening over-­all Soviet 
position on “cessation” by removing vulnerable points in present US 
position. Vulnerability US–UK position rests on short-­term implication 
of phrase year-­by-­year determination and in particular on this deter­
mination as applied to progress in disarmament, which seems to many 
people extraneous to problem of assuring end of weapons tests.
In private discussion with UK delegation, US delegation has 
gained clear impression that move to simplify and bolster public sup­
port of US–UK position by making this position rest clearly but solely 
on inseparability of obligation to cease tests from establishment of effec­
tive controls would give UK delegation, and presumably UK Govern­
ment, confidence for strong negotiating line with Soviets. We believe 
this would be the best way to remove temptations for UK to adopt tacti­
cal approaches which we believe are dangerous and unproductive. UK 
delegation has from time to time expressed hope that we could meet 
present situation by simplifying and clarifying US–UK position. UK 
views on disarmament link are already known to Department. Accord­
ingly, delegation recommends strongly that careful consideration be 
given to immediate move to make US position on agreement to stop 
tests rest solely on satisfactory establishment, extension and operation
