neighbor state. If the propriety of such extraterritorial extension of law is admitted, it is obvious that international trade might be subject to intolerable interference even before it crosses the border of the state where it originates. (2) The cost of production investigations are an inquisition into the affairs of French manufacturers contrary to all precedent. No French Parliament could stand which passed a law authorising French tax officials to inquire into the books of French citizens to the degree to which American agents are authorized to do so not in their own but in a foreign country. (3) Is it to be supposed that United States citizens would submit to similar inquisitorial legislation passed by France? Investigations of this sort are authorised in American law in connection with income tax and other legislation, but such inquiries are within the national territory, and have not even there been extended to cost of production. An attempt to enforce a foreign law in France as a condition for the right to sell in the United States is indefensible. (4) It is useless to try to differentiate between the actions of one set of American officials and another. The representatives of the Treasury Department demand the opening of books and the disclosures of production costs because they say they want to assure honest valuations for goods imported into the United States. If this were the only use which would be made of the information, the inquiries might be less objectionable. But the representatives of the Tariff Commission are in Europe to get information as to the cost of production in different countries in order that the American tariff can be adjusted in such a way that any advantage reaped by a foreign producer through cheaper labor, cheaper raw materials, or cheaper methods of manufacture may be counterbalanced by the tariff rate adopted in the United States. The information they want they try to secure through threat that if not given, the tariff will go up. The information they seek, if given, will be used to check the import trade which they are investigating. Is it to be supposed that the information given one set of officers for one purpose will not find its way into the hands of the other set of officers and be used by them for another purpose? (5) The investigations are, in addition, objectionable because they discriminate between French producers. If all the information asked were given, an efficient plant manufacturing at low cost would find itself at a disadvantage in American trade as compared to a less efficient plant. II. FRENCH ACTION PROPOSED
