Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: We are grateful to you, but this language cannot be accepted by Israel. It is written that this treaty is in the context of the Camp David Frameworks and a comprehensive peace. Mr. Baz will one day advise the Egyptian ruler to abrogate the treaty unless a comprehensive peace has been achieved. You can be sure of this. Ambassador Blum: Article 3128 of the Geneva Convention would allow Mr. Baz to make such a legitimate interpretation. Secretary Vance: We tried to use the language of the Vienna Convention, but you rejected it. Prime Minister Begin: This is the first time that I have ever heard that something Mr. Baz said might be legitimate. President Carter: Will you agree to delete Article 6 entirely? Prime Minister Begin: No! It is the soul and the heart of the peace treaty. (The Prime Minister quotes the language of Article 6). If Syria does not join in the comprehensive peace, the treaty must still stand. If this Article is deleted, it would cancel the peace treaty. If I may quote Dr. Kissinger in this room, he used to say that what Israel is being asked to give is tangible, and what the Arabs promise is intangible. Egypt gives us a peace treaty and recognition and for that we should not be thankful. They should have done it in 1948. This is what Sadat gives us, plus an ambassador who can be recalled. In return we give him Sinai, two wonderful air bases, our settlements, and this represents the greatest sacrifice ever made for peace. If Article 6 is not left in the treaty, then the treaty stands on whether the rulers in Damascus will make peace or not. If Article 6, paragraph 5, is weakened Egypt, could go to war at any time. This article must stand as it is. It is the soul of the peace treaty. President Carter: Let me close by saying that we will meet again on Sunday.29 I suggest that we each get together with our own sides to discuss these issues. Prime Minister Begin: We can meet again on Saturday night. President Carter: We can decide on our next meeting at a later time. Before closing, I want to say that we have talked today a lot about words and technicalities. You seem to be assuming that Egypt is looking for written excuses to attack Israel. This is the same fear that you had two or three years ago, but there have been changes since then.
