654
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Prime Minister Begin: We are grateful to you, but this language
cannot be accepted by Israel. It is written that this treaty is in the con-
text of the Camp David Frameworks and a comprehensive peace. Mr.
Baz will one day advise the Egyptian ruler to abrogate the treaty unless
a comprehensive peace has been achieved. You can be sure of this.
Ambassador Blum: Article 3128 of the Geneva Convention would
allow Mr. Baz to make such a legitimate interpretation.
Secretary Vance: We tried to use the language of the Vienna Con-
vention, but you rejected it.
Prime Minister Begin: This is the first time that I have ever heard
that something Mr. Baz said might be legitimate.
President Carter: Will you agree to delete Article 6 entirely?
Prime Minister Begin: No! It is the soul and the heart of the peace
treaty. (The Prime Minister quotes the language of Article 6). If Syria
does not join in the comprehensive peace, the treaty must still stand. If
this Article is deleted, it would cancel the peace treaty. If I may quote
Dr. Kissinger in this room, he used to say that what Israel is being asked
to give is tangible, and what the Arabs promise is intangible. Egypt
gives us a peace treaty and recognition and for that we should not be
thankful. They should have done it in 1948. This is what Sadat gives us,
plus an ambassador who can be recalled. In return we give him Sinai,
two wonderful air bases, our settlements, and this represents the
greatest sacrifice ever made for peace. If Article 6 is not left in the treaty,
then the treaty stands on whether the rulers in Damascus will make
peace or not. If Article 6, paragraph 5, is weakened Egypt, could go to
war at any time. This article must stand as it is. It is the soul of the peace
treaty.
President Carter: Let me close by saying that we will meet again on
Sunday.29 I suggest that we each get together with our own sides to
discuss these issues.
Prime Minister Begin: We can meet again on Saturday night.
President Carter: We can decide on our next meeting at a later time.
Before closing, I want to say that we have talked today a lot about
words and technicalities. You seem to be assuming that Egypt is
looking for written excuses to attack Israel. This is the same fear that
you had two or three years ago, but there have been changes since then.
28 A mistaken reference to Article 31 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties which posits a “general rule that a treaty is to be interpreted in good faith in ac-
cordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context
and in the light of the treaty’s purpose.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1969, p. 736) The
complete text of the treaty is at KAV 2424.
29 March 4. See Document 192.
