863.51 Relief Credits/79
[Document 754]
Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young)
[WASHINGTON,] March 19, 1928.
On March 17 and 19 I discussed the Austrian situation at considerable
length with Under Secretary Mills. With reference to his suggestion that the
procedure should be to conclude a debt settlement with Austria which
would take care of the question of subordination of the lien, I pointed out,
first, that this would entail some delay because of the time required for
drafting and for getting the necessary approval of the Austrian Government,
and that this delay might interfere with action at the present session of
Congress. I further pointed out that Austria could not make a definitive
agreement with the United States except in connection with a general
agreement with all the debtors. Although there is reason to believe that
agreement with the European relief creditors may be reached, at least in
principle, on March 30, it is not certain that that will result. Furthermore,
the drafting and obtaining of the necessary approval on the part of the
European countries is likely to take some time. I took the above position
after discussing the matter fully with Mr. Castle, Mr. Olds and the
Secretary. Mr. Mills finally agreed to the drafting of a bill which would, in
the first place, authorize subordination of the lien, and, second, would
authorize the Secretary of the Treasury to conclude a debt funding
agreement with Austria.
Mr. Mills and I conferred with Secretary Mellon, who approved that
procedure. Mr. Mills was inclined to the opinion that the Department of
State should take the leading part in urging the proposal upon Congress
inasmuch as the particular methods of handling the matter had been urged
by the Department. I took the position that the matter is predominantly
financial and therefore a matter primarily for the Treasury. Mr. Mellon
agreed that the Treasury would take a leading part. I stated that the
Department of State would, of course, assist in any way it could.
