Czechoslovakia
311
who is accredited here, has just arrived from Belgrade but has been
instructed to return there until New York strike situation is clarified.
Time magazine stringer Stichova tells us EE correspondent Aikman,
also accredited here, is expected to be in Prague next week and may
prepare a cover story on the anniversary.
4. Media coverage meanwhile focuses on campaign to denigrate
all aspects of 1968 policies, except the January Central Committee
Plenum (at which Dubcek replaced Novotny) and repeat shrill accusa-
tions against the main actors in Prague Spring. Rude Prova tends to
concentrate currently on alleged damage to the economy which resulted
in 1968–69 from the Sik reforms and to praise subsequent policy fol-
lowed under the Husak regime, which has brought Czechoslovakia to
its present supposedly enviable state of prosperity and stability. Weekly
Party press has moved increasingly from attacks on pro-reform individ-
uals and organizations to accusations that 1968 reforms were stimulated
and supported by the West in hopes of breaking Czechoslovakia away
from its allies; Herman Kahn, Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brezinski
are cited as chief proponents of this strategy. These latter pieces are
extended versions of noteworthy Yuri Zhukov commentary that
appeared in Moscow Pravda and was reprinted here August 8, showing
Soviet approval and probably close coordination of this line. Comment:
While the regime takes its precautions, the Czech masses seem to
be paying scant attention to the approaching anniversary. Prague’s
Wencelas Square, most likely site for any protest manifestation, is
thronged with tourists and shoppers, but so far reveals no sign of any
special security precautions. In spite of rumors of recent explosions at
Party buildings in Bratislava, neither we nor our NATO colleagues
have been able to find any significant evidence to suggest that August
20–21 will pass other than quietly.4 We think our FRG colleague is
probably correct in his expectation that the regime will formally greet
the anniversary, but have no clue yet as to the precise form this will take.
Byrne
4 Intelegram2256fromPrague,August23, theEmbassyreportedthattheanniversary
passed without any significant event, describing the event as a “hard-liner affair.” Official
propaganda, the Embassy reported, used the occasion “to politic against any sort of eco-
nomic reform.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780345–1196) In
telegram 2282 from Prague, August 25, the Embassy reported that it received information
that “four students marked the anniversary of the invasion by placing a bouquet of flowers
on the monument in Wenceslas Square and observing a moment of silence. The bouquet
was promptly removed by police and the students’ identification cards were checked. This
is the only such event on August 21 of which Morevec was aware.” (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780349–1036)
