724  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
policy objectives. And it is apparent that the potential for harm greatly 
exceeds the harm done thus far. It is possible to identify, as I have done, 
the cases where individual countries have been adversely affected by 
restrictions we have imposed. The impact has varied in each case. The 
cumulative impact has also varied.
We believe that we have reached a point, however, where any 
action has a disproportionate impact because of the preceding actions, 
and where the element of fear of the future can be expected to play an 
increasingly important part in determining foreign reactions to any fur­
ther restrictive measures we may impose.
At the present time most of the important industrialized countries 
of the world have overcome, or are about to overcome, the balance of 
payments difficulties which justified their retention of protective meas­
ures following the war. Therefore we can expect to see an expansion of 
world trade and, consequently, of our own export sales. At the same 
time the less developed countries of the world are seeking to expand 
their economies. It is clear, however, that at this juncture the course of 
future events will be determined almost entirely by what the US does. 
If we provide the leadership in liberalizing trade, the rest of the free 
world can be expected to follow our example.
There are a number of critical choices to be made in the immedi­
ate future. Regional trading arrangements are proliferating around the 
world. In Europe the six-­country common market is already a going 
concern. Negotiations are seriously under way toward establishment 
of a free-­trade area of seven other countries in Western Europe—the 
UK, the Scandinavian countries, Austria, Switzerland and Portugal. 
South America is determined to organize one or more common mar­
kets; and Central America is already committed to establishing a cus­
toms union.
US policy in the trade field will determine to a very large extent 
the evolving course of these arrangements—whether they will look out­
ward toward the development of a multilateral world trading system, 
or whether they will look inward in the pursuit of self-­sufficiency.
A major test of US policy is pending in the tariff negotiations sched­
uled to start in September 1960. These negotiations are the result of 
our initiative. A principal element will be the effort of many countries 
to negotiate reductions in the common tariff of the European common 
market. However, some of our European allies have already expressed 
doubt about the extent to which we will be willing to offer real and 
meaningful concessions in our own tariff in order to give impetus to 
the successful conclusion of the world-­wide negotiations. The success 
of these negotiations, therefore, will depend upon us.
