3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
182
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
would sharply aggravate the situation on the African Continent and
would as a whole increase the danger of the use of nuclear weapons.
The emergence of such weapons in the hand of the SAR would cer-
tainly be used by some other countries to justify the building of their
own nuclear devices. It is easy to see what a damage this would cause
to the treaty on non-proliferation and how considerably it would
weaken the framework of non-proliferation, to strengthen which joint
efforts of the USSR and the USA are directed. No one has the slightest
doubt that the SAR is in a position to build nuclear weapons only
through the help of other states. One also knows that the SAR has
access to the latest research in the nuclear field, that it received and con-
tinues to receive nuclear equipment and materials. “The London Un-
derstandings”5 demand, as we know, fulfillment of a number of condi-
tions aimed at preventing the use of materials, equipment and tech-
nology to build nuclear devices. The world public will be justified in
asking this question: since these understandings failed to prevent the
emergence of nuclear weapons in the SAR, then what are they worth?
We in the Soviet Union consider it a matter of extraordinary and
urgent importance to make all efforts to prevent the SAR from con-
ducting nuclear tests and building nuclear weapons. On our part we
have in mind publishing in the nearest future an appropriate state-
ment, having in view drawing the attention of the governments and the
public to the dangerous plans of the SAR. As to the USA we understand
that you have at your disposal the necessary channels and probabilities
to render directly a holding influence on this state.
Addressing ourselves directly to you, Mr. President, we take into
account the great attention which you personally pay to the problem of
non-proliferation. Cooperation between our two countries along the
lines of strengthening the Treaty on Non-proliferation is developing.
Our states have taken on themselves certain obligations on the preven-
tion of a nuclear war. Now a situation has developed where it is quite
necessary and urgently at that to undertake energetic efforts to prevent
the emergence of new nuclear powers and holding at bay the growth of
nuclear danger.
I hope that this appeal of mine would meet with your, Mr. Presi-
dent, understanding and from the US part appropriate and effective
measures would be taken.
On our part we would like to learn what are your views on the
above-mentioned matter.
5 Reference is to the Nuclear Suppliers Group guidelines, first published in 1978.
The Nuclear Suppliers Group, established in 1975, was initially composed of seven nu-
clear supplier states that limited their export of nuclear materials to non-nuclear states.
