“That each country indicate whether it is willing to carry out with its means and resources the work of exploration and the direct surveys, or surveys by means of aero-photography which may be necessary, and that they specify the time at which they can send this to the Central Committee. “That each country be asked to indicate the form of financing which appears most desirable with respect to that portion of the line included within its borders, in order that the road may be constructed in the shortest possible time.” As the subjects of this resolution are limited in that the countries of America are called upon merely to give consideration to said subjects it is desired that you approve said resolution and recommend that the participating States use their best efforts to further the work of the Pan American Railway Committee. Topic 5. Organization of a Technical Commission to Study and Recommend the Most Effective Means for the Establishment of Steamship Lines to Connect the Countries of America and to Recommend Measures for the Elimination of all Unnecessary Port Formalities. In the past ten years there has been a very gratifying improvement in ocean transportation facilities between the countries of the western hemisphere, due in large measure to the necessities arising out of the increased volume of trade carried on between those countries. Statistical data on this subject appears in the foreign section of volume 2 of the 1927 Commerce Yearbook. This is now in the press but will be made available to the Delegation. The question of improved ocean transportation and that of simplification of port formalities are matters that have been discussed at previous conferences. However, a technical commission, properly organized, might submit a more concise and practical presentation of the problems that are involved than has been the case heretofore. As further improvement is desired in this field you will manifest the interest felt by the United States in this subject and endorse any deserving project put before the conference with the view to increasing and improving steamship traffic.
