664
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
212.
Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department
of State1
Bucharest, January 9, 1979, 0622Z
138. Subject: Romanian Vulnerabilities and Soviet Leverage.
1. Introduction. There has been considerable speculation in recent
weeks since Ceausescu’s well-publicized policy differences with Roma-
nia’s Warsaw Pact allies as to the kind and extent of leverage the Soviet
Union can exert on Romania to influence Romanian behavior and where
Romania’s vulnerabilities lie. We have focused particularly on the
middle range between totally ignoring Romanian “deviations” to out-
right Czechoslovakia-style military invasion. Following is an initial
Country Team attempt to compile and assess areas, actual or potential,
where Soviets could exert leverage on Romania. We would appreciate
comments, particularly from Washington Intelligence Community.2
2. Political
A. Assassination of Ceausescu
As symbol of Romanian defiance of Soviet desires, one could argue
that physical removal of Ceausescu could well serve Soviet interests.
However, we consider such a move alone as unlikely since there is no
clear indication of what leader or leaders would come to power under
these circumstances and there is no guarantee that a post-Ceausescu
leadership would be any more amenable to Soviet influence than he
is. Nevertheless, assassination could be a viable option as part of an
overall Soviet plan to invade Romania and/or to install a pro-Soviet
faction in the Romanian leadership as was done in Czechoslovakia.
We note that, while we may not take a possible assassination attempt
against Ceausescu too seriously, apparently he does, since he is known
to demand thorough and rigorous personal security at all times.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790010–0944.
Secret. Sent for information to DIA, Belgrade, East Berlin, Bonn, Brussels, Budapest,
London, Madrid, Moscow, Paris, Beijing, Prague, Rome, Sofia, USNATO, and Warsaw.
2 In telegram 10206 to multiple posts, January 13, the Department informed the
Embassy that it found the telegram stimulating and will be discussing it with members
of the Intelligence Community. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D790018–0920) In telegram 23994 to Bucharest, January 29, the Department reported
that following the January 18 meeting chaired by the NIO for the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe, the judgment of the Intelligence Community was that “barring radical
new external events that could change the Soviet calculus of cost and benefit, it is unlikely
the Soviets would accept the costs entailed by measures drastic enough to bring Ceausescu
to heel.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790045–0130)
