German Democratic Republic 415 —A decree, announced on April 5, required citizens holding Western currency to convert it into non-transferable coupons in order to purchase Western goods in Intershops. —New regulations, published on April 14, required permanently accredited foreign journalists to obtain permission for interviews and to notify the authorities on the details of all planned trips outside East Berlin. —In April, dissident writers, including noted novelist Stefan Heym, were denied visas for travel to the West. —An FRG television reporter was expelled in May for recording a statement by Heym without obtaining permission. —Both Heym and Havemann were tried and fined for alleged violation of GDR currency regulations in accepting royalties for Western publications that had not been cleared by the GDR. —Nine dissident writers, including Heym, were expelled in June from the GDR Writers Union for “anti-communist agitation.” —A revision of the penal code, effective on August 1, broadened the definition of political crimes (inter alia, by proscribing actions deemed “harmful to the interests of the state”) and expanded considerably penalties for conviction thereunder. (C) It will take some time to discern how some of these restrictions—draconian in principle—are applied. For the moment, the regulations requiring conversion of hard currency into non-transferable coupons are proving cosmetic in that the coupons are effectively transferable. But it is clear that the Honecker regime now has a wider set of options in dealing with recalcitrant behavior and in rooting out Western influences. The penal code provisions are particularly chilling because the charge of treason can be lodged against individuals who convey detrimental information about the GDR—even unclassified— to “foreign organizations” (i.e., Western media). Dissidents and Journalists Targeted (C) Dissidents in the GDR have been particularly hard hit by the crackdown. The regime has decided to curb them as well as their de facto publicity agents—foreign journalists. Although relatively small in number and without a broad popular following, most of the critics are Marxists who damn the SED for prostituting Marxist ideals, a fact that evidently has made the regime nervous. In espousing a more “humanistic socialism” that can encompass greater pluralism and freedoms, the East German dissidents come close to the spirit of Eurocommunism and have generated some backing from that quarter. Probably pushed by such party ideologues as Hager and Naumann, Honecker may have come to fear that these arguments might win favor among youth, technocrats, and others—perhaps serving to instigate a wider political unrest that would filter down to the mass level. (U) The initial steps to repress dissent generated an unexpected though shortlived “public debate.” The regime actions against Heym
