804
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
The assessment should be completed in time to influence next
year’s aid budget requests.
The assessment should involve close consultation with members
of the Congress to ensure that their concerns are taken fully into ac-
count. Brookings’ close links with people on the Hill should facilitate
this.
The assessment might be assisted by an advisory committee of dis-
tinguished private citizens both to ensure that a wide variety of views
are brought to bear and to lend its conclusions added weight.
The State Department’s Office of External Research may be able to
make a contribution to funding the study, which I am told would cost
less than $100,000. If this contribution is not feasible or not sufficient,
we could support Brookings’ requests for funding from the National
Science Foundation and private foundations.
Since it would address the operations of several U.S. agencies, the
request for this study should come from the President. Contract rela-
tionships and coordination of governmental support activities can be
handled through the Department of State.
I attach a draft letter from you to Mr. MacLaury, President of
Brookings.2
2 The draft letter to Bruce MacLauray, President of the Brookings Institution, is not
attached. In a June 3 memorandum to Vance, Brzezinski wrote: “Further to your memo-
randum to the President of May 20, and our subsequent conversations concerning the de-
sirability of the Brookings Institution carrying out a study of U.S. foreign aid strategies, it
would be preferable for you to request the study on behalf of the President. In my view it
is unnecessary and undesirable for the President or members of the White House Staff to
become directly involved in arranging a contractual relationship with Brookings. Though
the choice of Brookings is the Department’s decision, there should be no doubt that the
President initiated the idea of the proposed study. To this end, you may wish to note in
your letter to Bruce MacLaury that the President wants the project to be undertaken.”
(Ibid.) No letter from Vance to MacLaury was found.
265.
Editorial Note
The Conference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC),
which began meeting in December 1975, held its final meeting at the
Ministerial level in Paris from May 30 to June 3, 1977. As the opening of
the meeting approached, officials at the Department of State revisited
the issue of announcing a doubling of U.S. foreign aid over 8 years. (See
Document 263.) On May 25, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance met with
