International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 589 Is it your desire that when Eizenstat, Cooper and I are satisfied that your concerns have been met, that I should conclude the negotiations or do you desire I bring it back to your desk for a final sign-off? Option 1. When Cooper, Eizenstat and Strauss are satisfied, conclude the negotiations (Eizenstat recommends)3 Option 2. When Cooper, Eizenstat and Strauss are satisfied, return to my desk for final acceptance or rejection 3 Carter indicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.” On February 15, Carter administration officials reached an agreement with textile industry representatives on a new textile import program. (“U.S. in Pact On Textile Protection,” The New York Times, February 16, 1979, p. D1) 201. Memorandum From Guy F. Erb of the National Security Council Staff to the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen)1 Washington, February 24, 1979 SUBJECT Selective Safeguards and Conditional Most-Favored-Nation Treatment: TPC Meeting, Tuesday, February 27, 1979, 2:00 p.m. Tuesday’s TPC meeting will take up two very important trade policy issues: conditional application of most-favored-nation (MFN) treatment and selective import safeguards.2 TPC decisions on these issues could affect the direction of U.S. trade policy for a generation. Conditional MFN For the last several decades the United States and other non- Communist countries have generally applied both trade benefits and trade restrictions on a non-discriminatory basis, an exception being voluntary export restraint agreements. The heart of the General Agree- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 108, North-South Policy: 1979. Confidential. On February 24, Erb sent a copy of the memorandum to Brzezinski; in his cover memorandum, he noted his recommendation that Owen “and the NSC staff oppose a ‘conditional’ most-favored-nation policy as well as selective safeguards. In my view, a US decision to adopt either of these policies would require Presidential approval.” Brzezinski underlined the phrase “either of these policies” and wrote “I agree” below it. (Ibid.) 2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.
