Human Rights
315
93.
Memorandum From Michael Armacost of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 30, 1977
SUBJECT
PL–480, Title I: Shipments to Human Rights “Violators”
PL–480, Title I shipments to a number of countries are being held
up as a result of monumental confusion in our purposes, exaggerated
interpretations of the Congressional intent, and bureaucratic mis-steps
by the Christopher Committee. The salient facts in this case are these:
—Section 112–A of the legislation governing PL–480 Title I pro-
grams specifies that shipments of commodities should not go to coun-
tries that are “gross and consistent violators of human rights”, except
when the President determines that any commodities going to such
countries will be channeled to the needy.
—There are 29 recipients of PL–480 Title I shipments. So far as we
are aware, none has ever been determined to be a “gross and consistent
violator of human rights”.2 Thus we are not legally required to with-
hold shipments to the intended recipients (evidently Chile has been
judged a “gross and consistent violator”, but none of the shipments are
planned for Chile anyway). The Christopher Committee has decided
that 14 of the 29 recipients have engaged in questionable3 human rights
practices, and the Committee has decided that our PL–480 contracts
with these countries be amended to provide for additional reporting on
human rights matters. Our Ambassadors to these countries have been
instructed to seek host government concurrence in such amendments.
—This effort has not been crowned with great success. The Indone-
sian Government bristled at our suggestion and refused. Our Ambas-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 49, PL 480: 11/77–1/80. Confidential. Sent for action. Inderfurth wrote at the top
right-hand corner of the memorandum: “See last paragraph first for explanation of ur-
gency. Rick.” Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum: “MA, good—OK—talked.
4 countries only [illegible] only. ZB.” Brzezinski also drew an arrow to Armacost’s name
in the “from” line. Attached to the memorandum is an undated handwritten note by
Brzezinski listing the four countries (Guinea, Bangladesh, Korea, and Indonesia) with the
comment “all we ask for answers & for information.”
2 Brzezinski placed a vertical line in the margin next to the portion of the paragraph
that begins with “we are aware” and ends with “violator of human rights.”
3 Brzezinski underlined a portion of this word.
