December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 713 late Camp David if Israel, the United States, and the Palestinians were to exclude Egypt from these discussions. Prime Minister Begin: Let’s follow the Camp David agreements. We can’t help suspicious minds. What we can do if Jordan does not join is to negotiate with Egypt alone. But Israel never said that Egypt will replace the Arabs or Jordan. We can’t do more. We could agree on one year of negotiations. We can hold the elections as expeditiously as possible. We can take one month to set up the self-governing authority. I have read about people who suspect Israel and the Jewish people. But that belongs to a different period. This autonomy is the focus of our debate. The parliamentary opposition is against it, and so are many of my friends. But we stand by our plan. I believe that one of the best ideas of Judaism and Zionism is the autonomy. We don’t want to interfere, but we need security. Minister Sharon has spoken of one million Jews in Judea and Samaria. There is nothing wrong for the Arab inhabitants in this. The number of Jews in Judea and Samaria is not a problem. We have the idea of living together. We only want security and no Palestinian state. I have a suggestion. President Carter: Before we change the subject . . . Prime Minister Begin: Minister Sharon will wait. He can obey. Minister Sharon: Only for a little while. President Carter: Egypt will have a liaison relationship in Gaza. (The President reads from the draft letter.) Prime Minister Begin: We should delete that whole sentence. There should be no Egyptians in Gaza. They won’t be there. We will never agree to Egypt doing this. There is no provision for liaison officers in the words of Camp David. Each state will have liaision officers with the police. I suggest deleting the whole paragraph. There can be no Egyptians in Gaza. Minister Sharon: I believe we could have moved forward more quickly if you understood our plans for Judea, Samaria, and Gaza. This is my personal opinion. We decided to have a debate on autonomy in the Cabinet and we will do it. I’ll emphasize that I believe in the idea of autonomy. We can live with it. But when we speak of autonomy, we don’t mean the establishment of second Palestinian state. There is already one Palestinian state. Israel should emphasize that Jordan is a Palestinian state. There are 1.5 million people in Jordan. 1.2 million are Palestinian. They are exactly the same Arabs as in Judea and Samaria. They are the same Palestinian Arabs who lived in the pre-1967 borders of Israel. They are represented in the Jordanian Parliament. Thirty of the 60 members of the Parliament are Palestinians from Judea and Samaria. Fifteen out of 30 members in the Senate are Jordanian citizens from Judea and Samaria. Jordan is a Palestinian state. The Hashemite
