1979  527
New types of surface ships and long-­range patrol aircraft with some-
what improved capabilities for ASW are likely. The critical problems 
confronting the USSR in ASW, however, are limitations in sensors and 
data processing.
—Foreseeable improvements will likely give the USSR better tech-
nical capabilities to detect, track, and attack SSBNs that are operating 
near the USSR, are in confined waters, or are transiting choke points 
such as straits.
—Judging by what we know of Soviet R&D programs and our 
understanding of ASW research in the United States, we believe the 
Soviets have little prospect over the next 10 years of developing sys-
tems capable of detecting and covertly tracking US submarines in 
broad ocean areas.
—With larger numbers of ASW-­capable forces and improved ASW 
sensors, the Soviets would have somewhat better capabilities for overt 
tracking of US submarines as they leave port or transit through choke 
points. Considering the likely limitations in Soviet forces, the counter-
measures available to US forces, and the general complexity of the 
problem, we do not believe that, during the next 10 years, the Soviets 
will be able to conduct sustained overt tracking of US SSBNs on patrol.
—In the 1980s, moreover, longer range SLBMs will triple the ocean 
area within which US SSBNs will be able to operate and remain within 
missile range of targets in the USSR.
—We therefore believe that, throughout the period of this Estimate, 
virtually all US SSBNs on patrol would be able to launch their missiles.
Major Factors Influencing Future Soviet Policy
23. As the Soviets now view their strategic position, they probably 
consider their strategic capabilities to be the equal of those of the United 
States and superior to those of their other adversaries. They almost cer-
tainly have increased confidence that these forces effectively buttress 
the USSR’s superpower position, and that they contribute to the Soviet 
aim of shifting the total world correlation of forces in the USSR’s favor. 
The Soviet leaders do not want nuclear war—­they believe it would be 
a disaster. In our judgment, however, their ideology and their political 
and military objectives combine to motivate them to compete with the 
United States in the global arena and to try to isolate it from its allies. 
From their perspective, powerful strategic capabilities offer foreign pol-
icy advantages, and superior capabilities to fight and survive a nuclear 
war constitute the best deterrent as well as the best preparation for the 
contingency of nuclear war should it occur.
24. The Soviets are approaching the end of an ICBM/SLBM 
deployment cycle and the beginning of a new Five-Year Plan. In the 
relatively near term, they face mounting economic problems and lead-
ership transition. They are aware that the United States and NATO are 
considering several important military program options which are as 
yet undecided. The Soviets want to conclude a SALT II agreement limit-
ing some aspects of the arms competition, for reasons which we believe
