616  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
political warfare victories within the UN framework to be sufficiently 
promising so that they will continue to give that body major attention.
237. Disarmament. The Soviet leaders evidently believe that by 
showing an active interest in disarmament they can enhance their claim 
to leading in the cause of peace. More specifically, they hope to neutral­
ize Western nuclear striking power by intensifying the stigma attached 
to nuclear weapons and thus inhibiting their actual or threatened use 
by the West. They may also believe that disarmament negotiations can 
help to reduce the chances of nuclear war. They will almost certainly, 
when circumstances seem to them appropriate, press for a continuation 
of such negotiations.
238. It is possible that the Soviets will conclude limited agreements 
in the field of disarmament, even if these involve some limitations on 
their own military capabilities, in order to gain what they would con­
sider to be a net advantage. Probably they have not yet resolved on 
the precise shape of agreements which would meet this prescription. 
We believe that their deep suspicion of the West and their aversion to 
extensive inspection in the USSR will forbid their acceptance of any 
truly comprehensive disarmament scheme, and will make negotiations 
on even the most limited measures highly complicated and drawn out.
Soviet Policy in Particular Areas
239. The Middle East. This area has offered since 1955 the most strik­
ing example of the attempt by Soviet policy to support anticolonialism 
and nationalist movements against Western interests and influence. The 
USSR did not create the Arab nationalist movement, but in providing the 
political backing of a great power, together with substantial military and 
economic assistance, it has enormously increased the power and effec­
tiveness of the movement.
240. The immediate Soviet aim is to deny this area to the West and 
to expand Soviet influence there, rather than to gain direct control of it. 
If Soviet policy can deepen the conflict between Arab nationalism and 
the West to the point of irreconcilability, several results follow: closer 
association of Arab states with the Bloc tends to alter the world political 
alignment in the latter’s favor; Western military bases in the Arab states 
are eliminated; Western control of the oil resources becomes tenuous. 
Consequently, we believe that Soviet policy will continue to present itself 
in the Middle East as the friend and supporter of Arab nationalism in 
the latter’s struggle against Western “imperialism,” and more particu­
larly, will for the present support Nasser as leader of the Arab nationalist 
movement. Further military and economic assistance will be made avail­
able to the United Arab Republic; UAR positions on Jordan, Lebanon, 
the Aden Protectorate, and other trouble spots involving Arab-Western 
conflict will be supported in Soviet propaganda and in the UN.
