German Democratic Republic observed that there is a difference between a constitution reality. Ms. Derian continued that the point is all govts recognize the need for these statements. 14. Ms. Derian referred to Nier’s distinction between internal matters and external matters and gave the example of a neighborhood in which everyone kept a neat garden in front of their house. She stated that if someone wanted to keep goats in their garden, or dump their garbage there, the people in the neighborhood would have to get together and talk about the problem peacefully. Nier replied that relations between nations are not the same as relations among neighbors. However, accepting Ms. Derian’s vivid example, Nier said that the GDR tries to keep its own garden neat, but that if its neighbor wants to raise goats in his garden or dump garbage in it, that is none of the GDR’s business. Ms. Derian said that he should know that goats will go into the next garden to which Nier replied then they would have to build a wall. 15. Nier at this stage changed the subject and said he would like to raise some bilateral issues in connection with some questions raised by the Ambassador in his September 19 meeting with Foreign Minister Fischer.3 Ms. Derian might also find his comments of interest: Narcotics problems—Nier stated that the GDR has no narcotics problem of its own and it was up to the US to judge whether it had one. He stated that the GDR is ready to cooperate in this area and is prepared to exchange information. Experts in the Ministry of Health are prepared to discuss these matters with US experts. Ms. Derian noted that Congressman English was planning to visit East Berlin to discuss these matters.4 Nier replied that his government had nothing against this. Consular Convention—Nier stated that he would only like to recall the remarks Foreign Minister Fischer had made to the Ambassador and that Grunert had made to President Carter on this question: The GDR is in favor of concluding a Consular Convention with the US. The GDR’s interest and willingness to sign such an agreement has been demonstrated through the several compromise proposals that it had made. “We have gone to the limit of what is possible.” In order for
