German Democratic Republic
381
observed that there is a difference between a constitution reality. Ms.
Derian continued that the point is all govts recognize the need for these
statements.
14. Ms. Derian referred to Nier’s distinction between internal mat-
ters and external matters and gave the example of a neighborhood in
which everyone kept a neat garden in front of their house. She stated
that if someone wanted to keep goats in their garden, or dump their
garbage there, the people in the neighborhood would have to get
together and talk about the problem peacefully. Nier replied that
relations between nations are not the same as relations among neigh-
bors. However, accepting Ms. Derian’s vivid example, Nier said that
the GDR tries to keep its own garden neat, but that if its neighbor
wants to raise goats in his garden or dump garbage in it, that is none
of the GDR’s business. Ms. Derian said that he should know that goats
will go into the next garden to which Nier replied then they would
have to build a wall.
15. Nier at this stage changed the subject and said he would like
to raise some bilateral issues in connection with some questions raised
by the Ambassador in his September 19 meeting with Foreign Minister
Fischer.3 Ms. Derian might also find his comments of interest: Narcotics
problems—Nier stated that the GDR has no narcotics problem of its
own and it was up to the US to judge whether it had one. He stated
that the GDR is ready to cooperate in this area and is prepared to
exchange information. Experts in the Ministry of Health are prepared
to discuss these matters with US experts. Ms. Derian noted that Con-
gressman English was planning to visit East Berlin to discuss these
matters.4 Nier replied that his government had nothing against this.
Consular Convention—Nier stated that he would only like to recall
the remarks Foreign Minister Fischer had made to the Ambassador
and that Grunert had made to President Carter on this question: The
GDR is in favor of concluding a Consular Convention with the US.
The GDR’s interest and willingness to sign such an agreement has been
demonstrated through the several compromise proposals that it had
made. “We have gone to the limit of what is possible.” In order for
3 In telegram 6144 from East Berlin, September 20, Bolen reported that he had
advised Fischer of White House and congressional interest in drug trafficking from East
Berlin. Other issues discussed included cultural exchanges, the visit of Assistant Secretary
Derian, the Consular Convention, trade, and the settlement of claims. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780390–0160)
4 During his November 14 visit to East Berlin, English stressed the importance
Congress and the administration placed on stopping drug trafficking and pressed the
East Germans on establishing an informal information exchange on known traffickers.
(Telegram 7417 from East Berlin, November 17; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780473–0704)
