850  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
full approval. Defense and FEMA added that we should move to imple-
ment it as rapidly as possible.5 (S)
Dr. Brzezinski next turned to three specific and unresolved issues 
in the procedures and responsibilities for implementation. (C)
1. Covert Versus Overt Funding—In the discussion of this budget-
ing question, DOD and JCS expressed strong support for overt fund-
ing. CIA took no position. FEMA and OMB preferred covert funding. 
Defense expressed concern that a covert approach would force Defense 
to pay for the entire program because FEMA could not so easily bury 
the money in its programs. (S)
OMB insisted that security of the program is important and that 
it should be funded covertly in order to avoid detailed public scrutiny 
by Congress. Defense pointed out that FEMA can manage “black” pro-
grams. Hugh Carter asked which approach would allow the program 
to be implemented faster. Defense insisted that greater speed is possible 
through overt funding. (S)
Defense proposed a compromise that the Joint Program Office 
work out a solution to this funding issue. All agencies agreed. (C)
2. Joint Program Office—FEMA originally objected to the concept of 
a Joint Program Office with Defense as the Executive Agent. By defin-
ing more clearly the boundary between Defense and FEMA program 
responsibilities, compromise language was found to satisfy FEMA. 
Therefore, the concept of a Joint Program Office was supported by all 
agencies. (S)
3. DCI/DOD Division of Management Responsibilities—Defense and 
CIA disagreed on the division of program management responsibilities 
for defining the new system. CIA insisted that the DCI, under Execu-
tive Order 12036,6 has the program responsibility through the NFIB for 
survivability of all intelligence systems and communications. Defense 
argued that the Executive Order gives this authority to the Secretary of 
Defense. OMB proposed compromise language which retains the pres-
ent modus operandi between the DCI and the Secretary of Defense on 
other disputed issues in interpreting Executive Order 12036. Thus this 
issue was set aside. (S)
With the above mentioned changes in the concept paper, all agen-
cies support a recommendation to the President that he direct the 
implementation of the new approach as it is spelled out in the respon-
sibilities and implementation sections of the paper. (S)
5 Attached but not printed is the paper; see Document 197.
6 Reference is to Executive Order 12036, “United States Intelligence Activities,” 
signed January 24, 1978. (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pp. 194–214)
