798
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
through grants. UNTYING. Untie all development loans, except SSA;
untie all AID bilateral assistance provided other donors untie their
loans. MULTI-YEAR COMMITMENTS/PL 480 PROGRAMMING. Op-
pose multi-year programming; continue PL 480 program as it presently
exists; abolish PL 480 Title I and appropriate equivalent dollar amount
for additional official development assistance (ODA).
2. Should some form of generalized debt relief be provided LDCs? They
desire additional resource transfers, and believe debt relief is more
readily obtainable than additional foreign assistance. The issue has
taken on disproportionate significance relative to its economic impact
because of the importance accorded it by certain LDCs in terms of their
political leadership among developing countries.
Recommendation: Continue to oppose all proposals for generalized
debt rescheduling because: (a) the distribution of debt accumulation
markedly mismatches current need of LDCs; (b) the U.S. would bear a
disproportionate share of cost; (c) incentives for efficient LDC resource
management would be reduced; (d) LDC creditworthiness in world
capital markets could be undercut; and (e) there would be little devel-
opment payout.
LDC Position: ODA loans outstanding to LLDCs should be con-
verted to grants; ODA loans to the other poor countries should be re-
written on IDA terms or better; and debt relief (on unspecified terms)
should be granted any other LDC requesting it.
Industrial Countries Position: Although the weight of industrial
countries’ opinion is against generalized debt relief, the industrial
countries are not united. Strongest opponents of debt relief are the U.S.,
France, Germany and Japan; advocates are Sweden and the Benelux
countries. EC unity is not easy to maintain because some regard debt
relief as a low-cost pacifier of the LDCs (important because the EC de-
pends heavily on trade with LDCs).
Summit Action: Be silent on this issue.
CIEC Action: Support existing U.S./EC proposals that: improve
functioning of “Creditor Clubs”; provide a new mechanism for speedy
assessment of LDCs with serious balance of payments difficulties (in-
cluding debt service problems); and coordinate donor responses.
Options Considered and Rejected: Use debt relief as a normal means
of transferring aid resources to LDCs; provide generalized debt relief
on a one-time basis and limit the cost by controlling the number of re-
cipients, terms of relief and the consolidation period.
3. To what extent should the developed countries commit themselves to
provide increased market access to developing country exports and how do we
respond to domestic requests for increased protection against imports from
LDCs?
