292 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I ment than we are now prepared to accept, and we may have thereby created the false impression in Moscow that being tough with the Carter Administration in fact pays off. We may have at times overstated the importance of the U.S.-Soviet relationship, thereby again stimulating fears in Western Europe that the United States is preparing to cut a deal with the Soviet Union not entirely in keeping with European interests. We probably have not put enough emphasis on our relations with China, and we have failed to exploit the Chinese end of the U.S.-Soviet-Chinese triangle in order to advance our own interests. We did occasionally act with insufficient consistency in regard to the Middle East, and in retrospect the U.S.-Soviet statement was both too explicit and implied more than was either intended or necessary.19 More generally, there is also the wider issue of the total impression created by our foreign policy. In this connection, it might be useful to look at alternative U.S. foreign policies in terms of four types, each based on certain basic preferences and assumptions. I could call them, to emphasize that they are part of a spectrum (with exaggerations at the edges), the liberal/liberal model; the liberal; the conservative; and the conservative/conservative. In a condensed fashion, the foregoing can be represented as follows:20 Liberal2 Liberal Conservative Conservative2 Basic Priority: Basic Priority: Basic Priority: Basic Priority: Detente Close relations Balance of Primarily with Allies and power anti-communism Emphasis on Third World SALT and arms Anti-Soviet focus Anti-Soviet control Both competition emphasis as well as accom- Pro-Chinese Clear-cut modation with Anti-Chinese preference for the Soviets Suspicious of defense cuts SALT and arms Anti SALT and Moderate control arms control Eagerness to toughness on accommodate SALT Indifferent to Hard on Cuba with Cuba Cuba Normalization Hard on Vietnam with China Indifferent to Vietnam 19 The U.S.-Soviet joint statement on the Middle East and the reconvening of the Geneva Conference was released on October 1. For the text, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, Document 120. 20 In the left-hand margin next to the table, the First Lady wrote: “I don’t think this should be released to the press.”
