that the result reached does not represent the will of the people of Tacna and Arica. If such contest proceedings be instituted the Commission shall hear said proceedings summarily in accordance with rules of procedure to be determined by it and report its findings thereon at the earliest possible date to the Arbitrator and to the Parties. If no contest proceedings are instituted within five days, the Plebiscitary Commission shall so advise the Arbitrator and the respective Ministers of Foreign Affairs by telegraph. REGISTRATION AND ELECTION BOARDS A. Constitution and Numbers.—At least four Registration and Election Boards and as many more as the Plebiscitary Commission finds to be necessary, each Board consisting of three members, shall be appointed in the following manner: One member shall be appointed by each member of the Plebiscitary Commission, other than the President of the Commission, and the third, who shall act as President of the Board, shall be appointed by the President of the Plebiscitary Commission. Vacancies shall be filled according to the manner of the original appointment. B. Procedure. The registration and Election Boards shall respectively act by majority vote. C. Place of sitting.—One Registration and Election Board shall sit in Arica, one in Tacna and the others shall sit in such places as may be designated by the Plebiscitary Commission to the end that proper opportunity shall be given to persons qualified to register and vote. D. Powers.—The Registration and Election Boards shall proceed, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Plebiscitary Commission, to make up and publish lists of the voters entitled to take part in the plebiscite and shall receive and count the vote. No person not duly registered shall be allowed to vote in the plebiscite. THE TIME OF THE PLEBISCITE The members of the Plebiscitary Commission shall be appointed within four months from the date of the rendition of this Award, and the Commission shall assemble in the City of Arica for its first meeting not later than six months from the date of the rendition of this Award. These times may be changed by the Arbitrator. The Commission shall thereupon proceed at once to formulate rules for its own procedure and regulations governing the plebiscite in conformity with the conditions herein set forth, and shall fix the date for the plebiscite, and the time and places of registration and voting. The dates, times and places so fixed may be changed by the Commission. EXPENSES OF THE PLEBISCITE
