824  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
of producers, processors, and consumers, (d) avoidance of adverse effects on 
international interests of the U.S., and (e) preference to disposal of excess 
materials from DPA inventories. Generally expedite disposals of excess mate­
rials that deteriorate, that are likely to become obsolete, or that do not meet 
quality standards.”
The Stock Piling Act requires that disposals of materials from the 
stockpile shall give due consideration to protection against disruption 
of usual markets, and current policy requires that similar protection 
be provided for disposals from the Defense Production Act inventory. 
Current policy also requires that disposals shall not adversely affect 
the international interests of the U.S. Continuation of these policies is 
recommended.
Expeditious disposal would be favored for (1) materials that are 
subject to deterioration or obsolescence, (2) non­specification-grade 
materials and (3) materials that do not have stockpile objectives. In the 
case of deteriorating materials, measures other than stockpiling, such 
as research to develop readily-available substitutes, should be empha­
sized for meeting emergency needs. Materials that are not directly 
applicable to objectives also should be available disposal.
Recommendation #3. New Legislation
At appropriate time submit proposed legislation, subject to interagency 
clearance, to achieve better coordination and management of the diverse stock­
pile programs.
The Stock Piling Act has not been revised since its enactment in 
1946. Meanwhile other stockpile legislation has been added piece­
meal. It is believed that a general revision of the legislation should 
be submitted to recognize changed conditions, especially the greater 
domestic hazard resulting from nuclear warfare, and to coordinate 
the various enactments relating to the strategic stockpile, Defense 
Production Act inventory, supplemental stockpile, and the residual 
tin inventory accumulated from the operation of the Texas City tin 
smelter. Proposed legislation has already been partly cleared with 
agencies concerned. This proposed legislation should be completed 
and submitted to Congress.
Recommendation #4. Relationships Between Disposals and Barter
Continue using barter to obtain materials within strategic stockpile objec­
tives. Consider establishing more definite standards for determining when to 
barter for materials beyond maximum objectives. Avoid simultaneous barter 
and sale of identical materials.
Barter should continue to be used to reduce the Government’s 
cash outlays for the strategic stockpile. Beyond that, there is a need for 
coordinating barter acquisition policy with disposal policy for strategic
