380 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV I. The Soviet military buildup is the greatest direct threat to the United States. It continues to compound at 4% every year, year in and year out. That has gone on for almost twenty years; over that same period our own defense effort has not increased in real terms, and has halved as a percentage of GNP or of the federal budget. Military capability, of course, is forces, equipment, and trained personnel, not money. But money largely determines those other factors. Funding is a crude—­but reasonably good-­overall measure of military capability. It is an even better measure of trends. Depending on our predilections and our detailed judgments we may differ as to which side—­the U.S.S.R. and its allies or the United States and its—­is ahead militarily today. But the balance is close, and six or eight years ago it was not—­we were clearly ahead. If the trend is not reversed, the balance will not be close six or eight years from now—­ the Soviets will be clearly ahead. The trend lines are crossing or already have crossed. For the first time since World War II, the balance of military power is in process of shifting. It is true that the Soviets have some problems that we do not, such as the PRC—­just as we have problems that are unique to us. Those problems of theirs are not enough to offset the advantage they are gaining. Unless we move, in a steady, real-­growth way, as you pledged to the NATO allies and directed in PD–18, the gap will widen more and more. And the results, in my view, will not be long in coming. II. I am as aware as anyone—­indeed, I have often reminded others—­ that spending for military purposes is not the sole determinant of national security. If it were, we already would be in a situation much more dangerous than the troubling one we now face. I also am aware that there are many claims on the federal budget, a budget which must be controlled in order to help fight inflation. But no claim compares in urgency to the claim which makes all else possible—­ the physical security of our country and the deterrence of war. Persistent inflation has had the effect of robbing our defense, just as it has robbed our people. For in the past three years the estimates of anticipated inflation allowed for in the Defense budget have not equaled the actual inflation after the results are counted each year. The same thing will happen again next year if inflation estimates are not realistic—­an apparent increase in real defense program disappearing in added costs of trying to maintain even the current level.
