National Security Policy  201
in the Chiefs that the present set-­up should be continued simply adding 
an integrated operational section; others feel that a J-Staff should be 
instituted, comparable to the staffs the unified commanders now have. 
He felt that if this step is not taken now, it may never be taken.
The President, after reviewing charts showing alternative patterns, 
said that the “J-Staff solution” is the way he would do it.
General Twining reported on recent developments regarding the 
reorganization proposal. General Twining said Congressman Vinson 
had tried to freeze the joint staff organization in its present form, but 
Defense is not agreeing to that. The President referred to several recent 
instances of Defense representatives departing from Administration 
positions in testimony to the Congress. The Navy is trying to get autho­
rization for twice as many Polaris submarines as approved. Mr. Roy 
Johnson is opposing the Administration’s proposals regarding the 
NACA. The President was delighted, however, to see the fine support 
Admiral Radford had given for the Defense reorganization bill. General 
Twining added that Admiral Burke has really been doing a good job on 
the Defense reorganization. His problem comes from the pressures on 
him from within the Navy.
General Twining then showed the President a copy of a memoran­
dum the Chiefs have submitted to the Secretary of Defense opposing 
the stopping of nuclear tests. He said the Chiefs of course realized that 
there are many factors that enter into the question with which they are 
not concerned, but they felt that the military aspect of the matter is such 
that there should be no cessation. The President said that if he could 
get the changes made in the law that he had asked, and could provide 
information to the United Kingdom, he thought we might very well 
want to achieve an agreement to stop tests after the present series. For 
the present, however, he thought we should just be negative on the pro­
posal; after Hardtack, and on the basis of an agreed and effective mon­
itoring system, he thought he would be agreeable to cessation. General 
Twining said the Joint Chiefs felt this action should be part of a wider 
package. The President stressed the great importance of getting inspec­
tion groups, capable of unimpeded movement, into Russia. Profound 
consequences could be expected, and we could anticipate extension of 
such inspection to other phases of disarmament. He repeated that as of 
now he would not stop the tests.
The President reverted to his comment about organization for outer 
space activities, and said he was concerned that the top-­most officials 
in Defense do not see the need to be firm on these matters and to stop 
the free-­wheeling testimony now going on. He recalled that Secretary 
McElroy and the scientists had agreed with him on the assignment of
