December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 703 am only a Prime Minister, we will elect the President as chairman of our meeting. This is unanimously adopted. President Carter: Now I see how you prevail! Prime Minister Begin: The word prevail is dangerous! President Carter: I hope that we can keep the discussions here confidential. Some of what I say about my meetings with Sadat should not be revealed. I am honored and gratified to be in Jerusalem on the free soil of Israel. My own deep feelings mirror those of the American people, including non-Jews. We feel a friendship toward Israel, we see mutual security interests, and we see a deep historical relationship with one another that fills my heart. When I was riding in from Tel Aviv last night, it was pointed out to me that Jerusalem was the city of peace, but that it had suffered in thirty-six wars. I would like to end my public service with actions that helped insure that there will be no more wars over Jerusalem. We have come a long way together against great odds. When we have reached the final moments of negotiations, you have never disappointed me. You have always helped to bring the negotiations toward a success. I have just come from Egypt where I have seen an outpouring of feelings by the Egyptian people for peace. I know that the Israeli negotiators in Egypt found this same welcome and the broad desire for an end to war. I would like to conclude the negotiations and settle all of the terms of the peace treaty today. President Sadat is eager to conclude the negotiations. I share that desire. It is very likely that if we are not successful it will be difficult to bring the talks to a conclusion in the near future. There are Arab pressures on Egypt. Saudi Arabia may cut off all aid to Egypt, which amounts to about $1.6 billion yearly.2 There is a threat of boycott. Sadat accepts this possibility. Some of his ministers are reluctant, but he is not. We have resolved most of the difficult issues. There are many that you consider to be more important than I do. I recognize that what we see as semantics may take on a difference for you. You are more directly involved. In our talks with the prime 2 On March 6, Saud commented to West that he hoped Carter’s visit to Cairo would not result in a “separate peace treaty between Israel and Egypt without adequate provisions for Palestine and withdrawal,” stating that such an action “would result in the automatic imposition of sanctions,” including Egypt’s expulsion from the Arab League, the League’s headquarters being moved from Cairo, and imposition of a boycott and economic sanctions on Egypt. When asked by West what this would mean for Saudi aid to Egypt, Saud replied that Saudi Arabia “would fill all of its existing monetary commitments,” including funding for F–5 fighter aircraft for the Egyptian Air Force, “but would provide no further assistance.” (Telegram 1902 from Jidda, March 7; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790129–0638) Following West’s protest on March 11 that sanctions on Egypt would “cause deep strain in U.S.-Saudi relations,” Fahd assured West that Saudi Arabia would “not rush into anything.” (Telegram 2056 from Jidda, March 11; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850036–2417)
