442  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
319.	 Telegram 970 from Geneva1
Geneva, October 27, 1955, 7 p.m.
970. From Johnson.
1. Two hour forty-­five minute meeting this morning opened by 
Wang with somewhat milder rehash CHICOM position on Taiwan 
which avoided renewal demand for US withdrawal and ended with 
presentation draft statement transmitted by separate tel.
2. I replied with statement along lines para one Deptel 996 and 
stated I would study and reply later concerning his draft statement.
3. He replied with long ad lib statement “rejecting” my statement 
on Taiwan. After some sparring and give and take I tried to probe fur­
ther for meaning para 4 his draft statement to determine whether it 
was any move toward meeting our position on renunciation of force in 
Taiwan area. While his replies followed Chou En-­lai formula they were 
somewhat more ambiguous than previously. Replying to my specific 
question he stated para 4 “included disputes between US and China 
in Taiwan area”. My specific probing on significance his continued use 
“conditions permitting” with respect “liberation” Taiwan led to no 
definite conclusion.
4. I then reverted to implementation in brief but strong terms to 
which he replied my information was not current with respect ability 
UK carry out its functions and rejected in harder terms than previously 
my raising question these meetings. He rebuffed all my efforts deter­
mine what he meant by my information not current.
5. I then made statement on missing military personnel in accord­
ance Deptels 824 and 828. In reply he read prepared statement “rejecting 
assertion 450 Americans still allegedly being held” and flatly refused 
accept lists.
6. I replied by pointing out I had not alleged 450 “still being held” 
but was asking for information with regard to their fate. I then cited as 
example case of Army PFC. Paul E. Craig, pointing out his specific men­
tion in Peiping broadcast and that they could not deny they had info 
with regard to him. If he were dead, all we were asking was when and 
where. There was then long and increasingly acrimonious discussion 
which I centered around facts in Craig case and humanitarian aspects. 
He rehashed position on fourteen thousand and reiterated entire matter 
should be taken up in MAC. He claimed he had answered our query by 
giving us list all Americans in China, including list last year all those 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–2755. Confidential; Niact; 
Limited Distribution.
