714
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
the negotiations, I suggest that you, Ambassador Strauss, and I meet in
the White House with Congressional leaders to discuss our agricultural
objectives and that you then meet with the press. This best could be
done in September, before serious discussions in the IWC and the MTN
begin.
—In parallel with our seeking dependable multilateral arrange-
ments, we should make clear our intention to be affirmative marketers
of America’s agricultural products. Among other things, this might im-
pose some discipline on our competitors and encourage them to take
the multilateral negotiations more seriously. In the following section I
outline initiatives in commercial export promotion. We should proceed
now with bilateral arrangements with centrally-planned countries
which do not participate in the MTN and with other initiatives which
do not conflict with multilateral negotiations.
Commercial Export Promotion
Commercial sales are by far the predominant element of our inter-
national agricultural trade. We need an effective commercial export
strategy and effective program management to support that strategy.
This Administration should assure that the United States is a depend-
able supplier of high quality agricultural products to the world.
The Department of Agriculture is taking these actions:
—We are analyzing individual countries abroad, and we are
looking especially for those situations where rising economic demand
can create rising markets for American agricultural products, now and
in the future. Using this information, we will design three- to five-year
plans with American agricultural export-promotion associations for
markets in individual countries. Depending on the characteristics of
each market, these plans will combine market-development activities
by the private export-promotion associations, credit facilities from the
private sector and from the United States Government, and commercial
supply arrangements backed up by appropriate commitments from the
Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC). We intend to complete these
plans for major countries by June 1978 or earlier.
—We will examine whether American agricultural cooperatives
need special help from the Department of Agriculture to operate di-
rectly in foreign markets. Our international grain trade is dominated by
a handful of private companies which operate as multinationals; they
do not seek to optimize American exports. American cooperatives
might enliven competition and expand exports of American grain. We
will consult with cooperatives in order to develop definite plans by the
end of 1977.
—We will design an intermediate credit program to fill in the gap
between the one- to three-year credits now available from the CCC and
