158 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV & World Report)4 makes this a matter of potential public sensitivity, not only because our procedures are mentioned, but also because Brezhnev is described as practicing frequently with his nuclear war command and control system. Our OPAL drills, your NEACP trip, and the IVORY ITEM drill are already giant strides in this area of readiness in comparison to anything since the issuance of NSDM–242 which called for similar “exercises” that never took place. Finally, I shall consult with Harold Brown on re-­emphasizing neglected aspects of NSDM–242.5

Tab A

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter6 Washington, August 19, 1977 SUBJECT US Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy (U) (TS) Several months ago, you directed Zbigniew Brzezinski to ask me7 several questions concerning our current nuclear weapons employment policy (NSDM–242), and the appropriateness of retaining that policy. My response to your questions was initially forwarded to the White House on June 3.8 At that time, however, it was anticipated that PRM–10 would likely provide additional insight with respect to nuclear weapons employment questions. As a consequence, the report was held within the NSC awaiting completion of PRM–10. The report was returned to me on July 29 to permit whatever modifications necessary to accommodate my views on the results of PRM–10. (TS) I have reviewed my previously developed responses to your questions, and am enclosing the report, slightly altered to the above end, for your information and consideration. In addition to responding to your specific questions, the report provides additional background to help in understanding our existing policy and the complexity of 4 Orr Kelly, “If U.S. Comes Under Nuclear Assault,” U.S. News & World Report, ­September 5, 1977. 5 Brzezinski wrote below this paragraph: “I inserted 5 clips, marking items you might want to read, time-­permitting.” 6 Top Secret. 7 See footnote 4, Document 9. 8 The June 3 memorandum is in Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 62, PRC 022, 7/8/77, US/USSR—PRM 10.
