518
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
strike a deal. I was and I am still determined to make peace. If our com-
mitment to that great cause is profound and unwavering, then our task
should transcend words and legal formulations. Then also, the chal-
lenge before us ceases to be a contest of oratory and scoring points here
and there. It becomes converted irreversably to one of winning the
hearts and minds of our peoples and enabling them to look beyond the
unhappy past.
It was in this spirit that we entered into direct negotiations with
you in a sincere attempt to build new bridges for the future. These ne-
gotiations reached their high and low points as we went deeper into the
core of our complex problem. We have achieved some progress. How-
ever, I feel that valuable time has frittered away in futile arguments and
discussions about issues of little or no real significance. Apparently,
some are still seized with the notion that the solution could be reached
at the expense of the other party. Still others remain captives to con-
cepts like that of David and Goliath instead of being inspired by the
brotherhood of Ismail and Isaac. Evidently, some old barriers do exist
and it is our joint responsibility to break them. A few days ago, one of
your colleagues chose to speak of the present state of affairs in terms
which are in clear contradiction with the new spirit of peace. He said
that Egypt must not forget that part of its territory is occupied and
could remain occupied. We reject that logic and I am sure that the vast
majority of the Israeli people shares our view.
It might be appropriate to remind you of what we have offered to
enable you to make the necessary decision for the establishment of
peace. First and foremost, we proved our willingness to look seriously
and sympathetically to your need to feel secure. Of course the need for
security is mutual and not confined to you alone. Still, we lent an atten-
tive ear to your concern for security in view of certain historical and
psychological factors. This must not go unappreciated. Nor should it be
misinterpreted or abused.
We offered you full recognition, not as a mere formality but as a
dynamic process of coexistence that includes diplomatic relations, eco-
nomic and cultural exchange for the mutual benefit of our two peoples
and infact for the good of the entire region. By conventional norms, this
process can take place only after the completion of withdrawal. How-
ever, I accepted the request of our good friend President Carter to start
the process after the completion of the interim withdrawal. I did so as a
token of my full confidence in the future as well my faith in our peoples
who are going to be the final arbiter.
We said, and still maintain, that we are most willing to establish
with you normal relations that exist between good-neighbors. No dis-
criminatory barriers shall stand in the way of free movement of people
