1955  591
consideration by your authorities of cases of imprisoned Americans. 
There is certainly no better case in which there is opportunity now 
demonstrate this than case of these two persons.
G. UK Charge who visited Mrs. Bradshaw on December 10 fully 
confirms our previous understanding that this unfortunate woman is 
now mentallly and physically in entirely helpless condition. She is eat­
ing practically nothing and could well pass away at any time unless 
prompt steps are taken. She is physically and mentally entirely inca­
pable of making arrangements for her departure and travelling from 
country. Apparently one of her few touches with reality is knowledge 
that her husband remains in prison and desire be reunited with him 
in departing from country. Apart from agreed announcement these 
humanitarian considerations alone should dictate prompt release of 
Dr. Bradshaw.
H. It is our understanding that even full sentence of Dr. Bradshaw 
expires in March. He is understandably extremely concerned over con­
dition of his wife and desires immediately return with her. I should 
think that policy of lenience, particularly in light of agreed announce­
ment, should make possible shortening of his five-year sentence by 
mere matter of ten weeks.
I. It is understandable that known facts with regard to Dr. and 
Mrs. Bradshaw greatly increase concern of my government for fate of 
imprisoned Americans with regard to whom we have no information 
and accentuates need for their expeditious release so that they can exer­
cise right of return recognized in agreed announcement.
J. At our last meeting you raised several questions with respect 
to carrying out by my government of obligations it assumed under 
agreed announcement. I am entirely prepared and willing fully 
answer those questions, even though they do not appear relate to fac­
tual information concerning any specific case nor to terms of agreed 
announcement.
K. Your first question related to whether my government was 
prepared provide Indian Embassy with complete list of names and 
addresses of all Chinese in U.S.
L. You will recall that we very fully discussed this question at time 
we were discussing text of our agreed announcement, and I am sur­
prised that you again raise matter. Next, I desire point out again that 
statement made by our two governments on July 25 with respect to 
holding of these talks, as well as our agreed first agenda item, relates 
solely to persons who desire return. I also want point out that agreed 
announcement of September 10 very specifically refers only to persons 
who desire return
M. At very outset of our talks I gave you list of Americans in your 
country who my government had reason believe desired return. I have
