January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1355 Alawite coalition would be the preferable successor from our standpoint, we lack the ability to influence the succession and efforts by us to do so could actually operate against U.S. preferences. Any effort now by the U.S. to support or encourage one of the groups arrayed against the regime would risk our remaining working relations with Assad without acceptable assurances that we would have influence with Assad’s ultimate successor. —While remaining out of Syria’s internal struggle, the U.S. should take steps to protect our interests in this transition period by conducting ourselves in a manner that will maximize U.S. ability to work with Assad for now and with whatever regime emerges after him. In general, this will mean a policy tailored—within the constraints imposed by our broader regional objectives—to keep our distance from Assad while stressing U.S. interest in, and support for legitimate Syrian national interests. Specifically, our objective will be to stress with Syrians and selected third parties our determination to remain uninvolved in Syria’s domestic political struggle and our long-range interest in maintaining Syria as an independent, moderate state. E. After the regime changes —Following a change of regime, we would have a limited but urgent agenda with Syria’s new leaders. At the earliest possible moment, we would want to assure: —(A) a cooperative relationship on Lebanon; —(B) maintenance of the Golan disengagement agreement and Olive Harvest arrangements; and, —(C) the safety of American official personnel, private citizens and facilities in Syria. —In addition, we would want to make clear that Syria continues to have a Western option and to discourage any move that would take Syria toward a significantly closer relationship with the USSR. —In the right circumstances, we would also want to consider tangible ways to underscore the U.S. interest in a constructive relationship with the successor regime. It is possible that conditions would make an offer of disaster relief and humanitarian assistance appropriate. We might also consider emergency financial and economic assistance in cooperation with other governments. F. Syria-Libya merger —The September 10 unity declaration3 by Assad and Qadhafi took place after the I–G meeting and was, therefore, not discussed. It is De- 3 Syria and Libya proclaimed on September 10 that they had become a single state. The declaration stated: “This unified state will be the base and means of confronting the Zionist presence and the means of liberating Palestine.” (John Kifner, “Libya and Syria Sign Merger Agreement,” The New York Times, September 11, 1980, p. A7)
