XVI
Sources
ment Subject File; and the National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Mate-
rial, General Odom File. The National Security Council Institutional
Files contain a full record of the National Security Council’s cabinet-
level meetings on Afghanistan and related memoranda, which together
show the development at the highest levels of the Carter administra-
tion’s multi-pronged strategy to challenge the Soviet intervention. The
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System
File contains, as the name suggests, material deemed so sensitive that it
was to be closely held and not included in the regular framework of the
NSC’s document transmission and filing system. The National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign
Leaders File contains several important letters to and from the Presi-
dent to international leaders regarding the crisis in Afghanistan. The
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables file contains tele-
grams which were deemed sufficiently important to warrant Brzezin-
ski’s, and in some cases, the President’s attention. The National Secu-
rity Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File contains many memoranda
of conversation and related documents covering Brzezinski’s diplo-
matic missions in the months after the Soviet intervention. The Carter
Presidential Papers, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs
File contains documentation from which the President drew to write
his memoirs. This unique collection offers insight into the issues Carter
deemed significant as he undertook to shape his own legacy as Presi-
dent. The National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s
CIA Daily Brief File is a clearinghouse for the short intelligence reports
the President received every morning. Because of the highly charged
and fluid nature of the crisis in Afghanistan, these reports provide a
real-time picture of the President’s decision making based on the latest
and most sensitive intelligence reporting.
The Carter Administration Intelligence Files, officially part of the
Carter Library’s collection but housed in Washington D.C., are the
main source for meeting notes and minutes of the Special Coordinating
Committee’s (SCC) discussions on Afghanistan. Because the covert ac-
tion to support the Afghan Mujahidin was at the heart of the Carter
administration’s policy in Afghanistan, this collection is arguably the
most vital in the entire volume. Other important documentation origi-
nating with the SCC can be found in the Carter Library’s collection, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File.
Of the Department of State materials, four collections proved to be
especially rich in material for this volume. The Central Foreign Policy
File is a repository for telegrams between the Department of State and
U.S. diplomatic posts. The cable traffic out of Kabul provides an exten-
sive and oftentimes dramatic narrative of events on the ground there,
particularly during two episodes: the death of Ambassador Dubs; and
