Delegates present agreeing to accept in principle the proposal of the Chinese Government for full tariff autonomy. The Chairman thereupon placed in the hands of the Delegates two memoranda88 and a Table showing the Chinese plan for the Abolition of Likin. These memoranda and the Table, together with explanatory remarks by Dr. Wang may be found on p. 22, et seq., of the Minutes of the Meeting of the Committee on Tariff Autonomy, October 30, 1925. Committee on Tariff Autonomy, Second Meeting, November 3, 1925. The Second Meeting of the Committee on Tariff Autonomy was held on November 3, 1925, and at this meeting Sir Ronald Macleay, on behalf of the British Delegation, gave his interpretation of the Chinese position on the question of Tariff Autonomy, citing particularly the first two proposals of the Chinese as follows: “(1) The participating Powers formally declare to the Government of the Republic of China their respect for its tariff autonomy, and agree to the removal of all of the tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties. “(2) The Government of the Republic of China agrees to the abolition of likin simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese National Tariff Law, which shall take effect not later than the 1st day of January in the eighteenth year of the Republic of China (1929).” Sir Ronald inquired of the Chairman whether it was his wish that the Delegates should agree to these two Articles and on being informed affirmatively he stated that it would not be possible for him to agree to the phraseology proposed, although he was prepared to declare that tariff autonomy was an inherent right of sovereignty and that he was fully prepared to discuss the question. Sir Ronald said that he had not the power to agree to the removal of all tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties; that a statement in the phraseology used in the Chinese proposals would in effect be a renunciation of the present treaty provisions. The Chairman replied that while the Chinese Delegation wished the Powers to agree to the removal of the tariff restrictions contained in the present treaties, he did not
