Afghanistan compact for the self-government of its disparate and dissimilar regions. And despite a renewed commitment by this leadership to the language and spirit of traditional Islam, it has failed to evolve a national ethic to transform the negativism of its founding impulse into a viable and enduring nationalism in positive terms. 14. (C) All of this is made worse by the knowledge that Pakistan’s Armed Forces are not what they ought to be. Weakened by obsolescence and financial constraints, haunted by a losing record on the battlefield, and distracted from its military pursuits by its direct involvement in running the country for nearly half its 32 years, the Pakistan Armed Forces have lost considerable effectiveness. They march smartly but appear increasingly afflicted with inefficiency in performing their military duties. While it would be perhaps dangerous to over-generalize, the American Mission’s experience on 21 Nov. in awaiting ‘rescue’ by a Pakistan Army whose ability to move and to communicate any more efficiently than Napoleon’s is instructive, and worrying.2 15. (C) A further complication for Pakistan in even responding to likely Western offers of assistance and support is the variegated nature of the interests Pakistan pursues abroad in search of security. Asked on 31 Dec. by a Western journalist how best the U.S. could help Pakistan in the present time, Agha Shahi unhesitatingly replied, “settle its differences with Iran.” This would uncomplicate the situation for Pakistan. On the one hand, Pakistan doubtless welcomes the possible new Western embrace events in Kabul may produce; on the other, it finds the prospect of too public an embrace embarrassing and counter to its pursuit of acceptability and support in and from other quarters and sources. Some indeed fear such an embrace will increase Soviet bellicosity. 16. (C) Pakistan’s options are limited, however, all talk of accommodation with the Soviet Union notwithstanding. Only the United States, and to a lesser degree, China can provide the hardware Pakistan needs and the international support it yearns for at the present time. But the conservative Islamics—especially the staunchly anti-Communist Saudis—can provide Islamic legitimacy and the bankroll to fund the military purchases and the development projects Pakistan so desperately needs. 17. (C) The heart of Pakistan’s problem of insecurity, however, lies deep at home, not abroad. Thoughtful Pakistanis, even in the immediate wake of Soviet actions in Kabul, do not really expect Soviet armored columns to proceed through the Torkham and Chaman checkpoints, down the Khyber and Bolan Passes and onto the Indus Plain. However,
