1955 303 228. Telegram 773 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 23, 1955 773. From Johnson. 1. Following is full account Wang’s prepared statement referred to in para 4 Mytel 767. 2. He said he was now going to make some observations regarding two points he had raised at 15th meeting. He recalled that at last meeting I had said that his proposal regarding preparations for Sino-American negotiations at a higher level was a procedural and not a substantive matter. He had indicated he could not agree with this position. Now he wished to further clarify point of view of his side. 3. He said it had been stated in July 25 agreed announcement on convening of these talks that they would be conducted “in order to aid in settling matter repatriation civilians who desired return their respec­ tive countries and to facilitate further discussions and settlement of cer­ tain other practical matters now at issue between both sides.” At outset of talks two items had been agreed upon for agenda on basis July 25 agreed announcement. Obviously item two had never meant to exclude discussion and settling at conference on higher level those practical matters this conference not able to solve. On the contrary it was the function of these talks to make arrangement for practical and physi­ cal channels through which these practical matters might be solved. Hence his proposal was consistent with both the agreed announcement of July 25 and the agenda for these talks. It was of very great practical significance to discuss the removal of tension between China and US in Taiwan area. Importance this matter recognized by general public opin­ ion and many important leaders in US. If we had any concrete opin­ ions on relaxing tensions in Taiwan area he certainly would be glad to hear them. When we came to a discussion of agenda item two each side could raise problems it thought should be considered and so we would be free to exchange views. He said I had approved this idea but now nearly two weeks had passed since agreement reached on agreed announcement and, while he had put forward two items for discussion, I had today failed to express any views on them or to put forward any ideas of my government. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2355. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution.
