About the Series
V
time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memoran-
dum was drafted.
Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Rela-
tions series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance
from the General Editor and the Chief of the Editing and Publishing Di-
vision. The documents are reproduced as exactly as possible, including
marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes.
Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions
for the publication of historical documents within the limitations of
modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for
each document included in this volume. Spelling, capitalization, and
punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that ob-
vious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and
omissions in documents are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correc-
tion is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words repeated in
telegrams to avoid garbling or provide emphasis are silently corrected.
Words and phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics.
Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the original
text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each
volume.
Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that
deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classi-
fied after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and,
where possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been
noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of text that were omit-
ted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been
accounted for and are listed with headings, source notes, and number
of pages not declassified in their chronological place. All brackets that
appear in the original text are so identified in footnotes. All ellipses are
in the original documents.
The first footnote to each document indicates the source of the doc-
ument, original classification, distribution, and drafting information.
This note also provides the background of important documents and
policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy ad-
visers read the document.
Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent
material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional
documentary sources, provide references to important related docu-
ments printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide sum-
maries of and citations to public statements that supplement and eluci-
date the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and
other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supple-
ment or explicate the official record.
