1956 889 21. I said I had not taken any arbitrary positions on this and I had in past and continued to express willingness give consideration any thoughts he might have on how thoughts expressed my January 12 draft might be better stated. I had hoped that this morning he would have such suggestions which would enable us get on it. I, of course, dis­ appointed that he had not. I hoped he would have at our next meeting so we could again resume progress on this. 22. I said with regard to civilians I had little to add to what I already said. What I said was very carefully considered and as I pointed out, very important. I only wanted add that statements here, statements on radio, press, vaguely charging that Chinese in US desiring return his country were not able do so, did not constitute facts or evidence that such is case. 23. I said very clear objective test was set up to determine whether or not our agreement regarding civilians was being carried out both sides. This test was third-­power arrangement. That test had provided very clear and irrefutable evidence as to who was and who was not carrying out our September 10 agreed announcement. 24. I said in list he gave me this morning I noticed in case Mr. Chen and Dr. Wang he referred to their having made application for permis­ sion return. His information this regard, I could only say, simply could not be correct. I had said over and over again here, and I categorically repeating, that any alien in US including any Chinese alien who desired depart US makes no application to US Government or any authorities for permission leave. 25. I said we had no exit visa, exit permit, or any other such requirement regarding departure from US by alien. He simply goes down, buys ticket on boat or airplane and goes. I did not ask him accept my word on this. Anyone familiar with US, including Indian Embassy, knows this to be fact and can confirm this to him. 26. Wang said again on question of declaration in statement I had just made I had spoken about this question in such way as to say that “if Chinese side desires make such declaration Chinese side should do thus and so”. Now he must ask me whether this indicated US not will­ ing make such declaration. 27. I said I did not quite follow his point. 28. Wang said he might quote actual words. I had said if his state­ ments regarding desire issue declaration and find point on which our views can be reconciled—“et cetera”. It appeared from my statement that I said if his side desired make such statement his side should undertake produce what I had termed alternative suggestions. In view this statement he might ask me if this indicated there no such desire make such declaration on my part. I referred to declaration as desire on their part.
