American territory contiguous to the United States. It is believed that such
an arrangement involving a double control over the Japanese quota of less
than 250 a year would accomplish a much more effective regulation of
unassimilable and undesirable classes of Japanese immigrants than it would
be practicable for us, with our long land frontier lines on both North and
South to accomplish by attempting to establish a general bar against
Japanese subjects to the loss of cooperation with the Japanese Government
in controlling the movement of their I people to the United States and
adjacent territories.
I am unable to perceive that the exclusion provision is necessary and I must
strongly urge upon you the advisability, in the interest of our international
relations, of eliminating it. The Japanese Government has already brought
the matter to the attention of the Department of State and there is the
deepest interest in the attitude of Congress with respect to this subject.
Third.—There remains the question of the adoption of the Census of 1890
as the basis of quota restriction. This has evoked representations from
European countries, and especially from Italy, which regards the choice of
such a basis as a discrimination against her. On December 31, 1923 I
communicated to you a memorandum presented to the Department of State
by the Italian Ambassador82 and, as I have no doubt that your committee
will examine these representations attentively, I shall not attempt to add any
further recital of facts. In appropriately providing for a restriction of
immigration, the importance of which I fully recognize, I hope that it will
be possible to find some basis which will be proof against the charge of
discrimination.
 
In addition to the questions considered above, permit me to direct your
attention to the following: Section 4 (c) of the proposed measure does not
appear to provide for immigrants from British Honduras and British, French
and Dutch Guiana as they would seem not to be “countries of Central or
South America” within the meaning of the bill (See sec. 11 (a)). It is also
not clear from the provisions of Section 4 (c) that it would provide for Haiti,
