800 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI limitations on their movements so as to ensure effective verification of adherence to the numerical limitations provided for in the treaty. In addition, the number of non-­deployed ICBMs for mobile launchers will be limited and mobile ICBMs will be subject to identification through the application of unique identifiers, or tags. To promote the objectives of the treaty, the sides will establish the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission. The sides have agreed that the treaty will have a duration of 15 years, unless superseded earlier by a subsequent agreement. If the sides so agree, the treaty can be extended for successive five year periods, unless superseded. The progress outlined above fulfills the aim. Set forth by the Presidents of the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics during their Malta meeting, of agreeing upon the basic provisions of the strategic offensive arms treaty by the time of their Washington meeting. The two presidents express confidence that the foreign ministers and the delegations of the two countries at the Geneva talks will be able to reach agreement in the remaining months on the outstanding issues that are still being negotiated. 3. Begin text of Joint Statement on Future Negotiations on Nuclear and Space Arms and Further Enhancing Strategic Stability: The United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, building on the results of the current negotiations, agree to pursue new talks on strategic offensive arms, and on the relationship between strategic offensive and defensive arms. The objectives of these negotiations will be to reduce further the risk of outbreak of war. Particularly nuclear war, and to ensure strategic stability, transparency and predictability through further stabilizing reductions in the strategic arsenals of both countries. This will be achieved by seeking agreements that improve survivability remove incentives for a nuclear first strike and implement an appropriate relationship between strategic offenses and defenses. In order to attain these objectives, the sides have agreed as follows: First. This year the sides will complete work on the treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms. Following the signing of the treaty, the sides will hold consultations without delay regarding future talks and these important talks will begin at the earliest practical date. Both sides in these future talks will be free to raise any issues related to any strategic offensive arms. Within the existing negotiating framework on nuclear and space arms in Geneva, the two sides will continue negotiations on ABM and space without delay.
