90 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II propose at the next meeting of the Inter-American Education, Science, and Cultural Council. f. Attention to Terrorism. Since mounting terrorism has recently contributed to worsening human rights situations, we would support broadening the mandate of the IAHRC to investigate the link between abuses of human rights and terrorism. Such an initiative would appeal to the conservative Latin American regimes and thus contribute to multilateralizing support for the IAHRC. g. Affirmative Reaction Program. A promising approach to the human rights problem, which we could recommend informally to the Commission, would be to emphasize the more positive features of the Commission’s role to study and recommend to member states innovative procedures that safeguard human rights, rather than concentrating on its potential to isolate and shame offending regimes. h. Unresolved Issue. Should the Commission appear to be developing into a tribunal, able to make judgments and level sanctions on individual governments, present support for strengthening its investigative machinery would wane. The dilemma is how to make the Commission a powerful instrument to monitor human rights performances without raising the spectre of political interference in the name of human rights. Southern Cone States are acutely sensitive to US pressure to clean house and are likely to react to that pressure by spreading the idea that our concern with human rights is just another version of “Yankee interventionism” aimed at disrupting Latin solidarity. i. Pending Questions. Should the State Department submit information concerning violations to the IAHRC? Should the US lobby strongly for the ratification of the American Convention on Human Rights? If the OAS threatens to narrow the mandate of the Commission, or to emasculate it by other means, should the US counter, either by threatening to reduce its budgetary contributions or to withdraw from the Organization? etc. j. High-Level Speeches. The Department will be providing language on human rights for the President’s speech before the OAS Permanent Council, April 14. You may also want discussion of human rights in your speech before the OAS General Assembly this June.40 40 The President’s April 14 address to the Organization of American States, delivered at the Pan American Union, is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 611–616 and is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy. Vance headed the U.S. delegation to the General Assembly of the OAS, meeting in St. George, Grenada, June 14–24. Vance’s intervention before the General Assembly, his statement on U.S.–Panama negotiations, a transcript of his news conference, and his remarks upon his return to Washington are printed in Department of State Bulletin, July 18, 1977, pp. 69–76.
