1078 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 322. Memorandum From Mary Hanley of the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to the Director of International Women’s Programs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs (Good)1 Washington, January 5, 1979 SUBJECT HA Policy Responsibilities Regarding Women The Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs is directly concerned with how official U.S. policy can better respond to the rights of women. The following are ways in which we can improve this responsiveness: 1. Section 502B and 116(d) of the Foreign Assistance Act call on us to submit annual reports to Congress on the human rights situation in countries receiving economic or security assistance. Guidelines to all posts for country reporting should call for specific information re status of women. Request for such information in general terms has so far brought little success. Until such reporting becomes routine, posts should be reminded to contact, become familiar with and receive/accept information from both government and NGO groups and organizations concerned with womens affairs. Constitutional provisions which in many states spell out in great detail—in far greater detail than in the U.S., in many instances—specific rights of women (right to vote, to work, etc.) should be examined for compliance and raised in the regular course of human rights representations. 2. The relevant findings of private organizations that deal with international women’s issues, gather information relating to women and are actively involved in organizing and/or implementing overseas programs for women, both privately and government-funded, should be given consideration in the preparation of our own country reports. 3. More attention should be paid to the role and status of women as a general human rights consideration during routine examination of U.S. economic security assistance, as well as development projects. 1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, SHUM Women 1979. No classification marking. Sent through Derian. Neither Hanley nor Derian initialed the memorandum.
