than one signed only by European countries. I did not think it was practical to undertake a negotiation with sixty-five nations. The time consumed in correspondence and discussion of various points would have made the project difficult if not impossible of solution within a reasonable time. I believed that if a treaty could be entered into between the principal Powers of Europe which was simple and did not involve any complicated system of sanctions or agreement to punish violators, that it would be readily accepted as a principle of international law by all the world. It was, therefore, thought wise to select six of the Powers involved in the last war—to wit, Japan, Great Britain, Germany, France, Italy, and the United States—and accordingly negotiations were carried on with these countries. It is not a fact that Great Britain was the country which suggested that the Treaty be open to adhesion by all countries. That was my proposition originally and acquiesced in by France before Great Britain was called into the negotiations. The only suggestion of extending the original signatories came from Great Britain and France in this way. Great Britain, as you will see, informed the United States that it could not sign for its Dominions and requested the United States to invite the Dominions directly sending the invitations to Canada and Ireland which countries had Ministers in the United States, and the other invitations to go through the British Government to the various Dominions. I realized that under the British Dominion system this was necessary and readily assented. I think, as I have explained to you before, France and Great Britain also raised the question as to whether the Treaty would be inconsistent with the obligations of the treaties entered into by Great Britain, Belgium, Germany, France, Italy, Poland, and Czechoslovakia, known as the Locarno Treaties. Under these Treaties the countries agree not to go to war but if any one of the Powers should violate the Locarno Treaties, the other Powers agreed to come to the assistance of the aggrieved State and as this was construed by some of the countries to include armed assistance, a question was raised as to whether an absolute agreement not to go to war would be inconsistent with this obligation. In substance my reply was that if all the Locarno Powers signed this Treaty and they break the Locarno Treaty, they would necessarily break this Treaty and the other Powers would be released as to the belligerent country and
