1978  303
annual rate of about 4 to 5 percent—­from 35–40 billion rubles in 1967 to 
53–58 billion rubles in 1977.
• Defined more broadly, as Soviet practice might require, defense 
spending grew from 40–45 billion rubles in 1967 to 58–63 billion rubles 
in 1977.
Economic Impact. The defense effort has had a substantial impact on 
the Soviet economy:
• During the 1967–77 period, defense spending consumed an 
almost constant share of Soviet GNP—11 to 12 percent or 12 to 13 per-
cent, depending on how defense spending is defined.
• Defense investment consumed about one-­third of the final prod-
uct of machinebuilding and metalworking, the branch of industry that 
produces investment goods as well as military hardware.
• Between 65 and 75 percent of the males reaching draft age were 
conscripted into the Soviet armed forces. Uniformed military service-
men and civilians working for the Ministry of Defense constituted 3 to 
4 percent of the total labor force.
• Defense takes a large share of the economy’s best scientific, tech-
nical, and managerial talent and large amounts of high-­quality materi-
als, components, and equipment.
The armed forces accounted directly for a small share of total Soviet 
energy consumption. Less than 5 percent of the refined petroleum and 
less than 5 percent of the heat and electricity consumed by the USSR 
went to the armed forces.
Composition and Allocation. Ruble estimates provide insight into 
the resource composition of the Soviet defense effort and the trends in 
resource allocation among the services. Analysis based on the narrower 
definition of defense—­for which the estimates are more precise—­
indicates that during the 1967–77 period over one-­half of total spending 
went for investment, a little over one-­fourth for operating expenditures, 
and over one-­fifth for research, development, testing, and evaluation.
Examination of defense spending according to service indicates 
that:
• The Air Forces and the Ground Forces received the largest shares 
of investment and operating spending. The share going to the Air 
Forces increased during the period as a result of increased spending 
for Frontal Aviation. The Ground Forces’ share was relatively constant.
• Spending for the Navy and the National Air Defense Forces 
grew more slowly than defense spending as a whole. As a result, the 
shares of investment and operating spending going to these forces were 
smaller in 1977 than in 1967. Most of the growth in spending for the 
Navy was allocated to ballistic missile submarines, while most of the 
growth in spending for the Air Defense Forces was allocated to inter-
ceptor aircraft.
• The Strategic Rocket Forces received the smallest share of invest-
ment and operating spending among the five services. Spending for 
the SRF was primarily determined by deployment cycles for ICBMs
