1196 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement I avoided [text not declassified] commitment any kind pending formal clarification [text not declassified] status. Meanwhile I would appreciate any guidance Department may be able furnish2 for reply Larrazábal if he should approach me along lines suggested. After conversation3 [text not declassified] advised by other source Congressional elections when held will probably be on basis 20 percent seats for each of three major parties, 5 percent for Communists, 35 percent for junta. Burrows 2 Telegram 483, to Caracas, February 13, 1958, in part stated, “Department believes immediate categoric answer should be given other government official that U.S. believes GOV would be making very serious mistake in granting legal status to Communists . . . . Manner in which Communists already have begun participate local political and labor activities is indicative efforts they will make to infiltrate all sectors government and gain participation Venezuelan political scene. The rapidity with which Communist leaders returned Venezuela and their intensive activities point up danger inherent granting legality Communist Party.” With respect to assistance for a new secret investigative bureau, the telegram instructed the Embassy to indicate willingness to discuss the matter with Larrazábal and stated that while the Department would have interest in helping to establish technical police methods along the lines of U.S. investigative agencies, “It would be necessary emphasize Larrazábal that U.S. of course could not be associated in any way with police or investigative organizations which might assume character former SN.” (731.5/2–1258) 3 Larrazábal requested that Burrows speak with him on February 25, 1958, and the Chargé discussed the subject with him along the lines suggested in telegram 483. (731.5/2–2658) VE–4. Letter from the Attorney General (Rogers) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1  Washington, February 13, 1958. Dear Mr. Murphy: This will confirm my telephone conversation with you in which I expressed my concern regarding the issuance of a visa by the Department of State to the ex-Dictator of Venezuela, Marcos Perez Jimenez. As I told you, I learned of the issuance of this visa for the first time in a newspaper account. In view of the commitment made by the Department of State, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, of course, will admit Perez Jimenez if he applies for admission to the United States. However, 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/EST Files, Lot 61 D 319, “Visas—Perez Jimenez—Estrada.” Confidential.
