Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
597
bled areas. The actual effect of rejecting such a treaty might be precisely
the opposite. The most intransient and hostile elements of a Soviet po-
litical power structure would certainly be encouraged and strength-
ened by our rejection of a SALT agreement. The Soviets might very well
feel that they then have little to lose by creating new international
tensions.
A rejection of SALT II would have significance far beyond the fate
of a single treaty. It would mean a radical turning away from America’s
longtime policy of seeking world peace. We would no longer be identi-
fied as the peace-loving nation. It would turn us away from the control
of nuclear weapons and from the easing of tensions between Amer-
icans and the Soviet people under the system of international law based
on mutual interests.
The rejection of SALT II would result in a more perilous world. As
I said at Georgia Tech on February 20, “Each crisis, each confrontation,
each point of friction—as serious as it may be in its own right—would
take on an added measure of significance and an added dimension of
danger. For it would occur in an atmosphere of unbridled strategic
competition and deteriorating strategic stability. It is precisely because
we have fundamental differences with the Soviet Union that we are de-
termined to bring this most dangerous element of our military competi-
tion under control.”8
For these reasons, we will not try to impose binding linkage be-
tween Soviet behavior and SALT, and we will not accept any Soviet at-
tempts to link SALT with aspects of our own foreign policy of which
they may disapprove.
Again, SALT II is not a favor we are doing for the Soviet Union; it’s
an agreement carefully negotiated in the national security interests of
the United States of America.
I put these issues to you today, because they need discussion and
debate and because the voices of the American people must be heard.
In the months ahead, we will do all in our power to explain the
treaty clearly and fully to the American people. I know that Members of
Congress from both parties will join in this effort to ensure an informed
public debate. And you, more than any other group I can imagine in the
United States, share this responsibility with me and with the Congress.
During this debate, it’s important that we exercise care. We will be
sharing with the Congress some of our most sensitive defense and in-
telligence secrets. And the leaders in Congress must ensure that these
secrets will be guarded so that the debate itself will not undermine our
own security.
8 See Document 111.
