Eastern Europe Region Outlook15 Although dissident activity in many East European countries has declined considerably since early 1977, it is likely to persist throughout the region. Many of the factors that propelled the recent surge of dissent will still be at work. Economic problems may worsen and provide dissidents with renewed hope that some of their proposals for political reform will be heeded by regimes weakened by or preoccupied with dissatisfied consumers. While such hopes may be misplaced, the combination of dissident pressures and a sluggish economy could create acute domestic instability. [classification not declassified] The situation is especially acute in Poland, where intense popular dissatisfaction over consumer supplies is likely to continue over the next several years, and where dissidents see their job of pressing for political change as a long-term endeavor. In Czechoslovakia, recent dissident activity has been tied to the 10th anniversary in August of the Soviet-led invasion, but it will continue to exist at least as long as the regime fails to come to terms with the large number of people who were purged after 1968. The dilemma for the Prague regime—how to rehabilitate people without rehabilitating their ideas—is complex, and may be unsolvable without changes in the leadership. In Romania, the direct link between dissidence and emigration that was established last year should help perpetuate dissent in a country where a spartan and harshly totalitarian life makes emigration particularly attractive. [classification not declassified] Other factors that could perpetuate and intensify East European dissidence include: • A difficult leadership succession problem in the USSR that engenders either hope for moderate policies or fear of orthodoxy. • Continued political sparring between the Soviets and the Eurocommunists. • The second Helsinki accords review conference to be held in Madrid in 1980. This will remain a factor even though the dissidents’ expectations may have been reduced by the limited accomplishments of the Belgrade review conference. • The continued unsettling effect of Western contacts with, and presence in, the region. The area’s economic needs argue against any cutback in Western ties. • Uncertainties surrounding the succession to Tito in Yugoslavia. [classification not declassified] On the personal level, the camaraderie of the struggle, the excitement of matching wits with the authorities, and the hope that is 15 An unknown hand wrote “ANALYSIS” next to this section title.
