442 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement missionary efforts, which, carried to extremes, might produce a situation in which the Roman Catholics were actually playing the communist game. I suggest that the Roman Catholic authorities be provided with material for conducting a sophisticated anti-­communist program—­this to be done without the slightest hint of favoritism to any of the religious bodies. The Protestant missionaries, which are becoming a more and more potent force in Latin America, could also use some of this kind of aid—­and I might point out that such a program would reach right into the very classes of society to which the communists make their strongest appeals. The important point in this discussion is that of preventing a clash between the religious bodies, and keeping them focused on a sworn enemy of religion—­one that is dramatically opposed to Christianity in all forms. Recommendation No. 10 Regional Plan 24—Information on UN and OAS Accomplishments. General. Except for those members of Embassy staffs who have done duty with the UN or the OAS I feel that there is a considerable basic ignorance and appreciation of just how these organizations work and the good which they accomplish. Everyone knows about this in general terns but I feel a few simple expedients would greatly increase the efficiency of the presentation by diplomats in the field of the merits of these organizations. Specifically, I recommend: (1) That a definite program of visits by Ambassadors and other important Embassy personnel, while home on leave or consultation, to the working sessions of these organizations, be arranged and budgeted for in terms of time and money. (Note: I was shocked to hear from Ambassador Lodge14 in 1954 when I paid a call on him in New York, that I was just about the first American Ambassador who had done so.) (2) In the field we sorely need more concise and readily usable information as to the functions and day-­to-­day operations of the two organizations. Particularly in the case of the OAS I have long been asking for a handbook with detailed appendices as to the operations of that organization. Every time a crisis comes up in the field we have to research through scattered pamphlets and even then we do not have a proper book which shows us the precedents and other necessary material. Besides talking about this with my friends in the Department, I specifically made the suggestion for such a book to Ambassador Dreier at the April meeting of Chiefs of Mission in El Salvador.15 About a 14 Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., Representative of the United States to the United Nations. 15 The Meeting of U.S. Chiefs of Mission in the Carribean Area was held at San Salvador, April 9–11, 1959.
