Chapter 5, May–June 1990 713 proposals designed to find some solutions, and we are going to study the US proposals very carefully. And we hope you will do likewise with ours. And I also here am referring to the suggestions you made to me in our one-­on-­one meeting. On chemical weapons, I think there has been a great deal of work that’s been done. The draft text of the bilateral treaty is really for all practical purposes been completed. There has been a real break-­through for destroying chemical weapons, and I think that’s important. I think there’s no doubt we can sign a bilateral agreement in Washington—­it will stimulate further, I think, movement toward a multilateral convention. We do have some serious technical problems with destruction, but we also have some interesting ideas and after the signing of the bilateral agreement, we also see good potential for cooperation here. We have in addition to this a good draft that’s been prepared non-­ proliferation in general and we’re also be able to sign and complete the NTT protocols. In any case I think despite the fact that we still have some questions remaining I think it fair to say that the main substantive elements of START will be completed by the time of the Summit. We can think about a title or document that incorporates the main provisions of this treaty and also similar or other documents of a future START treaty. I think we ought to agree that we should have such a document—­maybe we should instruct our people on both sides to go ahead and draft such a document, then in a few days our people would come to Washington to try to finalize the text. Baker: Are you saying that the final text or documents should be signed? Shevardnadze: We both decided to have a document, and I think they might want to have it signed. It will have to be prepared quite well. The other document could be the declaration of our intentions for the next phase of START. Baker: Well, we had in mind a joint statement to cover the follow-­ ­on negotiations on what would be included in the follow-­on to START. And I think, in fact, that is being worked on in Geneva. The only other thing that relates to START is whether we will have a joint statement the parties can agree on that says all the major substantive issues have been worked out because you have identified some important remaining issues. In fact, I think, if I understood, you to say that the non-­ circumvention issue is still not resolved. Shevardnadze: Yes, it is not fully agreed because in the reply that you sent us the statement that you made, it doesn’t fully cover the issue of supply of nuclear weapons to third countries. I think there could be some misunderstanding—Britain is in a position to receive all kinds of weapons, they could in fact be stabilized via the strategic situation.
