Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX not yet replied to messages of the United States regarding conditions for return of the Crown that you insisted upon. He said that my letter thus could not be answered, because you did not have the information needed to answer it. About four hours later, at approximately two o’clock, I received by special messenger from the State Department copies of correspondence between the American Ambassador to Hungary and the Hungarian Foreign Minister stating the very conditions that just a few hours ago supposedly were not known. Just yesterday, George Boutin, an economic officer of the Department of State, outright denied the news account in the Washington Post calling for the Crown’s return on or about January 7th and 8th. He said details on the Crown’s return still had not been made between our two countries. These statements, obviously, were false, and so apparently were the statements you made concerning your desire to listen to and consult with Hungarian-Americans on this issue. Hungarian-Americans and others concerned about the safety of the Crown were never consulted in the first place when, according to the State Department, a review of U.S. policy on the Crown was undertaken during the late spring and summer of this year. To my knowledge, no one outside the Administration, even those who pointedly asked about the Crown, was ever told that a review of this policy was underway. It is clear that even the cryptic announcement made by the State Department on November 3 would not have been made but for a leak of the decision to the media. It is also clear that since that announcement and our November 9 meeting, the Administration has conducted what amounts to an elaborate charade, speaking in terms of concern for the views of those opposed to return of the Crown, but going ahead with your plans as if we did not exist. While you were under no obligation to accept the views we offered, you could have kept your word and at least listened, and you could have at least provided us with truthful answers to our questions. The events of today show that you did neither. For the second time in a little over a month, I have, as a Member of Congress, heard of an important Administration decision on a matter on which I repeatedly expressed great concern, from a State Department functionary after members of the press had the same information. And in both instances, the substance of the message was contrary to what I had been told repeatedly by the Administration on earlier occasions. To me, this is a very sad day for our country and for all of the oppressed people of the world. I had fully supported the human rights policy you enunciated at the beginning of your Administration, believing it to be consistent with the highest traditions of American foreign policy. Now, it is clear that your human rights policy is nothing more
