March 1952–February 1953
285
wld find Shah evasive and vague and not (rpt not) responsive to ap-
peals either to logic or patriotism.
Henderson
94.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, July 21, 1952.
316. After weighing developments in Iran and public reaction
thereto during past four days it seems clear that Qavam resignation
and triumph Natl Front due to two factors: 1) refusal of Shah, because
of innate distrust, to grant powers to Qavam sufficient to maintain
order and 2) resultant Govt impotency seized upon by Natl Front orga-
nization to play on popular fear that return Qavam meant also return
foreign domination Iran.
Admittedly prestige Mosadeq and Kashani had materially de-
clined by time Mosadeq resignation. However, as we have stated in
past, successor regime to Mosadeq which wld not clearly have Natl
Front blessing, wld require strong measures to establish itself and to
stop political, economic, and social deterioration of Iran. For first 24
hours it appeared Qavam wld be able to do this but Front, quickly real-
izing he had not received and wld not receive real powers, speedily or-
ganized its forces. It proclaimed in series manifestos and political state-
ments country in grave danger of foreign domination thru so-called
“traitorous clique” as exemplified by Qavam. Deflated figures Mo-
sadeq, Kashani and other Natl Front politicians were again inflated in
popular mind to dimensions of time of oil nationalization.
Qavam had no organization in country to beat drums for him.
Majlis cld not meet in absence of Front deps and those deps who origi-
nally voted for Qavam kept silent. Press after first day likewise did not
have temerity to give his regime support but adopted wait and see atti-
tude. Papers did not even dare publish excerpts from N.Y. Times edito-
rial praising Qavam Govt as harbinger of changes for better in Iran.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified
general records, Box 29. Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Melbourne and ap-
proved by Henderson in draft. Repeated to London. The telegram is the Embassy copy as
approved and has no time of transmission.
