1002  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
15. The Soviet leaders are aware that sustained and rapid economic 
growth is an important asset in the world power struggle. It will enable 
them to carry the burden of competitive armaments more easily. The 
USSR will be able to enlarge its aid programs, and perhaps ultimately 
compete in world markets in an important way. This will mean political 
leverage in many countries. If, in addition, the Soviets can finally raise 
living standards enough to demonstrate that their system provides for 
the growth of welfare as well as the expansion of national power, they 
will expect the influence of communism to spread even more rapidly. 
The Soviet leaders can be counted on to press the growth of their econ­
omy in all ways open to them, including substantial structural reforms 
when necessary, in order to achieve the political goals which they 
regard as the real aim of economic policy.
Scientific Developments
16. The achievements of its scientists have become one of the prin­
cipal instruments of the USSR’s prestige and influence, and the Soviet 
political leadership has been astute in exploiting this fact as a demon­
stration of the superiority of the Communist system in competition 
with the West. The Soviet successes arise from a generous commitment 
of resources over the years to training personnel and providing research 
facilities, from the fact that the motivations and incentives of scientists 
in the Soviet environment are high, and especially from the concentra­
tion of effort in fields related to national power. The rate of advance 
of Soviet science appears to be increasing, and the current Seven-­Year 
Plan, which relies heavily on scientific and technological achievements, 
will provide additional impetus. Thus, significant Soviet advances in 
science and technology are likely to occur with greater frequency than 
in the past, and over the next several years, the USSR may achieve 
world leadership in some additional scientific areas. It will probably 
add a number of “firsts” in prestige fields. In the immediate future, 
these are most likely to occur in the Soviet space program, but the qual­
ity and intensity of research on such problems as controlled thermonu­
clear reactions and direct conversion of heat to electricity may produce 
spectacular results in other scientific fields.
Internal Political Developments
17. The outlook on the Soviet internal political scene points to con­
tinuing stability. Khrushchev’s position as leader has become virtually 
unassailable, and if he lives, will probably remain so during the period 
of this estimate. While there may be elements within higher Party cir­
cles which mistrust his leadership, it is unlikely that, in the absence of a 
major failure of his policies, any effective opposition could form. Given 
Khrushchev’s age, however, the prospect of a new succession problem 
probably already figures in inner Party maneuvering. Khrushchev’s
