March 1952–February 1953 309 2. This proposal was taken up with the British, and we have been advised by London that the British Foreign Office3 feels it is premature to enter into discussions on this subject at this time.4 Frank G. Wisner5 3 Wisner deleted the word “Service” following “British” and added “Foreign Office.” 4 At the end of the memorandum is a handwritten note by Wisner that reads: “This memorandum not used—subject matter was fully covered orally with the three addressees at the Senior Consultants meeting of August 6, 1952. F.G. Wisner.” At the “Senior Consultants meeting”, i.e. a meeting with representatives from State, Defense, and the Joint Chiefs, held on August 6, Wisner “recalled that the Representatives had previously agreed on a service to service approach to the British for the purpose of developing plans for implementation if, as and when a total crisis situation developed in Iran. Mr. Wisner reported that the approach had been made to SIS and that an answer had been received to the effect that the Foreign Office felt it would be premature to enter into joint planning at this time. There was no further explanation. Speculating on the reasons for this position Mr. Wisner said it might be because we were still ‘poles apart’ on policy questions or that the British are in the process of developing a change in their current policy toward Iran.” (Central Intelligence Agency, DDO–IMS Files, Job 80–01795R, Box 11, Folder 7, Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) History 8Aug52–29Aug52) 5 Printed from a copy that bears Wisner’s typed signature. 111. Monthly Project Status Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, July 1952. [Omitted here are operational details.] C. REACTION: Political: The political atmosphere and the practical ruling authority of Iran has been in the throes of upheaval during the last two weeks of this month. Mosadeq’s resignation, Qavam’s appointment, the wholesale riot in Tehran, the Shah’s inability to take strong action, Qavam’s resignation, and Mossadeq’s re-appointment as Prime Minister has substantially changed the political picture of Iran. The Tudeh Party, with their advantage gained in joining with the National Front Party during the riots, plus the fact that loosely organized political “cliques” other than the National Front Party have been soundly defeated, is ensconced in a position similar to the one held in July 1951. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 59–00133R, Box 5, Folder 13, [cryptonym not declassified]. Secret.
