Arms Control and Disarmament  1647
of the other side’s activities (which certainly applies to the nuclear 
tests) or to provide timely warning of preparations and launching of an 
attack (which could have been the effect of the “Open Skies” agreement 
if the attack were to be launched by conventional ground or sea forces). 
Neither objective may be attainable with rather limited agreements, 
but they may still be valuable for political reasons, e.g., the building of 
mutual confidence, the experimentation with inspection in essentially 
unfriendly countries, etc.
II. Agreements for comprehensive monitoring of armed forces. The 
word comprehensive implies here that no geographic limits are set on 
the inspection apparatus. As regards the thoroughness of inspection, 
however, some limits must be set, as their absence would imply a vir­
tually complete surrender of sovereignty by contracting parties, not a 
likely event. The immediate objectives of such inspection schemes are 
strategic information and possibly “early” warning in a tactical sense; 
the ultimate objectives are reduction of tensions and of the arms race.
III. Partial arms limitation agreements. It is our national policy 
not to accept any such agreements unless the compliance is monitored. 
The nature of the monitoring, however, should vary greatly depend­
ing on what is the nature of the limitations (e.g. that of the improved 
nuclear weapons in the test cessation proposal). There may be other 
factors which should influence our choice of the severity of monitoring. 
For instance, agreements where the agreed-­to monitoring apparatus is 
the sole mechanism for detecting non-­compliance and where the non-­
compliance can lead to drastic changes in the balance of power before 
detection, call for especially strict monitoring, etc.
IV. Comprehensive arms reduction, i.e. disarmament, agreements. 
The world we live in is such that ambitious disarmament proposals 
seem much less realistic than even the more modest steps indicated 
above, but some understanding of the comprehensive plans should 
be acquired, in order to insure that the more modest plans could be 
molded so as not to conflict with the comprehensive plans.
Any one of the agreements broadly indicated above contains many 
inputs, of military, technical and political nature. In the following we 
shall indicate some of them, insofar as we have become aware of them 
in preparing for and then participating in the Geneva conference on the 
prevention of surprise attacks.
Effective inspection and monitoring of military forces inevitably 
provides the inspecting side with strategically important information 
on the disposition, state of readiness, etc. of the inspected forces. If 
suitably designed, it may also supply the inspecting side with early 
warning of the impending attack. However, as the speed of the attack 
increases with changing military technology (e. g. the trend from ground 
forces to long range fast bombers and then to ballistic missiles) the
