723.2515/1633: Telegram
[Document 230]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, October 9, 1925—9 p.m.
[Received October 10—12:50 a.m.]
From Pershing: At the meeting of the Plebiscitary Commission held on October 8, I
introduced the resolution which was the subject of my cable Sept. 24, 10 a.m., and
suggested that it go over for consideration at meeting Oct. 10; suggestion was agreed to
unanimously.
Today I received a letter from Mr. Edwards in which, after referring to my resolution
and to the opinion of my legal advisers, which I read in support of resolution, the
Chilean Commission asserts that the gravity of the documents and their unexpected
scope make it imperative that he should wait for special instructions from his
Government, and he accordingly requested postponement of the meeting arranged for
tomorrow. Mr. Edwards closed his letter by saying that although he thought that his
Government would be willing to consider any reasonable suggestion to give every
qualified voter protection and freedom to which he is entitled, he was sure that it would
not surrender, however unfortunate might be the consequences, any of the rights which
Chile enjoys under Treaty of Ancon and arbitral award. Among these, he reminded me,
was right to full, unrestricted exercise of all the powers pertaining to sovereignty, a
right which the Government of Chile was determined to preserve undiscussed and
untouched through all the plebiscitary proceedings and which would only be
surrendered if and when the vote of the plebiscite shall have decided that it shall
terminate.
On receipt of Edwards’ letter and in accordance with procedure that the Commissioner
of Chile had suggested some time ago and has heretofore obtained, I sent one of my
staff to him with request that he call at my residence for consultation with me. He
declined to call but said that he would be at home all day.
I have informed Mr. Edwards in writing that I saw no reason for postponing
tomorrow’s meeting; that it might profitably be devoted to discussion of the resolution,
but that resolution will not be permitted to come to a vote at the meeting except with
his consent.
