828 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement HO–18. Telegram from the Ambassador in Honduras (Burrows) to the Department of State1 Tegucigalpa, November 18, 1960, 4 p.m. 391. Reference Department telegram 231, 141 to Managua.2 This is day of national rejoicing and at least momentary political unity in Honduras.3 Orderly manifestations and celebration have continued since 6 a.m. with participation all shades political spectrum and with official holiday declared. Examples of prevailing spirit were appearance at Plaza Morazan of ex-President Galvez together with Villeda Morales and joint manifesto signed by Villeda Morales, former Presidents Galvez and Carias plus members of 1956 junta hailing juridical victory and peaceful return of disputed territory. Some voices calling for immediate and unilateral implementation if necessary of court decision but indications have been since character of decision first known here on November 14 that Honduran Government does not intend endeavor force untimely or disorderly takeover of territory. This has been clear from conversations with Foreign Minister4 and with private secretary of the President5 among others. This morning, when I conveyed substance reference telegram, President confirmed this attitude, gave me copy his message to Somoza translated below, and professed readiness work closely with Nicaraguan authorities toward orderly transfer of territory. In answer suggestion that students or Guardia Civil might move precipitously he pointed out students or others could not possibly arrive at border without air transportation which definitely would not be provided. Military and civil authorities interested only in continuation to final conclusion of legal orderly process which has so successfully been begun. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 615.173/11–1860. Secret; Priority. Sent also to Managua. 2 In telegram 231 to Tegucigalpa, the Department of State informed Ambassador Burrows that it had received a report for Exised Managua that should the International Court of Justice adjudicate the Nicaraguan-Honduran boundary dispute in favor of Honduras, the Government of Nicaragua feared that Honduran students and elements of the Honduran Guardia Civil would provoke an incident in the disputed area. To prevent such an incident, the Department of State requested the Embassies at Tegucigalpa and at Managua to convey promptly the hope of the United States Government that Honduras and Nicaragua would make every effort to carry out promptly and without incident the decision of the International Court of Justice. (615.173/11–1760) 3 On November 18, 1960, the International Court of Justice announced its decision upholding Honduras’ claims against Nicaragua to the disputed area known as Gracias a Dios. 4 Andrés Alvarado. 5 Juan Agurcia.
