1298 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX trying to regroup in the area. They will talk, but retain their identity; will others say that Jordan goes too far? He will talk to the PLO, maybe in New York before he leaves. The Europeans are worried; he hopes they will be involved. The Soviet Union is not important; it only needs to know where we are going. Jordan can prevail on the reasonable elements among the Palestinians. He will not promise that he can deliver, with things as vague as they are. With Egypt and Israel in Camp David, everything was clear. On the Palestinian side, it was not clear. Therefore Jordan posed its questions. He wants the U.S. to understand totally where Jordan stands. Our objectives are one and the same. But how can we move? He wants to move as fast as possible. The President said that what he would like for His Majesty to say— after consulting with the PLO, the Palestinian people, and the other Arabs—is to acknowledge that the U.S. will not abandon Camp David. His Majesty can deplore this if it [he] wants—he hopes he (His Majesty) will not condemn it; and His Majesty can say that the ultimate goal of Camp David is too limited. But second, please say that the Palestinians must have a voice in our affairs: a free assembly, the vote, the right to take over administration of the occupied territories, a congress to speak for the Palestinians, and that the ultimate goal—which is different from others’—will be pursued and not abandoned. This would be a step forward. He hopes that the code words could be avoided. King Hussein said that there is one difficulty: Israel wants sovereignty over the West Bank, Gaza, and Jerusalem. The President said no, they prefer West Bank sovereignty, but this is for negotiating. Some Palestinians are for an independent Palestinian state; and some are for a confederation with Jordan. No one has to relinquish demands for a final solution. He wants His Majesty to say that the Palestinians must have a voice, a free assembly, the vote, the right to choose a body to represent them, and to state their ultimate goals and say they will work for them. He (the President) hopes that His Majesty will not condemn the Camp David process, but say that he (His Majesty) will not speak in favor of it or join it, but the Palestinians in the area must have a way to express themselves. This would add a new dimension, although it might not succeed. Palestinian leaders do not need to acknowledge acceptance of Camp David; but Egypt, Israel and he, himself will not abandon Camp David. We can work in harmony. If His Majesty says this, that would be good. Please consult with us; and have the Jordanian foreign minister and prime minister come back and talk with Muskie, Linowitz, and with him. Perhaps Jordan will say that it didn’t work, or that the PLO said to say that, but please report and we will see how we can proceed. He wants to explore how to break the deadlock. (The meeting ended at 12:09 p.m.)
