511.3 B 1/144: Telegram
[Document 19]
The Minister in Switzerland (Grew) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, February 6, 1924—7 p.m.
[Received February 7—7:18 a.m.]
5. [Paraphrase.] I reminded the Commission today that I was not authorized
to state views on any subject but the traffic in arms. I did this because of
Department’s 53 of September 12, 5 p.m.,24 which stated that the American
Government was not in a position to secure the passage of legislation
establishing effective control of the traffic in arms by imposing penalties
applicable to private companies engaged in arms production. The occasion
for my statement was the proposal that the subcommittee should discuss the
private manufacture of arms with the idea of including both production of
and traffic in arms in one convention. It seems to me difficult to reconcile
the instruction referred to above with the reference in your telegram 9,
February 2, 6 p.m., to “restriction on production.” With this in mind, and
because the trend of discussion today indicates that it is possible that no
distinction may be made between state and private manufacture of arms, I
have left myself in a position to give a more detailed explanation of our
views should I receive further instructions. It would be helpful to me to be
informed whether any distinction is made by the Department between state
and private production of arms. [End paraphrase.] In connection with the
discussion of a central international office of control, I furthermore
explained fully to the Commission the attitude of our Government towards
the intertwining of the Convention of Saint Germain with the League of
Nations, at the same time making it clear that other points of objection
would be touched upon at the appropriate moment.
At the opening of the meeting this morning the Commission began the
reading and discussion of the draft convention proposed by Magaz.25
During my absence discussion of the first article Lebrun supported26 Cecil
expressed the view that he saw no reason why the objections raised by me
