4. I was most emphatic in stating that under no circumstances did the
American Government wish to take sides in conflicts between Chinese
factions; that I thought our neutrality might be seriously compromised by the
step which the Heads of Legation proposed; that it was my opinion that
Chang would of necessity be forced to assume control in Peking with or
without an expressed welcome from the Heads of Legation concerned if the
Communistic menace was as great as my colleagues believed; and that I
would not be surprised, in view of my previous experience with him, if
Chang were trying again to use the Communistic menace to secure some
form of support from the powers for himself. The British Chargé expressed
himself categorically in a similar sense. The Italian Minister assured me that
he had information entirely independent of that from Chang Tso-lin as to the
Communistic menace to foreign lives and property. It was stated by all Heads
of Legation that they had no wish to take sides in disputes between factions.
They felt, however, that foreign lives and property were in great danger not
only in Peking but throughout China and that we must take advantage of all
possible assistance both to protect ourselves and to prevent any untoward
incident between Chinese and foreigners which would precipitate an
antiforeign outburst.
5. My British colleague and I decided after long argument and discussion that
we could not assume the responsibility of preventing action desired by the
other Heads of Legation. We caused a formula to be adopted, however, for
such action by which I believe our neutrality will not be compromised. The
Italian Minister was authorized to make confidentially and orally a statement
to the representative of Chang Tso-lin, a translation of which follows. [End
paraphrase.]
“The interested Heads of Legation have taken cognizance of the
considerations which Marshal Chang Tso-lin has conveyed to them
concerning the necessity for the reestablishment of order in Peking
in order to prevent further difficulties and the development of a
situation which threatens to become dangerous. They have the
honor to make known to him that, preoccupied above all with the
question of assuring the safety of their nationals, [they?] shall
welcome with satisfaction any support which would be given to the
Government for the maintenance of order and for taking
appropriate measures to the end that the present agitation may
cease.”
6. While the British Chargé d’Affaires and myself do not completely share
the apprehension of our colleagues as expressed above I view the situation
with a certain alarm because of the undoubted intense Soviet activities for the
