1270 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Trujillo Government; the President suggested that Ambassador Sparks might take this memorandum along with him to Santiago to discuss it with Mr. Rubottom. One of the main complaints the President will include in this memorandum, it seemed apparent from the conversation, will be a detailed reference to the daily radio broadcasts from the Dominican Republic attacking Betancourt. Every morning at 6:30 a.m. the official Dominican Station carries a vitriolic diatribe, in insulting terms, against the Venezuelan Government and Betancourt personally. This program is monitored by the Venezuelan Armed Forces, the President says, and transcripts are furnished him immediately. The President said the Venezuelan Government radio never broadcasts propaganda of this nature. The President also said that he would suggest to Gonzalo Barrios that he talk to Mr. Burrows before he goes to Washington and explain to Mr. Burrows what he intends to do in the OAS. The President then turned to the matter of anti-Betancourt and anti Venezuelan propaganda which has been “flooding” the country from the Dominican Republic. He referred specifically to the American ship SS NANCY LYKES which is being held in Puerto La Cruz and said that he is going to issue definite instructions that any ship or airplane coming to Venezuela from the Dominican Republic be subjected to a thorough inspection before any cargo or passengers can be discharged. The land of inspection he envisaged will result in costly delays, but he is satisfied that the only answer for the shipping lines or the airlines will be not to have any ships or planes attempt to enter Venezuela after having stopped in the Dominican Republic. Ambassador Sparks observed that this was a very strong measure to take and the President agreed that it was but he made quite clear that as far as he is concerned there is no alternative. President Betancourt at this point also referred to the numerous bombs that are being found around the city. So far they have been found before explosion and he trusts the police will continue to be successful in this. He is satisfied they are being placed by Dominican agents; certainly he thinks no Venezuelan would be capable of manufacturing one. Venezuelans, he said, have had no experience as terrorists. The President said that his military people advise him that members of the American military missions have been expressing to Venezuelan military officers their concern about the inroads of the Communists in Venezuela. The President made it very clear that he did not think these matters fell within the purview of the American military missions and that he did not consider that remarks of this kind made his job any easier. He said that he is not ingenuous about the position of the Communists and he repeated that appropriate attention is being paid them; he said further that the Armed Forces are solidly with and
