Arms Control and Disarmament  1389
to its scientific and technical aspects. Since receiving your letter, I have 
brought together a group of the Committee and we have engaged in a 
two-­day preliminary discussion as to how the study you propose is to 
be undertaken. This discussion has resulted in a progress report con­
taining several conclusions which I wish to present to you before we 
proceed with further study.
We would emphasize first that the Surprise Attack problem is 
wholly different in kind and in magnitude from the problem of devis­
ing an inspection system to monitor a nuclear test cessation agreement. 
It cannot be dealt with in such specific technical terms, therefore, as we 
have dealt with the current problems under discussion in Geneva. We 
also conclude that the examination of existing proposals for inspection 
zones will require a more general analysis, and in this general analysis 
some of the following problems will be important.
Our early warning lines and our radar detection systems are 
designed to provide us with a few hours’ warning of approaching hos­
tile aircraft. This time might be extended greatly by aerial inspection of 
the Soviet territory or by appropriately-­stationed observers within the 
Soviet Union. The problems involved in thus extending our warning 
time may be more military and political than technical. The use of aerial 
inspection or ground observers clearly involve difficult military esti­
mates of the result of any specific proposal about limited aerial inspec­
tion zones or limited numbers or mobility of ground observers.
In the event that we enter into discussions with the Soviets on the 
problem of Surprise Attack, it seems highly likely that they will raise the 
problem of the training flights by our Strategic Air Command bombers, 
particularly when these bombers are carrying nuclear weapons. If the 
U.S. delegates are to discuss such a topic, it would seem of great impor­
tance that we analyze in advance the present Fail-­Safe technique and 
its possible modifications, the effects of limiting the numbers of aircraft 
in flight at any time, and of restrictions on their flight paths. These, too, 
are predominantly military problems.
We must also expect that the proposed discussions with the Soviets 
will not be limited to present weapons such as manned aircraft, but will 
encompass also long-­range missiles. Their era is rapidly approaching, 
and consideration of them in the proposed discussions would greatly 
increase the significance and value of these discussions.
The size of the Soviet satellites leaves no doubt about the early 
achievement by them of missiles of essentially unlimited range when 
carrying warheads of thermonuclear size. They can be located anywhere 
in the USSR and still reach targets in the United States. Since this is true, 
it is clear that in the missile era geographically limited aerial or ground 
observer zones in our respective countries can provide no substantial
