1978  225
BACKGROUND
In order to meet the required Initial Operational Capability date 
for the Air Launched Cruise Missile (ALCM), top priority for industrial 
resources is essential. Your approval will allow assignment of a BRICK-
BAT DX industrial priority rating to our contracts with industry.2 It will 
assure that materials, components and other resources will be applied 
to the Cruise Missile program first in the event of conflict with commer-
cial or lesser important Defense contracts.
1. Production Leadtimes—Industrial experience during FY 76–77 has 
shown that leadtimes for many materials and components, particularly 
aluminum ingots and electronic parts, are lengthy. Failure to apply a 
blanket BRICK-BAT rating to the program will make it necessary to 
resolve individual resource bottlenecks and conflicts on a slower and 
more costly case-­by-­case interagency basis.
2. Relationship to Sea and Ground Launched Cruise Missiles (SLCM 
and GLCM)—Because many of the component parts of the ALCM, 
SLCM and GLCM are manufactured by the same Defense contractors, 
it would be more cost-­effective and efficient to apply equal priority in 
industry for these systems at this stage in their development.
3. Other BRICK-BAT Programs—Programs have received this 
assignment in the past, generally because of key political, scientific, 
psychological or military objectives. Nine programs are presently in 
the BRICK-BAT category. Included are systems such as the M60 Tank, 
TRIDENT, MINUTEMAN and the Ballistic Missile Defense Advanced 
Technology Program.
4. Adverse Reaction/Impact—We do not anticipate any adverse reac-
tion from special interest groups. Impact on industry will be minimal 
providing the DX industrial priority rating is assigned early in the 
acquisition cycle.
5. DX Usage Limitation—The program is estimated to cost $999.65 
million through FY 78. Of the total cost, approximately $130 million 
is estimated to be for critical components and materials which will be 
benefited by assignment of the DX industrial priority rating.
I recommend that you approve the Cruise Missile Program as a 
program of highest national priority. The enclosure contains the text of 
a suggested reply.3
Harold Brown
2 BRICK-BAT DX is the highest level of priority for production and acquisition of 
industrial resources.
3 Not found attached. Carter signed his name below Brown’s to indicate his approval 
of the recommendation.
