Chapter 2, January–June 1989  173
ICBMs to relatively small locations in peacetime except for notified 
transits or infrequent exercise or operational dispersals. (We have not 
specified what percentage would be allowed on notified transits at any 
one time; internal discussions have focused on a range of 15–20 percent. 
[1½ lines not declassified] The size of the overt inventory of mobile mis-
siles and launchers would be verified through data exchange and mon-
itoring of production, with a system of tagging used to identify legal 
missiles. The Soviets have accepted portions of this scheme, but have 
rejected others. The tabled U.S. proposals deal exclusively with manag-
ing the legal inventory of mobile ICBMs and launchers and with moni-
toring future production at declared facilities. Our existing Suspect Site 
Inspection regime, is focused on ballistic missile production.
On April 22, 1989, the President adopted a U.S. ICBM modernization 
program consisting of (a) rebasing the existing 50 silo based Peacekeeper 
missiles in a Peacekeeper rail garrison mode by the early 1990s and 
(b)  development of the small ICBM for deployment in a road-­mobile 
configuration by the late 1990s. The President did not specify (a) whether 
the small ICBM would carry one warhead or two, (b) how many Small 
ICBM missiles/warheads would be deployed, and (c) which of the 
competing basing modes for the small ICBM would be selected. Basing 
modes under consideration include so-­called Southwest basing, involv-
ing periodic random movement, and basing on existing Minuteman sites 
to either disperse when directed or dash on tactical warning.
Discussion. Given the foregoing background, the following issues 
appear to warrant review:
— Issue 1: Whether to alter our formal position banning such 
missiles;
— Issue 2: Whether to consider an option banning MIRVd mobile 
ICBMs while allowing single-RV mobile ICBMs;
— Issue 3: If mobiles are to be allowed, what numerical constraints 
to seek on them;
—  Issue 4: Whether, and if so, how to address accountability and 
inspection provisions for “movable” ICBMs (e.g., fixed area, multiple 
shelter concept).
A separate paper will examine whether, and if so how, to mod-
ify the existing verification regime the U.S. has proposed in the Joint 
Working Paper.
Issues 1/2—Allowing Mobile ICBMs. Mobile ICBMs tend to have 
greater survivability, and hence, greater crisis stability, assuming START 
restrictions either (a) allow dispersal when required or (b) allow opera-
tion in Deployment Areas large enough to ensure survival without dis-
persal. A situation in which both sides possess substantial mobile ICBM 
forces, and therefore survivable, land-­based second-­strike capability, is
