590 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 117. Remarks by President Carter1 New York, April 25, 1979 President Al Neuharth,2 distinguished members of the American Newspaper Publishers Association, other guests and friends: I want, first of all, to commend and to endorse the theme of this convention: the defense of the first amendment of our Constitution and the freedom of the press. Liberty of expression is our most important civil right, and freedom of the press is its most important bulwark. We can never afford to grow complacent about the first amendment; on the contrary, you and I and others must actively protect it always. The American press has grown enormously since the Nation’s early days—not only in its size and breadth but in its concepts of its own duties and its own responsibilities. The highest of these duties is to inform the public on the important issues of the day. And no issue is more important than the one I want to discuss with you today in a solemn and somber and sincere way—the control of nuclear arms. Each generation of Americans faces a choice that defines our national character, a choice that is also important for what it says about our own Nation’s outlook toward the world. In the coming months, we will almost certainly be faced with such a choice—whether to accept or to reject a new strategic arms limitation treaty. The decision we make will profoundly affect our lives and the lives of people all over the world for years to come. We face this choice from a position of strength, as the strongest nation on Earth economically, militarily, and politically. Our alliances are firm and reliable. Our military forces are strong and ready. Our economic power is unmatched. Along with other industrial democracies who are our friends, we lead the way in technological innovation. Our combined economies are more than three times as productive as those of the Soviet Union and all its allies. Our political institutions are based on human freedom. Our open system encourages individual initiative and creativity, and that, in turn, strengthens our entire society. Our values and our democratic way of life have a magnetic appeal for people all over the world which a materialistic and a totalitarian philosophy can never hope to challenge or to rival. 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pp. 693–699. The President spoke at 12:35 p.m. in the Grand Ballroom at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel at the annual convention of the American Newspaper Publishers Association. 2 Reference is to President of the American Newspaper Publishers Association Allen Neuharth.
