Afghanistan 819 308. Letter From Senator Moynihan to Secretary of State Muskie1 Washington, August 1, 1980 Dear Ed, At our lunch Tuesday we talked about the problem of maintaining the security of information in foreign affairs.2 I told you I had become deeply depressed by our seeming inability to maintain any confidences and our further inability to see what this tells us about the condition of our principal institutions. I promised to send you the specifics of the Afghanistan example which I cited. In the course of 1979 the President began to move toward supporting the low-level insurgency that appeared to have developed against the pro-Soviet Amin government in Kabul. In July and again in November, Presidential Findings directed that small amounts of nonmilitary aid be passed to these groups. On December 19, 1979, Izvestiya charged that “U.S. is stepping up interference in Afghanistan’s internal affairs, supporting the insurgents who are waging an armed struggle against this country’s legitimate government.” Izvestiya cited “the latest issue of the magazine COUN- TERSPY.” (I am informed by staff of the Intelligence Committee that this journal is or was associated with the Institute for Policy Studies.) On December 24 the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, overthrowing Amin. As it happens a Presidential Finding was then making its way through the bureaucracy calling for a stepping up of the earlier program directed against Amin, providing some $2 million in lethal military equipment. This Presidential Finding was signed December 28. It had begun as a project directed against the previous regime, but now of course took place in the context of the full-scale Soviet intervention. On January 1 Izvestiya charged that, “The CIA is directly involved in training Afghan rebels in camps in Pakistan and maintains contacts with counter-revolutionaries and reactionaries in Afghanistan itself.” The journal Counterspy is mentioned. On January 5 the Boston Globe reports that the Carter administration has undertaken an unannounced “hush-hush decision that the U.S. . . . will do everything possible to slip weapons to the Moslem 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Official Files of Edmund Muskie, 1980–1981, Lot 82D100, folder 1. Secret; Sensitive; Not for the System. Muskie initialed the letter, indicating he saw it. Moynihan’s letter is on the stationery of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, of which he was a member. 2 The previous Tuesday was July 29. No record of that meeting was found.
