Chapter 7, January–May 1991 977 Now, we will, to be sure, need to have a talk on the Baltics. You have probably seen the letter the President sent. We don’t want to have to freeze the economic measures we have taken towards you but the Congress could mandate such a freeze. We need to talk and see if there is a way to work out the problem on the Baltics. We had such a discussion last June in my office and there was a commitment to find a positive way to resolve the problem there. We need to see whether there are some positive steps that could be taken like moving the Black Berets from the Baltics and setting up a credible dialogue. You can see that the situation in the West and the attitudes in the West on what is going on in the Baltics are not particularly positive from your point of view. So I think it would be useful for us to have a serious discussion about the Baltics. Bessmertnykh: Thank you very much for outlining those views about the situation. Actually, we have come to the same conclusion about the timing of the Summit. So we agree with the idea of having a mutually-­ agreed postponement. But maybe we could say that this is not an indefinite postponement, but rather one that would be tied to a suggestion for a meeting later in the spring. The second point I would like to make is really when do we make this statement. I agree that making it sooner rather than later is a good way to go, but could we do it when I come? Might that not make sense? It would then look as if we had discussed this and our agreement would come out of our discussion. Baker: That is okay, but I am a little worried about the Congress taking action before you come. I don’t want the Congress to call for the postponement put us in a position looking like we are only responding to their pressure. You know we had Baltic leaders here calling for a postponement and I think it is better for us to take the step and do it on our own and not make it look like it’s in response to pressure. Let me read to you a possible statement we might make. This is something I need to go over with the President. This is a rough outline of something we might like to say as a joint announcement “By mutual agreement, Presidents Bush and Gorbachev will be rescheduling their Summit in Moscow originally planned for February to a later date in the first half of this year. The Gulf war makes it inappropriate for President Bush to be away from Washington. In addition, progress on START is not sufficient at this point to finalize the treaty by the mid-February date. Both Presidents look forward to setting an exact Summit date as soon as it becomes feasible to do so.” Bessmertnykh: Yes, that sounds acceptable in general. Baker: I think we definitely need to do this sooner rather than later.
