International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
153
want the North-South dialogue to give more attention to basic human
needs, and have suggested that OECD countries come up with a plan
on this.
The Germans, at CIEC, took a slightly harder position than the US
on a number of issues, and are particularly concerned about com-
modity agreements, which they see as having the potential to distort
markets. Beyond this, the Germans are somewhat more reluctant than
the US to go along with any sort of “common fund”—although they
grudgingly agree to a pooling arrangement among the funds of indi-
vidual buffer stocks. Schmidt has pushed a global scheme to stabilize
commodity export earnings as an alternative to extensive new interna-
tional commodity arrangements, but we believe this comes too close to
duplicating the IMF’s compensatory finance facility.
This meeting provides an opportunity to convey our position on
the above issues and probe the German position. This might also be a
useful occasion to determine whether Schmidt has given any further
thought to how to induce the Soviet Union to play a more constructive
role in the development process—a desire he expressed at the Downing
Street Summit. And, given the domestic political benefits which Gis-
card
seems
to
derive
from
French-sponsored
progress
in
the
North-South dialogue, are there any new measures for which we
should let him take partial credit—e.g. co-sponsoring the idea of a new
economic committee in the UNGA framework?
43.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Japan1
Washington, July 14, 1977, 0228Z
163810. For Ambassador Mansfield. Subject: U.S./EC Consulta-
tions on MTN. From: Ambassador Strauss for Ambassador Mansfield.
1. In discussions between myself and EC Commission President
Roy Jenkins, on Monday, July 11, we have reached agreement on an
ambitious timetable for putting together the major elements of an MTN
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770250–0373.
Limited Official Use; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Feketekuty (STR), cleared by Deputy As-
sistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy William Barraclough and Thomas
G. Martin (S/S–O), and approved by Strauss.
