552
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
185.
Telegram From the Embassy in Romania to the Department
of State1
Bucharest, October 17, 1977, 1035Z
7631. Subj: GOR’s Campaign for Multi-Year MFN. Ref: Bucharest
6891.2
1. Summary: During Counselor Nimetz’s visit in Romania, he met
with three high-level GOR officials who, each in his fashion, issued a
clear signal that the Romanians intend to launch a full-blown campaign
for the eventual achievement of multi-year Most Favored Nation treat-
ment. President Ceausescu has clearly put this issue at the head of his
list of priorities in terms of US–GOR economic relations. The point
man in this campaign will be Deputy Prime Minister Patan who is
scheduled to visit Washington, October 27–November 3. The culmina-
tion of this phase of the campaign would logically occur with the
Ceausescu visit. Meanwhile we need to think out how best to achieve
our own interests. End of summary.
2. The Government of Romania’s serious intent to attempt to
achieve the extension of Most Favored Nation treatment for longer
than one year at a time was clearly and repeatedly expressed in conver-
sations held with Counselor Nimetz in the course of his visit to Roma-
nia, October 10–12. Foreign Minister Macovescu said that it was politi-
cally important to avoid an annual debate in Congress which tends to
be treated as an open invitation for a debate focusing on any topic
whether or not it has any direct bearing on US–GOR economic relations.
He said that if it appears now to be politically impractical or unwise
to attempt to separate out the Romanian case from the 1974 Trade
Act, some provision should be found which would permit that the
congressional review take place only every three years. Noting that
the Foreign Minister was even more familiar with the MFN issue than
he was, the Counselor pointed out that emigration performance was
bound to be important, especially in coming months, as we assess it
on a bi-annual basis. Anything GOR could do to make this performance
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770380–1259.
Confidential. Also sent to Budapest.
2 In telegram 6891 from Bucharest, September 19, the Embassy reported on a Septem-
ber 14 conversation between Barnes and Patan. Despite understanding the challenges
multi-year MFN for Romania would have to overcome, Patan made clear “GOR will
persist in discussing here and in D.C. the desirability of multi-year review and continue
to explore modalities, direct and indirect, for attaining their objective.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770340–0145)
