Article XV. Criminal and civil jurisdiction over consular officers. The
Department notes that the Austrian negotiators agreed to substitute for the
first paragraph of Article XV of the original draft a paragraph similar to the
first paragraph of Article XVIII of the Treaty of 1923 between the United
States and Germany which is quoted on page 3 of instruction No. 552 of
February 11, 1927, so as to subject consular officers to prosecution for
“offenses locally designated as crimes other than misdemeanors.”
It is further noted that the Austrian negotiators apparently regarded the
second paragraph of Article XV as contained in the original draft as
satisfactory and did not press the suggestion first made that the paragraph
be altered to provide specifically that in criminal cases consular officers
may be required to testify only as to matters of fact. As pointed out in
instruction No. 552, the Department is of the opinion that the provision of
the original draft satisfactorily covers the situation, and it is therefore
pleased to note your opinion that the Austrian suggestion will be dropped.
Article XVI. Exemption of consular officers and Government property from
taxation. The Department notes your statement that the Austrian negotiators
apparently did not desire to press the objection originally raised to the first
paragraph of Article XVI relating to the taxation of income of consular
officers derived from other than immovable property as that objection was
set forth on page 20 of your despatch No. 374 of December 18, 1923, and
that therefore you assume that the paragraph will stand as proposed by the
United States, but that it is possible that in full conference the Austrian
negotiators will return to it.
You state that in accordance with instruction No. 552 authorizing you to
accept the Austrian suggestion on the point, the word “governmental” in
line 7 of the second paragraph of Article XVI has been stricken out and
“diplomatic or consular” inserted in lieu thereof and that the paragraph will
therefore read as set forth on page 10 of Instruction No. 552.
Article XVII. Privileges of consular officers. The Department notes your
statement that the Austrian Government was not disposed to press its
suggestion as set forth on page 22 of your despatch No. 374 of December
18, 1923, and page 2 of your despatch No. 419 of March 4, 1924,90 that
provision be made in Article XVII for the protection of consular titles, arms
