Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 297. Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, July 25, 1980 SUBJECT Military Supply Relationship with Yugoslavia Attached at Tab A2 is Harold Brown’s response to your memo of July 7 which noted the dissatisfaction with the military supply relationship expressed by Defense Minister Ljubicic to the President during his trip to Belgrade3 and asked Brown for a status report of where we stand. In the memo Brown argues that progress in our military relationship over the last year has been “significant and solid” and suggests that the main problem is the inability of the Yugoslavs to pay for the equipment they want. He also notes that DoD is at work on a package to provide the Yugoslavs with weapons in case of an “emergency” (i.e., Soviet threat). (S) Brown’s memo gives the impression all is well and that we basically have little to worry about. This is not exactly the case. According to Ambassador Eagleburger, who participated in the discussions at the Joint Committee meeting in June,4 the question of the training samples has become a political issue for the Yugoslavs, especially for Ljubicic (hence his remarks to the President). The main problem has been the question of leasing. DoD had originally offered to lease the Yugoslavs the training samples for a period of 90–180 days (because DoD feared that a longer lease would involve legal and legislative problems) and then simply to renew the lease. However, the Yugoslavs have been unhappy with this arrangement. They want assurances of continuity and they see DoD’s unwillingness to enter into a long-term lease as a weakening of US support for Yugoslavia. However, the Congress has been just as adamant in its belief that leasing should not be used to avoid congressional oversight of controversial sales, and the FY 82 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
