980
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
297.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 25, 1980
SUBJECT
Military Supply Relationship with Yugoslavia
Attached at Tab A2 is Harold Brown’s response to your memo of
July 7 which noted the dissatisfaction with the military supply relation-
ship expressed by Defense Minister Ljubicic to the President during
his trip to Belgrade3 and asked Brown for a status report of where
we stand. In the memo Brown argues that progress in our military
relationship over the last year has been “significant and solid” and
suggests that the main problem is the inability of the Yugoslavs to pay
for the equipment they want. He also notes that DoD is at work on a
package to provide the Yugoslavs with weapons in case of an “emer-
gency” (i.e., Soviet threat). (S)
Brown’s memo gives the impression all is well and that we basically
have little to worry about. This is not exactly the case. According to
Ambassador Eagleburger, who participated in the discussions at the
Joint Committee meeting in June,4 the question of the training samples
has become a political issue for the Yugoslavs, especially for Ljubicic
(hence his remarks to the President). The main problem has been the
question of leasing. DoD had originally offered to lease the Yugoslavs
the training samples for a period of 90–180 days (because DoD feared
that a longer lease would involve legal and legislative problems) and
then simply to renew the lease. However, the Yugoslavs have been
unhappy with this arrangement. They want assurances of continuity
and they see DoD’s unwillingness to enter into a long-term lease as a
weakening of US support for Yugoslavia. However, the Congress has
been just as adamant in its belief that leasing should not be used to
avoid congressional oversight of controversial sales, and the FY 82
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 87, Yugoslavia: 6/80–1/81. Top Secret. Sent for information. Kimmitt concurred
with the recommendations. A copy was sent to Madeleine Albright.
2 Attached at Tab A is a July 19 memorandum from Brown to Brzezinski.
3 Telegram 5272 from Belgrade, July 3, reported Eagleburger’s conversation with
Vujatovic, and also referenced the comments made by Ljubicic to Carter at the June 24
State dinner. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800320–0566)
4 In telegram 4906 from Belgrade, June 19, Eagleburger summarized the discussions
at the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Military Committee meeting in Belgrade June 17–18. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870123–0429)
