December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
679
Sadat said “believe me, they are idiots. I gave them a better proposal on
Gaza, and they will come to regret the fact that they did not accept it.”
After finishing reading the proposed U.S. language, Sadat turned to me
and asked “what if I accept? Why doesn’t the President plan to sign the
treaty during the trip?” I told Sadat that you had that eventuality in
mind if things go well, and he expressed the strongest support for such
an approach.
9. He then went on to say that he wishes me to convey to you his
“two directives”. The first is his directive to all of his associates to make
your visit to Egypt “A devastating and unprecedented success, at
whatever cost.” The second is that the U.S. and Egypt should join in a
partnership and go forth together, whether Begin agrees to a settlement
or whether he doesn’t.
10. It was at this stage that I told Sadat of Begin’s desire to visit
Cairo and that it would be a mistake to shunt him aside to Ismailia.
After some exchanges, Sadat smiled and said that I might well be right
for psychological reasons, and that he will give you an invitation to
convey to Begin, if things go well, to visit Cairo. He would propose that
the three of you stay at the Mena House at the foot of the pyramids, and
that by pre-arrangement a day or so be spent on “bargaining” so that
Begin can protect himself at home, following which the peace treaty
would be signed.
11. Sadat kept reiterating the importance of success in this venture
and asked me what are the things you might need “to hammer Begin.”
It was at this point that I ventured that you might need some help from
him on oil and on the ambassadors. He then made the aforementioned
proposition on oil, which he will authorize you to take with you to Is-
rael. On ambassadors, he said he might be willing to do it immediately
after the first phase of withdrawals is completed, but he added that he
needs to discuss this with you. I stressed to him the symbolic signifi-
cance of this issue to the Israelis and how it could prove to be a decisive
element in making it impossible for Begin “to stall”, a tactic which
Sadat fears Begin will employ.
12. The foregoing essentially completed the bilateral part of the
discussions, with Sadat being deeply touched by your letter and ex-
pressing, in a manner which impressed me as very genuine, his
warmest feelings for you. He was particularly responsive to my frank
discussion of our domestic political aspect of the problem.
13. The second part of the discussion involved a geopolitical re-
view. Sadat had a globe brought out into the room and he gave me an
overview of the regional situation as he sees it. Its essentials can be re-
duced to the following points: he described Saudi Arabia as a scare-
crow and a U.S. protectorate, to which we attach excessive importance.
He indicated that he could give additional assistance militarily to Saudi
