Romania 565 replied that he still believed they were “O.K.” and that the left wing of the PLO headed by Habash is not a real problem. Mr. Habib said that rejectionist element, not the “left” element, is the most serious and wondered whether the “rejectionists” influenced Arafat toward continuing rejection of Israel’s right to exist. Macovescu said that Arafat will accept the right of Israel to exist. Date of Ceausescu Visit The Secretary said we were looking forward to the visit of President Ceausescu and we will try to have a date very soon. Macovescu replied that this is very important.4 Ceausescu is planning to go to London around that period (late spring 1978) and would like to prepare his schedule. Also, he would like to begin preparations on the substance of the trip. The Secretary agreed that he would move forward to get a date very soon. [Omitted here is discussion of Vance’s visit to Latin America.] Continuing Contacts The Secretary thanked the Foreign Minister for coming to Washington to discuss the Middle East and stressed the importance of maintaining these contacts. The Foreign Minister said that he had discussed this desirability with Mr. Habib. Mr. Habib replied that the Romanians have been very kind to keep open their invitation to him to visit Bucharest, but the Secretary kept him so busy he could not go. Macovescu said that Mr. Habib was always welcome and he renewed his invitation to the Secretary to visit whenever he could. The Secretary thanked the Foreign Minister. 4 In December, the Department of State recommended that some visits by foreign dignitaries scheduled for the first half of 1978 be rescheduled for the second half of 1978 or early 1979. The memorandum was forwarded to Mondale by Clift on December 13, with his concurrence. Disagreeing with the recommendation, King wrote “Ceausescu and the Romanians are going to be very upset over this. He has already been told the first half of 1978 and proposed April. To put this off is going to cause real problems for us, since the Romanians are already having doubts about our interest in them. I will do a more formal protest memo if that is required.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 12, Romania: President Ceausescu, 4/12–13/78: Cables and Memos, 12/13/77–4/10/78)
