Human Rights some willingness to cooperate with us to advance human rights in the IFIs provided we proceed quietly, selectively, and with sensitivity to the risks involved. In fact, President Giscard d’Estaing of France has personally made just these points, in setting French policy on the subject. It is urgent, therefore, that we review our present strategy and procedures for handling human rights in the international development banks. This will implement the President’s Directive/NSC–30 that “U.S. human rights actions in the IFIs shall be designed and implemented so as not to undermine essential U.S. interests of preserving these institutions as effective economic instruments.” Specifically, there is a need for: 1. Comprehensive human rights strategy papers for problem countries, which analyze the three key issues; our specific human rights objectives in such countries, the relationship between human rights objectives and other U.S. national objectives, and the array of policy instruments which can be used to further the human rights effort. I believe that U.S. human rights objectives must be part of a comprehensive country strategy which takes into account both U.S. goals and available policy instruments. In certain countries, human rights violations may be so egregious as to overshadow completely all other considerations. But only when such a country strategy is delineated can we decide what U.S. position on prospective IFI loans (and bilateral assistance programs) is the proper one to achieve our objectives. Our current procedures focus too much on specific loans rather than on how, and with what policy instruments, we can most effectively induce offending governments to alter their human rights practices.2 2. A clearer set of criteria for invoking sanctions in the IFIs and for excepting loans which directly meet basic human needs. In my view, sanctions in the IFIs generally should be applied only after our several bilateral policy instruments have been tried. 3. Agreement to limit the use of U.S. votes in the IFIs to clear-cut situations of gross violations, where we are most likely to be supported by other members. 4. A systematic effort to keep other like-minded governments informed of our views and intentions regarding loans to countries which present serious human rights problems, and for ongoing consultations with such governments aimed at developing greater consensus on criteria and policies for dealing with human rights problems. We need to develop a clear, consistent, and careful approach for dealing with human rights in the international development banks 2 Vance underlined this sentence.
