Human Rights
415
some willingness to cooperate with us to advance human rights in the
IFIs provided we proceed quietly, selectively, and with sensitivity to
the risks involved. In fact, President Giscard d’Estaing of France has
personally made just these points, in setting French policy on the
subject.
It is urgent, therefore, that we review our present strategy and pro-
cedures for handling human rights in the international development
banks. This will implement the President’s Directive/NSC–30 that
“U.S. human rights actions in the IFIs shall be designed and imple-
mented so as not to undermine essential U.S. interests of preserving
these institutions as effective economic instruments.” Specifically, there
is a need for:
1. Comprehensive human rights strategy papers for problem coun-
tries, which analyze the three key issues; our specific human rights ob-
jectives in such countries, the relationship between human rights objec-
tives and other U.S. national objectives, and the array of policy
instruments which can be used to further the human rights effort.
I believe that U.S. human rights objectives must be part of a com-
prehensive country strategy which takes into account both U.S. goals
and available policy instruments. In certain countries, human rights vi-
olations may be so egregious as to overshadow completely all other
considerations. But only when such a country strategy is delineated can
we decide what U.S. position on prospective IFI loans (and bilateral
assistance programs) is the proper one to achieve our objectives. Our
current procedures focus too much on specific loans rather than on
how, and with what policy instruments, we can most effectively induce
offending governments to alter their human rights practices.2
2. A clearer set of criteria for invoking sanctions in the IFIs and for
excepting loans which directly meet basic human needs. In my view,
sanctions in the IFIs generally should be applied only after our several
bilateral policy instruments have been tried.
3. Agreement to limit the use of U.S. votes in the IFIs to clear-cut
situations of gross violations, where we are most likely to be supported
by other members.
4. A systematic effort to keep other like-minded governments in-
formed of our views and intentions regarding loans to countries which
present serious human rights problems, and for ongoing consultations
with such governments aimed at developing greater consensus on cri-
teria and policies for dealing with human rights problems.
We need to develop a clear, consistent, and careful approach for
dealing with human rights in the international development banks
2 Vance underlined this sentence.
