222
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
74.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Vice President Mondale1
Washington, December 28, 1979
SUBJECT
Broadcasting to the Moslem World (U)
In answer to your query at the PRC yesterday,2 all the participants,
with the exception of OMB, are moving to implement the decisions
taken at the December 11 SCC on broadcasting to the Moslem World
and approved by the President. To date OMB has:
—released funds for VOA’s most urgent needs but been reluctant
to provide funds for the expansion of Hausa, Swahili, Indonesian,
Hindi and Amharic (the latter is particularly important)
—allocated no money to BIB for RFE/RL to improve the content
and depth of Radio Liberty broadcasts in Uzbek, Tatar, Kazakh, Azeri,
Tajik, Turkmen and Kirgiz on the grounds that funds for such steps
could not be released until arrangements for transmittal rental have
been accomplished. Improvements in these language services are
needed now, however, in order to have better broadcasts ready when
the transmitters are rented. Moreover, RL must begin to hire new
people for these languages, a difficult task which will take months and
which should be begun as soon as possible. (C)
Recent developments in Afghanistan3 have underscored the impor-
tance of moving rapidly to implement the December 11 SCC decisions,
particularly funding for VOA and RL programming needs. I think
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
America: 10–12/79. Confidential. Larrabee forwarded the memorandum to Brzezinski
on December 28 and noted he had coordinated it with Henze. (Ibid.)
2 On November 23, Robert Gates asked Gary Sick and Paul Henze to prepare a
memorandum for Brzezinski’s signature answering a query from Mondale about U.S.
actions to counter Soviet propaganda in the Persian Gulf. Henze provided Brzezinski a
draft memorandum on November 26. In his covering memorandum, Henze asked Brze-
zinski to engage Mondale as a supporter of a more assertive U.S. approach to international
broadcasting. (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, I–023,
SCC Meeting Folders, 1979–1980 and Attorney General Actions, SCC(i) Meeting on
Broadcasting and Related Issues, 11 December 1979) Aaron signed the memorandum
on Brzezinski’s behalf on November 27, reporting that severe budget limitations imposed
on RFE/RL and VOA prevented progress. (Ibid.) On December 27, Mondale again asked
about broadcasting to Muslim audiences.
3 On December 25, Soviet airborne troops began arriving in Kabul, Afghanistan.
On December 27, Soviet Army and KGB troops attacked the Presidential Palace in Kabul
and killed Afghani President Hafizullah Amin. Concurrently, Soviet ground forces began
crossing the border into Afghanistan.
