Chapter 2, January–June 1989 189 purposes, and for exercise and operational dispersals with notifications, but without geographic limitations. — Option 2—Alter the existing position to adopt a large Deployment Area with unrestricted movement within that Deployment Area. No dispersals permitted outside the Deployment Area. — Option 2A—Provide for Deployment Areas using the civilian rail network limited only by geographic boundaries. — Option 3: Alter the existing position to adopt a larger Deployment Area in addition to the small Garrisons. Movement within the Deployment Area is unrestricted, but changes in the net number of missiles/launchers in each Garrison must be pre-­notified. The concept of exercise dispersals is eliminated. — Option 3A—Continue to allow operational dispersals without geographic limit, with post-­notification and a stated national security rationale. — Option 3B—Do not allow any dispersals beyond the Deployment Area. Perimeter Portal Monitoring (PPM) and Suspect Site Inspections (SSI). The U.S. proposes to monitor additions to the mobiles inventory through PPM of facilities that produce accountable stages of mobile ICBMs. In addition, PPM would be used to deter covert production at facilities that are producing any ICBM or SLBM stage and are also producing any type of motor that exceeds the length and diameter of the smallest mobile accountable stage. SSI is intended to deter covert mobile production at other facilities. Short-­notice SSI (without a right-­of-­refusal) would be permitted at facilities on an agreed, but not yet determined, list that is intended to focus chiefly on solid rocket motor production facilities; SSI at all other locations would be subject to a right-­of-­refusal, although the refusing party is required to make a “good faith” effort to resolve the concern by other means. There would be quotas on listed facility and right-­of-­refusal inspections. All agree that our current position on PPM permits us confidently to determine the production of accountable stages for mobile missiles at declared production plants (which are subject to continuous monitoring) and to deter excess or illegal production at those locations (assuming our definition captures Soviet facilities at which segmented motors are assembled). [4½ lines not declassified] In addition, some believe that our current approach does not adequately protect U.S. facilities from intelligence loss during SSI. [2 lines not declassified] PPM. The current approach would subject to PPM a subset of the facilities capable of producing rocket motors; namely, plants currently engaged in strategic rocket motor production which also produce a motor at least as large as a mobile first stage. It does not provide for PPM at all production plants which may have critical equipment in
