Romania on the Soviet Union’s southern border. But, except for its periodic polemics with the Soviet Union over Bessarabia and North Bukovina (annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940), all of Romania’s foreign policy efforts have been aimed at making everyone forget or overlook its “little brother” relationship to its northern neighbor and its membership in the Warsaw Pact Treaty Organization. 22. Although Romanian diplomats can be found pursuing their nationalistic policies in many international forums, they seem to have concentrated their efforts on establishing relations with Peking, Washington, and the Third World in order to balance Romania’s relations with the Soviets. In the Third World, they have succeeded in carving a niche for Romania as a quasi-nonaligned state without, however, being able to gain formal acceptance to the nonaligned movement (NAM). Although there seems to be growing disillusionment on the part of African countries over their relations with Romania, as well as with the quality of Romanian goods received, there is no indication that Romania intends to cool its ardor in seeking Third World friends and markets. In fact, it is renewing its campaign to become a full member of the NAM in preparation for NAM meetings scheduled this year and next, and it is allocating a larger ratio of its foreign trade to the Third World. Interestingly, trade figures also show a projected larger share for the East European Economic Organization (CEMA). Increases in both the Third World and CEMA will be at the expense of trade with the industrialized countries, reflecting probable Romanian disappointment that its opening to the West has not paid off in economic terms as rapidly as it had hoped. 23. Having apparently played a role in arranging the first U.S. contacts with the People’s Republic of China in 1972, Romania has kept its taste for middleman situations, most recently having played a role in Sadat’s visit to Israel. There were some apparently unfounded rumors in Bucharest earlier this year that Ceausescu was exploring the possibility of stepping into the Moroccan-Algerian Sahara problem, and there are similar rumors now concerning the Cambodian-Vietnamese conflict. Romania takes obvious pride at having good relations with all countries regardless of their politics, and Ceausescu has a wellknown penchant for wishing to build up his own and his country’s prestige (which in Gaullist fashion he probably does not separate) by involving himself in such go-between roles. Given these two ingredients, Ceausescu may be given somewhat more credit than he deserves in the face of scarce information on these situations. 24. Along with its semi-independent foreign policy, Romania has an extreme aversion to being overlooked on such questions as MBFR and is very active at disarmament and other international forums (for example, recently at Belgrade), and at promoting its ideas behind a
