604 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement to start searching for an alternative and majority appear to be fastening on ex-President Osorio. While reports of Osorio activities differ greatly, some suggest his forces active throughout crisis attempting utilize it for own partisan political ends. These same reports say Osorio is dressed and waiting in the wings. General consensus is that if Lemus-Osorio rift could be patched up tranquility could be rapidly restored. This voiced from both sides and also from friends of both men. However, I believe breach so great that conciliation between two is wishful thinking. While original disturbances party directed against us “Yanqi imperialism” this aspect disappeared after force and violence turned public ire against President. Leaflets currently being distributed return to this theme strongly suggesting communist leadership, which disappeared during more vociferous disorders, has returned to guide both students and CGTS. Against this background, current period seems be interlude in what will be continuing test of strength. Regardless Lemus faults, Embassy strongly believes present government deserving of our moral and material support and U.S. should render such as long as Lemus remains in power and his government continues pursue policies the aims of which coincide with our own. At present time, main forces seem be directed toward maintaining Lemus government and avoiding making of El Salvador another Cuba. Thus, while agree that we should make our views known to subtle and direct way which we have already done, do not believe we should publicly deport ourselves in way which would add substance to charges, already being levelled by communists, of intervention in internal affairs. Rather, we should speed up action on pending aid requests, economic integration, social welfare program, et cetera, which will give notice our support and confidence in Lemus government. Re press attitudes see Weeka 36.9 Kalijarvi 9 Reference is to despatch 64 from San Salvador, September 8, 1960. (716.00(W)/9–860)
