1977 65 available for the study forced it to depend on significant portions of the analytical work done for its predecessor, the Joint Strategic Bomber Study (JSBS).4 The JSBS was done over three years ago by DOD at the request of the Congress. That study made a number of critical assumptions that tended to favor the B–1, and assumed the worst for the cruise missile. In fairness, this looks worse now than it did then because the cruise missile has now largely met or exceeded what were then only design goals. Nonetheless, the JSBS was sharply criticized by the Congress and by outside reviewers in the systems analysis community as being extremely biased. Since then, various portions of the JSBS have been reexamined and in the process a great deal of bias against the cruise missile has been removed. We should not assume, however, that the cruise missile has now been given a completely fair shake. A really fair look at the relative cost effectiveness of the B–1 and the cruise missile would probably require a completely fresh start by a study team as impartial as this last one, and would probably require a year to do (the JSBS took slightly over a year). It would reexamine every assumption and would attempt to assess previously untreated effects such as the ability of large numbers of cruise missiles to attack in loosely spaced clusters and thus saturate the Soviets’ air defenses. Midcourse Threats The OSD study argues that large cruise missile carriers could be particularly vulnerable to extended area defenses that would attempt to attack them before they launch their cruise missiles. The particular threat envisioned by the study is based on AWACS type aircraft and long range fighter interceptors. This concept deserves careful study, particularly to determine why such a threat would have significantly more capability against a force consisting of perhaps 60 cruise missile carriers than it would against a force of perhaps 150 B–1’s. (Note: Both forces carry about the same number of nuclear weapons.) The study argues that a large cruise missile carrier would be difficult to mask with ECM; we would argue that an AWACS aircraft will be able to see either aircraft well enough to vector fighters out the bearing to the target at very long ranges. The study also argues that because the large cruise missile carrier would present fewer targets it would be more vulnerable than the B–1. This argument implicitly assumes that 150 B–1’s will be sufficient to 4 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXV, National Security Policy, 1973–1976, Document 104.
