Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1139
Smith and the Embassy that it could obtain Argentine agreement to the
“pragmatic solution.”
11. Now, in the cable received by the Embassy from Gerry Smith in
New Delhi, reporting his conversation with State Secretary Haunschild
(Reftel), it appears that the initial negotiating position of the FRG will
not be to request full-scope safeguards, but rather will be the “prag-
matic solution.” Further, it appears, [1 line not declassified] that the
opening negotiating position of Argentina will be much less than full-
scope safeguards, or the pragmatic solution. In fact, it will be less than
the nuclear suppliers’ group guidelines. (We also have seen [1 line not
declassified] despite assurances we have had to the contrary, Argentina
has no intention of signing the Tlatelolco Treaty after completion of the
deal with the FRG and Switzerland.)
12. If one assumes that in the course of negotiations some compro-
mise is reached between the opening positions of the FRG and Argen-
tina, the result clearly will be less than the full-scope safeguards we de-
sire, and may well leave the door open for Argentina to pursue a
nuclear option outside of international safeguards leading to nuclear
weapons capability.
13. Action requested: In light of this very serious and possibly de-
teriorating safeguards position, I recommend that you call in Ambas-
sador Hermes and inform him of the serious concern of the U.S. that the
FRG may be heading for a compromise on safeguards which not only
leaves the world vulnerable to the development of a nuclear weapons
capability in Argentina but also can establish a very undesirable prece-
dent at a time when we all are seeking stronger safeguards against
proliferation.
14. I am concerned that this whole matter has the potential of de-
veloping into a problem of considerable import in U.S.–FRG relations.
For this reason, in addition to proliferation considerations, I believe it
would be desirable to discuss the situation frankly with Hermes (who
was closely involved in the negotiations with Argentina in his previous
position) to make sure that the FRG understands at a high level the
risks of the course they apparently are contemplating.
Stoessel
