International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 rencies not now in the Snake might initially have leeway for greater rate fluctuations than now exist among the Snake currencies, but it is envisioned that when fully implemented the new system would be at least as restrictive as the Snake. As you know, the U.K. and Italy have serious reservations about such a plan, and did not endorse it at Bremen. Moreover, the features are all subject to change and negotiation. III. Analysis of the Proposals As the exact details will be unclear for weeks or months, we can only pose a series of potential problems that the EMS may hold for the U.S. and world economy. 1. Will EMS restrict the ability of the dollar to reflect underlying market forces? If the EMS only attempts to reduce fluctuations among European currencies, extreme fluctuations of the dollar against individual European currencies may be reduced. (For example, the dollar might depreciate less against the German mark and more against the French franc than it would have otherwise.) On average, the depreciation against European currencies might well be unaffected. There are some hints in the Bremen statement and from other reports, however, that the new system might be used to manage the value of the dollar against European currencies. If these operations went beyond efforts to counter disorderly markets, they could deprive us of needed exchange rate flexibility. Comment. We must be assured unequivocably that the dollar will be free to adjust when fundamental economic conditions warrant. It must not be pegged. 2. Will the proposals destabilize the dollar? The discussion and development of these new proposals is itself likely to create nervousness and uncertainties in exchange markets—indeed, some has already occurred. This probably will be temporary and modest. Moreover, initially speculators will test the new set of intra-European exchange rates rather than focus on European/U.S. rates. If the new system uses dollars to intervene when it is buying or selling currencies of its members, and if the transactions are not balanced between buying and selling, then the value of the dollar would be affected. A more fundamental question arises as to whether the development of more stable rate relationships within Europe, and perhaps ultimately the emergence of a European currency, will make European currencies relatively more attractive compared to the dollar as international money. This may occur, but it is unlikely to occur overnight. Moreover, the dollar as the key currency is likely to face growing competition from the DM and the yen in any case.
