Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX review the question of MFN each year. The Romanians wanted to see a solution of the MFN question on a permanent basis, as in the case of China. (C) The Vice President noted that the U.S. favored this as well. The question was really one of timing. There was considerable positive feeling toward Romania, but the question was really when we should Burtica emphasized that the Congressmen with whom he had met felt that the time was appropriate to move on the question of MFN. He had found considerable good feeling toward Romania in Congress, particularly as a result of Romania’s independent stand on Afghanistan. Senator Jackson in particular was positively disposed toward granting MFN on a permanent basis.6 (S) At this point Secretary Klutznick interjected that Senator Jackson was favorably disposed to yearly renewal not multiyear renewal. (C) The Vice President commented that perhaps the attitude in Congress was changing and that we ought to look into this. The Vice President also noted that when Ceausescu came in 1975 he had gotten into a tiff with Senator Jackson and that Jackson had found that Ceausescu was not easily pushed. (S) Burtica replied that in the meantime Senator Jackson had been in Romania and had come away with a positive impression. (C) The Vice President promised that the U.S. would take another look at the question of granting MFN to Romania on a permanent basis. (S) Turning to economic relations, Burtica commented that Romania had a large number of very important negotiations, especially with General Electric.7 If this deal were to be concluded, it would extend to the year 2000. The Romanians basically agreed on all points except counter-trade. Burtica stressed that such a deal would be easier to conclude if MFN was granted on a permanent basis. This created uncertainties. (S) The Vice President asked if Burtica meant that Romania needed access to U.S. markets. (C) 6 Burtica’s conversation with members of Congress, including Senator Jackson, was reported in telegram 121462 to Bucharest, May 8. “While discussing this year’s MFN waiver” the Department reported, “DPM Burtica never confronted Jackson on the issue of multi-year MFN. We do not know if this was by design or simply inadvertence, but Jackson was prepared to tell the Romanians that no chance existed for change in the trade legislation or procedures to permit multi-year MFN.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800227–1123) 7 In an undated memorandum (drafted on March 28) from Vest to Clift, Vest summarized U.S. support for General Electric’s proposal to supply the Romanians with two turbine generators for their nuclear plant at Cernavoda. (Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Box 67, Foreign Countries—Romania, (1980))
