International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 duce minimal results and that much more far-reaching steps are needed. Dick Holbrooke feels that only two Americans can credibly carry this message to Fukuda, because of their domestic political credentials: Ambassador Mansfield and Bob Strauss. There is widespread interagency agreement that Mansfield, buttressed by a small technical team from Washington, should convey the word early next week if we can get our position together in time. Strauss could then go to Fukuda in December to conclude the final agreement, once the Japanese had decided which approach to choose. On the interagency follow-up, there is now reasonably effective coordination at the Assistant Secretary level (chaired by STR) and at the working level (chaired by State). If a more formalized EPG subgroup is deemed necessary, it should be chaired either by Treasury (due to your chairmanship of the EPG and overall international economic responsibility) or by STR (because these GOJ measures will be almost wholly in the trade area). Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, November 9, 1977 SUBJECT “Year of the Economy” You were wise to make 1977 the Year of Energy—both because the issue is important and because it is useful to order an administration’s activities around a central theme and “subordinate other business to it,” as Churchill once said. From a foreign policy standpoint, it would make sense to make 1978 the Year of the Economy—for two reasons: 1. Economic Issues Are Now Central: In the industrial world stagflation may not pose as dramatic a danger as the Great Depression did in the 1930’s, but it could eventually do as much to weaken moderate political forces in Europe and Japan, and thus to unhinge the existing in- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 121, Trade: 1977. Confidential. Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Stu. C.” Brzezinski also initialed the memorandum.
