International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
237
duce minimal results and that much more far-reaching steps are
needed.
Dick Holbrooke feels that only two Americans can credibly carry
this message to Fukuda, because of their domestic political credentials:
Ambassador Mansfield and Bob Strauss. There is widespread inter-
agency agreement that Mansfield, buttressed by a small technical team
from Washington, should convey the word early next week if we can
get our position together in time. Strauss could then go to Fukuda in
December to conclude the final agreement, once the Japanese had de-
cided which approach to choose.
On the interagency follow-up, there is now reasonably effective coor-
dination at the Assistant Secretary level (chaired by STR) and at the
working level (chaired by State). If a more formalized EPG subgroup is
deemed necessary, it should be chaired either by Treasury (due to your
chairmanship of the EPG and overall international economic responsi-
bility) or by STR (because these GOJ measures will be almost wholly in
the trade area).
73.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, November 9, 1977
SUBJECT
“Year of the Economy”
You were wise to make 1977 the Year of Energy—both because the
issue is important and because it is useful to order an administration’s
activities around a central theme and “subordinate other business to
it,” as Churchill once said. From a foreign policy standpoint, it would
make sense to make 1978 the Year of the Economy—for two reasons:
1. Economic Issues Are Now Central: In the industrial world stagfla-
tion may not pose as dramatic a danger as the Great Depression did in
the 1930’s, but it could eventually do as much to weaken moderate po-
litical forces in Europe and Japan, and thus to unhinge the existing in-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 121, Trade: 1977. Confidential. Sent for information.
Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Stu. C.” Brzezinski also initialed the memorandum.
