Afghanistan
535
ing of how India views the situation created by the Soviets’ move into
Afghanistan.
5. The Foreign Minister responded by first expressing appreciation
to the President for having sent you (Mr. Clifford) as his emissary. The
closeness of the relationship between the President and Mr. Clifford
gave the latter’s visit a special dimension and assured the authenticity
of the views that he expressed. He said also that Indians generally
have great respect for President Carter and feel he has a sense of affinity
for India. Thus, the Foreign Minister was confident that there was
goodwill on both sides and that it could help the two governments
overcome friction and setbacks arising from differing perceptions. On
strictly bilateral matters, he said, there seemed to be few problems,
but, as Mr. Clifford had intimated, there were differences in the way
the two countries perceived world events. It was good that there could
be candid exchanges of view on these differences.
6. The situation arising from the Soviets’ action in Afghanistan,
the Foreign Minister said, had indeed serious implications. Rather than
speculating about what led to it, or arguing about the rights or wrongs
involved, it was a situation that everyone should now be seeking to
“defuse.” Moreover, while there are no doubt wider implications, for
India the paramount concern had to be the new threat of big power
confrontation within the South Asia region. India’s concern was how
it could pursue its critical development objectives free of these tensions,
without the impediments that they threaten.
7. Then, speaking very deliberately, the Foreign Minister expressed
objection to America providing arms for Pakistan. Any introduction
of arms for Pakistan, he said, will not achieve security for that country;
it will simply escalate the tensions.3
[Omitted here is the remainder of the telegram, unrelated to
Afghanistan.]
Goheen
3 Clifford met with Carter in the Oval Office, February 6, to report on his meeting
with Gandhi. He relayed that Gandhi “opposes what the United States is doing in
Pakistan. India has no confidence in President Zia; his government is very narrowly
based. India is concerned that Pakistan may use arms from the United States against
India. Mrs. Gandhi does not like Zia or Pakistan but she did not favor intervention.”
Clifford reported that he responded that Gandhi “should not worry” that U.S. arms
shipments to Pakistan would be used against India. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 38, Memcons: President: 2/80)
