Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX in future years. (The Egyptian program is now handled on a “full funding” basis in which credits are set aside from the start to cover the entire cost of a program.) By shifting to the cash flow basis, some of Egypt’s credits under the $1.5 billion “Peace Package” would be freed to cover start-up costs on additional programs. —That an additional $350 million in credits be added to the FY 81 budget. This additional increment, plus cash flow funding, would smooth out the two-year gap until additional funds became available in FY 82. If this course of action were adopted, we would have to explain to Congress that the withdrawal of Arab support from Egypt required us to request additional funds before the end of the three-year period previously anticipated for the “Peace Package.” It would also provide leverage for Israel to request an increase in its own funding level. (S) All agencies except OMB agreed that this level of funding was consistent with Egypt’s needs. OMB representatives stated that they would want to take a much closer look at the concept of cash flow funding. OMB indicated that they would submit their comments on this and the budgetary implications of this very large proposal to the President separately since they had not had time to study it sufficiently. (S) OMB questioned the need to seek a decision on this issue now, rather than during the regular budget review process in December. Secretary Brown noted that we had promised General Ali to resume talks in early November. At that time we would have to be able to provide some indication of the size of the program we were prepared to offer. It was also noted that the proposed sums—although very large—required an appropriation of only ten percent of the total amount as a credit guarantee. (S) The PRC reviewed the list of items which Egypt has requested. All agreed that we could not support its request to purchase F–15 aircraft at this time. However, all agencies, including ACDA, supported the OSD/JCS proposal that we indicate our willingness in principle to sell
