Comprehensive Test Ban
319
(4) Much of the international discussion of CTB benefits has
dwelled on interrupting the process of developing new improved nu-
clear weapons; and recent Soviet statements at the UN have also taken
this line. This way of thinking about the matter is deficient on two
counts:
(a) basic advancement of nuclear weapon technology is not the
only substantial reason for nuclear weapon testing—it may no longer
even be the main reason. Primary reasons for such testing now and in
the foreseeable future are to prove out weapon designs that have been
tailored in detail to best match new delivery systems; to test the effects
of nuclear explosions on other military equipment, and to verify experi-
mentally the functional soundness of weapons in the stockpile. All of
these can be done through PNE operations;
(b) any meaningful PNE program will, itself, include development
efforts to advance and test nuclear explosive technology and specific
designs. The civil engineering reasons for such continued development
and testing (e.g., to reduce the diameter of a device, to establish designs
that are more economical of fissionable materials, to establish the
ability of the device to deliver reliably its design yield with acceptable
precision) could not be challenged as unnecessary or inappropriate;
however, they generally parallel corresponding desiderata in the mili-
tary field. Some of the kinds of device advancements to be sought for
PNE applications are on the frontier of current nuclear weapon R&D.2
US PNE PROGRAM
(5) The US does not have a significant PNE program; and, based on
current estimates of economic value in the US plus environmental and
regulatory factors, there is no evident justification for a significant US
program.
WEAPON-TEST ASYMMETRY
(6) Because of the inactive current and projected status of the US
PNE program, allowing an active Soviet program under a complete
ban on acknowledged weapon tests would extend to the USSR a sub-
stantial unilateral military asset (i.e., a clear basis for indirect contin-
uance of weapon testing).
2 Carter wrote Brezhnev on February 14 and said that he welcomed “your will-
ingness to intensify efforts to reach agreement on a comprehensive test ban. I recognize
that there are remaining issues with respect to other countries who continue to have test
programs and the possible use of peaceful nuclear explosions for mining or construction,
but I believe there are satisfactory ways of dealing with these issues. I intend to ratify the
existing agreements which have been negotiated between our two governments but I
consider these only steps toward a common objective of a complete cessation of nuclear
tests. In the meantime these unratified agreements will be honored by our government.”
The letter is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Docu-
ment 7.
