1956  1161
been able to gather about the incident, there is little question but that 
the plane was shot down by Chinese Communist fighters. However 
it appears that the plane may have been off course and over Chinese 
Communist territory or territorial waters when attacked. Whether it 
was forced there by Communist fighters is unknown. The Secretary has 
drafted a public statement giving the facts so far as we know them and 
characterizing the attack as unprovoked and unjustified. It will also 
state that we will demand reparations. The finishing touches are being 
put on the statement in consultation with the Pentagon today and it 
will probably be issued before you receive this letter. We will see that 
you receive the text of the statement promptly.
The results of O’Neill’s renewed request to visit American pris­
oners were as expected. We shall await a reasonable time to see what 
reply the Chinese Communists will make to his approach. We intend to 
have him keep pressing Peiping on this point emphasizing the fact that 
American prisoners have been prevented from communicating with 
him and contrasting this with our offer to permit the Indians to see 
Chinese prisoners here even when the latter had not communicated 
with the Indian Embassy.
We were glad to have Dave’s letter enclosing his careful study of 
the new material on the missing servicemen. Col. Monroe who has 
just returned from a trip to Korea is coming over today to discuss the 
next move. A recent communication from UNCMAC gives their view 
that the matter should not be taken up again in UNCMAC but rather 
shifted to Geneva. We do not understand clearly the reasons for this 
and hope that Col. Monroe will be able to clarify this.
The Chinese student in the mental institution at Logansport, 
Indiana to whom we sent a copy of the Agreed Announcement has 
indicated he wishes to communicate with the Indian Embassy. We have 
told him he may do so. And we have also informed the Indian Embassy 
of the case and our readiness to allow him to go to Mainland China 
so that they could not put it to us as a case of an individual claiming 
obstruction and thus mar the perfect record to date of having received 
no such representation.
The Chinese Communists are engaged in an all out campaign to 
have Americans come to Communist China. In addition to the visas 
approved for the news men, invitations have been issued to the U.S. 
National Students Association, to some of the relatives of American 
prisoners and we recently heard from an American missionary that he 
had been invited to make a trip to Communist China.
We are trying to get a hold of two copies of the Yale University 
publication on Chinese language reform which you requested and will 
send them to you as soon as we can get them.
