August 8–September 17, 1978 167 ments, primarily with regard to Sinai but also with respect to some aspects of the West Bank and Gaza. Dayan said he would like to invite Defense Minister Weizman to join since this was the subject of the discussion, and the remainder of the participants came in ten minutes later. Before their arrival, Secretary Vance asked whether the Israelis could accept joint patrolling with the Jordanian and Egyptian armed forces. Dayan replied that he would not rule it out for the Jordan River Valley with the Jordanians; in fact, he thought it was a good idea. However, he saw no appropriate way to do it in Gaza since the international frontier was only about three miles long between Gaza and Sinai. It was apparent, moreover, that Dayan saw no possibility of Egyptian forces being readmitted to Gaza; he admitted only the possibility of mixed border control points with some token Egyptian participation. Vance then went over very quickly with Dayan the latest version of the U.S. draft “Framework” document,2 pointing out to him where the Israeli suggestions on the previous draft3 had been rejected and where they had been accepted. (Review with Dayan was so rapid that he could not have obtained more than a very general idea as to which of the Israeli counterproposals had been accepted.) Dayan then made his familiar argument in favor of the U.S. taking over Etam air base, both to solve the problem on the air base itself and also to make easier an ultimate solution of the Rafah settlements issue. Vance explained why Sadat had rejected this idea and why the whole concept of foreign bases on Arab soil is antithetical to the Arabs at this point. He said that Sadat had not completely ruled out the idea, but would consider it only with the greatest reluctance, and that he, himself, was not enthusiastic about it. Dayan said that he was against the idea of “civilianizing” the three Israeli airports; under Egyptian-civilian control they could be transformed over night during a crisis into staging bases for Egyptian military aircraft almost adjacent to the Israeli frontier. If the UN had control over the airport at Sharm el-Sheikh, this would be a good way to protect it for use as a civilian facility; the same idea could apply to port facilities at Sharm el-Sheikh. Perhaps the same idea could apply to the other two airfields as well. Dayan then said he wanted to raise another subject, that of the need to resettle permanently the large refugee population in Gaza. They all have employment, he said; what is needed is sufficient money to house them properly, and this would all be accomplished under the 2 See footnote 34, Document 28. 3 See footnote 31, Document 28.
