188
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
there is to be a settlement.7 But Resolution 242 does not by itself pro-
vide all that is required. We, therefore, decided to work with the parties
concerned to outline the overall framework for an enduring peace. Our
concept was to use this framework as the basis for a phased negotiation
and implementation of specific steps toward peace.
A major impediment to this approach lay in the fact that the posi-
tions of all sides were frozen. The words and phrases used by the
parties had become encrusted with the fallout of countless diplomatic
battles.
We have tried to regain momentum in this process. We have en-
couraged Arabs and Israelis to begin thinking again seriously about the
elements of peace and not to remain committed to particular words and
formulations.
To this end the President has tried to describe our understanding
of what the key elements of an overall framework for an agreement
might be:
—A commitment to a genuine and lasting peace demonstrated by
concrete acts to normalize relations among the countries of the area;
—The establishment of borders for Israel which are recognized by
all and which can be kept secure;
—A fair solution to the problem of the Palestinians.
The President has set forth these elements not to dictate a peace or
to impose our views but to stimulate fresh thought.
Relations Among Middle East Countries
President Carter has gone further than any of his predecessors to
stress with Arab leaders the essential point that peace must mean more
than merely an end to hostilities, stating as he did in Clinton, Massa-
chusetts, last March:
. . . the first prerequisite of a lasting peace is the recognition of Is-
rael by her neighbors, Israel’s right to exist, Israel’s right to exist perma-
nently, Israel’s right to exist in peace. That means that over a period of
months or years that the borders between Israel and Syria, Israel and
Lebanon, Israel and Jordan, Israel and Egypt must be opened up to
travel, to tourism, to cultural exchange, to trade, so that no matter who
the leaders might be in those countries, the people themselves will have
formed a mutual understanding and comprehension and a sense of a
common purpose to avoid the repetitious wars and death that have af-
flicted that region so long. That’s the first prerequisite of peace.8
We have found that the Arab leaders did not insist that this kind of
peace is something that only future generations could consider. Some
7 See footnote 4, Document 40.
8 See footnote 2, Document 32.
