934 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 586. Letter 30 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 30 Geneva, April 25, 1956 Dear Walter: I received your letter No. 39 when I returned yesterday evening and this morning the guidance for tomorrow’s meeting came in. I greatly appreciate the many thoughts incorporated into the guidance which are of great help to me in formulating my presentation which I will have to play entirely by ear tomorrow. I realized after I had sent my 1799 that I may well have erroneously given the impression that I did not intend to vigorously push our draft, as I had not made it clear the last paragraph referred only to a contingent position. Therefore, I think that the com­ ments in paragraph 2 of your 1912 are very well taken and are actually entirely in accordance with my own intent. Thanks very much for the Defense instructions to MAC on the missing servicemen. I was particularly happy to see that MAC would be asked to refer their proposed statement to Washington which will give you a chance to frame it in more effective terms and keep it consist­ ent with what has been done here. I can well see the difficulty we are in with regard to the COCOM and CHINCOM position, and entirely agree the Chinese Communists will probably realize the situation. I have not seen anything recently in the press on the progress of the Foreign Aid Bill and wonder what the outlook actually is. With respect to Holdridge, in my letter No. 29 which you will now have received, I said that I had been able to work out an arrangement with Gowen for the loan of a reporting officer from the Consulate ­General and was therefore willing to release Holdridge. He is planning to leave here on Friday for Hong Kong. I put the necessity of having a second officer to keep the record in the essential category, and a knowledge of Chinese on his part in the desirable category. The arrangement which I suggested with regard to Stanley not having worked out, I find it hard to justify keeping Holdridge sitting here from week to week with noth­ ing really substantive to do between meetings and, therefore, acquiesced to his departure and the arrangement with the Consulate General. It is not the best arrangement from my standpoint, but I can get along. In this connection, it seems to me that the Department ought really to be doing something about training a Chinese interpreter. As you well know, just a 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Printed from a copy that Johnson signed “Alex.”
