International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 77 agreements should be negotiated individually, that prices should be stabilized around market trends, and there should be a common funding agreement for these individual agreements. This is not what the LDC’s want, but it’s as close as we can get without doing violence to their interests and ours. The Group put in some language about studying stabilization of export earnings; Schmidt will propose this and we see no harm in a study so long as it embraces not only his proposal but other means of achieving the same objective, e.g., an increase in the IMF compensatory financing facility (which would be additional to the general increase in IMF financing mentioned earlier). You will note that the penultimate paragraph of the North-South section refers in rather general language to the world development program and asks the World Bank and IMF to study it. We gave the other members of the Preparatory Group a memorandum on this subject (attached)8 which the World Bank had prepared. Before seeing this memo, some of them had worried as to whether this venture would generate new demands for increased aid; they now seem reassured, especially since the draft Declaration only proposes that the Summit ask the World Bank and IMF to study the idea—presumably for review by the IBRD–IMF Development Committee,9 which is interested in this subject and which includes both developing and developed countries. General Statement The Group agreed on the need for a general one page statement concerning the overall meaning and message of the Summit, which would precede the more detailed five page Declaration. The British and I will try our hands at drafting such a statement. Like all other parts of the draft Declaration, it will be revised in light of Summit discussions, as they progress. European Community The European Commission was represented at the preparatory session. British thinking is that Jenkins will attend the second day of the Summit, but not the first—when domestic economic policy, nonproliferation, and other subjects not thought by the French to be in the Commission’s competence will be discussed. This will create problems, since it will be difficult to dissociate non-proliferation from energy, which is to be discussed the second day. The British hope that Giscard will relent and let Jenkins come part of the first day, as well. 8 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated 3-page paper entitled “An Approach to a World Development Program.” 9 The IMF/IBRD Development Committee (formally known as the Joint Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors of the World Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources to Developing Countries) was established in October 1974 to address the problems of developing countries.
