International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
77
agreements should be negotiated individually, that prices should be
stabilized around market trends, and there should be a common
funding agreement for these individual agreements. This is not what
the LDC’s want, but it’s as close as we can get without doing violence to
their interests and ours. The Group put in some language about study-
ing stabilization of export earnings; Schmidt will propose this and we
see no harm in a study so long as it embraces not only his proposal but
other means of achieving the same objective, e.g., an increase in the IMF
compensatory financing facility (which would be additional to the gen-
eral increase in IMF financing mentioned earlier). You will note that the
penultimate paragraph of the North-South section refers in rather gen-
eral language to the world development program and asks the World
Bank and IMF to study it. We gave the other members of the Prepara-
tory Group a memorandum on this subject (attached)8 which the World
Bank had prepared. Before seeing this memo, some of them had wor-
ried as to whether this venture would generate new demands for in-
creased aid; they now seem reassured, especially since the draft Decla-
ration only proposes that the Summit ask the World Bank and IMF to
study the idea—presumably for review by the IBRD–IMF Develop-
ment Committee,9 which is interested in this subject and which in-
cludes both developing and developed countries.
General Statement
The Group agreed on the need for a general one page statement
concerning the overall meaning and message of the Summit, which
would precede the more detailed five page Declaration. The British and
I will try our hands at drafting such a statement. Like all other parts of
the draft Declaration, it will be revised in light of Summit discussions,
as they progress.
European Community
The European Commission was represented at the preparatory
session. British thinking is that Jenkins will attend the second day of the
Summit, but not the first—when domestic economic policy, non-
proliferation, and other subjects not thought by the French to be in the
Commission’s competence will be discussed. This will create problems,
since it will be difficult to dissociate non-proliferation from energy,
which is to be discussed the second day. The British hope that Giscard
will relent and let Jenkins come part of the first day, as well.
8 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated 3-page paper entitled “An Ap-
proach to a World Development Program.”
9 The IMF/IBRD Development Committee (formally known as the Joint Ministerial
Committee of the Boards of Governors of the World Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of
Real Resources to Developing Countries) was established in October 1974 to address the
problems of developing countries.
