Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 505 [At this point, the President read the text of the joint communique, which reads as follows:] JOINT COMMUNIQUE ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA JANUARY 1, 1979 The United States of America and the People’s Republic of China have agreed to recognize each other and to establish diplomatic relations as of January 1, 1979. The United States of America recognizes the Government of the People’s Republic of China as the sole legal Government of China. Within this context, the people of the United States will maintain cultural, commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan. The United States of America and the People’s Republic of China reaffirm the principles agreed on by the two sides in the Shanghai Communique2 and emphasize once again that: —Both wish to reduce the danger of international military conflict. —Neither should seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region or in any other region of the world and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony. —Neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or understandings with the other directed at other states. —The Government of the United States of America acknowledges the Chinese position that there is but one China and Taiwan is part of China. —Both believe that normalization of Sino-American relations is not only in the interest of the Chinese and American peoples but also contributes to the cause of peace in Asia and the world. The United States of America and the People’s Republic of China will exchange Ambassadors and establish Embassies on March 1, 1979. Yesterday, our country and the People’s Republic of China reached this final historic agreement. On January 1, 1979, a little more than 2 weeks from now, our two Governments will implement full normalization of diplomatic relations. As a nation of gifted people who comprise about one-fourth of the total population of the Earth, China plays, already, an important role in world affairs, a role that can only grow more important in the years ahead. 2 See footnote 6, Document 29.
