August 8–September 17, 1978
203
Dayan—This letter in this form will just be the end of the Confer-
ence. Jerusalem too sensitive. Had it been about Gaza, well, possibly.
(grimaces.) But you’re not insisting on stating your views now on set-
tlements, etc.
Barak (after talking to Begin)—OK we accept “shall govern them-
selves”—but want it clear in the minutes of the meeting that Israeli in-
terpretation of the phrase will by [be?] “shall govern themselves
through their autonomous institutions.”
(Mondale & Jordan + Dinitz enter)
Dayan: (Restates position on letter to Mondale).
(Dayan & Barak insist none of them heard Pres. talk last night
about this letter—if so, would be impossible.)
(Carter enters)
JC—Sadat this morning said he could accept placement perma-
nence of UN forces in Raffah, if GOI had perm. UN observers on their
side & be flex. on Jerusalem. I said they can’t be. He said perhaps he
could delete, if exchange of letters. We can word them as moderate as
possible, re-endorse UN resolutions we have voted for.
MD—Argues against any restatement of US position.
JC—I can’t go back on my promise to Sadat. I’m willing to let Barak
& Cy work on wording, however.
MD—OK. But let me review problem of “occupied territory” lan-
guage. Reviews Mt. Scopus, Hadassah, Wailing Wall, Jewish quarter
history. They took it, we took it back. We have our position—& when
time comes we’ll negotiate about it. But for you to propose to restate
I have nothing to suggest.But for first time at Camp David, we’ve
been presented with a statement of your position—we didn’t come here
to argue with you over Jerusalem.
JC—Well. I understand your position. Sadat has frequently said
here that he doesn’t contemplate return of all East to Arabs.
But we need to work on this.
Barak: Why doesn’t Sadat state his position in his letter, & express
in it your position? And you just send it to us.
CV—Maybe we could merely refer to statements made by Yost,
Scranton, & Young.2
Discussion Dayan/Carter—re definitions of East Jerusalem, etc.
Carter—You can’t deny us right to state our position. We might
qualify our statement re Holy Places, etc.
2 References are to Charles W. Yost, who served as Representative to the United Na-
tions from January 1969 until February 1971; William W. Scranton, Representative to the
United Nations from March 1976 until January 1977; and Andrew Young.
