First Responses U.S. action and that any executions would result in very severe action. A blockade was considered as a possibly appropriate step in the event trials begin. This is to be discussed further with the President. (TS) 5. The Shah. Available information indicates that radiation treatment should be completed this week, with a non-surgical attempt to remove the gallstone early next week.5 If all goes well, we are informed it is the Shah’s present intention to leave near the first of December, either to Mexico or some other location. Warren Christopher believes the Shah will ask for our advice before taking any decision. The Shahbanou is apparently counseling him not to go and to ignore the United States. It would be useful to have direct information, rather than secondhand messages, about what the Shah is thinking. The DCI will consult with the Attorney General about possible technical surveillance. The DCI believes the Shah’s departure would lead to an emotional outburst in Tehran which would be unpredictable but dangerous for the hos- 6. Iranian Diplomats. The SCC felt that restrictions on Iranian diplomats were too insignificant to have any effect on the negotiating situation. They might, however, interfere with the progress of negotiations or—if our restrictions were very severe, e.g. restricting them to the embassy—it could lose us support by dragging us down to Khomeini’s level. The Vice President recommended continuing for several more days with the negotiating track through the UN. If that does not work, then we should do something with some bite, such as sanctions, limiting sale of foodstuffs, perhaps mining harbors. (TS) 7. Covert Action. The DCI will prepare a finding for the meeting tomorrow to begin specific steps [3 lines not declassified]. 8. Longer Range Options. The SCC discussed our objectives in the post-hostage situation. All agreed that a decision to work for the overthrow of Khomeini would require a major U.S. commitment to follow through with money and the risk of direct military involvement. David Aaron will circulate an options paper drawn from the work by his “black chamber” group. (TS) 5 Attendees at the November 19 SCC meeting discussed the Shah’s health, noting that he had completed his fifth radiation treatment and that he was scheduled for nonsurgical gallstone removal, a procedure that, if successful, meant that the Shah could leave the United States as early as December 1. Attendees questioned the impact on the hostage crisis. On the Summary of Conclusions of the meeting, Carter wrote: “I think it’s better for him to leave when able.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff
