722
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
To facilitate the above, I would recommend that you proceed as
follows:
1. Fundamental Approach. The distinctive quality of the Carter for-
eign policy is that it blends the two main strands of traditional Amer-
ican thinking on foreign policy issues—strands that have often been
seen as in conflict.
You favor a more open, positive approach toward the Third
World—but you also believe it is essential to maintain a power equilib-
rium. The former is designed to shape a more decent world in a revolu-
tionary age—for otherwise America would be isolated and increasingly
vulnerable. The latter is designed to prevent Soviet exploitation of that
revolutionary process and to create the preconditions for a more gen-
uine and stable detente. (McGovern and Kennedy have emphasized the
former and slighted the latter; Nixon and Kissinger have stressed the
latter and ignored the former.)
In addition, in the more immediate future, we must face the fact
that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan poses a very major strategic
threat, both in the region and because it is clearly international aggres-
sion, and failure to resist it undermines a central principle of world
order since the Second World War. It is not Afghanistan per se which is
the issue but the simultaneous disintegration of Iran as the American
strategic pivot and the disappearance of Afghanistan as a buffer that in-
vites Soviet political meddling and quite possibly even military intru-
sion into a region of vital importance to us. This is why it is no exagger-
ation to say that we confront the most serious long-term strategic
challenge since the inception of the Cold War. Failure to recognize its
magnitude and to respond accordingly would be an historic error, with
probably irreversible consequences.
(Your State of the Union message is germane here.)
2. Central Guidelines. On four broad issues, your position is clear
and firm, and there will be no deviation:
a. Soviet Union: The Soviet Union must be made aware tangibly that
aggressive behavior entails costs. This means no sudden warming of
relations while the Soviets are busy suppressing the Afghans and thus
altering the strategic situation in the third central strategic zone of vital
importance to us.
b. Western Europe/Japan: We need to establish close unity, and that
will be the major purpose of the Venice Summit.5 At the same time, the
Allies must be made to recognize that detente is not divisible and they
5 The Venice Economic Summit was scheduled to take place June 22–23. Documen-
tation on the summit is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic
Policy. For the text of the declaration issued at the conclusion of the summit, see Depart-
ment of State Bulletin, August 1980, pp. 8–11.
