January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1241 the region, and shuttle back and forth to nail down individual points. This is an exhausting process; but past experience (e.g. the Kissinger shuttles) indicate that this is the recipe for success. Of course, given Sol’s current status, at some point soon he will exhaust his remaining 50 days or so of his 120-day appointment, and some other status could be required. (S) Intensifying the talks in this way—while being careful not to raise expectations unduly—could hasten the time (if at all) when enough work would be done to merit reconsideration of the option of bringing the talks to a head (perhaps through a summit). (S) Under other circumstances, Muskie’s going to the area next month could give an added fillip of senior authority. For the near term, however, his becoming that deeply involved would probably not be a good ordering of his priorities. (C) We also need to be alive to the risks that there will be a continuing rise in violence on the West Bank. This may be, as Sam Lewis argues, something Fatah has decided upon for internal political reasons within the PLO, basically unrelated to the course of the talks. I am less convinced (since tactics on Camp David is the issue on which much of PLO politics turn). And it may be that violence—and Israeli counteractions—will go down now that the pressure of May 26 is off. But I suspect we will still face a recurring cycle of violence and counteraction, including UN resolutions. (S) One approach would be to make greater efforts to explain what we are about to the Palestinians on the West Bank and Gaza (and working on the Israelis to “cool it” with regard to such steps as further deportations of mayors). (S) There is another—more sensitive—line that bears thinking about (though I am not recommending it). I met this morning with Mustapha Zein, an American-educated Palestinian (who [less than 1 line not declassified] is close to the PLO). He argued that the PLO leadership, as well as Palestinians on the West Bank, are uncertain about the directions we are going, although he acknowledged that we have explained the process over and over in public. He suggested better flow of information (he did not, however, suggest any variation on our proscription on dealing with the PLO—since he argued there is nothing for us to talk with the PLO about!). (S) Of course, he also took the argument a step further, in saying that an effort to isolate the PLO from the West Bank and Gaza is doomed to failure, and would only intensify Fatah’s efforts to assert control there—and also to be active. (This was at least in part self-serving stuff). (S) Nonetheless, there might be some merit in exploring ways to seek a reduction in the tolerance among West Bankers for disruptive violence,
