December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
759
to cooperate in the process. But many Israeli critics of Begin in the
Knesset say the result will be a Palestinian entity with self-government.
Therefore, we hope and ask for two things. First, we want the Pales-
tinians to show the political wisdom to seize this opportunity; sec-
ondly, we want our friends, and especially our close friends with
whom we can cooperate on regional security, to give this process a
chance and not join into actions designed to derail it. I am very encour-
aged by what his Royal Highness said that Saudi Arabia has an over-
riding interest in shaping a moderate Middle East.
Mr. Christopher said that we live in a world of alternatives. This al-
ternative (the treaty) is much preferable to others. Leaving the status
quo only creates a dangerous situation. If the present situation con-
tinues and the Israeli occupation continues, there is no chance of
progress.
Crown Prince Fahd said that he would speak as a friend and that he
shared the desire for a stable Middle East, but he wanted to mention
and make clear that no one can guarantee that what we say will be
heeded by Iraq, Syria, or the others. We will do our best because we
share this view. We will try to knock some sense into them. He would
like to have something clear, however; if the area experiences acts of
destruction and we find ourselves keeping quiet or following a policy
not readily understood, you should know that we are not being de-
structive but dealing with the matter in our own way. We are happy to
consult but you should not misunderstand our motives. It simply
underscores the need of both sides to get together on what is hap-
pening. Things are not predictable.
Dr. Brzezinski said that his mission is an example that we are
always ready to do that. We hope that you will soon be able to consult
with the President, since there is no substitute for consultation at the
highest level. He deduced that our fundamental objectives are similar,
that we share the same concern regarding the external threat and in-
ternal security and to continue to help Egypt set in motion the peace
process so that we can go on to the next phase. We are talking about a
partnership for moderation and stability in the Middle East.
Crown Prince Fahd said this is what is required.
Crown Prince Saud noted that there were certain Arab League tech-
nical measures that would be taken.
Dr. Brzezinski said we would hope the Arab League would not
force you to do things that you would not want to do, such as economic
sanctions.
Crown Prince Saud said the technical measures are not punitive but
jointly agreed upon by the Arab League including such things as a
boycott.
