1978  505
point where making a decision will be appropriate. While so short a 
period for a final examination may not appear to be the ultimate in 
orderly decision-­making processes, we can make clear that the air-­
mobile idea has been studied in detail before—­and that this relatively 
short period is enough for an update of these studies plus a careful 
comparison. (C)
Options to Be Given Further Study
At this point, two systems you are quite familiar with would be 
in the finals—MAP, and the air-­mobile system. Further, some of the 
arguments given above suggest that introduction of wholly new ideas 
at this point simply isn’t a good idea. If there is another horse to be 
entered in the race, the only reasonable candidate in my view would be 
an off-­road mobile system, an idea that also received detailed study by 
the Air Force some years ago. (C)
This concept would involve deploying 150–200 large transporter/
erector/launcher vehicles at perhaps fifteen military bases scattered 
across the Western part of the US. The vehicles would carry an M–X 
size missile and be capable of off-­road operations without resupply 
for 60 days. Except for occasional exercises, they would remain at their 
bases. In a crisis they would disperse throughout the rural areas within 
100–150 miles, hiding during the day and changing their positions 
each night. The total available dispersal area of perhaps 400,000 sq. 
miles is far too large for the Soviets to barrage. Attached is a table 
summarizing the main features of the MAP, air-­mobile and off-­road 
mobile systems. (S)
In my opinion, the pros and cons of asking DOD to include off-­
road mobile systems in their final evaluation are as follows: First, you 
will be under enormous pressure to go forward with one of the options 
considered in this evaluation. There are many uncertainties about the 
air-­mobile system, particularly its cost. If the system gets disqualified 
on cost, we will be into MAP for better or worse. Second, if the off-­road 
mobile system’s drawbacks are ultimately acceptable, it might save us 
a lot of money. (C)
The verification problems posed by this system are uncertain, but 
probably easier to deal with than those posed by MAP. You should note 
that the verification [3 lines not declassified] (S)
The most significant of the drawbacks to the system are its need for 
occasional exercises in the public domain, and the fact that its surviv-
ability depends upon getting [7 lines not declassified] (S)
Bridging the Early ’80s Gap
There are three possible alternatives for increasing our strate-
gic forces’ capabilities during the early ’80s when Minuteman will be
