Yugoslavia
823
Points to be Made:
—The U.S. supports an international economic system of progress
and cooperation based on equity, growth and, above all, justice.
—The U.S. is willing to discuss any issue of the North/South
dialogue so long as negotiations are confined to the functional fora
where they can be considered by technical experts in an atmosphere
relatively free of political debate.
—In our view, the UNGA Committee of the Whole got off to a
good start by agreeing at its organizational meeting in February to
discuss specific issues in a global economic context and to avoid inter-
vention in the ongoing negotiations in functional fora.
—It is very important for the new Committee of the Whole to
demonstrate that nations can examine the economic issues which affect
us all in a spirit of cooperation, rather than confrontation.
7. Middle East/Horn of Africa
President Tito will be interested in your latest assessment of devel-
opments and the prospects for resolving the disputes in these two
trouble spots. He will want to hear your presentation before respond-
ing, and would like to discuss both questions in some detail, following
the lines of his recent letters to you.
8. Southern Africa
U.S. Objectives: To gain Yugoslav support for U.S. efforts to work
toward a peaceful and just solution in Southern Africa.
Yugoslav Objectives: To urge more direct pressure on Pretoria and
Salisbury to bring about majority rule; to encourage more active U.S.
contact with the “liberation” forces.
Essential Factors: As one of the last “colonial” issues, Southern Africa
is obligatory as a topic “for the record.” Yugoslavia has long had
close ties with the African liberation movements and strongly supports
majority rule. It has been impressed and pleased with U.S. recent efforts
toward this goal, but Tito will urge that we do more.
Points to be Made:
—We oppose racism and apartheid in all forms and are pursuing
policies which we hope will lead to peaceful and just solutions to
problems of Namibia, Zimbabwe (Rhodesia) and South Africa.
—The recent proximity talks on Namibia in New York, while not
conclusive, registered some progress; further talks are expected.
—We regard reports from Salisbury of an internal “settlement” to
be premature.
