318 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Hobbled by internal rivalries, devoid of popular support, reluctant to risk Soviet displeasure, and presided over by a moderate conservative with neither the political strength nor the inclination to undertake bold new ventures, the regime ranks among the most cautious in contemporary Eastern Europe. [classification not declassified] To characterize individuals within the leadership is a risky undertaking. Information on internal debate is scarce and often suspect. Individual positions on specific issues may reflect regional interests, personal rivalries, or momentary considerations, rather than basic political outlook. As in other East European countries, terms like “moderate,” “conservative,” “pragmatist,” and “ideologue” can be applied only in a relative sense. [classification not declassified] With these qualifications, it is useful to distinguish between two basic points of view within the party hierarchy. One is more conservative, prone to think in terms of ideology and protective of the status quo. Its dominant concern is to avoid a repetition of 1968, when relaxation of controls permitted the growth of forces that threatened the party’s monopoly of political power. Adherents of this view regard with suspicion any inclination toward leniency, either toward current dissidents or toward those who supported the 1968 liberalization. Presidium members subscribing to this outlook include Vasil Bilak, Antonin Kapek, Karel Hoffmann, Alois Indra, and Milos Jakes. [classification not declassified] Other Presidium members are believed to hold more moderate, pragmatic views. They are more open to innovation, at least in the economic sphere, and would probably not oppose some political relaxation if the overall political climate in Prague and Moscow were to allow it. Adherents of this view include Josef Kempny, Lubomir Strougal, Jozef Lenart, and Peter Colotka. [classification not declassified] General Secretary Gustav Husak probably finds this division both a strength and a weakness as it affects his leadership: a strength because it tends to prevent any potential rival from amassing preponderant support; a weakness because it impedes the formulation of policy. Husak has faced challengers from both camps during the past decade, but the number of potential rivals is greater among the conservatives. Husak, accordingly, has tended to side with the moderates, and it is they who have benefited from the strengthening of his position in recent years. [classification not declassified] Intraparty Debate: Husak Dominant Gustav Husak was not the Soviet Union’s first choice in August 1968 to lead Czechoslovakia back to orthodoxy. As deputy premier from April through August, he had fully supported the reformers’ Action Program, which Moscow deeply distrusted. Immediately after the invasion, however, Husak began cultivating the confidence of the
