766
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Your letter to Gromyko clearly keeps the door open and lays out
our basic conditions for a solution. At this stage, we think our allies
should be encouraged to help to shape and encourage the Islamic
initiative rather than proposing their own variants which the Soviets
can pick and choose among in an effort to escape pressure for with-
drawal. The allies are generally sympathetic to the Islamic Conference
Committee’s initiative. We have already encouraged the FRG to discuss
the Islamic initiative with Agha Shahi, who will be visiting Bonn
next week.
The Committee’s terms of reference are quite close to our own
principles, although we cannot be certain how the Committee will
proceed in its work and we will certainly have no control over it. There
is, however, a good bit of value in having the Soviets confront an
Islamic initiative. The Committee may build a record of Soviet intransi-
gence which we could point to later, particularly in the UNGA. How-
ever, you should be aware that according to press reports on June 7,
the Committee has authorized Chatti to ascertain the views of the
Soviets, Afghan authorities and resistance leaders regarding a politi-
cal solution.
We have not made known our attitude toward the Committee. A
public embrace would probably be unwelcome and counterproductive.
Unpublicized contact, however, could be useful in indicating our sup-
port and perhaps even influencing the process of negotiation.
The President has authorized us to convey to the Islamic Committee
members the approach contained in your letter to Gromyko. We pro-
pose in addition to express our interest in the work of the Committee
and our hope that we could quietly stay in touch at least with Chatti
and Pakistan Foreign Minister Agha Shahi. In this connection, we sug-
gest that we tell Shahi that you would welcome an early opportunity
to exchange views with him on Afghanistan. (Shahi may be coming to
a meeting at the UN in the next few weeks and could come down to
Washington for a brief undramatized meeting.) Such a meeting would
give you an opportunity to brief Shahi on your conversation with
Gromyko, provide an assessment of Soviet intentions and other initia-
tives for a political solution, and exchange views on the Islamic Com-
mittee’s work. The meeting with Shahi could also have a collateral
benefit in terms of our bilateral relations with Pakistan.
Finally, we realize that Ghotbzadeh is in a different category from
Chatti and Agha Shahi, but we think there is some advantage in giving
recognition to the important role Ghotbzadeh has played in this issue
and the parallelism of U.S. and Iranian interests on Afghanistan. Since
Ghotbzadeh is the Iranian official working most vigorously for release
of the hostages, to establish this common interest could have some
benefits for us.
