January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1121
state and restoration of the pre-1967 Arab role in Jerusalem, I believe
we can convince them of progress with less. Most moderate Arabs will
tell you that they are prepared to go along with us in a transition to a
Palestinian solution once they believe that our objectives are in the
right ballpark and once they see again a U.S. ability to deliver. Al-
though the Baghdad group will still not accept full autonomy, I believe
in the end that the key Palestinians, the Jordanians, the Saudis, and the
Egyptians will recognize that Palestinian autonomy and a lifting of the
Israeli civil/military occupation could be an important step forward—
if they are genuine.
6. Israel can be approached by recalling to Begin his oft-repeated promise
to fulfill everything agreed at Camp David and by negotiating in detail. We
cannot ask Sadat to accept less, but we have to ask him to cooperate with us in
detailed negotiation as long as we pursue the negotiations. Begin himself, as I
remember, was the author of the phrase “full autonomy”—which must
have differed even in his mind from “self-rule,” which was his own ear-
lier formulation. This coupled with the Israeli negotiating team’s state-
ment that their proposals are negotiable provides a basis for insisting
on achieving the fullest autonomy envisioned at Camp David. We must
always keep in mind—and explain to the Egyptians—that the only way
to move the Israelis to decision is by presenting detailed textual pro-
posals. Neither the Israeli mind nor the Cabinet can make decisions on
broad principles. Understandable Israeli fears can only be met, to the
extent that is possible, by pinning down agreements in detail. Only if
we can provide the detailed proposals needed for the Israeli decision-
making process and convince Begin that the proposed agreement is
within the limits agreed at Camp David do we have a shot at Israeli
agreement. Despite predictions to the contrary since last fall, we cannot
assume that Begin is dead politically even though the old spark may be
gone and even though the government faces serious political and eco-
nomic difficulty this spring. In any case, we must present our position
as fully within the Camp David Framework.
The Situation Ahead: The Central Issue
The big issue through May 25 is how much to invest in pressing
the autonomy talks to agreement by that date. While a maximum effort
is desirable, I believe we would make a big mistake to lock ourselves
into a May 25 cut-off point. For one thing, I doubt it is physically pos-
sible to put together a signable agreement by that time. For another, we
can manage in the Middle East as long as serious work is going on. The
important issues are whether the process can be serious enough to keep
Sadat with us, to focus Israeli decision-making on the issues, and to
sustain our involvement, including possible disagreements with Israel,
here at home. In dealing with the May 25 date, we all should remember
the three-month “deadline” in the Camp David Framework for the con-
