516
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
I firmly believe that the negotiations should continue until we con-
clude a treaty we can accept without reservation. I would like to sign a
treaty which is likely to start a new chapter in the history of the area
and put an end to controversy, not one which adds to the old griev-
ances or gives rise to endless claims and counterclaims.
With this in mind, I appeal to you to reopen the text of the treaty
for certain rectifications which are necessary to redress the existing im-
balance between the positions of the parties. The Israelis have to dem-
onstrate the same flexibility and understanding we showed. I do not
like anyone to misinterpret your request concerning the finality of the
present text as a means of applying pressure on the cooperative party.
Thus, I welcomed the statement Secretary Vance made on Novem-
ber 25 on the state of the negotiations and the draft proposals.46 I also
hope that my message to Prime Minister Begin47 will persuade him to
cooperate.
Before I conclude, allow me to raise a less significant point relative
to the duration of the security arrangements which is a matter of con-
cern to the Egyptian people. We would like to be sure that entering into
negotiations for the purpose of amending these provisions becomes
mandatory upon the request of either party. So long as these measures
are intended to solidify the structure of peace, they should be subject to
review as the normalization of relations between the parties reaches
different horizons. Here, what is needed is a minor linguistic adjust-
ment rather than the introduction of a new text. I am sure that you will
be able to find the proper formula for that. My confidence in your sense
of fairness and good judgment has no limit. May God Almighty grant
you all the support you need while you discharge your awesome
responsibilities.
With best wishes and warm regards,
Mohamed Anwar el-Sadat
Unquote.
3. Mubarak noted that PriMin Khalil will also be presenting an oral
message.48 Asked what that oral message was, he said it will simply be
an elaboration of some of the points in the written message. Among
46 Reference is likely to an interview with Vance which appeared in the The New
York Times on November 25, in which Vance was reported to have stated that “acceptance
by Israel of the draft text of a peace treaty with Egypt was insufficient in itself to permit
the conclusion of negotiations” and that the “draft text did not meet Egypt’s insistence on
a timetable for Palestinian autonomy on the West Bank of the Jordan and in the Gaza
Strip.” (Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance Says Israel and Egyptians Need to Continue Talks,”
The New York Times, November 25, 1978, p. 1)
47 See Document 146.
48 No written version of Khalil’s message has been found. For discussion of the De-
cember 1 meeting between Khalil and Carter, see Document 148.
