184  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
road-­mobile configuration by the late 1990s. The President did not spec-
ify (a) whether the small ICBM would carry one warhead or two, (b) 
how many Small ICBM missiles/warheads would be deployed, and 
(c) which of the competing basing modes for the small ICBM would 
be selected. Basing modes under consideration include so-­called 
Southwest basing, involving periodic random movement, and basing 
on existing Minuteman sites to either disperse when directed or dash 
on tactical warning.
Discussion. A separate paper has reviewed whether to alter our 
formal position banning mobile missiles; whether to consider an option 
banning MIRVed mobile ICBMs while allowing single-RV mobile 
ICBMs; and, if mobiles are to be allowed, what numerical constraints 
to seek on them. This paper examines whether, and if so how, to mod-
ify the existing verification regime the U.S. has proposed in the Joint 
Working Paper.
Mobile ICBMs pose serious monitoring, verification and breakout 
problems. [6 lines not declassified] Agencies differ about whether our 
approach to missile production monitoring, and the other measures 
for verifying compliance with limits on mobile ICBMs (e.g. monitor-
ing logistics and force structure), can meet our verification standards. 
All agree, however, that the longer the Soviets produce mobile missiles 
unmonitored, prior to a treaty, the greater will be the uncertainty as to 
their total inventory.
[1 paragraph (15 lines) not declassified]
Thus, if mobile ICBMs are to be allowed, the verification scheme 
involving them must carefully balance the risks of Soviet cheating with 
the costs of reciprocal impacts on the U.S. These considerations will 
also be weighed carefully by the Senate during the ratification debate. 
While all aspects of a mobile verification regime are important, four 
specific questions warrant examination before negotiations resume:
(1) should we modify the restrictions on road-­mobile ICBMs;
(2) should we modify our position on rail-­mobiles to restrict mis-
siles to a specified Deployment Area;
(3) is our approach to continuous monitoring of production suffi-
ciently broad based; and
(4) should we require a more extensive suspect site inspection 
regime?
Road Mobile ICBM Basing Mode. The U.S. approach to verification 
of road-­mobile ICBMs confines such systems to 25 square kilometer 
Restricted Areas peacetime except for notified transits or infrequent 
exercise or operational dispersals. The United States would place a per-
centage limit (not yet determined) on the number of systems which 
can be in transit outside Restricted Areas. The U.S. concept includes
