294
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
proval, a general trend has been developing, based on our individual
decisions, to rule out weapons which could be used for internal secu-
rity purposes. In addition, weapons going to police and civil law en-
forcement forces of such countries have been particularly suspect. Re-
strictions thus have been placed on arms transfers to Argentina,
Nicaragua, El Salvador and Uruguay. Some commercial license ap-
provals for weapons to Korean national police were deferred for sev-
eral months on human rights grounds. Weapons for the Indonesian
prison guards were specifically denied.
However, substantial amounts of military equipment continue to
be sold to regimes which engage in serious violations of human rights
and which deny to their people the ability to participate in government.
If there is one aspect of our policy that is sure to draw, and has al-
ready drawn, criticism from human rights advocates of the Congress
and among the human rights constituency, it is military assistance and
sales. For that reason, it seems appropriate to examine much more vig-
orously proposals for arms transfers to countries with serious human
rights problems even where a judgment has not been made that a par-
ticular country falls within the parameters of Section 502(B).
An additional criterion which is being used at times in examining
arms transfer requests relates to whether the equipment desired is le-
thal or non-lethal.
B. After discussions, the Departments of State and Defense both di-
rected by telegram that all human rights policy cable exchanges be
made available to the appropriate military attaches, Security Assistance
managers, and to the appropriate unified military commands.11
6. Cooperation of Congress and NGOs
A. Together with H, we have been involved in attempting to obtain
the most effective legislation dealing with human rights.
B. Foreign Assistance Act amendments of 1977 did not signifi-
cantly alter the human rights provisions of Section 116 although addi-
tional human rights reports covering all economic assistance recipients
are now required.
C. After considerable pulling and tugging, language was adopted
in the conference on the international financial institutions authoriza-
tion bill which modifies the Harkin amendment slightly and extends its
reach to all international financial institutions.12
11 See Document 70.
12 See footnote 2, Document 83.
