March–August 1953
631
240.
Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa
Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency
(Roosevelt) to Mitchell1
Washington, July 16, 1953.
The following was received 15 July:
1. Zahedi claims to have following military assets, and has fol-
lowing plan of action:
2. Military figures to take active part:
A. Col. Timur Bakhtiar, temporary milgov Isfahan and Khuzistan.
B. Col. H. Akhavi, Chief Army Transport.
C. Gen. Derakshan, Asst. Chief Police.
D. Gen. Daftari, Commander Customs Guards.
E. Col. Nasiri of Imperial Guard.
3. Plan action (assuming Shah’s cooperation).
A. Since Zahedi unwilling “political suicide” by extra-legal move,
he expects gain legal status for move in one of following ways:
(1) Shah to appoint Zahedi Prime Minister on grounds that Mos-
sadeq forfeited office by “unconstitutional acts”.
(2) Shah to dismiss Mossadeq without appointing successor;
Zahedi temporary Military Governor “pending selection of Prime Min-
ister by Majlis”.
(3) Shah appointment Zahedi to replace Riahi as Chief Staff; imme-
diate arrest Riahi by Zahedi.
(4) Shah’s appointment Zahedi Minister Court; immediate isola-
tion Amini, present Min Court.
B. Implementation of one of above would trigger following series
operations:
(1) Two gordons (battalions) Shah’s Imperial Guard (ie apparently
the entire Guard) under Col. Nasiri, secure area around Royal Court
and Prime Minister’s home, arrest Mossadeq and entourage.
(2) Transportation units under Col. Akhavi take over radio Tehran
and Army radio.
(3) Imperial Guards, police under Derakshan, and Customs
Guards (station note: very small group) control streets overnight.
(4) Next morning, 10 battalions troops from provinces (station
note: presumably under Col. Bakhtiar) arrive in Tehran to support new
govt.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 80–01701R, Box 3, Folder 12,
Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret. The recipient is referred to as “Mr. Mitchell” in
the original and is not further identified.
