600
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
We have also informed President Bani-Sadr of our great willingness
to make a major effort and give the Iranian people the necessary satisfac-
tions in order to solve peacefully the disputes between our two Govern-
ments. I can understand very well that the takeover of the Embassy
of our country there could be an understandable reaction of the youth
of Iran. But the situation has changed, and I have serious reasons
to harbor doubts as to the true motivations of those who took over
our Embassy.
Today this takeover is creating major problems for your Govern-
ment and for mine. It has now become an element of discord which
does not allow us to end the present crisis or to establish these new
relations which you talk about and which we accept on the basis of
equality of mutual respect. We are ready to recognize the new realities
created by the Iranian revolution. This continues to be our objective
and our hope, because in the final analysis I believe that we share a
single objective—world peace and justice for all peoples. From the
moment that the overthrown former Shah left the United States where
he had been admitted for humanitarian reasons and for medical pur-
poses, my Government decided not to intervene in these problems.
The ex-Shah’s departure from Panama was his own personal decision,
and we were in no way involved with the negotiations he himself
undertook with Sadat in order to find refuge in Egypt. We would like
there to be no misunderstanding on that point: We opposed his return
to the United States, we opposed his being treated in American hospi-
tals and by American physicians. We conveyed to President Bani-Sadr
all the information we had on the physical condition of the former
Shah. I consider it to be essential to maintain the principle that these
two problems should be kept totally separate. The crisis between our
two countries must be resolved by the will and the capacity of our
Governments to act in accordance with reality and in the interest of a
serious future for our peoples. I wish to say to you that as soon as the
immediate problem is resolved by the transfer of the hostages to the
custody of the Iranian Government, we are ready to adopt a reasonable
and friendly attitude in regard to our numerous bilateral problems. It
has been recommended to us that there be established a Joint Commis-
sion as the instrument for dealing with those bilateral issues. We would
be receptive to this approach and could see the Commission as the
means for developing our future relationship. I would ask you to make
a great effort to help me to resolve the crisis between our two countries
in a manner which is fair and honorable for all. I am very grateful to
you. Our peoples will be very grateful to you. I would note for you
that in my humble opinion time and the true enemies of our respective
political processes are working against us.
With my greatest respect,
signed: Jimmy Carter
