Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA 231 78. Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 7, 1980 SUBJECT BIB and RFE/RL Muslim-Language Broadcasts REFERENCE Walter Roberts’ Letter to you of August 1, 1980 (U) Walter Roberts’ letter to you of August 1, 1980 (Tab A)2 is a clever stratagem to put you over the barrel on problems which the BIB has handled badly. The main reason why the BIB has made no progress in working out an agreement with the Egyptians for transmission time and/or facilities is the leaking of our plans for expanding Muslim broadcasts. These leaks, you will recall, came immediately after SCC decisions were taken last December (Binder in NYT, December 16, 1979).3 This story, taken up and repeated over and over again in subsequent months, by Moscow among others, embarrassed the Egyptians and naturally aroused doubts in their minds about the wisdom of doing business with an organization such as the BIB. [2 lines not declassified] It is not surprising under such circumstances that the US Embassy in Cairo now concludes that BIB-sponsored broadcasts from Egypt should be given low priority because they could become controversial domestically for Sadat. If the purpose of Shub’s original leak to Binder was to frustrate the expansion plan and keep it from being implemented, it has come close to being achieved. (S) Walter Roberts’ letter is specious in several respects. He poses the issue of broadcasting from Egypt solely in terms of building transmitters 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 113, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 1980. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action. Copies were sent to Albright, Brement, and Sick. On August 11, Brzezinski wrote in the left-hand margin of the first page: “Paul, let me know what the others say on the 3 options. OK on the letter to Roberts. ZB.” 2 Dated August 1; attached but not printed. The letter addressed the impasse reached by RFE/RL in their negotiations for additional transmitter facilities. (See Document 73.) Roberts wrote that the delay in negotiations in Egypt meant that two transmitters initially destined to be installed in Portugal but now slated for Egypt in order to bolster transmitting power to Central Asia might end up in Portugal after all, delaying the expansion of transmitting power to Central Asia by 18 months. Brzezinski forwarded the letter to Henze on August 4, asking for a brief report on the situation. He also asked that Henze draft a response to Roberts under his own signature. 3 See footnote 2, Document 72.
