800.51 W 89France/50a: Telegram
[Document 80]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, December 30, 1924—8 p.m.
493. Extracts from statement of so-called “balance sheet of France” issued by Finance
Minister Clémentel21 has [have] been given wide publicity in press and have caused
most unfavorable impression. It would appear that Clémentel endorses a policy not in
accord with the statements heretofore made to you as reported in your letter of
December 12th,22 or with the statements made to the World War Foreign Debt
Commission by M. Parmentier. For instance, the report is said to contain the
following:23
“This technical exposition of the elements which constitute our debt to the
United States and Britain doesn’t seem, however, sufficient to justify a brutal
addition to our liabilities of the sums which it seems to represent.
“The question of a settlement of our debts to Britain and America has just
raised the general problem of interallied debts, an examination of which has
not yet been seriously taken up because of the uncertainty existing from a
lack of accord among the Allies on ways and means of the payment of
reparations by Germany. …24 If we abandon the juridical plane and look on
the matter from the higher view of cooperation and fairness, strict justice
would seem to demand a general pooling of war expenditures and their
allotment among the allied States proportionately to the riches of each one,
and without taking count of the particular engagements which the necessities
of the moment imposed. …24 at least France could hope that the rank she
occupied on the long list of sorrows and devastations would give her the right
to legitimate concessions in the domain of compensations.24a
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
If the abstention of our principal debtor has not yet permitted us to undertake
a settlement, for which we first hoped, nevertheless we cannot consider the
possibility of assuming the burden of annual payments which may be fixed
until we have first completed the work of reparation of the damages which
our devasted regions suffered, and until the payments due us under the peace
treaty have created for us the necessary resources.25
