844
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
254.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Saudi Arabia1
Washington, May 11, 1979, 2249Z
120410. Subject: Letter to Khalid. Jidda for the Charge. Cairo for the
Ambassador.
1. Secret (Entire text)
2. Please arrange for immediate delivery of the following letter
from President Carter to King Khalid.2 Signed original being pouched.
3. Begin text. Your Majesty,
The spirit of friendship and respect that underlies the relationship
between our two countries requires that I bring to your personal atten-
tion a matter of great concern to me. As Your Majesty is aware, we have
consistently sought to coordinate our efforts with the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia on behalf of stability, security and justice in the Middle
East. While we have not always agreed on specific issues, I have felt
that our broad objectives are fully compatible, rooted as they are in our
national interests and our historic ties to one another. I am confident
that you share this view of the importance of maintaining the closest
possible relations between our countries.
4. It is thus with great concern that a statement3 has been attributed
to Foreign Minister Saud that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is no longer
prepared to assist Egypt in acquiring the F–5E aircraft that we have
agreed to sell. This report is particularly surprising in light of explicit
commitments and promises made by your government.
5. Apart from my personal concern for the effect that such a deci-
sion could have on US-Saudi relations, I am also deeply worried about
the encouragement such a decision could give to those who do not wish
good US-Saudi relations. Egypt, which remains committed to a com-
prehensive peace, will be further isolated from her Arab brothers and
may find it difficult to play an effective role in the next stage of negotia-
tions dealing with the question of the Palestinians. In addition, the So-
viet Union and its allies in the Middle East may try to capitalize on this
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850027–2159. Se-
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Raphel; cleared by Saunders (in draft) and
Richard Castrodale (S/S–O); approved by Vance. Sent for information Immediate to
Cairo and the White House.
2 On May 12, Daniels delivered Carter’s letter to Saudi Deputy Foreign Minister
Abd al-Aziz Thunayan, who said he would convey it to Khalid “immediately.” (Tele-
gram 3708 from Jidda, May 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P850027–2406)
3 See Document 251.
