Negotiating Channels
441
The Time Frame
The time frame is set by the series of elections which began with
the first round of the Presidential elections on January 25. Bani Sadr
appears to be the winner. The Assembly elections are scheduled for
February 15 but may be delayed until later in the month. The next step
will be appointment of a Prime Minister by the President and the
selection of a Cabinet by the Prime Minister, but none of them will
have authority until approved by the newly elected Assembly.
During this transitional period, a major religious celebration is
scheduled the week of February 10 to commemorate the 15th centennial
of Islam and the anniversary of the Revolution. These dates could
provide an occasion for releasing the hostages if the way is paved.
The new government will take office only when the Assembly
sits and gives it a vote of confidence, presumably around the end
of February.
Analysis of the Present Negotiating Situation
We have been frustrated until now by the absence in Iran of a firm
decision to resolve the crisis and negotiating partners who could with
authority negotiate with us directly or designate a particular intermedi-
ary to negotiate for them.
If the word brought by our French contacts is correct, Ghotbzadeh
and the President-elect may now be receptive negotiating partners.
We are told by our visiting French contacts that, before the election,
Khomeini and the Revolutionary Council placed the hostage problem
in the hands of Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh, who was to keep the
President-elect and Khomeini informed. (A summary of the January
25 talk with the French contacts is Attachment 1.)2 That may have
changed with Bani Sadr’s landslide victory. He may well decide to
take full charge of the hostage crisis and impose his own views which
may differ from the ideas of Ghotbzadeh. Therefore, our first task is
to check with him any ideas on procedures and on a scenario.
In addition to our French contacts, other potential intermediaries
are waiting in the wings.
Alternative Approaches
There are two views of how the release of the hostages might be
negotiated:
Approach 1: The first is reflected in our approach to date and in
the position given to the Iranians by Waldheim on January 12
2 Attached; printed as Document 164.
