244
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
ever that US wld be willing assist new Iran Govt financially in case that
govt shld take what US wld consider as reasonable attitude re oil
problem and shld make honest effort bring about quick solution that
problem.
3. I told Ala so many factors involved in hypothetical situation pre-
sented by him I cld not (rpt not) give categorical answer. Said I had
reason believe however that if present or future govt shld adopt course
of action which wld make it clear that Iran itself was doing all that it
reasonably cld be expected to do in order to finance itself from its own
resources, including oil, US Govt wld do what it cld in circumstances
save Iran from collapse. I then outlined to Ala points A, B and C of
Deptel 2742 of May 30.4 In so doing I made it clear that I was merely
giving him what I understood to be way in which US Govt was
thinking at present time. US Govt was of course not (rpt not) in position
to make any commitments re what it might do in situation which might
involve unanticipated factors. Ala expressed appreciation and asked if
I wld object if he wld pass on to Shah who is at present on Caspian Sea
for weeks “rest” what I had told him. I replied in negative and said I
would be glad to discuss matter myself with Shah on his return in case
latter shld desire me to do so.
4. Reverting to problem of who successor of Mosadeq might be,
Ala referred particularly to Hakimi, Qavam and Mansour. He said that
there was strong feeling in Senate that situation of country made it nec-
essary for some widely respected personality of broad experience to
take over as PriMin and to bring into his cabinet other political leaders
also of imposing stature. If, for instance, Hakimi shld come into power
he might bring into his cabinet people like Mansour, Rais (former
MinFonAff in Razmara cabinet), Djam, etc. I said that I had heard that
Qavam was reputed to dislike having imposing figures about him, he
was to want only “yes-men” in his cabinet. Ala said he thought I had
been correctly informed. If Qavam shld become PriMin cab might be
made up of comparatively young so-called “technicians” rather than
elderly statesmen. Ala said he had noticed me talking with Hakimi on
preceding evening and he wondered what kind of impression Hakimi
4 In telegram 2742 to Tehran, May 30, the Department discussed what the U.S.
should do in the event Mosadeq was removed from office. Acheson authorized Hen-
derson to discuss with Ala, at the Ambassador’s discretion, the following three consider-
ations: (a) that the U.S. felt as committed to the independence of Iran as it did to the inde-
pendence of Greece and Turkey, but that the oil dispute rendered it difficult to extend aid
to Iran that would be effective; (b) that should the oil dispute be resolved, the U.S. would
extend such aid to Iran that could be absorbed constructively and that Congress would
allow; and (c) that the U.S. could not comment on whether the Shah should dismiss Mo-
sadeq, but it would nevertheless wish to emphasize its view that no solution to Iran’s
problem could be found in absence of a solution to the oil dispute. Telegram 2742 is
printed ibid., pp. 386–389 (Document 177).
