LXXXIV  Summaries of Compilations
Uruguay
U.S. Relations With Uruguay
Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents 
in the text.
U.S. relations with Uruguay during the triennium, while expe-
riencing a surprising downturn at the start of the period, improved 
greatly after a change of government in Montevideo at the beginning 
of 1959.
In March 1958, Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom noted: “It 
is paradoxical but true that with no country in the hemisphere do we 
have more difficulty in our relations than with Uruguay—­traditionally 
the most stable and democratically-­oriented nation in Latin America.” 
(UR–1)
The problems, in considerable measure, stemmed from the increas-
ingly bad state of the Uruguayan economy. The United States felt that 
Uruguay had to come to grips with its own sad plight for which it was 
itself almost solely responsible. (UR–2) The United States was con-
cerned and willing to help, but as a first step Uruguay had to restrict 
imports and balance its budget.
Vice President Nixon’s visit in April 1958 was regarded as a dis-
tinct success in smoothing ruffled feelings, as he promised that the 
United States would not intervene in the case of American meatpacking 
plants recently expropriated by Uruguay. (UR–3) Later, the Uruguayan 
Ambassador told Secretary of State Dulles that his country bought from 
the United States 4½ times what it sold there. The severe imbalance of 
payments forced Uruguay to seek sales of its goods to the Soviet Union 
which in turn attempted to impose further demands in return for the 
purchases. U.S. efforts to help by providing loans and removing high 
duties on wool tops, a key Uruguayan export, proved unsuccessful.
General improvement in relations began with the advent to power 
at the end of 1958 of a different faction of the ruling Nationalist Party, 
one which favored agricultural interests. This was perceived as a nec-
essary first step in developing agricultural exports, which would pro-
duce the foreign exchange necessary for Uruguay to acquire essential 
imports. The prospect made the Embassy in Montevideo generally 
optimistic about the future of relations. (UR–9) Early in 1959, it proved 
possible for the United States to remove its troublesome countervailing 
duty on Uruguayan wool tops (UR–10), and an aura of good feeling 
permeated the bilateral relationship. (UR–13)
By 1960, U.S. preoccupation in the area with the threat of Fidel 
Castro was more and more evident. Uruguay was sympathetic but
