428  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
by on-­site inspection. Soviets have recently offered to accept about 100 
such bombers if the U.S. accepts other elements of their ALCM/heavy 
bomber proposal.
Discussion
U.S. and Soviet Objectives. Significant asymmetries in U.S. and 
Soviet force structures, target bases and technologies underlie the 
ALCM issue. The U.S. relies heavily on air-­breathing systems in its 
force structure and on advanced technologies, including ALCMs, to 
maintain the capability to penetrate Soviet air defenses. This empha-
sis has led us to seek the loosest possible constraints on bombers and 
ALCMs, consistent with our force plans. Another important consider-
ation in seeking to discount bomber weapons in START is the judgment 
that the U.S. requires significantly more than the 6000 weapons nomi-
nally permitted under START for an effective deterrent (as defined by 
our ability cover and damage targets). Given relatively greater Soviet 
reliance on ballistic missiles and the very limited U.S. air defenses, the 
U.S. has concluded that Soviet ALCMs do not add significantly to the 
Soviet threat and that tight constraints on Soviet ALCMs are a second-
ary priority.
In contrast, the Soviet position in START is probably driven primar-
ily by a desire to constrain the U.S. force, and implies relatively mod-
est Soviet requirements for ALCM-­carrying heavy bombers. Although 
the Soviets have agreed to discount bombs and short-­range missiles 
heavily (each non-ALCM bomber counts as only one weapon, regard-
less of its actual load), they propose to constrain ALCMs through “as 
equipped” counting rules that are comparable to the standard applied 
to ballistic missile RVs. The Soviets may be less concerned with cur-
rent U.S. ALCM capabilities than with foreclosing future possibilities, 
such as “flying boxcars” loaded with very large numbers of ALCMs or 
“MIRVed” nuclear ALCMs.
ALCMs in U.S. Forces. Implicit in our planning has been an assump-
tion that weapons on penetrating heavy bombers, heavily discounted, 
would continue to comprise a significant part of U.S. strategic forces. 
The impact of near-­term defense budget cuts on the size and schedule 
of the B-2 program, however, may mean that the U.S. will have fewer 
weapons on penetrating bombers. Thus, in terms of our ability to cover 
Soviet targets, discounted ALCMs could become more important, but 
they cannot fully substitute for the B-2.
A related, more general, premise of our START proposal is that 
U.S. heavy bombers and their weapons, including ALCMs, will remain 
affordable and effective in the face of Soviet air defenses that would 
not be constrained in START. Although the U.S. considered air defense 
limitations early in the negotiations, we have never adopted such a 
proposal.
