Human Rights —Specific proposed courses of action with respect to each country, with consideration to be given to each of the available approaches to encourage recognition of human rights. —Strategy papers and action plans on how best to use security assistance, bilateral economic aid, and U.S. participation in international financial institutions to promote human rights. —Action plans on more creative use of public diplomacy (e.g., through USIA’s efforts) to further human rights. —Action plans for using multilateral institutions to promote human rights. —More effective cooperation with the Hill and the growing numbers of human rights lobbies. In addition, I have directed circulation throughout the Department and to all U.S. posts abroad of important statements on human rights made by you and senior Administration officials, including of course the Law Day speech.2 I have also appointed Warren Christopher as Chairman of the Department’s Human Rights Coordinating Group3 which oversees all major human rights decisions within the State Department, AID and USIA. 2. To enlist fullest possible support for our human rights policy, coordination throughout the Executive Branch is necessary. Many decisions in this area require collaboration with, for example, the Department of Defense, the Treasury, and the National Security Council. In one particular area—decision-making on human rights issues as they relate to foreign assistance—interdepartmental coordination is already being provided by an interagency group formed pursuant to an NSC memorandum of April 1.4 That memo specified that the group should be chaired by my representative, and earlier this month I designated Warren Christopher as Chairman. I believe that the coordination should now be broadened to include Executive Branch efforts on all fronts. The State Department is prepared to take the lead, if you agree. Recommendation That you direct the State Department to coordinate Executive Branch efforts affecting the promotion of human rights abroad.5 2 See Document 39. 3 See Document 14. 4 See Document 31. 5 There is no indication as to whether the President approved or disapproved the recommendation. A handwritten notation on another copy of the memorandum reads: “No Record in White House per WH Suspense. OBE.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770144–0667)
