Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
533
directed at Iraq and highlighted by an anti-Iraqi commentary entitled
“The Baath in the Dock.” The main themes of Iranian propaganda are:
• Iraq secretly supports the United States and Israel against Iran.
• Iraq is fomenting sedition in Iran.
• Iraqi Shias are oppressed and should rise against the Baathist
leadership.
The programs directed toward Iraq occasionally include messages
from little known Iraqi dissident organizations supporting Tehran and
attacking the Baathists. [portion marking not declassified]
Iran also has provided some training and arms for Iraqi Shia dissi-
dents. According to one account Iran had given military training to
about 1,000 Iraqi militants by February 1980. There have been several
small border clashes between the two countries, and some have proba-
bly been caused by dissidents crossing the border from Iran. [less than
1 line not declassified] a clash in mid-December was the result of Iraqi
commandos raiding a Shia guerrilla center in Iran. [less than 1 line not
declassified]
[1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]
Baghdad has assets of its own to counter Iranian support for the
Iraqi Shia dissidents. Iraqi President Saddam Husayn has not hesitated
to order Iraqi security forces to pursue Shia rebels, and his Information
Minister said last June that “if there are those in Iraq who seek martyr-
dom, the government is prepared to accommodate them.” Baghdad
also seeks to exploit Persian-Arab differences and uses economic and
welfare programs to improve the Shias’ standard of living and loyalty.
[portion marking not declassified]
Tehran’s support for the Iraqi Shias also has been hindered by the
Shias’ traditional inability to unite. [3 lines not declassified]
Tehran will probably continue to provide propaganda backing to
the Iraqi Shias and may increase direct assistance. Bani-Sadr probably
will seek to prevent relations with Baghdad from deteriorating too far,
however, because he recognizes that the Iranian military is far inferior
to the Iraqis’. Iranian revolutionary leaders hope that limited support
for the Iraqi Shias will keep Baghdad off balance, prevent Iraq from
interfering in Iran, and ultimately create the revolutionary mobilization
of the Iraqi masses necessary for the creation of an Islamic Republic
to replace the Baathists. [portion marking not declassified]
Saudi Arabia
Tehran’s relations with the Saudi monarchy have been predictably
uneasy since the fall of the Shah. To many Iranians, the Saudi royal
family shares many of the Pahlavis’ worst characteristics—a pro-US
regime that has embarked on a massive modernization program with-
