356  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
II. DEFENSE OF THE STRIKING FORCE AND HOME BASE
A. General Discussion
It is perhaps in this area that the interrelations of weapons systems 
with each other is most complex and the evaluation of the technical 
facts is most dependent upon policy judgments. Important among the 
issues involving policy judgments are:
a. The size of the striking force to be defended;
b. The missions assigned to that force and for which it must then 
be defended—­this influences the composition of the striking force and 
the fraction of each component which must, in extremis, be preserved;
c. The relative needs for defense of other targets on the home base, 
e.g. cities; determination of these needs involves judgment directly; it 
also involves judgment indirectly because decisions made under “a”, 
and “b”, above influence the amount of the enemy’s force available to 
attack targets other than the striking force.
In principle, once policies have been set which establish a yard-­
stick for effectiveness, many technical issues can be settled by adequate 
analyses of systems and their costs. Interpreted in this light, the broader 
technical questions relate to:
a. The choice of means for best defending the striking force—­e.g., by 
warning and alert, by dispersal and hardening, and by active measures;
b. The extent to which defense against aircraft must be prosecuted 
in a missile age;
c. The choice of means for air defense;
d. The extent to which the threat from missiles launched at sea 
should be countered by warfare at sea.
Once the policies mentioned above are set and the technical analy­
ses just listed are done, it is possible in principle to consider the broad­
est issues: the extent to which a given budget should be apportioned 
between striking force and its defense, and finally, the budget for the 
two which best meets the country’s needs as set by policy.
Another issue of a somewhat different sort seems important in 
connection with defense. The complexity of the defensive mission 
places great demands upon the organization which conducts this mis­
sion. The present organization, NORAD, is unified in the somewhat 
narrow sense that it can deploy and command the forces made avail­
able to it. But the technical composition of these forces and the nature 
of their equipment and of their supporting elements, (e.g., SAGE), 
are determined by separate actions of the three services (and also the 
services of Canada). On these matters NORAD can advise and request 
but not control.
Nor, outside of NORAD, is there any other mechanism of author­
ity by which policy decisions, such as those mentioned above, can 
be brought directly to bear upon procurement, or upon research and 
development as these relate specifically to defensive efforts.
