Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX inflation, while our military budget is smaller than 18 years ago.” Carter continued: “This worries not only us, but also China and Western Europe. We believe that the Soviet commitment to increase its conventional and nuclear weapons [stockpiles] is much larger than what is required for self-defense.” Carter concluded that, while “there are world problems, world issues, which connect the United States with the Soviet Union,” these issues are “stronger than the disagreements, the differences that divide us.” He told the Yugoslav delegation: “We are very grateful that you are ready to relay our opinion to the Soviet Union, and that you have passed to us their opinions.” The meeting ended with an appeal from Tito for a halt in the U.S. development of the neutron bomb. “I think the bomb is wrong,” Tito declared. “The Soviet Union and the U.S. have nuclear weapons, and these are very powerful weapons,” he continued. “Regarding the N bomb, the Soviet Union can make it within a short period of time, but it costs a great deal, it is a burden on its economy. I think that, if there was to be a war and the neutron bomb were to be used, nuclear weapons will be used immediately after. I am certain of that, because neither side will allow itself to be defeated. This all leads in the direction of mutual self-annihilation,” Tito concluded. Carter countered that the United States had not yet made the decision as to whether to produce the bomb, and that it was a weapon limited to a defensive character. “The Soviet S–20 bombs are much more dangerous,” Carter added, “and the S–20 also worries Western Europe, not just us.” Carter concluded: “The Soviet Union has a large number of various weapons which are much more dangerous and have a greater impact and range than the Neutron bomb.” The meeting ended at 11:04, when Carter escorted Tito to the South Lawn for his departure. In the joint statement released by the two governments at the conclusion of the visit, the discussions were described as “extensive and useful,” held in “a spirit of mutual regard, candor, and friendship” and that the meeting reinforced “the already strong foundations of the US-Yugoslav relations.” The joint statement also referenced that the two Presidents had emphasized “the decisive importance of the development of energy for the economic growth of all countries, and of the developing countries in particular, and they believe therefore that nuclear energy for peaceful purposes should be made accessible to all countries without discrimination.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pages 485–488)
