Peru  1109
might do in Lima, and that the Congress as a whole had not spoken. I 
understand that the efforts of Peruvian leaders to improve Peru’s stan-
dard of living through encouraging the investment of local and foreign 
capital may suffer in an atmosphere of popular resentment against the 
United States. Peruvian leaders might more effectively point out that 
the United States has long advocated a multi-­lateral approach to the 
problem of excess lead and zinc production, as it has in the current cof-
fee arrangement; that the United States Executive and many groups in 
the United States work constantly on behalf of free trade; and that the 
lead-­zinc market has strengthened considerably. You can be certain that 
my Government is very conscious of Peru’s interests in the products 
you have mentioned, and also in fishmeal exports that are becoming so 
important in Peru’s economy.
President Eisenhower has been most disappointed at not being 
able to visit Peru, as he has told President Prado in a personal mes-
sage.9 Your Ambassador has presented your attitude on this matter 
most effectively, and I can only emphasize that President Eisenhower’s 
decision was based on the limitations of time available for his trip.
(Mr. Rubottom then discussed the inter-American Conference and 
arms limitation, and replied to Ambassador Hoyos Osores on the bor-
der question—see separate memoranda of conversations.)10
9 The referenced message, dated January 11, was sent by telegram 485 to Lima, 
January 11, and delivered on January 13. (711.11–EI/1–1160)
10 Only the memorandum of conversation, cited in footnote 5, concerning the Peru-
Ecuador boundary dispute was found in Department of State files.
PE–38.	
Editorial Note
Airgram 97 to Lima, November 10, 1959, authorized the Embassy 
in Peru to negotiate with the Peruvian Government for the sale of 
$12 million (including one half the cost of transportation) worth of 
United States surplus agricultural commodities under Title I of Public 
Law 480, the Agricultural Trade development and Assistance Act of 
1954. Enclosed was a draft sales agreement. (411.2341/11-1059) The 
proposed agreement was signed at Lima on February 12, 1960. Of the 
total value of approximately $12 million, 45 percent was to be loaned to 
Peru for economic development; 25 percent to finance loans to private 
enterprises in Peru under Section 104(e), the Cooley Amendment to the 
Act; and 30 percent was to be retained for United States Government
