Arms Control and Disarmament  1413
Similarly, there is no evidence that the Soviets possess tactical 
weapons of small size and yield comparable to those possessed by the 
U.S. Evidence on the Soviet test program indicates that it has not fol­
lowed the most promising avenue for the development of weapons of 
small size and good yield.
If one looks back over the history of U.S. and Soviet weapons 
development, one has to conclude that a test cessation at an earlier date 
would have left the U.S. in a position of much greater relative military 
advantage. It is likely that the Soviet Union will continue to progress 
more rapidly than the U.S. and will approach the capability of the U.S. 
in nuclear warheads if testing is continued.
2. Military Security: Actual Requirements
a. The Hardtack test series has been very successful and has met 
essentially all important military requirements. [text not declassified]
b. In defending the U.S. against attack, particularly a ballistic 
missile attack, the major technological problems are not in the area of 
nuclear weapon development, but in the non-­nuclear aspects of these 
defensive weapons—particularly electronics. If we can solve the elec­
tronics problems of these weapons systems, we can construct effective 
systems around nuclear weapons available after the Hardtack tests. In 
the case of ballistic missiles, while an increase in yields would be use­
ful, we could gain much more by the improvement of guidance and 
thereby accuracy of delivery.
c. Although we do not now have small-­yield “clean” weapons 
which unquestionably would have tactical applications, there are 
now available conventional weapons or air-­burst fission weapons to 
accomplish equivalent objectives. It is also significant that radioactivity 
induced by “clean” weapons in ground burst is substantial and may 
produce radioactivity equivalent to 20% of fission yield.
3. Detection of Clandestine Nuclear Tests
There appears to be little question that it is technically possible 
to design a control system to monitor a test cessation agreement. The 
current Geneva Conference will probably result in agreed-­upon con­
clusions concerning a control system which can effectively detect and 
identify nuclear explosions of between one and two kilotons and above 
in the atmosphere and above five kilotons underground and which 
would have at least deterrent value for lower yields. In addition, recent 
theoretical calculations have indicated that it is considerably more dif­
ficult to hide underground weapons tests by reducing the coupling to 
seismic waves than had previously been believed.
4. Test Cessation is an Important Step in Disarmament
A test cessation would be an important step in easing world ten­
sions. It would create an atmosphere in which further disarmament 
missions which are considered more important from our point of view 
could more easily be negotiated. We must start somewhere seeking
