584 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI individual sub-­group meetings, leaving START and D&S to be dealt with in a smaller core group. Akhromeyev agreed. Bartholomew noted that he and Akhromeyev were required to make a report to their ministers at 6:00 pm. He asked the ambassadors who were serving as chairmen of the sub-­groups to be available at 5:15 pm to brief the core group, and to be able give two or three points summing up their sessions. Akhromeyev agreed, noting that by 5:15 the chairmen should be ready to brief on what they had achieved. Bartholomew stated that the two sides were thus in agreement on procedure, and asked Akhromeyev if the chairmen of the sub-­groups should be asked to leave and go to work. Akhromeyev suggested that a sub-­group should also review the joint statement on non-­proliferation. Bartholomew agreed, but also suggested that perhaps the statement might be something that he and Akhromeyev could themselves take a first look at, since agreement on the statement at the summit would be very important. Akhromeyev said that on that day, he and Bartholomew should address START and CFE as the first priorities. He suggested that the subgroup chairmen could discuss the non-­proliferation statement, and that he and Bartholomew could then return to it on the following day. Bartholomew agreed, noting that Ambassadors Lehman and Ledogar could address non-­proliferation, and that Ambassador Hawes would address Open Skies. (At this time, sub-­group chairmen and experts departed for individual meetings. After a few moments, the core group session resumed.) Akhromeyev began by stating that the results of the Moscow ministerial on ALCMs and SLCMs created friction among Soviet experts; when they got a look at the equation with regard to those two systems, they had legitimate concerns. Akhromeyev offered to go over the points and answer U.S. questions, so that the sides could reach agreement on their differences. Bartholomew repeated his deep concern over two basic problems: first, the overturn of important decisions reached in Moscow; second, the return to solutions that had proved unworkable in the past. The net result had been to convince the U.S. side that these were two major blocks preventing the sides from reaching agreement on strategic arms reductions this year, as had been agreed by their leaders. Bartholomew asked Akhromeyev how he would reconcile the positions broached the
