904 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 20. Yugoslav expectations from your visit: The Yugoslavs will wish to hear your view on European security issues, above all the prospects for detente. You will have a particularly good opportunity to discuss with them decisions taken at the NATO Ministerial, especially the reasons why theater nuclear modernization is so critical for the maintenance of the European military balance on which peace depends. The Yugoslavs will be glad to exchange views on the situation in China and in SE Asia, where our positions are closely parallel; they may raise Korea, if so, they will tell you the North Koreans have become really quite reasonable and suggest that we try to do a deal with them; on the Middle East, they will urge you to begin dealing directly with the PLO and will be keenly alert for any indications of evolution of our policy in that direction. If there is time, South African issues could come up—Yugoslav support for national liberation movements is virtually unqualified, but they are deeply concerned about Cuban (and hence Soviet) penetration of the continent and will welcome a genuine solution in Zimbabwe-Rhodesia if that indeed appears in prospect. 21. On bilateral issues, they may present their case on the Krsko nuclear power plant project. They will almost certainly urge greater balance in our trade, press for continuing efforts to suppress anti- Yugoslav terrorism, ask that we be more forthcoming in our military sales relationship, and seek a reiteration of our policy of support for Yugoslavia’s unity, territorial integrity and independence. Above all, they will welcome your reassurance that US foreign policy toward Yugoslavia rests on a clear and steady perception of our national interest, that our support for Yugoslavia’s integrity predates the present administration and will continue after it precisely because it corresponds to our most vital national interest—a stable, peaceful, non- Soviet-dominated Europe. Scanlan 274. Editorial Note On January 12, 1980, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski informed President Jimmy Carter that the basic contingency plan for Allied support for Yugoslavia following Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito’s death had been completed. (See Document 275.) Tito’s advanced age and deteriorating health had set the stage for planning for his death for several years, with a first National Security Council contingency plan produced and adopted
