The Argentine Government will be represented at the Conference by Dr.
Isidro Ruiz Moreno, the Solicitor of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
Upon their arrival at the Foreign Office the delegates were received by Dr.
Sagarna, the Minister for Foreign Affairs ad interim. After the exchange of
credentials Dr. Sagarna, who presided over the first meeting, welcomed the
commissioners in the name of President Alvear and explained that
Argentina had extended its good offices in the desire that the long standing
difficulty should be satisfactorily solved without injury to the sovereignty of
either nation. Both delegations were then received by President Alvear, to
whom they presented their respects.
Certain Paraguayan and Bolivian delegates have given interviews to the
press, couched in vague but optimistic terms, alleging that their respective
delegations are inspired by a spirit of justice and friendship. Dr. Mujía, of
the Bolivian Delegation, however, is reported to have stated that his country
must have an outlet on the Paraguay River, which should be not only of
immense benefit to Bolivian commerce, but of great value to Paraguay. On
the other hand, Dr. Guggiari, one of the Paraguayan representatives, has
pointed out to La Nación that his country is much more vitally interested
than Bolivia in the Northern Chaco and has substantiated its claims
repeatedly during the last half century by military occupation, commercial
concessions, etc. This interview has called forth a sharp reply from Dr.
Escalier, who, in a letter to La Nación, expressed his surprise at Dr.
Guggiari’s statements and asserted that the Bolivian delegates could also
proclaim the incontestable rights of Bolivia to the Northern Chaco.
Among Argentine officials there seems to be slight hope of the Conference
reaching a solution of this long outstanding controversy. In Paraguay, so I
am informed by the diplomatic representative to Argentina from a
neighboring country, who has just returned to Buenos Aires from a visit to
Asunción, there is a pronounced feeling of pessimism on the outcome of the
Conference, and public opinion is strongly adverse to making any
concessions to Bolivia.
It will be remembered that Article 4 of the Protocol of April 22 provides for
the formation of an arbitral tribunal should the present Conference fail to
reach a definite agreement. In this connection press reports of apparently
