512 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII almost certainly be accomplished by this summer, and that Soviet control of the media will then make it possible for them, without necessarily eliminating the resistance everywhere in Afghanistan, simply to declare victory, a declaration which will be greeted with a sigh of relief by our European Allies, among others (Tab C).6 (C) Whether this is a correct analysis or not really begs the question. The hidden assumption behind the statement that Afghanistan is a “Soviet Vietnam” is that the Soviets are having, and will have, so much trouble in that country that this in itself will be a lesson to them to desist from further actions of this kind. The corresponding message for Americans is that the Soviets will derive the same lessons from Afghanistan that we did from Vietnam. This is not only contrary to fact but also undermines our policy, because it implies that it would be sufficient for the United States and our Allies simply to sit back and observe Soviet discomfiture at the “miscalculation.” Strong actions on our part, in this light, are obviously overreactions. Such analysis consequently undercuts our efforts to ensure that our Allies take, and the general public supports, strong, concrete and punitive measures against the Soviets because of Afghanistan. (S) The Short Duration of Our Reaction. Some public testimony, in addition to much background briefing, leaves the implication that the pendulum will swing back in due course and that within several months we can expect “business as usual” with the Soviets. This has been evident at several meetings I have recently attended. The primary evidence for such belief is that we have carefully maintained the fabric of our relationship and have not “broken any agreements” with the Soviets. In fact, the Soviets are carefully spreading the myth that they will be withdrawing from Afghanistan in short order. The Singaporeans evidently believe such twaddle and have warned us not to be left holding the bag when this fabled event takes place in thirty days. (The Soviets, of course, spread the same sort of stories and repeated them officially after the invasion of Czechoslovakia.) (S) Questioning the long-term commitment of the President to the actions we have undertaken undercuts his leadership, puts his judgment in doubt, and is politically very damaging (i.e., if this is the most serious event since the Second World War, then why will we be engaging in “business as usual” in a matter of months?). Furthermore, it is grist for the mill of those Europeans and others who argue against taking precipitate or strong action against the Soviets. (S) 6 Printed as Document 132.
