602
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
C) What reply should TCA make to the National Iranian Oil Com-
pany’s request to have 100 employees trained in the U.S.?
It was agreed that no reply should be given the Iranians on this
matter for the present. If they press us for a reply, however, they may
be informed that we have the matter under study.
D) What reply should President Eisenhower make to Dr. Mo-
sadeq’s letter of May 28 requesting increased U.S. aid to Iran?
It was agreed that a reply should be drafted for the President to
send Dr. Mosadeq politely refusing his request for immediate in-
creased economic aid but not burning any bridges in case at some later
date we might wish to make budgetary and economic aid available to
an Iranian Government.
In the discussion of this matter it was agreed that it would be un-
fortunate at this time to give Mosadeq any ammunition which would
strengthen his political position. In view of the unlikelihood that Mo-
sadeq will ever come to a reasonable settlement of the oil dispute with
the British, it seems that keeping Mosadeq afloat will serve only to
perpetuate the present frustrating situation. Ambassador Henderson
stated that the chances of getting a successor better than Mosadeq are
better now than the chances of getting someone worse. However he
emphasized most firmly that we must be prepared to give any
non-communist successor to Mosadeq immediate budgetary and eco-
nomic support in substantial quantities. Without that, we would surely
lose Iran.
E) What reply will be made to Mr. Stassen who has instructed
DMS to open conversations with the Department on the basis of his un-
derstanding that U.S. economic aid to Iran is to be increased by approx-
imately $15,000,000 in FY ’54?
It was agreed that confidential conversations could be held with
DMS to prepare a position, on a contingency basis, to give budgetary
and economic support to a non-communist successor to Mosadeq if one
should arise.
F) Should the Department remove policy objections to the Export-
Import Bank’s consideration of a $25,000,000 loan to Iran for agricul-
tural and road-building machinery?
It was agreed that this matter would not be raised with the Export-
Import Bank for the present.
G) What funds can the U.S. Government use to subsidize an Amer-
ican airline in affiliation with Iranian Airways?
It was agreed that it is in our national interest to support the affilia-
tion of an American airline with Iranian Airways and that we may so
inform Mr. Nelson, President of Transocean Airlines who is interested
