March 1952–February 1953
317
115.
Memorandum From the Director of the U.S. Technical
Cooperation Administration Mission in Iran (Warne) to the
Ambassador to Iran (Henderson)1
Tehran, August 12, 1952.
My visit with Seyed Abdol Ayatollah Kashani
At his request brought to me by one of his sons and after dis-
cussing the matter with you, I went to a home in Shimron at 11 a.m. on
August 11 to meet Ayatollah Kashani. Present at most of the conference
also was Mr. Shams Ghanat-Abadi, a mullah, reported son-in-law, and
close follower of Kashani, who is a deputy from Shahrod, and two sons
of Kashani, one a mullah named Khashanizahed Kashani, and the other
named Mostafa Kashani.
After waiting some 30 minutes while Kashani completed a confer-
ence with mullahs in another room, I was joined by Ayatollah Kashani.
He appeared most interested in our conference; to the point indeed of
keeping me there past 1 o’clock, which is his lunch time, through lun-
cheon, and until his siesta period at 2 p.m. The conference, of course,
was slower than those we might hold where only one language is
spoken because of the necessity of translating carefully everything that
was said. I was accompanied by Mr. Ardeshir Zahedi, of Point 4, who
acted as interpreter for the conference.
At the outset, I congratulated Kashani on his election as President
of the Majlis. I said this was a great honor but also a great responsibility
in these times. He replied that he considered it as a very small matter
since long before he had been spiritual leader of most of the Middle
East. I said I recognized the responsibilities he had carried as spiritual
leader of millions but I did not think one could over-emphasize the im-
portance of being President of the Majlis in Iran at a time when Iran
held such a fateful position in the world. He then said that his position
as spiritual leader gave him great power as the events of last month had
clearly shown. He said he would give his life for his country and was
motivated only by its best interests. He said when Great Britain and the
United States brought in Qavam as Prime Minister his displeasure was
based on the fact that it was not in the interests of Iran and his displeas-
ure was reflected in the demonstrations that overthrew Qavam. He
said some people thought the communists had joined him but he as-
sured me that he was even more against the communists.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 469, Records of U.S. Foreign Assistance Agencies
1948–1961, Mission to Iran, Executive Office Subject Files (Central Files) 1951–1961, Box 6,
Folder 7, Travel Development—Political 1952. Confidential.
