September 18–December 16, 1978 315 —Agree that Palestinian Arabs in East Jerusalem can vote in West Bank elections and hold office in the self-governing authority. —Agree that the self-governing authority will take over administration of public lands. —Relax procedures for Arabs crossing Jordan River bridge. Dayan has listened with interest but has been non-committal on all but two points. He said he would discuss with Weizman drawing up a list of Palestinian political detainees to whom amnesty might be granted. He also is considering some unilateral reduction in the Israeli military government presence and responsibilities, though in a later timeframe than we believe desirable. 88. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, October 17, 1978, 2–3:15 p.m. SUBJECT Summary of President’s Meeting with the Israeli Delegation, October 17, 1978, 2:00–3:15 p.m., Oval Office 1. Dayan expressed his concern with three main obstacles in the peace treaty negotiations. First is the question of “priority of obligations.” Israel wants to make clear that Egypt’s obligations under the peace treaty will supersede any other obligations, such as mutual defense pacts. 2. Dayan’s second problem was the linkage between the Egyptian- Israeli treaty and the West Bank/Gaza issues. Israel wants the treaty to stand on its own without any linkage to other obligations. He will accept mention of the comprehensive framework in the preamble, and some of the Camp David understandings can be included in an exchange of letters. In addition, Israel might be prepared to consider 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 14, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 10/13–18/78. Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office. The memorandum was found attached to an October 19 covering memorandum from Quandt to Brzezinski, upon which Brzezinski marked his approval, as well as a copy of the memorandum for the record of Carter’s conversation with the Egyptian delegation later the same afternoon, printed as Document 89. The covering memorandum also stated that copies of the summaries would be sent to Eilts, Lewis, and Vance. (Ibid.)
