238
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. At the opening of the round the Delegation should say that the
US is deeply disturbed by reports that Chemical Weapons have been
used in Laos, Kampuchea, and Afghanistan. These reports make it all
the more important to negotiate a complete, effective and verifiable
prohibition of chemical weapons. The bilateral negotiations can be in-
strumental in achievement of that goal. Delegation should state (A) US
expects all states to observe the principles and objectives of the Geneva
protocol and (B) US hopes that USSR will join with US in reaffirming
publicly support for the protocol.
4. During round eleven the Delegation’s strategy should be to:
A. Emphasize the US expectation that the pace undertaken in the
latter half of round ten will be continued and perhaps accelerated;
B. Continue to give priority attention to major unresolved issues,
particularly verification-related issues (including declarations); and
C. Continue drafting in order to reaffirm and define precisely
points thought to be agreed. (The Delegation should continue to be
guided by the format and substance contained in the position summary
provided to the Soviets during round nine.)
5. Key points in the guidance package:
A. Discussion points have been provided on the possibility of at-
taining mutually agreed procedures for mothballing declared facilities.
Our objective is to facilitate verification by eventually specifying which
actions can and cannot be taken.
B. Guidance is provided for responding to Soviet round ten state-
ments on verification and on declarations.
C. The Delegation is authorized to agree to a scaled-down version
of the Soviet proposal on declaration of past transfers. If possible US
agreement on this proposal should be traded for Soviet willingness to
accommodate the US proposal for exchange of information on CW pro-
tective activities (round 5 guidance).
D. Further guidance on safe riot control chemicals and herbicides
is included in the package.
6. The Delegation should continue to brief allied representatives in
Geneva during the course of the negotiations. In addition an offer
should be made to hold quadrilateral consultations with the US, FRG
and France at the end of the round.
Vance
