Arms Control and Disarmament  1517
by itself it would probably, in the long run, have little effect on weapon 
development and would not require a control system that would have 
any significant impact on the Soviet Bloc.
Alternative No. 2—Modify “Geneva” System to Improve Capabilities.
It would be possible to modify the “Geneva” System in a man­
ner which would substantially improve the capabilities of the system. 
This might be accomplished if one of more of the following steps were 
adopted:
1. Increase the number of seismographs at each control post in the 
Geneva System (e.g. An increase in seismographs from 10 to 100 might 
improve the signal to noise ratio for detection by a factor of 3).
2. Halve the seismic grid spacing by adding unmanned, seismic-­
only stations using the same number of seismographs as in the main 
control posts.
3. Augment the agreed-­upon grid of manned control posts with a 
much closer spaced grid (e.g., 100–150 KM) of small, unmanned seis­
mographs which would telemeter information.
4. Increase the number of inspections.
5. Develop other presently promising techniques to identify earth­
quakes and to discriminate between explosions and earthquakes.
A carefully-­engineered modification of the present system, includ­
ing some combination of the above concepts, could restore or even bet­
ter the effectiveness of the system proposed at Geneva.
Alternative No. 3—More Effective Use of Inspection in “Geneva” System.
It would be possible to provide at least some level of deterrence 
down to 1 KT or below with the present “Geneva” system by a more effec­
tive use of onsite inspections. This might be accomplished by employing 
some variation of one or more of the following procedures:
a) Establish a graduated, decreasing scale for the percentage of 
unidentified events which would be inspected on a random basis in 
different yield ranges (e.g., 100% over 20 KT; 25% 20–10 KT; 10% 10–5 
KT; 2% 5–1 KT; 1/2% less than 1 KT.)
b) Establish weighted inspection procedure focused on the nuclear 
powers and possibly their principal allies (e.g., in areas outside the 
nuclear powers and possibly their principal allies reduce the percent­
age of events inspected by a factor of 4 and undertake no inspections on 
a routine basis below 5 KT).
c) Increase the number of inspections substantially over the num­
ber previously contemplated by simplifying the inspection procedure 
and only undertaking exhaustive examinations when an initial survey 
indicated the possibility of suspicious activity.
This position has the advantage of not requiring the reopening of 
any of the conclusions of the Geneva Conference of Experts; however,
