Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 trade agreements, the antiballistic missile treaty,5 the interim agreement on strategic offensive armaments,6 and the limited test ban agreement.7 Efforts still continue with negotiations toward a SALT II agreement, a comprehensive test ban against nuclear explosives,8 reductions in conventional arms transfers to other countries, the prohibition against attacks on satellites in space, an agreement to stabilize the level of force deployment in the Indian Ocean, and increased trade and scientific and cultural exchange. We must be willing to explore such avenues of cooperation despite the basic issues which divide us. The risks of nuclear war alone propel us in this direction. The numbers and destructive potential of nuclear weapons has been increasing at an alarming rate. That is why a SALT agreement which enhances the security of both nations is of fundamental importance. We and the Soviet Union are negotiating in good faith almost every day, because we both know that a failure to succeed would precipitate a resumption of a massive nuclear arms race. I’m glad to report to you today that the prospects for a SALT II agreement are good. Beyond this major effort, improved trade and technological and cultural exchange are among the immediate benefits of cooperation between our two countries. However, these efforts to cooperate do not erase the significant differences between us. What are these differences? To the Soviet Union, de´tente seems to mean a continuing aggressive struggle for political advantage and increased influence in a variety of ways. The Soviet Union apparently sees military power and military assistance as the best means of expanding their influence abroad. Obviously, areas of instability in the world provide a tempting target for this effort, and all too often they seem ready to exploit any such opportunity. As became apparent in Korea, in Angola, and also, as you know, in Ethiopia more recently, the Soviets prefer to use proxy forces to achieve their purposes. To other nations throughout the world, the Soviet military buildup appears to be excessive, far beyond any legitimate requirement to de- 5 Reference is to the Anti Ballistic Missle Treaty, signed by Nixon and Brezhnev on May 26, 1972, which limited strategic defense systems.
