Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
413
trade agreements, the antiballistic missile treaty,5 the interim agree-
ment on strategic offensive armaments,6 and the limited test ban
agreement.7
Efforts still continue with negotiations toward a SALT II agree-
ment, a comprehensive test ban against nuclear explosives,8 reductions
in conventional arms transfers to other countries, the prohibition
against attacks on satellites in space, an agreement to stabilize the level
of force deployment in the Indian Ocean, and increased trade and sci-
entific and cultural exchange. We must be willing to explore such av-
enues of cooperation despite the basic issues which divide us. The risks
of nuclear war alone propel us in this direction.
The numbers and destructive potential of nuclear weapons has
been increasing at an alarming rate. That is why a SALT agreement
which enhances the security of both nations is of fundamental impor-
tance. We and the Soviet Union are negotiating in good faith almost
every day, because we both know that a failure to succeed would pre-
cipitate a resumption of a massive nuclear arms race.
I’m glad to report to you today that the prospects for a SALT II
agreement are good.
Beyond this major effort, improved trade and technological and
cultural exchange are among the immediate benefits of cooperation be-
tween our two countries. However, these efforts to cooperate do not
erase the significant differences between us.
What are these differences?
To the Soviet Union, de´tente seems to mean a continuing aggres-
sive struggle for political advantage and increased influence in a va-
riety of ways. The Soviet Union apparently sees military power and
military assistance as the best means of expanding their influence
abroad. Obviously, areas of instability in the world provide a tempting
target for this effort, and all too often they seem ready to exploit any
such opportunity.
As became apparent in Korea, in Angola, and also, as you know, in
Ethiopia more recently, the Soviets prefer to use proxy forces to achieve
their purposes.
To other nations throughout the world, the Soviet military buildup
appears to be excessive, far beyond any legitimate requirement to de-
5 Reference is to the Anti Ballistic Missle Treaty, signed by Nixon and Brezhnev on
May 26, 1972, which limited strategic defense systems.
6 Presumable reference to SALT. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXII, SALT
I, 1969–1972.
7 See footnote 5, Document 56.
8 See footnote 4, Document 52.
