630
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
203.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 13, 1978, 10:30–11:30 a.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Private Meeting with President Nicolae Ceausescu
of Romania
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
President of Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu
Mr. Celac, Interpreter
(Note: This summary is based on the Romanian notes. The Presi-
dent’s remarks were translated into Romanian and then translated back
into English.)
The President said he would like to have a few minutes to talk
privately on any matters that President Ceausescu would like to raise.
Relations between our countries are very good and we have established
good rapport personally. Before the larger talks, it might be useful to
exchange views on matters of special interest.
President Ceausescu reiterated his appreciation for the progress in
relations between the two countries and expressed satisfaction with
the visit and talks thus far. He agreed that a good personal relationship
has been established and expressed the hope that it will continue. He
noted that the two have communicated previously through special
channels and he felt that it would be useful to continue such contacts
in addition to those through the two embassies when problems arise
in the future.
The President agreed, suggesting that they might exchange personal
letters without waiting for a crisis or special problems.
MFN and Emigration
President Ceausescu agreed. He mentioned his meeting that morn-
ing with a group of US Senators at which the question of MFN was
raised. They came to the conclusion that some improvements could be
made in the process by which annual renewal of MFN is handled
which would not require that the matter be raised before Congress
each year. A more permanent solution can possibly be worked out later.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 36, Memcons: President: 4/78. Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office.
Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum of conversation to Vance on April 18. (Depart-
ment of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–
1980, Lot 84D241, Box 9, Vance Nodis MemCons, 1978)
