748
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
a. Is it true that the U.S. has agreed to guarantee that Israel will re-
ceive its needed oil supplies, at OPEC prices, from either Egypt or the
U.S.?
b. Is it true that the U.S. is handling the issue of Egypt’s defense
pacts with other Arab states by obtaining a specific Israeli guarantee
not to attack Syria or Jordan? [less than 1 line not declassified] Arafat sees
this as an “open invitation” for the Israelis to strike at the Palestinians
in Lebanon, rather than protection for Syria or Jordan.)
c. Is it true that the U.S. will agree to a clause making any “self-
rule” timetable contingent upon “cooperation” by the inhabitants of
the occupied territories? [handling restriction not declassified]
3. [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]
4. [1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]
5. This information is also being provided to the Assistant to the
President for National Security Affairs.3 (U)
Stansfield Turner4
3 Quandt produced a draft response to Arafat’s March 10 message. The draft was
edited from an earlier March 22 draft by Saunders, and forwarded to Brzezinski on
March 23. The message repeated U.S. commitment to “focus its primary attention on the
issues of concern to the Palestinians” in the coming negotiations and urged the Pales-
tinians to consider providing “quiet authorization” to some West Bank and Gaza Pales-
tinians to work with the United States and Egypt to bring about an Israeli military with-
drawal and create a self governing authority. On Arafat’s concern over the January 22
assassination of his aide, Ali Hassan Salameh, the response states that the United States
“had no association whatever” with Salameh’s murder. At the same time, the message
concludes, the United States “seeks comparable assurance that all components of the
PLO will take measures to prevent violence” against “American officials or installations.”
Both Quandt’s and Saunders’s drafts are ibid.
4 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above this typed signature.
