Afghanistan 127 could be handled unilaterally. Explicit GOP cooperation would not be required, although tacit approval for the movement of arms and material through Pakistan and the continued use of Pakistan territory for training, etc., would be needed. Nevertheless deniability could be maintained by both the U.S. and Pakistan. Although we would attempt to maintain secrecy, word of our assistance would leak (or we could deliberately leak it). This would demonstrate to informed Pakistanis, Saudis and others that we are willing to underwrite the Afghan fight against communism and stand up to the Soviets. Through our funds, we should be able to exercise some influence over the insurgents, encourage them to put aside their parochial differences and improve their efficiency. Assuming they are ultimately successful in overthrowing the DRA, our contribution to this process should give us some influence on the Afghan Government that subsequently emerges. Cons: Control on how our funds are used would be difficult. Money could be wasted, stolen or used to support intramural battles among the emigres. 3. Insurgency Support—Indirect Financial Aid Financial aid would be provided as in Option 2, except we would use a third party such as the Saudis or Pakistanis as an intermediary. Costs: [1 line not declassified] Pros: This approach should encourage a team effort. For example, if we used the Saudis, they should be encouraged to add their contributions to ours. With this option, the U.S. hand would be better hidden than in the case of direct financial aid. Cons: We would lose much control over how the funds would be spent, and also much of the influence which would accrue through dealing directly with the Afghan dissidents. 4. Insurgency Support—Non-Lethal Material CIA could provide a variety of non-lethal material support to the dissidents in Pakistan. Full GOP cooperation would be required, however. Under this option we would propose to equip a 2,000-man force for one year. Costs: [amount not declassified] —Communications Equipment [amount not declassified] —Medical Supplies [amount not declassified] —Ancillary Equipment (Pack, web gear, compass, poncho, clothing, entrenching tool and some rations) [amount not declassified] (FY 1979–80)
