Peru 1107 PE–37. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of West Coast Affairs (Coerr)1  Washington, January 23, 1960. SUBJECT Peruvian-U.S. Relations: U.S. Commercial Policy; U.S. Role in Peru-Ecuador Boundary Dispute; President Eisenhower’s Visit to Latin America. PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Guillermo HOYOS Osores, Adviser, Peruvian Ministry of Foreign Relations. Ambassador Juan Bautista DE LAVALLE, Peruvian Ambassador to the OAS and Delegate to the UN. Miguel GRAU, Chargé d’Affaires, Peruvian Embassy. Rear Admiral Luis Edgardo LLOSA, Naval Attaché, Peruvian Embassy Mr. Rubottom, ARA Mr. Coerr, ARA/WST (*Ambassador Hoyos Osores is carried as third man on the Peruvian Foreign Office list, immediately after the Secretary General,2 although the Peruvian Embassy has explained that he is, in effect, second in command to Foreign Minister Porras. The Embassy also explains he is traveling as “Ambassador-­at-Large”.) Ambassador Hoyos Osores—I am not here to recite affronts (“agravios”) but to explain certain realities of inter-American relationships. The responsible element in Peru believes the destinies of Peru and of the United States are conjoint. This element desires friendly Peruvian-U.S. relations not only in general terms but also as an essential to its own security within Peru. But, in Latin America there is widespread resentment and suspicion of the U.S., whether or not justified, that stems from many and complex causes of which the following are the most important in Peru: (1) In recent years U.S. commercial policy has dealt Peru repeated blows, damaging Peru’s major exports—lead and zinc, cotton and sugar—and aggravating Peru’s economic problems so that Peruvians feel they can count on U.S. friendship only “relatively”. (2) As a guarantor of the Rio Protocol, the U.S. has not collaborated to produce a guarantors’ statement that would disauthorize the absurd position Ecuador has taken (in its boundary dispute with Peru). 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.23/1–2360. Confidential. 2 Javier Delgado Yrigoyen.
