December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
753
ening of that time would cause problems. Secretary said he would do
his best to help get agreement on four months. He could not guaran-
tee that Ali wouldn’t start by asking for three months, but he did not
think this was something the parties should get hungup on. Secretary
pointed out that there are two other things that might cause problems
in the talks on sub-phasing: 1) the fact that Alma comes at the end of 9
months instead of 5 or 6 as earlier agreed; and 2) only allowing Egyp-
tian civilian police into evacuated areas when full withdrawal is com-
pleted. Weizman indicated that if Israel could get some further assur-
ance on provision of oil from Egypt transfer of Alma could take place
earlier than nine months.
3. Weizman’s main concern was with levels of assistance.2 In
Knesset debate on the treaty next week he wanted to be able to say that
“our defense problems are being taken care of.” He would like to leave
the US with assurances on this. Israel had asked only for $3 billion in
redeployment assistance but it now looks as though actual cost will be
$4 billion, or $3.5 billion at minimum. Airbases3 will cost $1.1 billion; if
US assistance is $2.5 billion this will leave only $1.4 billion for all other
costs. Weizman stressed magnitude of work Israel will have to do to
build infrastructure in Negev and value of infrastructure and installa-
tions it is giving up in Sinai. Furthermore inflation is steadily eroding
value of US annual $1 billion FMS program. Weizman asked that an-
nual assistance program be increased by $500 million and that another
billion dollars be added to proposed USG redeployment aid package.
This would cover Israel’s needs and give Israelis a feeling of security. It
would be very good if I could go back with this, Weizman said. If not,
Israel will still sign the treaty but “there will be much less joy,” in later
remarks, Evron expressed concern over what he had heard concerning
terms of our redeployment assistance package. Evron said there had
been talk about commercial bank loan and this was worrisome (owing
to an interruption Evron was unable to spell out fully his concern and
there was no time for further discussion of it).
2 Meeting with Weizman on March 16, Brown stated that the annual foreign mili-
tary sales level was “likely to remain at present level given congressional attitudes and
state of American economy.” Moreover, Brown indicated that the United States intended
to budget $2–2.5 billion to assist with Israel’s redeployment from Sinai. (Telegram 65826
to Tel Aviv, March 17; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Cables File, State Department Out, Box 115, 3/17–21/79)
3 On March 16, Department of Defense officials briefed Weizman on the conclu-
sions of the U.S. airbase survey group, and informed the Israeli Defense Minister that the
United States would “take responsibility” to make operational four Israeli squadrons
from the proposed Ovda and Matred bases in the Negev desert within three years. (Tele-
gram 65825 to Tel Aviv, March 17; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Cables File, State Department Out, Box 115, 3/17–21/79)
