Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 169 their intention, an impossibility. We want to make phase two an impossibility and phase one so attractive that they will commit themselves to it. Dr. Brzezinski agreed to a statement that Rabbi Schindler could use with the press to describe the Administration’s attitude. The agreed statement is as follows: “We had a comprehensive discussion of the Middle East situation, including US-Israel relations, in the course of which Dr. Brzezinski reaffirmed the Administration’s underlying commitment to the security of Israel, and particularly to the special and organic relationship that binds the United States to Israel. He further noted that the Administration’s statements on the questions of territory, the Palestinians, and peace do not represent a blueprint to be imposed, but rather are a conceptual framework within which the parties can negotiate a peaceful settlement to the Middle East conflict.” 40. Address by President Carter1 South Bend, Indiana, May 22, 1977 UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME To Father Hesburgh and the great faculty of Notre Dame, to those who have been honored this afternoon with the degree from your great university, 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 954–962. The President spoke at 3:25 p.m. at the commencement exercises at the University of Notre Dame Athletic and Convocation Center. Father Hesburgh conferred an honorary doctor of laws degree on the President and then offered opening remarks. On March 18, Hesburgh had sent Carter a memorandum congratulating him on the United Nations address (see Document 29) and noting that the Overseas Development Council, which Hesburgh chaired, planned to release The United States and World Development: Agenda 1977, the fifth in the ODC’s annual assessments of the relationship between the United States and the developing world. Hesburgh commented that the report might prove useful in Carter’s elucidation of the “basic human needs” strategy as referenced in the United Nations address. Carter sent Hesburgh’s memorandum to Eizenstat and Fallows under a March 28 handwritten note: “Begin working on a Notre Dame speech outline for May—use ‘Human Rights’ in its broadest sense. This ODC report is good basis for ideas. J.C.” (Carter Library, Hertzberg Donated Historical Material, Speech Files, Box 1, Notre Dame Speech 5–22–77) Additional materials regarding the speech preparation are ibid. According to the minutes of the May 23 Cabinet meeting, Brzezinski “commended the White House speech writers and Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher for their work preparing the President’s Notre Dame speech. He said that the speech reflects an ongoing effort to reassert the moral and political leadership of the United States—perhaps for the first time in fifteen years.” (Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 18, Cabinet Minutes, 1–5/77)
