Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 278. Memorandum From the National Intelligence Officer for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe (Horelick) to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1 Washington, January 21, 1980 SUBJECT Yugoslav Contingency Planning [classification not declassified] 1. On Friday morning, 18 January, I attended a Mini-SCC on Yugoslavia chaired by David Aaron. Attendees included Assistant Secretary Vest, EUR/State, Jim Sienna and Maj. Gen. Bill Bowman, DoD, Lt. Gen. John Pustay, JCS, as well as representatives from Treasury, and various NSC staffers. [classification not declassified] 2. The purpose of the meeting was to lay down guidelines to organize the government’s preparations for the contingency of President Tito’s death. An Interagency Working Group (IWG) at the Assistant Secretary level headed by George Vest was established to coordinate USG policy during the immediate period following Tito’s death. Defense, CIA, Justice, Commerce, and Treasury will participate as needed either in the full group or in special subgroups. I attended the first meeting of that working group late Friday afternoon. [classification not declassified] 3. A USG Contingency Study for Yugoslavia has been available since shortly after the 1968 Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia and has been periodically updated. This is a continuing operation. As part of that planning exercise routine documents (official statements, messages to the new Yugoslav leaders) have already been prepared. Special antiterrorism measures are being studied.2 [classification not declassified] 4. Because of the extreme sensitivity of any military or logistical support contingency planning, this aspect of the preparations is being very closely held to a small subgroup of the Interagency Working Group on which we are represented. PM has been charged with preparing an updated military contingency planning document suitable for 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
