Ecuador  551
EC–18.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the First Secretary of 
the Embassy in Ecuador (Rogers)1
Quito, August 31, 1960.
US/MC/2
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files, Lot 64 D 559, CF 1750. Confidential. 
Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took place in the U.S. 
Ambassador’s residence at 3 p.m.; it described a continuation of the conversation 
reported in Document EC–17 on a different subject.
United States
Under Secretary Dillon
General Robert Cutler
Mr. John Leddy, Special Assistant to the 
Under Secretary
Edward S. Little, Charge d’Affaires a.i.
J. L. Hummel, Director of USOM/Ecuador
J. T. Rogers, First Secretary, Embassy Quito
Ecuador
Minister-Designate (Foreign Affairs)
Jose Ricardo CHIRIBOGA Villagomez
Minister-Designate (Development)
Jaime NEBOT Velasco
SUBJECT
Ecuador’s Economic Development Needs
Minister-Designate Nebot repeated in part remarks already made 
by Chiriboga on the nature of the social revolution of June 1960 elec-
tions. If their aspirations are not satisfied, people of Ecuador would take 
a road other than that of peaceful election to achieve their objectives.
Nebot pointed to the deterioration in Ecuador’s terms of trade 
over the past 20 years and the decline in the annual increase of the 
Gross National Product. The problem of unemployment is increasing, 
he said, with a 3.1 percent annual increase in population, which meant 
50,000 new jobs required annually. This number of new jobs are sim-
ply not available. He said Ecuador needed help particularly in medium 
­industries which complement Ecuador’s basically agricultural econ-
omy. He mentioned specifically electric power, highway construction, 
and social needs such as housing. Nebot emphasized that effective 
help is needed quickly and that not a great deal of time is available. 
He added that at the moment there is no Communist representation 
in Congress and no major division in Congress as regards economic 
cooperation with the U.S.
In response, the Under Secretary reviewed U.S. economic aid pol-
icy over the past twenty years, pointing out that through the experi-
ence of the Institute of Inter-American Affairs and of Point IV we have 
learned a good bit, including the fact that in order to make development
