International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 On August 5, after a large steel price increase, you directed CWPS to prepare a report on the industry.3 You asked for that report by September 30. Preparation of the report is in its final stages. I have not yet seen it, but Barry Bosworth (CWPS Executive Director) has briefed me on its emerging contents. The report is factual and analytical and makes no recommendations. But it is a hard-hitting report, and no matter how diplomatically written, the facts and analysis will step on a lot of toes—industry, labor, and government. (See below.) The CWPS authorizing law expires September 30. A 2-year extender has passed the Senate, but has been hung up in the House because of Andy Biemiller’s4 opposition. We finally worked out arrangements to speed it thru by Friday.5 But publication of a controversial report might hang it up. Bosworth will hold up delivery of the report until sometime next week, after passage of the CWPS extending legislation.6 You may want a further delay until after your meeting with steel management and labor which is now being arranged for the very near future.7 Upon receipt, you can announce that you are referring the report to the task force or other group that will be established to prepare recommendations for you on government policy toward the industry. Some Examples of Tentative Findings to Date 1. Operating costs in the U.S. steel industry have grown far more than the average for other industries. • Between 1967 and 1977 average wages in the U.S. economy rose 97 percent—steel worker wages rose 142 percent, and coal wages (coking coal is an important cost) rose 124 percent. • Most of the earlier U.S. competitive advantage in raw material costs has been lost; sharp improvements in shipping costs have reduced the disadvantage to the Japanese of buying U.S. coal. 2. Technologically, new U.S. steel facilities are not inferior to other countries. But U.S. construction costs have risen very sharply, which increases the costs and lowers the potential profits from steel modernization investment. Japanese construction costs are much lower and the time it takes to construct a new plant far less.
