International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
211
On August 5, after a large steel price increase, you directed CWPS
to prepare a report on the industry.3 You asked for that report by Sep-
tember 30.
Preparation of the report is in its final stages. I have not yet seen it,
but Barry Bosworth (CWPS Executive Director) has briefed me on its
emerging contents. The report is factual and analytical and makes no
recommendations. But it is a hard-hitting report, and no matter how dip-
lomatically written, the facts and analysis will step on a lot of toes—in-
dustry, labor, and government. (See below.)
The CWPS authorizing law expires September 30. A 2-year ex-
tender has passed the Senate, but has been hung up in the House be-
cause of Andy Biemiller’s4 opposition. We finally worked out arrange-
ments to speed it thru by Friday.5 But publication of a controversial
report might hang it up.
Bosworth will hold up delivery of the report until sometime next
week, after passage of the CWPS extending legislation.6
You may want a further delay until after your meeting with steel
management and labor which is now being arranged for the very near
future.7 Upon receipt, you can announce that you are referring the re-
port to the task force or other group that will be established to prepare
recommendations for you on government policy toward the industry.
Some Examples of Tentative Findings to Date
1. Operating costs in the U.S. steel industry have grown far more
than the average for other industries.
• Between 1967 and 1977 average wages in the U.S. economy rose
97 percent—steel worker wages rose 142 percent, and coal wages (coking
coal is an important cost) rose 124 percent.
• Most of the earlier U.S. competitive advantage in raw material
costs has been lost; sharp improvements in shipping costs have reduced
the disadvantage to the Japanese of buying U.S. coal.
2. Technologically, new U.S. steel facilities are not inferior to other
countries. But U.S. construction costs have risen very sharply, which in-
creases the costs and lowers the potential profits from steel moderniza-
tion investment. Japanese construction costs are much lower and the
time it takes to construct a new plant far less.
3 See footnote 7, Document 47.
4 Andrew Biemiller was, as Director of the Department of Legislation, the principal
lobbyist for the AFL–CIO.
5 September 30.
6 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
7 Carter underlined the phrase “further delay” and wrote “no” in the margin adja-
cent to this sentence.
