Afghanistan
587
211.
Translation of a Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister
Gromyko to Secretary of State Vance1
Moscow, February 16, 1980
Dear Mr. Secretary,
Having read your letter of February 8 I would like to tell you
frankly the following.2
One could only welcome the recognition in the letter of the crucial
importance of relations between our countries for the general world
situation and the apparent desire to search for ways of overcoming
the serious situation prevailing now in these relations.
However, the attempt to evade consideration of the real causes
complicating the international situation, efforts to reduce the whole
matter to the recent developments in Afghanistan depicted, for that
matter, in a completely distorted light, and the raising of various kinds
of other far-fetched questions—all this in no way demonstrates a real
intention to rectify the current situation.
Indeed, it is impossible, without sinning against the truth, to dis-
pute the fact that the exacerbation of the international situation by no
means began at the end of last December, but rather much earlier.
We also pointed out to the US side the reasons for this exacerbation
much earlier.
Among these is the decision on deployment in the US of the MX
mobile ICBM system which was made almost immediately after the
SALT II Treaty was signed in Vienna.
There is also the artificially created “mini-crisis” on the question
of a “Soviet brigade” in Cuba.
There is also the urgent establishment of the “Rapid Deployment
Force” designed for armed intervention in various parts of the world.
There is the long-range program of permanent defense spending
increases and arms build-up imposed by the US on its NATO allies.
Finally, there is the decision to deploy new US missiles on the soil
of Western Europe, which creates a serious threat to the security of
the USSR and its allies.
And what has become of the SALT II Treaty? Incidentally, in taking
the decision to develop and deploy MX missiles the US Government
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special
Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet Affairs, 1977–1981, Lot 81D109, CV-Gromyko Letters,
2/16/80. No classification marking. The translated letter is printed in full in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 261.
2 See Document 202.
