862 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 the President,4 he showed signs of physical problems. He noted that the State Department representative who had accompanied him (Sheldon Krys) had been extremely solicitous and anxious that Queen not get over tired. Katherine Keough said that she wished to put in a word for Krys as a great man who had been extraordinary in his help to the hostage families. She could not say enough good about him. That was also true of other State Department representatives—Peter Constable, Henry Precht, and others—who were competent, hard working and sensitive to their problems. She was not a State Department wife, but she had come to have enormous respect for them. The President was well served by people such as Krys, whom she would term an exceptional bureaucrat. The President had noted that, when he offered the Queens White House tickets to the Kennedy Center, Krys had stressed the need for Richard to rest. 4 Carter met with Queen on July 19 from 10:59 until 11:50 a.m. No other record of the meeting has been found. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary) 321. Editorial Note On July 23, 1980, the Special Operations Review Group, chaired by Admiral J. L. Holloway, III, submitted the Final Report of the Special Operations Review Group, often referred to as the Holloway Report, to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In the Forwarding Statement, Holloway wrote that the report was a “professional critique” for the Joint Chiefs and not an after-action summary or a white paper. In this context and as a result of hindsight, he felt that the report would appear to be “highly critical, more so probably than a wider review from a national perspective would deserve.” But he added that the review group had “seen infinitely more to be proud of than to complain about.” The operation, he concluded, had been “risky and we knew it, but it had a good chance of success and America had the courage to try.” The Final Report contained an Executive Summary, 5 chapters (Introduction, Chronology, Issue Analysis, Conclusions, Recommendations), and annexes. The Executive Summary listed specific and general conclusions. In the specific conclusions, the main points were: 1) that the operation had been conceptually valid and feasible, but high-risk;
