3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 373 not doubt that the invaders had been encouraged and supplied by those allies of the Soviet Union. The President said there were also some other concerns in Africa which he would not have time to discuss now. The Libyans, allies of40 the Soviet Union, had moved into Chad. We had no interests in the area except that we did not want to see borders violated by military action. There was a broad pattern emerging41 of Soviet supply of military weapons, some of which Cubans used, to train42 black troops to43 keep military action going in many African areas. This situation had escalated44 in scope and intensity, and we were very concerned about it, as the President had said earlier. In addition to refraining from45 military action, we would like to have the Soviet Union’s positive support for our efforts in Rhodesia and Namibia. The President had understood the statements Gromyko had made, and hoped that Gromyko understood the seriousness with which we viewed these developments. Human Rights There was one more item on which the President wanted to put great emphasis—that was the question of human rights.46 Trials were underway in the Soviet Union against people who had organized to monitor compliance with the Helsinki agreement. We did indeed look on this as an internal matter for the Soviet Union, and recognized that we had no authority to intercede. However, the President felt that he had the duty to express concern47 when the people tried were given maximum sentences, in violation48 of even Soviet laws.49 He was quite concerned over future plans in the Soviet Union to repeat the circum- 40 Bartholomew put brackets around “allies of” and wrote “supplied by” in the margin above it. 41 Bartholomew put brackets around “emerging” and wrote “spreading” in the margin above it. He also added “military aid and economic aid and” after “emerging of Soviet” and “advanced” before “military weapons.” 42 Bartholomew put brackets around “to” and wrote “and” in the margin above it. He also changed “train” to “trained” indicating he wanted the phrase to read “used and trained black troops.” 43 Bartholomew added “use to” after “troops to.” 44 Bartholomew put brackets around “had escalated” and wrote “was increasingly growing” in the margin above it. 45 Bartholomew put brackets around “refraining from” and wrote “not encouraging” in the margin above it. 46 Bartholomew added “We had perhaps an even greater difference of opinion here.” 47 Bartholomew added “deep” before “concern.” 48 Bartholomew put “violation” in brackets and wrote “contravention” in the margin above it. 49 Bartholomew added “forsaking compliance with Helsinki” after “Soviet laws.”
