January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1171 and 20 between Alexandria and Tel Aviv. This will place the talks near the governments, and there is a need for consultations. Thank you for inviting us to Washington. But communications are difficult. The Soviet Union listens to all international calls, and cables are sometimes slow. Minister Burg and Shamir—and the negotiating team—will need to consult with the Israeli Cabinet, and with Prime Minister Begin, too. We will need to do this quickly, and can send emissaries in 45 minutes, to take decisions. This is his suggestion. He accepts the objective of holding intensive talks. If questions are asked of the President, Sadat, and himself, then they can talk by phone. We can see perhaps whether we can reach the goal of 26 May. Israel wants to carry out autonomy, as faithfully as the peace treaty—as Sadat said: “faithfully and with honor.” For nine months, all the burden has fallen on the Israelis’ shoulders—land, the removal of the flag. They don’t regret it. They gave back the Alma oil field, and now pay $650 million a year to Egypt for oil; and next year it will be $800 million, as the price goes up. This is equal to all of American aid. Israel spends 30% of its gross national product on defense: there is no precedent for this. This (the oil) is a burden on the Israeli economy, and is difficult. But they do it without complaint; they did it for the sake of peace. The treaty has been carried out scrupulously, and they will with the first (sic) part of Camp David—autonomy. If we carry the negotiations forward, he hopes we can succeed. As at Camp David, three months were provided to complete the treaty, but they kept at it for three months more. It was a pity, but what tragedy was there? In March 1979, at the treaty signing here, all were happy, those were great happy days. He hopes that more will come with effort. Thank you for inviting us. We shall do our best and try to meet the goal. There will be intense daily negotiations in Alexandria and Tel Aviv. Let us try—we may succeed. Ambassador Linowitz asked whether Prime Minister Begin understood that we had proposed holding the talks here for one week, and then going to the Middle East. The U.S. feels the need for 8–10 hours of negotiations every day. We can’t do it there. It will be tough if Khalil is in Egypt—he could give one or two hours at most at a time because of his other responsibilities, as is also true of Ministers Burg and Shamir. He (Ambassador Linowitz) thought that only 2 or 3 people from each side would come here. Prime Minister Begin said that his answer is “no.” He understands the idea of meeting in Washington. Ambassador Linowitz’s remarks do not matter. If Khalil were here, he would have to go home after a day or two. It would not be serious if we have to extend the negotiations a day or two. Let’s decide to start the day after tomorrow, or next week, in Alexandria and Tel Aviv. There are lots of people in the Israeli delega-
