1144
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
“—Add a section to the draft program on women and access to po-
table water to encourage women’s participation in planning and imple-
menting water technology and to highlight a linkage between the
Women’s Decade and the Decade on Drinking Water and Sanitation;
“—Work for recognition of the economic value of women’s work
not traditionally renumerated or counted in national statistics;
“—Work to assure that women and women’s organizations play
an active, recognized role in the development process.”
In advance of the departure of the U.S. delegation on the evening
of July 11, President Jimmy Carter issued a statement in which he noted
that the conference “will provide a constructive opportunity to review
the progress of women throughout the world during the past 5 years
and to establish a meaningful plan of specific actions to benefit women
for the coming 5 years. The work of this Conference to improve the con-
ditions of women’s lives everywhere in the world can make a major
contribution to the enhancement of human rights, a goal which has
been a vital element of my administration’s policy. The United States is
deeply committed to eliminating all forms of discrimination and will
continue to work for equal rights at home and abroad.” The President
also indicated that he had authorized Weddington to sign the Conven-
tion on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women,
which had been adopted by the UN General Assembly in December
1979. (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, July 11, 1980, pp.
1335–1336)
Following the opening plenary session on July 14, delegates estab-
lished two committees for the purpose of reviewing the draft Program
of Action. In briefing materials prepared for Secretary of State Edmund
Muskie’s July 18 breakfast meeting with President Carter, Department
of State Executive Secretary Peter Tarnoff outlined the administration’s
position:
“Our objective at the Conference is to keep the focus on women’s
problems and to avoid contentious unrelated political issues. The US
Delegation is attempting to steer the proceedings toward three sub-
themes of the conference, ‘employment, education and health’ for
women, and to avoid political exploitation of the three main agenda
items: ‘The Effects of Israeli Occupation on Palestinian Women Inside
and Outside the Occupied Territories,’ ‘Women and Apartheid’ and
‘Women as Refugees.’
“A speech by Sarah Weddington, Co-Head of the US Delegation,
July 15 urging a spirit of compromise and describing the progress of
women in the US was well received. Ms. Weddington also announced
that the US would sign the Convention Eliminating All Forms of Dis-
crimination Against Women.
