Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Yet despite the passing of that age, we also in a sense can feel “present at the creation,” for changing world realities are creating a whole new tradition and environment for American diplomacy. There are several paradoxical aspects of this development that deserve examination, and I would like to turn to them now. Nationalism and Interdependence The diffusion of power internationally and the accelerated development of a global economy have radically changed the international environment. The code word for this is interdependence, a reality that requires a different approach to diplomacy, that presupposes, on the part of the American foreign policy establishment and the public, a more nuanced understanding of international political realities. Yet habits are hard to break, and a clash between reality and perception continues to hamper our efforts. The most ready example of this is our national struggle to come to grips with the opportunities and risks of detente. But another more telling example is our persistent misunderstanding of the politics and importance of the nonaligned nations. Linked to this is our deep resentment of this effort to pursue aggressively their interests as though such a cause of action was permitted only for the developed countries. It is ironic that our most enthusiastic flagwavers and manipulators of nationalistic symbols are invariably incapable of understanding similar feelings among others. The debate over the Panama Canal treaties is a case in point. The canal may have had strategic importance to us in the past, and it may still be of vital interest to us as a free and open waterway. But we could hardly maintain that its military importance is the same in an age of ballistic missiles and nuclear submarines as it was 30 years ago. Moreover, we have no exclusive claims to vital interests there, as these interests are shared by the Panamanians, the other South American countries, as well as the rest of the world. Yet the entire Panama Canal debate tells us something about ourselves and the forces that move nations in 1978. The careful calculation of national interest and of net advantage—the essence of traditional diplomacy—was nearly swamped in the emotional and unpredictable national reaction to the canal treaties. We were fortunate that we had people in the Senate who displayed real political courage. A segment of our public’s reaction to President Carter’s recent overseas tours to developing countries is another good example of our lingering tension between national bias and international reality.4
