3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
177
economic relations for purposes of exerting influence upon Soviet
behavior.
—The Soviets believe that, in the US itself, conflicting domestic in-
terests place severe limits on the US ability to use its policy instruments
for these same purposes.
The growing dependence of Soviet economic growth on a rising
productivity of labor and capital will put an increasing premium on
Western capital goods and technology during the next decade. In addi-
tion, Moscow will need vast amounts of Western equipment to sustain
production of oil in some fields, minimize declines in others, and de-
velop new sources of oil and gas. Some of this equipment will have to
come from the United States.
Technology
In importing Western technology and equipment, the USSR is
playing “catch-up.” Specific sectors of Soviet industry—such as the fer-
tilizer and automotive industries—are being helped greatly by Western
technology and equipment, increasing the quality and quantity of
output and reducing costs. The Soviets will be especially dependent on
Western energy technology in the future, such as high capacity oil
lifting equipment discussed separately below. The magnitude of Soviet
imports of Western equipment, however, is too small to have much im-
pact on overall economic growth.
In only a few areas is the United States the sole supplier of the most
advanced technology of interest to the Soviets. In many of these fields,
US pre-eminence is being increasingly challenged by technological ad-
vances in Western Europe and Japan. Moreover, less advanced tech-
nology is often sufficiently good to satisfy immediate Soviet needs. In
the many instances where US technology is available from US licensees
or subsidiaries abroad, the Soviets can turn to these.
The United States must rely primarily on persuasion in marshaling
effective support from its allies for control of technology exports. The
record on this score is disappointing at best. Our allies see little or no
need to limit Soviet acquisition of technology unrelated to items on the
COCOM List. Even in COCOM, they have shown a tendency to push
for relaxation of definitions to permit the sale of their own goods while
supporting the embargo on those higher technology goods produced
only in the United States. Their reluctance in the past to go along with
the United States in controlling anything but the most sensitive tech-
nology and equipment affords little hope for consent to broader vigi-
lance now.
Energy
The supply of oil in the USSR will become a critical problem in the
next few years, with production peaking perhaps as early as next year
