530
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
174.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, October 31, 1978
SUBJECT
Reactions in Summit Countries to Your Anti-Inflation Program
We asked US posts abroad to report reactions to your new
anti-inflation program.2
Official statements in Summit countries are favorable: The German
Cabinet spokesman, the Japanese Chief Cabinet Secretary, and the
French Economic Minister all issued supporting statements. Callaghan
indicated a willingness to do so.
The exchange markets are, as you know, more sceptical: A Bank of
Canada official expresses concern as to whether the US will “be willing
to bite the bullet (and to keep biting) on macro-economic policy man-
agement.” German bankers and press cite budgetary deficits as the real
cause of inflation, and predict that “with real US interest rates still low
by German standards . . . pressures on the dollar would be continuing”.
French exchange dealers mention the need for the Fed to raise interest
rates. Bob Roosa believes that the basic reason the exchange markets
are reacting so adversely is that your speech was over-billed: They ex-
pected tighter budget controls, higher interest rates, and new measures
to stimulate capital formation.
Nowhere among these reported reactions is there a demand for
stronger US intervention. Perhaps the demand is there but unex-
pressed; or perhaps they feel that the pressures are now too great to be
overcome by intervention—that only domestic US policies can do the
trick.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/International: 7/78–1980. Confidential.
Sent for information.
2 Telegram 272339 to all OECD capitals, October 26, requested reports on the re-
sponse to Carter’s new anti-inflation program. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D780440–1238) On October 24, Carter announced the program, which in-
cluded reductions in government spending, Federal employment cutbacks and Federal
pay limits, regulatory reform and deregulation, opposition to Federal income tax cuts,
voluntary price and wage controls, and the submission of anti-inflation legislation to
Congress in January 1979. For the text of Carter’s announcement, see Public Papers of the
Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 1839–1845. Undated letters
from Carter to Andreotti, Callaghan, Fukuda, Giscard, Jenkins, Schmidt, and Trudeau
describing the program are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/International:
7/78–1980.
