28 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement 1. Proposed Inter-American Banking Institution The Chairman referred to the draft paper2 which had been distributed as the basis of a charter approach to an Inter-American Banking Institution,3 and said that the primary problems appeared to be the kind of institution which would be set up, and the way in which the capital would be provided. He asked the other Council members for comments. Mr. Dillon said that in view of its political objective the proposed Bank should be organized as an Inter-American Institution with control by the Latin Americans. The United States approach should be as flexible as possible. One unresolved question was whether the Institution should make hard, soft, or mixed loans. While no rigid formula should be adopted at this time, the United States should decide which approach it preferred, subject to any necessary accommodation to Latin American views. He inclined to the view that the Bank should make mostly soft loans, and should not compete with existing institutions making hard loans. Mr. Dillon continued that the kind of loans would affect the raising of the capital. The Bank would probably be unable to borrow substantial amounts in the private market in the absence of a U.S. Government guarantee. If it made soft loans, such borrowing would be out of the question. If the Bank were a soft loan institution, replenishment of capital, although not the original capital contribution, should come from the Development Loan Fund, which he thought should develop into a central source for soft loan capital. Mr. Dillon thought that the question of U.S. representation was related to the location of the Bank. If it were located in Latin America, it would not be feasible for the U.S. Executive Director of the International Bank to be the U.S. Executive Director of the Inter-American Bank. He also raised the question of whether the management of the Inter-American Institution should be similar to that of the International Bank, or should have a greater flavor of foreign policy, with policy guidance tied in more closely with the Development Loan Fund. He thought the paper provided a good start for consideration of these various problems. Mr. Stambaugh commented that Latin America was the most valuable and important foreign trade area of the United States. The ability of the Export-Import Bank to provide credits had always been an important factor in retaining markets in Latin America, as well as in other parts of the world, and the United States should avoid setting 2 Not found with the source text and not further identified. 3 On August 12, Under Secretary Dillon announced that the United States was prepared to consider the establishment of an inter-American development institution. (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 408–409)
