Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II focus for a World Hunger Campaign: an attack on the pervasive worldwide problem of malnutrition. Behind the suggestions in this memo lie several basic considerations: —For a World Hunger Campaign to have any meaning or importance it must represent a distinct political initiative. Patting ourselves on the back for past policies or tinkering with current policies will not provide sufficient content or justification for mounting a new “campaign.” At the same time, however, any proposals we make must stand on their own substantive merits. —Policies deriving from a World Hunger Campaign must be consistent with US agricultural policies, with US development policies, and in particular with our basic human needs orientation. —Any new policies must strike a responsive domestic chord if they are to obtain adequate public and Congressional support. —They must also be consistent with our domestic policies involving efforts to support the poor and, in particular, to overcome problems of hunger at home. The Problem of World Hunger A number of important factors bear on understanding and attacking the problem of world hunger. —The world does not face a major problem of world hunger or starvation today; favorable weather and good harvests in most parts of the world over the last several years have replaced the shortages and hunger of 1973–4 with adequate and even surplus grain supplies in many countries. Nor is the world facing a Malthusian3 specter of being unable to feed itself over the coming years or decades. With normal or favorable weather conditions the world can produce more grain than it can consume in any one year. Evidence of this are the near record grain stocks building up in the US and other major grain producers (including India). —However, the world food system is a fragile one where low stocks and only slight drops in production can send grain prices skyrocketing, as was proven in 1972–3 when world grain production fell by only 2%. Thus, while grain supplies are plentiful now and prices relatively low and stable, even a small drop in production, as could happen in an exceptional year, could lead once again to problems of hunger and starvation, particularly if stocks prove inadequate or are ineffectively controlled. 3 Reference is to 18th-century English political economist Thomas Robert Malthus, author of An Essay on the Principle of Population, as It Affects the Future Improvement of Society.
