742
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
focus for a World Hunger Campaign: an attack on the pervasive world-
wide problem of malnutrition.
Behind
the
suggestions
in
this
memo
lie
several
basic
considerations:
—For a World Hunger Campaign to have any meaning or impor-
tance it must represent a distinct political initiative. Patting ourselves
on the back for past policies or tinkering with current policies will not
provide sufficient content or justification for mounting a new “cam-
paign.” At the same time, however, any proposals we make must stand
on their own substantive merits.
—Policies deriving from a World Hunger Campaign must be con-
sistent with US agricultural policies, with US development policies,
and in particular with our basic human needs orientation.
—Any new policies must strike a responsive domestic chord if
they are to obtain adequate public and Congressional support.
—They must also be consistent with our domestic policies in-
volving efforts to support the poor and, in particular, to overcome
problems of hunger at home.
The Problem of World Hunger
A number of important factors bear on understanding and at-
tacking the problem of world hunger.
—The world does not face a major problem of world hunger or
starvation today; favorable weather and good harvests in most parts of
the world over the last several years have replaced the shortages and
hunger of 1973–4 with adequate and even surplus grain supplies in
many countries. Nor is the world facing a Malthusian3 specter of being
unable to feed itself over the coming years or decades. With normal or
favorable weather conditions the world can produce more grain than it
can consume in any one year. Evidence of this are the near record grain
stocks building up in the US and other major grain producers (in-
cluding India).
—However, the world food system is a fragile one where low
stocks and only slight drops in production can send grain prices sky-
rocketing, as was proven in 1972–3 when world grain production fell
by only 2%. Thus, while grain supplies are plentiful now and prices rel-
atively low and stable, even a small drop in production, as could
happen in an exceptional year, could lead once again to problems of
hunger and starvation, particularly if stocks prove inadequate or are in-
effectively controlled.
3 Reference is to 18th-century English political economist Thomas Robert Malthus,
author of An Essay on the Principle of Population, as It Affects the Future Improvement of
Society.
