Haiti 753 the Haitian President which, if complied with, should tend to stabilize the presently-disturbed situation in that country. A further consideration motivating my recommendation for the early assignment of a military training unit is that the experience of this temporary unit will provide a test of the probable effectiveness of the proposed full-scale training mission as well as a test of the Haitian Government’s ability to allay political tension, as agreed in the memorandum of understanding. A copy of that memorandum is enclosed.5 Sincerely Yours, Robert Murphy 5 The temporary Marine Corps training unit arrived in Port-au-Prince on October 31. (Telegram 212 from Port-au-Prince, October 31; 738.58/10–3158) On December 29, 1958, the United States and Haiti concluded a Naval Mission Agreement that provided for the assignment of a permanent mission of Naval and Marine Corps personnel. For the text of the agreement, see 9 UST 1528. HA–10. Draft Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1  Washington, February 2, 1959. SUBJECT Request for Grant Assistance for Haiti from President’s Contingency Funds Recommendation Owing to the failure of the coffee crop and declining coffee prices, Haiti has exhausted its U.S. dollar reserves and is running a very substantial budgetary deficit despite severe reductions in fiscal expenditure. 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 61 D 279, “Haiti 1959.” Confidential. Drafted by Post. The source text is an uninitialed carbon copy that was not sent. It lists the concurrences of Assistant Security of State for Economic Affairs Thomas Mann, Special Assistant for Mutual Security Coordination John O. Bell, and Regional Director of the International Cooperation Administration’s Office of Latin American Operations Rollin S. Atwood. According to a memorandum from Snow to Dillon, undated but apparently drafted CIRCA February 12, the International Cooperation Administration had refused to concur in Rubottom’s memorandum of February 2 and had indicated instead that a “substantial revision” was needed. An uninitialed carbon copy of the ICA memorandum is attached to the source text.
