104
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
exceeds that which exists in most other Warsaw Pact countries. Despite
the occasional strains it has produced in its relations with the Soviet
Union, the Gierek regime has given every indication of continuing its
moderate, pragmatic approach to Poland’s cooperation with the West.
The regime continues to pursue a course of relative restraint toward
vocal political dissidents; it continues at least an outward conciliation
toward the thriving Roman Catholic Church, which has been greatly
strengthened by the accession to the Papacy of John Paul II; and, in
the interest of stimulating improved economic performance, it has
shown some desire to encourage private farmers who cultivate about
80 percent of all arable land.
26. Moscow has grudgingly tolerated these deviations because it
wants, above all, stability in strategically located Poland, and knows
that cruder forms of interference or repression could lead to an
upheaval that would necessitate an unwanted military intervention.
In return, Poland faithfully supports Soviet foreign policy objectives,
as well as the Soviet economic integration goals in Eastern Europe.
Although only half of Poland’s trade is with CEMA countries, its inter-
ests in the area as a market for its products and dependence on Soviet
raw materials are genuine. Warsaw’s support of major Soviet foreign
policy goals also derives from an historically based fear that Moscow
might one day revise its attitude on the German question, to Poland’s
disadvantage.
27. The major question-mark surrounds Poland’s economic situa-
tion, which has deteriorated in recent years due to five successive bad
harvests; stagnation in Western export markets; and a failure to date
of major investments in Western capital equipment to pay off. As a
result, Poland’s external hard currency indebtedness has grown mark-
edly. Generous Western public and commercial credits have been
granted but future prospects for Poland’s external economic picture
are cloudy and Warsaw faces some tough political and economic
choices ahead.
HUNGARY
28. Having gained power in the Soviet invasion of 1956, Hungarian
party leader Kadar consolidated his position in the early 1960s and
has since displayed skill and pragmatism in promoting Hungary’s
national interests, without violating essential Soviet desiderata. He has
thus achieved a rather firm political base and a measure of popularity.
Kadar has in more recent years departed from orthodox Bloc patterns
in such key areas as:
—the ten-year-old economic reforms (New Economic Mechanism),
which provide for a variety of incentives and other market forces
to operate;
