1284  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
A conservative estimate indicates that the survey would take of the 
order of at least six months for all the stations suggested.
The procurement of equipment, which could be initiated con­
currently with the surveys, is estimated to take from 6 to 18 months, 
depending upon the type of equipment. The installation of the equip­
ment, which must take place in series with the surveys, will take from 
12 to 18 months, depending on the type of installation. Training of oper­
ators, which can start concurrently with the start of the survey, will take 
from 6 to 12 months, depending on the type of training and upon the 
procurement of personnel to be trained. This could become relatively 
involved if utilization of personnel of several nations is planned.
Based upon the above time factors, it is conservatively estimated that 
two years would be required for the installation. Assuming a minimum of 
ten months to determine U.S. policy and to negotiate an agreement with 
the USSR, the system would not be in operation prior to 1 January 1961.
A rough estimate of cost of the installation has been made based 
upon the assumption that each installation be self-­sufficient and inde­
pendent of the local economy. It was further assumed that all materi­
als and labor would be provided from the U.S. Individual station costs 
include water supply and filtration, electrical power supply, sewage dis­
posal, access roads, pole lines and vaults, equipment shelters, barracks 
and latrines, mess hall, vehicle storage and maintenance, fuel storage, 
technical and support equipment and, most costly of all, a complete com­
munications center. Obviously, depending upon local conditions at each 
site, the extent of local support in manpower, materials and communi­
cations, considerable reduction in cost figures could be effected. These 
rough estimates indicate that the equipment and installation would cost 
about $100,000,000 and operation might run $30,000,000 per year.
4. A SYSTEM FOR DETECTING NUCLEAR TESTS IN REMOTE 
AREAS OF THE WORLD.
In Section 3 of this report, a comprehensive detection system has 
been described which would detect clandestine tests of relatively low 
yield within the USSR. While this system is by no means fool-­proof, 
principally because of the possibility of evasion by conducting tests 
underground where detection and identification of all tests is extremely 
difficult, it would certainly force the Soviets to consider other environ­
ments in which clandestine tests might be conducted either with less 
risk of detection or with greater facility.
It has been pointed out previously in this report that the existing 
AFOAT–1 Long Range Detection System, as well as the system within 
the USSR and China described in Section 3, will have a very poor detec­
tion and identification capability for tests in areas of the earth remote 
from those detection systems. The Soviets certainly are aware of this fact 
and therefore might be strongly tempted to conduct tests in these remote 
areas using a submarine task force. Tests under these conditions would 
probably permit limited but adequate diagnostics for the purpose.
