1955  275
had agreed in announcement what these functions should be and they 
were ones which had to be undertaken in the US. We had immediately 
taken all action necessary to permit GOI undertake these functions. That 
was substance of situation. We had done everything we could to permit 
GOI undertake functions his government wanted and Indian Ambas­
sador was today discussing implementation announcement in US. In 
contrast with US action, I understood from him that UK still was not in 
position undertake functions agreed announcement in PRC. Imperative 
whatever words might be used, his government take same action with 
respect UK as we took with respect to India so that UK can undertake 
functions under agreed announcement.
11. Wang asked whether UK was “invited” by US.
12. I repeated that UK had been formally requested undertake 
functions set forth and this done even before our last meeting and very 
promptly, as with other matters relating agreed announcement. I did 
not know of this action at time of last meeting or I would have informed 
him then.
13. Wang said, “Do I understand US invited UK and agreed to invi­
tation GOI by PRC”.
14. I said that was not what I had said.
15. Wang asked if what I meant was PRC had invited GOI and US 
had invited UK, or was there difference of opinion between us.
16. I said I thought it important to get into substance situation 
which was that US had done everything permit GOI undertake its func­
tions in US. I understood that was what he was interested in, and that 
had been done.
17. Wang said he concerned with two points: one was invitation to 
third government, and the other was agreement to this invitation. He 
was ready agree my statement that UK invited by US but he wanted be 
clear whether GOI being invited by PRC or US.
18. I said it was our clear understanding of agreed announce­
ment that we should invite GOI perform functions. At same time I had 
no objection his government taking whatever action it desired with 
respect GOI, and whatever words they used between them was up to 
him. His government had suggested GOI undertake functions in US, 
but, as we had discussed in previous meetings, third parties could 
undertake functions only if authorized. Essential element is that each 
government permit functions be undertaken within own territory. If we 
invited someone to do something of course we agree to their doing it 
and would assist them.
19. Wang said “to agree” and “to invite” were two different things. 
If US had invited GOI, then it appeared US had invited both UK and 
GOI. PRC had never invited UK to do anything. Merely said they
