December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
619
reached agreement. There is a danger that positions will harden, that
there will be leaks, and that we will lose control. Therefore, if progress
is made in the talks, it would be desirable to move directly to a summit.
This would help add to the sense of urgency.
Secretary Vance said that he was sympathetic to this idea and that it
should not be ruled out. But he is afraid that it will expose the President
too soon, before a proper framework has been laid. Perhaps the Presi-
dent could come up Friday3 night and meet with the two heads of the
delegations. Dr. Brzezinski said that if the talks fail, the President will be
blamed in any case. If he must be involved, he should start at the begin-
ning. Secretary Brown stated that he shared the concern of involving the
President prematurely. We should hold back someone, but if the Presi-
dent could confine his comments to regional security, then it would be
worth having him meet with both delegations right away.
Ambassador Lewis noted that it might be difficult to get Cabinet ap-
proval for an immediate summit. The Cabinet is very determined to re-
view everything that happens in the negotiations. If Begin is invited, he
will probably try to bring half the Cabinet with him. Nonetheless, Am-
bassador Lewis saw merit in the idea of an immediate summit. The
President said we should keep this as a desirable option. The Vice Presi-
dent asked if we could give something to Dayan to take back to the Cab-
inet, possibly private messages that he would just pass on to Begin.
Turning to the Gaza option, Secretary Vance asked if the letter
should be changed. The President said we should just urge the Egyp-
tians to drop their commitment to negotiate the West Bank. Sadat
should get his foot out of the West Bank, and this would allow him to
put pressure on Hussein. The President felt that two errors had been
made at Camp David. First, too much emphasis was placed on the ex-
change of ambassadors. Second, Sadat should not have been asked to
negotiate for the West Bank.
Dr. Brzezinski asked what the incentives were for each party to con-
clude the negotiations. In particular, what do the Israelis fear from the
failure of negotiations? The President thought they were afraid of Egypt
turning to a more hostile posture. This would contribute to the general
malaise in Israeli society. Ambassador Lewis thought that the primary
concern was the deterioration of U.S.-Israeli relations. The President felt
that the Iranian situation should make the Israelis want peace with
Egypt more. Ambassador Lewis noted that the majority of Israelis may
feel that way, but that others are reacting more cautiously. The Presi-
dent also felt that there was an increase in threat from the Palestinians in
the West Bank and Gaza to the Israelis, and that the situation in Iran has
3 February 23.
