652 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 209. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Romania1 Washington, October 10, 1978, 2314Z 256604. For the Ambassador. Subject: The Secretary’s October 2 Meeting at UNGA With Foreign Minister Andrei. Romanian Participants Stefan Andrei, Foreign Minister Teodor Marinescu, Ambassador to the United Nations Mircea Mitran, Special Assistant to the Foreign Minister (Interpreter) US Participants The Secretary Matthew Nimetz, Counselor Carl Schmidt, Director, EUR/EE (notetaker) 1. Summary—Andrei stressed the importance which President Ceausescu attaches to good US-Romanian relations and to elimination of issues which impede their further development. Andrei said the fact that the US allowed Pacepa to come here has created tensions, and he requested the US to cease all “covert activities” against Romania. The Secretary said we understand Romania’s concerns but we must now put this case behind us. Andrei said Romania would continue to strive to solve emigration problems in a humanitarian spirit. He said some progress had been made in resolving export license problems, but Romania wished to accelerate the process. The Secretary indicated we had worked hard to make progress in this area and cited recent consideration of a license for the Rom-Control Data joint venture as a positive example. Andrei appealed for more liberal treatment of Romanian exports. The Secretary accepted in principle an invitation to visit Romania. He reiterated the strong interest of the US in continuing to expand relations with Romania, and expressed appreciation for Romania’s cooperative efforts on various international issues. The Secretary and Andrei briefly reviewed the status of the Camp David Accords, and issues involving Lebanon and Greece-Turkey. End summary. 2. Introductory comments—Andrei said he was aware how very busy the Secretary was, and therefore he was especially grateful that he had made time available to meet. President Ceausescu had asked 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780414–1133. Confidential; Priority, Exdis. Sent for information to USUN. Drafted by Schmidt; cleared by Nimetz; approved by George H. Mitchell in S.
