Romania
571
PLO, in an exercise in self-determination. One problem is that no one
knows for sure whether the PLO and the Palestinian diaspora would
in the end accept or reject something less than a fully independent
state, for example. The Palestinians were not monolithic, he said. He
went on to speculate that, in an initial period, the West Bank and Gaza
might develop their own administration and a degree of autonomy,
and there would also be changes in basic Arab-Israeli conditions. Who
could say for sure whether the PLO and others might find the new
situation unacceptable. He concluded that, even if the parties came to
an agreement on all other issues, a Middle East settlement will not
work unless it deals satisfactorily with the basic Palestinian issue.
7. The Secretary said that we had made clear the need for Palestinian
participation in the determination of their future, as in the Aswan
statement. There has to be some consent of the governed to what is
going on. The only real answer for the question of Palestinian represen-
tation, however, would be for the Arab confrontation states to come
up with some ideas and suggestions, including perhaps names, accept-
able to Israel. He agreed that the Israelis wanted to deal only with the
West Bank/Gaza aspect and acknowledged that the overall Palestinian
issue had to be resolved in the context of a larger settlement. That
broader issue was greater than who represented the Palestinians on
the West Bank and Gaza. Pungan argued that it was easier to deal
with the basic problem by broadening participation at the beginning.
The Secretary said conceptually this was correct, but practically it was
not easy.
8. The Secretary noted that Jordan felt the refugee problem should
be tackled in smaller steps, dealing initially with the 1967 refugees and
displaced persons, and then moving on.
9. Noting that the Romanians believed that the Arabs should now
elaborate some concrete proposals in lieu of making demands and
statements of principles, Pungan asked whether the West Bank/Gaza
under a UN administration would be practical for an interim period.
The Secretary said he had proposed this last spring to all parties, but
met with a mixed reception. The Israelis were particularly wary of
anything with a UN role.
10. The Secretary and Saunders said that the total Middle East
problem was so complex and so difficult to digest that there was
virtually no choice but to try to break it down into its component
elements and deal with them individually.
11. Pungan said another problem was wider Arab participation,
with Jordan in the first instance. He had met with both Assad and Arafat
shortly after Sadat’s Jerusalem visit. Assad gave him the impression
that he was not as opposed to Sadat’s efforts as had been portrayed.
He would wait and see the results, but he felt the initiative was not
