North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 improve the overall export earnings of developing countries. We are working toward this goal in the Geneva trade negotiations and encourage your leadership. As you note, energy prices concern both of us greatly. We should examine all aspects of this issue—for instance, the relationship between oil price increases and debt. The fivefold increase in oil prices since 1973 created balance of payments problems for both our countries, as they did around the world. These increases have slowed the pace of development. We are concerned about the debt issue and are discussing it in appropriate forums, such as UNCTAD and the IBRD/IMF Development Committee. I agree with you that increased transfers to developing countries are necessary. At the Conference on International Economic Cooperation, the United States and other countries pledged to increase their development assistance substantially. My Administration will carry out its commitment as we seek appropriation of additional development assistance from the Congress in coming years. My Administration will appeal to the Congress to continue its support for US participation in the international financial institutions. We will join in a general capital increase of the World Bank. We are determined to support substantial replenishments of Inter-American and the Caribbean Development Banks. We expect to win Congressional approval of the United States’ participation in the IMF’s new Supplementary Finance Facility.7 It is important to recognize, however, that there are limits to the amount of assistance which the US and other developed countries can provide. As you note in your letter, additional economic assistance must be provided by oil-producing countries as well as traditional donors. We must remember that much of the external capital the developing world receives comes from the private sector—and that their share is likely to increase. Therefore, it is in our interests to ensure that measures are not taken which would discourage these flows. At your request, I have instructed the Commerce and State Departments to cooperate with your government to do an analysis and a report of the investment climate of Jamaica, offering suggestions on how it could be improved. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter 7 Meeting in Paris in August 1977, representatives of selected IMF member states agreed to the establishment of the supplementary financing facility known as the Witteveen Facility. Later that same month, the IMF Executive Board formally established the
