North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
915
improve the overall export earnings of developing countries. We are
working toward this goal in the Geneva trade negotiations and en-
courage your leadership.
As you note, energy prices concern both of us greatly. We should
examine all aspects of this issue—for instance, the relationship between
oil price increases and debt. The fivefold increase in oil prices since
1973 created balance of payments problems for both our countries, as
they did around the world. These increases have slowed the pace of de-
velopment. We are concerned about the debt issue and are discussing it
in appropriate forums, such as UNCTAD and the IBRD/IMF Develop-
ment Committee.
I agree with you that increased transfers to developing countries
are necessary. At the Conference on International Economic Coopera-
tion, the United States and other countries pledged to increase their de-
velopment assistance substantially. My Administration will carry out
its commitment as we seek appropriation of additional development
assistance from the Congress in coming years.
My Administration will appeal to the Congress to continue its sup-
port for US participation in the international financial institutions. We
will join in a general capital increase of the World Bank. We are deter-
mined to support substantial replenishments of Inter-American and
the Caribbean Development Banks. We expect to win Congressional
approval of the United States’ participation in the IMF’s new Supple-
mentary Finance Facility.7 It is important to recognize, however, that
there are limits to the amount of assistance which the US and other de-
veloped countries can provide. As you note in your letter, additional
economic assistance must be provided by oil-producing countries as
well as traditional donors.
We must remember that much of the external capital the devel-
oping world receives comes from the private sector—and that their
share is likely to increase. Therefore, it is in our interests to ensure that
measures are not taken which would discourage these flows. At your
request, I have instructed the Commerce and State Departments to co-
operate with your government to do an analysis and a report of the in-
vestment climate of Jamaica, offering suggestions on how it could be
improved.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
7 Meeting in Paris in August 1977, representatives of selected IMF member states
agreed to the establishment of the supplementary financing facility known as the Wit-
teveen Facility. Later that same month, the IMF Executive Board formally established the
facility. See Document 50 and de Vries, The International Monetary Fund, 1972–1978: Coop-
eration on Trial, vol. I: Narrative and Analysis, pp. 549–554.
