March 27–December 31, 1979 997 Regrettably, the cable6 of follow-up instructions to Beirut went out this morning without any NSC (or Strauss) consultation.7 Most is non-controversial, but it does reach conclusions on U.S. policy (page 2) which—while probably a consensus view—go against the senior level agreement8 that talks here would follow the Habib visit before further efforts were undertaken. (C) RECOMMENDATION: That this process be kept in line by convening a meeting of the Senior Level Group early this week.9 (C) 6 In telegram 288533 to Beirut, November 5, the Department instructed Dean to make contact with Sarkis and other Lebanese officials to ascertain the progress they had made since Habib’s trip. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790508–1212) 7 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence in the leftand right-hand margins and added the handwritten notation: “RH, complain officially & in writing.” 8 See Document 301. 9 Brzezinski approved the recommendation. 307. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, November 7, 1979 SUBJECT Long-Term Military Relationship with Egypt (C) At Tab A is the State-Defense decision memorandum on longerterm military assistance to Egypt, which you requested after the PRC met on this subject. I have held this memorandum awaiting Jim McIntyre’s comments,2 but they are still not available, and I think that a decision is needed now. (C) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 12, Egypt: 11/79. Secret. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “State/DOD must assess Egypt/Israel military needs as part of the ZBB approach to ’81 budget—compared to worldwide nation-by-nation priorities. J.C.” The memorandum was found attached to a November 8 memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance and Brown, forwarding to them the text of Carter’s handwritten comment. (Ibid.) 2 See footnote 2, Document 322.
