818
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
3. Begin text:
Dear Mr. Minister:
—Your letter of July 22 raises questions concerning the Soviet
position on withdrawal from Afghanistan.3 Since this is a central issue
in our discussions of a possible political settlement in Afghanistan, I
would appreciate any clarifications you can offer.
—We obviously differ on the significance of the military with-
drawal you have announced. Our analysis indicates that this was part
of a tactical redeployment designed to make Soviet units more effective.
I would be interested in knowing whether there has been a reduction
in the overall number of Soviet troops in Afghanistan, whether these
withdrawals are permanent and whether you are prepared to under-
take a process which would lead to complete withdrawal and a political
settlement.
—In your letter of July 22, there is no reference to ultimate Soviet
withdrawal from Afghanistan. Is this a change in the Soviet position?
If satisfactory assurances were provided would there be a simultaneous
withdrawal of all Soviet troops?
—As we have said, we would be prepared to explore some transi-
tional arrangement to facilitate such a solution. A government accept-
able to the Afghan people would be essential.
—Finally, your letter of July 22 stresses that normalization of
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbors should take place
simultaneously with the cessation of “armed incursions into the terri-
tory of Afghanistan as well as of all forms of interference in the internal
affairs of that country in general.” This implies that the Soviet Union
would withdraw all its forces from Afghanistan to coincide with nor-
malization of relations between Afghanistan and neighboring states.
Is this your position?
—The questions I have posed in this and my last letter represent
serious efforts to gain a clearer understanding of your position. I hope
you will give them careful consideration.
—Sincerely, Edmund S. Muskie
End text.
Christopher
3 See Document 306.
