346
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
4. (S) Whether the trend of increasing strength of the Soviet Union
relative to the United States will taper off in the future is a matter of
considerable debate within the Intelligence Community; [3 lines not de-
classified] It is impossible to project the threat which may now be devel-
oping and which may not be clearly perceived by the United States
until such time as a CTB would make it difficult or impossible to
respond.
5. (S) Current US force improvement initiatives have been taken
primarily to respond to threats which have been postulated with some
certainty. A CTB agreement will limit US ability to develop military
systems which are essential to respond to these postulated threats. It is
recognized that a CTB which includes prohibition of peaceful nuclear
explosions (PNEs) will constrain the Soviet Union’s ability to develop
new initiatives. However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff emphasize that a CTB
may render the United States virtually unable to respond to the future
threat which may now be developing and, thus, is unconstrained by the
effects of a CTB.
6. (S) National policy calls for development and maintenance of a
deterrent and warfighting capability across the spectrum of warfare,
ranging from strategic nuclear offensive and defensive operations
through tactical nuclear, conventional, and unconventional operations.
To support this policy, the existing strategy provides for forces which
are highly selective, effective, flexible, and responsive to the require-
ments of the National Command Authorities. By continuing a strong
technological capability made possible under the constraints of the
LTBT through the maintenance of a viable underground test program,
the United States has continued the development of nuclear capabilities
which will assist in the fulfillment of national policy objectives. How-
ever, without the present underground testing capability, the US
Armed Forces could not confidently exploit advanced nuclear weapons
development technology or nuclear weapons effects technology to pro-
vide these capabilities nor could they assure the reliability either of new
designs, of older nuclear weapons which have been stockpiled over
long periods of time, or of replications of older tested designs. There-
fore, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that, for the foreseeable future,
continued nuclear testing will be necessary.
7. [1 paragraph (23 lines) not declassified]
8. (S) In the view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the adequacy of veri-
fying a CTB agreement is dependent on the ability unequivocally to as-
sure the national authorities that no potential adversary is achieving
military benefits through nuclear testing. Although the PRM–16 re-
sponse points out that improvements to US national technical means
could reduce the likelihood of undetected tests, the Executive Sum-
mary [10 lines not declassified]
