Chapter 4, February–April 1990  539
finally formulated our position, we also thought that it would become 
important to have an overall ceiling in the central zone. In fact given the 
changes that have taken place in Central Europe now, such an overall 
ceiling seems to make a lot of sense.
Baker: Are you talking about a 750,000 limit in the central zone of 
overall stationed forces?
Shevardnadze: Yes. An overall stationed forces limit in the central 
zone not in the Atlantic to the Ural zone.
Baker: I understand.
Shevardnadze: This is consistent with what we said in Moscow 
because there what we said is that we wanted to have a limit in the cen-
tral zone. There we were talking only, however, about the US and Soviet 
manpower limits in the central zone. So what we are talking about now 
is an overall ceiling within which those US and Soviet numbers would 
apply.
Baker: Well, let me just say I am not agreeing to an overall ceiling, 
I am just trying to understand what it is you said. And I think I do 
understand it.
Shevardnadze: We could always come back to this and reassess this 
question but our allies actually feel quite strongly for coming to some 
kind of agreement on overall manpower ceiling or stationed forces ceil-
ings in the central zone.
Baker: Have you finished what you were going to talk about on 
START?
Shevardnadze: Yes.
Baker: Then I would like to raise something with you. Your sug-
gestion that we look ahead to follow-­on negotiations and give some 
thought to the kind of strategic relationship we are going to have down 
the road between the United States and the Soviet Union is an important 
one. And we have been thinking about the opportunity for achieving 
something like that in this treaty and in follow-­on negotiations—­again, 
particularly in light of the kind of changed political conditions and 
developments we’ve seen.
If you go back almost a year when Presidents Bush and Gorbachev 
exchanged letters4 on the requirements for strategic stability you could 
see that there is in fact a fair amount of common ground. When I look 
at the informal discussions that Ambassadors Burt and Nazarkin have 
had, it also seems to me that we see some basis on which to be think-
ing about strategic stability, and how we make it greater, both in the 
current START treaty and in the follow-­on discussions. We see in these 
4 See footnote 2, Document 34.
