Arms Control and Disarmament  1521
(j) Detectors on ocean bottom.
(k) Detectors in deep hole.
(l) Diagnostic possibilities of microseisms.
(m) Focal depth of disturbances.
5. [4.] On the basis of its review of the above techniques, the PSI 
believes that the following four promising approaches are within the 
present limits of technology and should be considered:
(a) Analysis of long-­period surface waves. The capability of the Geneva 
System for the identification as earthquakes of seismic events equiva­
lent to 5 kilotons or larger by the analysis of long-­period surface waves 
is conservatively estimated at 25% and may be much larger.
(b) Network of unmanned auxiliary seismic stations. A triangular net­
work of such unmanned stations is suggested, spaced 170 km apart 
between the stations of the 1000 km grid proposed in Geneva for the 
seismic regions of the world. If this network were installed and effec­
tively operated, it would very greatly increase the capability of the 
Geneva system for identifying as earthquakes those seismic events 
occurring in interior areas and corresponding in energy to under­
ground tests equivalent to one kiloton or larger.
(c) Larger arrays of seismometers at manned control posts. It is reason­
ably certain that the replacement of 10 distributed seismometers per 
control post as recommended by the Geneva Conference of Experts with 
arrays of approximately 100 distributed seismometers would increase 
the signal to noise ratio by a factor of from 1.5 to 2.5. This would sub­
stantially increase the capability of the system to identify small seismic 
events as natural earthquakes.
(d) Detectors in deep holes. A detection method which employs 
a seismometer in a hole at a depth of several thousand feet is being 
investigated at the present time. The method offers possibilities for 
improving the detectability of small signals by a factor of the order of 
ten, provided that the technological problems of operating instruments 
at the required depths can be solved. The results to date are incomplete 
but encouraging. If the factor of ten can in fact be achieved, it would 
drastically increase the capability of the system to identify small seis­
mic events as natural earthquakes. More definitive results are expected 
by mid 1959.
The proposals (a), (b), and (c), above, are discussed more fully in 
the appendix attached.
6. The PSI invites attention to the fact that detection of aftershocks 
by specially and immediately implaced seismometers can be used by 
an inspection party as an aid in establishing that an unidentified seis­
mic event was in fact a natural earthquake.
7. The PSI believes that seismic research has not in the past been 
supported as strongly as many other areas of science. Vigorous research
